U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety
Administration

901 Locust Street, Suite 480
Kansas City, MO 64106

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: michael.koby@enbridge.com, david.stafford@enbridge.com,
and jim.ramness@enbridge.com
January 7, 2022
Michael Koby
Vice President, US Operations
Enbridge Energy, Limited Partnership
5400 Westheimer Court
Houston, TX 77056
CPF 3-2022-016-NOPV
Dear Mr. Koby:
From July 19 to September 17, 2020, representatives of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code, inspected
Enbridge Energy, Limited Partnership (Enbridge) Control Room Management procedures and
records in Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
This Notice is in response to PHMSA’s Control Room Management (CRM) Initiative, which is a
national level program that includes inspectors from every region. As a result, you may have
received this Notice from a different Regional Director than typical because the CRM Initiative
inspections are currently separate from the standard inspection program. Notices and
correspondence from other types of inspections will remain unchanged.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that Enbridge has committed probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). The items
inspected and the probable violations are:

2
1.

§195.446 (c) Provide adequate information.
(1)….
(2) Conduct a point-to-point verification between SCADA displays and related field
equipment when field equipment is added or moved and when other changes that
affect pipelines safety are made to field equipment or SCADA displays:

Enbridge’s point-to-point documentation failed to demonstrate compliance. A review of Point to
Point (P2P) documentation did not support verification of correct alarm priority, alarm
messaging, and that set points triggered appropriately and were logged to the event log in
SCADA. During the inspection, operator personnel, in response to a question asking if these
items were checked, responded, “Yes, but probably not documented.” In another instance,
operator personnel stated it was “assumed” the items were checked as the records did not
indicate such.
2.

§195.446 (c) Provide adequate information.
(1)….
(3) Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for
manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at
intervals not to exceed 15 months.

Enbridge failed to test and verify their internal communication plan to provide adequate means
for manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not
to exceed 15 months for the years 2017, 2018, and 2019.
Enbridge identified its internal communication plan as the Quarterly Qualified Individual
Notification Exercise (QINE). Enbridge described this in their Control Room Management
(CRM) Plan, Version 11.0, as a “spontaneous exercise verifying that employees qualified in the
manual operation of pipelines can be contacted in a timely manner.” Enbridge performed
quarterly calls to these individuals and asked each person three questions to verify their role and
contact information. However, § 195.446(c)(3) requires an internal communication plan
to "provide adequate means for manual operation of the pipeline safely." For major SCADA
outages, Enbridge indicated their practice was to shut down the pipeline, which would need to be
a manual operation. While Enbridge had procedures to facilitate shutdown, in practice they did
not facilitate tests or drills to exercise the procedures for the manual shut down of the pipeline.
Enbridge’s “Communications Failure – Pipeline” and “Communications Failure – Terminal”
procedures were more specific in the steps controllers and field personnel must follow to initiate
either manual shut down of equipment or continue manual operation of pipeline sections, and for
reporting requirements of local operations to the control room. These processes were also not
tested to verify their internal communication plan to provide adequate means for manual
operation of the pipeline safely.

3
Proposed Civil Penalty
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 C.F.R. § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018, and before
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679. For violation occurring on or after November 2,
2015, and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022. For violations occurring
prior to November 2, 2015, the maximum penalty may not exceed $200,000 per violation per
day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,000,000 for a related series of violations.
Warning Item
With respect to item 1, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved
in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty assessment
proceedings at this time. We advise you to promptly correct these items. Failure to do so may
result in additional enforcement action.
Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to item 2 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Enbridge Energy, Limited
Partnership. Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part
of this Notice.
Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. 552(b).
Following the receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to submit written comments, or request a
hearing under 49 CFR § 190.211. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice,
this constitutes a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the
Associate Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further
notice to you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that
you submit your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. This
period may be extended by written request for good cause.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2022-016-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.

4
Sincerely,
signed by GREGORY ALAN OCHS
GREGORY ALAN OCHS Digitally
Date: 2022.01.07 15:18:41 -06'00'

Gregory A. Ochs
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
cc: David Stafford, Manager Compliance david.stafford@enbridge.com

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings

5

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Enbridge Energy, Limited Partnership (Enbridge)
a Compliance Order incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance
of Enbridge with the pipeline safety regulations:
A.

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to testing and verifying manual
operating plans for the safe operation of the pipeline, upon amendment of
procedures related to §195.446(c)(3) as stated in Notice of Amendment in
CPF 3-2022-015 NOA, Enbridge must test those procedures/plans for the
controlled shut down of the pipeline and procedures/plans as set forth in the
“Communications Failure – Pipeline” and “Communications Failure – Terminal”
documents, and verify that they are effective and that personnel are
knowledgeable in carrying out their roles and responsibilities. These tests can be
either live or simulated. Upon completion of the test, Enbridge must conduct and
document an effectiveness review for each process. Any findings from the review
must be addressed in an appropriate manner which could include training or
procedure amendment. This must be completed within 90 days of receipt of the
Final Order. Please provide documentation of completion of this item to Director,
Central Region within this timeframe.

B.

It is requested (not mandated) that Enbridge Energy, Limited Partnership
maintain documentation of the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling
this Compliance Order and submit the total to Gregory A. Ochs, Director, Central
Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. It is requested
that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with
preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost
associated with replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline
infrastructure.

