U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety

901 Locust Street, Suite 480
Kansas City, MO 64106

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: tampapc@outlook.com; stlouispipelinegm@outlook.com;
Edric.kidd@panamericanpipelines.com
December 19, 2024
Robert Rose
President
St Louis Pipeline Operating, LLC
4120 Higel Street
Sarasota, FL 34242
CPF 3-2024-001-NOPV
Dear Mr. Rose:
From May 20, 2024 through October 18, 2024, representatives of the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter
601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.) performed an on-site inspection of St Louis Pipeline
Operating, LLC’s (SLPCO) refined petroleum pipeline system, in Madison County, Illinois and
St Louis County, Missouri.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that SLPCO has committed a probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The item inspected
and the probable violation is:
1.

§ 195.420 Valve maintenance.
(a) Each operator shall maintain each valve that is necessary for the safe
operation of its pipeline systems in good working order at all times.

SLPCO failed to maintain pipeline valves necessary for the safe operation of its pipeline system
in good working condition, as required by § 195.420(a). During PHMSA’s inspection, PHMSA
reviewed SLPCO’s valve mainline inspection Form 08 reports for calendar years 2021, 2022,
and 2023. The valve inspections included Valve 6, where records from 2022 indicated “valve #6
is hard to turn, had to get started with pipe wrench.” Per SLPCO’s records, Valve 6 still had this
issue in 2023. SLPCO did not have any documentation to demonstrate that Valve 6 was
subsequently repaired to ensure it was in good working order at all times. During the PHMSA

inspection of SLPCO’s headquarters in May 2024, SLPCO staff informed PHMSA that Valve 6
had yet to be repaired. Thus, SLPCO failed to maintain Valve 6 in good working condition, as
required by § 195.420(a).
Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to Item 1, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to St Louis Pipeline Operating
LLC. Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this
Notice.
Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to
you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. The Region
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted
demonstrating good cause for an extension.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2024-001-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,

GREGORY ALAN OCHS

Digitally signed by GREGORY ALAN OCHS
Date: 2024.12.19 15:40:13 -06'00'

Gregory Ochs
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
cc:

Barry Croft, Facility Supervisor, St Louis Pipeline Operating LLC,
stlouispipelinegm@outlook.com
Edric Kidd, National Pipeline Manager, St Louis Pipeline Operating LLC,
Edric.kidd@panamericanpipelines.com

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings

2

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to SLPCO a Compliance Order incorporating the
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of SLPCO with the pipeline safety
regulations:
A. In regard to Item 1 of the Notice, pertaining to SLPCO’s failure to have each valve
necessary for the safe operation of the pipeline system in good working condition at all
times, SLPCO must submit to the Director, Central Region, a plan to remediate Valve 6
within 30 days of receipt of the Final Order, for the Director’s review and approval.
Furthermore, SLPCO must submit records to demonstrate the implementation and
completion of the remedial work plan within 60 days of the Director’s approval of the
remedial work plan.
B. It is requested (not mandated) that SLPCO maintain documentation of the safety
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total
to Gregory A. Ochs, Director, Central, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in two categories: (1) total cost
associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and (2)
total cost associated with replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline
infrastructure.

3

