U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety

901 Locust Street, Suite 480
Kansas City, MO 64106

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO:
gregory.mcilwain@energytransfer.com; todd.nardozzi@energytransfer.com;
eric.amundsen@energytransfer.com;
June 13, 2024
Gregory McIlwain
President/CEO
Energy Transfer Company
8111 Westchester
Dallas, TX 75225

CPF 3-2024-020-NOPV

Dear Mr. McIlwain:
From March 29 to January 11, 2023, representatives of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49
United States Code (U.S.C.), virtually inspected Crestwood Midstream Partners, LP’s
(Crestwood) and Colt Connector Pipeline’s (Colt Hub) control room management procedures
and records in Epping, North Dakota. Colt Hub is a subsidiary of Crestwood Midstream Partners,
LP. Crestwood Midstream Partners, LP, reorganized under Energy Partners after an acquisition.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected
and the probable violations are:
1.

§195.446 Control room management.
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .

(b) . . . .
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each
of the following:
(1) . . . .
(4) Test any backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at
intervals not to exceed 15 months.
Colt Hub’s Hazardous Liquid Pipeline, Control Room Management Program Manual, Rev.
20200820, updated August 2020 (Colt Hub CRMP), was not adequate to demonstrate
compliance for testing any backup SCADA systems at least once each calendar year, but at
intervals not to exceed 15 months for calendar year 2020.
During PHMSA’s inspection, Colt Hub stated that there was no back up control room location.
However, beginning in calendar year 2020, Colt Hub operated a SCADA system with two
servers: one functioning as primary and the other as backup in the event the primary failed. Colt
Hub’s CRMP did not have procedures to test the two-server backup SCADA system at least once
each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months, and records were not available to
demonstrate they tested the system. Colt Hub did provide a separate stand-alone procedure,
owned by the SCADA group, to test the SCADA servers, but these procedures were not
formalized, and they were not referenced in the Colt Hub CRMP. The stand-alone procedure also
did not have procedures to test the two-server backup SCADA system at least once each calendar
year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months. If the stand-alone procedure is going to be used, it
must be formalized and referenced in the CRMP. Colt Hub did not keep backup SCADA system
test (or actual event) records to show it was done at least once each calendar year at intervals not
to exceed 15 months for calendar year 2020, as required by § 195.446(j)(1).
2.

§195.446 Control room management.
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each
of the following:
(1) . . . .
(3) Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for
manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year, but at
intervals not to exceed 15 months.

2

Colt Hub failed to follow its procedure to test and verify its internal communication plan to
provide adequate means for manual operation of the pipeline safely, as required by Colt Hub’s
CRMP section 304.
Section 304, entitled “Internal Communication Plan,” contained four sections: (1) a general
statement of the purpose and frequency requirement, (2) a testing process, (3) a plan process, and
(4) testing documentation. The purpose section stated, “this test will be provided to ensure the
communication adequately covers operations during a partial failure of the SCADA control
displays and to ensure individuals are able to communicate and understand their responsibilities
during a SCADA outage.” It also stated, “the intent of this requirement is that Colt Hub performs
exercises or drills to assure communication plans will be effective during an actual emergency
involving loss of all SCADA system functions or other systems relying on SCADA data such as
(flow transmitters).” Form CRM-304-EQ, “Test of Internal Communications Systems,” was used
to document the test. A review of tabletop drill exercises dated October 27, 2019, and October 9,
2020, provided by the operator during the inspection to demonstrate compliance, were drills that
tested participants emergency response. One controller was involved in the drill, primarily as a
witness. The drill did not reference or include a loss of SCADA. These drills failed to
demonstrate that the internal communication plan and associated test procedure was followed.
In addition, Colt Hub’s CRMP, which Colt Hub failed to follow, was not adequate to provide
a detailed plan for manual shut down or manual operation. Section 304 stated, “Colt Hub has
determined that the pipeline may be controlled manually during a catastrophic failure of the
SCADA/control displays.” This indicated that Colt Hub will move product manually through
the pipeline in the event SCADA fails. The procedure indicated that, “procedures are available
in O&M & ERP to safely perform a controlled shut down and maintain pipeline integrity.” The
procedure did not identify how it would be determined, or who would make that determination,
that the pipeline would be shut down or continue to move product manually. Section 304 failed
to contain any procedures related to how it would be determined the pipeline was shut down
and in a safe mode. The procedure also failed to contain: (1) identification of key points to
monitor, (2) how to monitor for leaks, (3) abnormal operations, (4) how emergencies would be
managed, (5) frequency for calling in to support monitoring of pressures, and (6) other critical
information regarding how to document this information and critical operating parameters
(replacing SCADA alarm set points) to alert controller of pipeline conditions. Therefore, the
procedure, in practice, failed to provide a plan and procedure to manually operate the pipeline
safely. For both reasons, Colt Hub failed to meet the burden of § 195.446(c)(3).
3.

§ 195.446 Control room management.
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements
of this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written
3

alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An
operator's plan must include provisions to:
(1) . . . .
(2) Identify at least once each calendar month points affecting safety that have
been taken off scan in the SCADA host, have had alarms inhibited, generated false
alarms, or that have had forced or manual values for periods of time exceeding
that required for associated maintenance or operating activities.
Colt Hub failed to demonstrate that it identified at least once each calendar month points
affecting safety that had been taken off scan in the SCADA host, had alarms inhibited, or that
had forced or manual values for periods of time exceeding that required for associated
maintenance or operating activities. Specifically, Colt Hub utilized Form 506-1, “Monthly
Review of Alarms.” A review of the December 2020 record (representing the review of
November 2020) indicated that at the time of the inspection Colt Hub had not completed its
review. The alarm list was provided, but there was no review of the alarm. Even if there were
no points that had been taken off-scan, inhibited, or had forced or manual values during
November 2020, the form response should have been “NO,” rather than incomplete. Thus,
Colt Hub failed to identify at least once each calendar month points affecting safety that had
been taken off scan in the SCADA host, had alarms inhibited, generated false alarms, or that
had forced or manual values, per the requirements of § 195.446(e)(2).
Additionally, the procedure did not provide adequate detail to require generating reports from
the data base to identify points affecting safety that had been taken off scan in the SCADA
host, had alarms inhibited, or that had forced or manual values. As a result, a review of
records from August 14, 2019 (representing the review for July 2019) indicated that Colt Hub
collected and reviewed only the safety related alarms that presented for the month to
determine if the points, related to the alarms, had been taken off-scan, were inhibited, or had
forced or manual values. Colt Hub did not look in the data base to determine if points had
been taken off scan, were inhibited, or had forced or manual values which is important
because these would not generate alarms. It also did not include how Colt Hub would validate
that these points were not in these states for periods of time exceeding that required for
associated maintenance or operating activities. If a point is found to be deficient per the
procedure, the procedure failed to include direction of how to address those cases or clarify
how long a point could linger without correction, if maintenance was delayed. Outside of
identifying the required form, the procedure simply restated § 195.446(e)(2). Thus, on this
additional basis, Colt Hub failed to meet the burden of § 195.446(e)(2).
4.

§ 195.446 Control room management.
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
4

(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An
operator’s plan must include provisions to:
(1) . . . .
(3) Verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point values and alarm descriptions
when associated field instruments are calibrated or changed and at least once each
calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.
The Colt Hub CRMP was not adequate to verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point values
and alarm descriptions when associated field instruments are calibrated or changed and at least
once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months. Specifically, Colt Hub CRMP
section 507 failed to include the requirement for verifying alarm set-point values and alarm
descriptions when associated field instruments are calibrated or changed; it only required the
calendar year requirement. Form 303 was used by the field for calibrations. While the form did
indicate that verification of the set point with the control room was required, descriptions were
not verified by the control room. There was no record in the control room to verify compliance
with this section. Colt Hub only used the field verification, which was not adequate to verify
compliance. While the Colt Hub CRMP procedure required use of Form 507-1 for the yearly
review, it did not provide direction on how to conduct the review or how to complete the form.
Additionally, Colt Hub’s procedures failed to contain a requirement to document and correct
deficiencies identified through the verification review, in violation of § 195.446(e)(3).
5.

§ 195.446 Control room management
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An
operator’s plan must include provisions to:
(1) . . . .
(4) Review the alarm management plan required by this paragraph at least once
each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 months, to determine the
effectiveness of the plan.

Colt Hub failed to follow its procedure in CRMP section 508 for the 2019 and 2020 reviews of
its alarm management plan to determine the effectiveness of the plan. Specifically, section 508
required using Form 508-1 for the Alarm Management Plan Review. The procedure also
provided four “effectiveness criteria,” which consisted of both objective and subjective measures
with no metrics. The effectiveness criteria utilized in the completed review forms for 2019 and
2020 did not reflect the effectiveness criteria provided in section 508. Section 508 stated the
“[r]eview shall determine the effectiveness of the plan, by including safety related alarms and
alarm indications of emergency conditions.” Form 508-1 did not reflect this element of the

5

procedure, nor the four effectiveness criteria identified in the procedure. Additionally, Colt
Hub’s Form 508-1 did not include any values to support determination of effectiveness. For
these reasons, Colt Hub failed to follow its procedure for review of its alarm management plan.
Additionally, Colt Hub’s CRMP did not provide any performance metrics, such as industry
standards or those developed by the operator, that could be used to determine effectiveness of the
Alarm Management Plan. The procedure did not offer details of how the annual review was to be
completed and who was accountable to conduct the review. For example, the procedure did not
clarify (1) how many alarms are to be reviewed, (2) the duration of the review, (3) the alarm
descriptions, or (4) over what period and measurement should the alarms be reduced. Thus,
section 508 was not adequate to review the alarm management plan at least once each calendar
year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 months, to determine the effectiveness of the plan, per the
requirement of § 195.446(e)(4).
6.

§ 195.446 Control room management
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An
operator’s plan must include provisions to:
(1) . . . .
(5) Monitor the content and volume of general activity being directed to and
required of each controller at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not
exceeding 15 months, that will assure controllers have sufficient time to analyze and
react to incoming alarms.

Colt Hub’s workload study was not adequate to demonstrate compliance with § 195.446(e)(5) to
monitor the content and volume of general activity being directed to and required of each
controller nor to assure that controllers have sufficient time to analyze and react to incoming
alarms. Colt Hub did not demonstrate that it examined all tasks and content directed to the
controller. Specifically, a review of Colt Hub’s workload study records from 2019 and 2020
identified an assessment of number of alarms/per hour per12-hour shift (2019 and 2020) and
phone calls per 12-hour shift (2020). The remainder of the study consisted of controller surveys
related to the controllers’ perceived effort or workload. An example of a response to one
question was, “from the workload studies, and interviews from the controllers at Colt Hub, they
were successful in accomplishing their rounds and assigned tasks in a reasonable amount of
time.” What was missing was the task(s) and time related to this, and how it related to the overall
controller workload. The study did not provide enough detail for Colt Hub’s CRMP procedures
to be based on sufficient information, rendering them inadequate to demonstrate compliance.

6

Furthermore, the Colt Hub CRMP was inadequate to provide a process to monitor the content
and volume of general activity being directed to and required of each controller at least once
each calendar year, but at intervals not exceeding 15 months, that will assure controllers have
sufficient time to analyze and react to incoming alarms. Section 509 of the CRMP described
the review method as, “(1) Controllers will complete the activity review forms in a timely
manner when utilized or logbooks if used, and (2) Operations Supervisor will review forms
and/or logbook data for preparation and development of final report.” The content and
volume of general activity includes all activity conducted by the controller. This includes
activities such as, phone calls, alarm response, sending commands and set points, paperwork,
and/or 811 calls. The procedure was deficient as it did not require review of all activities.
Section 509 also included a subsection entitled "Benchmark for Controller Workload.” This
stated, “the rule does not establish a uniform benchmark for controller workload. Colt Hub
will evaluate and document the substantive adequacy of controller workload criteria.” This
procedure did not provide any specific metrics to demonstrate substantive adequacy of
controller workload criteria. There are industry best practices that can serve as benchmarks;
Colt Hub did not reference these in the CRMP but considered them in the workload study.
The procedure also did not describe the surveys and interviews that are identified in the
records. The procedure is void of any metric that will assure controllers have sufficient time
to analyze and react to incoming alarms.
Thus, Colt Hub failed to demonstrate compliance, in both procedure and implementation, to
monitor the content and volume of general activity being directed to and required of each
controller, in violation of § 195.446(e)(5).
7.

§ 195.446 Control room management.
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section . . . .
(b) . . . .
(f) Change management. Each operator must assure that changes that could affect
control room operations are coordinated with the control room personnel by
performing each of the following:
(1) Implement section 7 of API RP 1168 (incorporated by reference, see §195.3) for
control room management change and require coordination between control room
representatives, operator's management, and associated field personnel when
planning and implementing physical changes to pipeline equipment or
configuration.

Colt Hub failed to follow its CRMP section 602 and section 7 of API RP 1168, “Pipeline Control
Room Management,” (IBR) to establish and implement a Management of Change (MOC) when
it upgraded the Colt Hub’s HMI from the existing system platform to their standard SE design
package early 2021. This upgrade included modifications to screen colors, the addition of a

7

backup server, and multiple screen capabilities. Section 602 requires an MOC when, “new
equipment is coming online” and when “SCADA/control display changes,” both of which
occurred during Colt Hub’s December 2020 upgrade. The MOC process is a method of
identifying all affected parties, processes, equipment, personnel and others that could be
impacted by the change and putting in place the necessary communication, consideration,
testing, time, documentation and training to insure smooth transition. Colt Hub failed to follow
its procedure to establish and implement an MOC for their SCADA modification.
Colt Hub did complete a Form 302, entitled “Implement API 1165 Requirements,” on December
17, 2020, for the SCADA upgrade, but Form 302 was insufficient as a management of change
record. Form 302 was required by CRMP section 602 when, “[c]hanges that impact display
parameters (such as display symbols, color palettes, or anything that affects the controllermachine interface).” API RP 1165 section 7.2 discusses the SCADA system and recommends,
“[m]odifications should be tested and their functionality be verified.” Section 7.3 also
recommended, “[n]otification and/or training should be provided to ensure the ability to
implement the change.” Thus, Colt Hub failed to follow the requirements of § 195.446(f)(1).
8.

§ 195.446 Control room management
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
(h) Training. Each operator must establish a controller training program and review
the training program content to identify potential improvements at least once each
calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months. An operator's program
must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and responsibilities
defined by the operator. In addition, the training program must include the
following elements:
(1) Responding to abnormal operating conditions likely to occur simultaneously or
in sequence.

Colt Hub’s training program was not adequate because it did not provide content to train controllers
to carry out the roles and responsibilities defined by the operator as it related to controllers
responding to abnormal operating conditions likely to occur simultaneously or in sequence.
Specifically, while Colt Hub CRMP section 803 identified the training requirement, it did not
include a list of abnormal operating conditions that can occur simultaneously or in sequence and the
expected response by the controller for those conditions to provide content for the training.
Section 195.446(b)(2) requires operators to define the controller’s role and responsibilities related
to the detection of abnormal operating conditions. Colt Hub CRMP section 203 clarified that
responding to abnormal operating conditions is a defined role of the controller and responsibilities
are assigned for response. Section 195.446(h)(1) requires operators to clarify the roles and
responsibilities of controllers when responding to abnormal operating conditions likely to occur
simultaneously or in sequence. Therefore, training program content must be in place to train the

8

controllers to carry out controller’s roles and responsibilities in responding to abnormal operating
conditions likely to occur simultaneously or in sequence. Colt Hub’s training program failed to
provide content to train controllers on such subjects, in violation of § 195.446(h)(1).
Proposed Civil Penalty
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed
$266,015 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,660,135 for a
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 6, 2023, and before
December 28, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $257,664 per violation per day the
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after March 21, 2022, and before January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $239,142 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after May 3, 2021, and before March
21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after January 11, 2021, and before May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after July 31, 2019, and before
January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $218,647 per violation per day the
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after November 27, 2018, and before July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may
not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of $41,200
as follows:
Item number
1
2

PENALTY
$11,100
$30,100

Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to Items 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 8 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Colt Hub.
Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this
Notice.
Warning Items
With respect to Item 7, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved
in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty assessment

9

proceedings at this time. We advise you to promptly correct this item. Failure to do so may result
in additional enforcement action.
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to
you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. The Region
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted
demonstrating good cause for an extension.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2024-020-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,

signed by GREGORY ALAN OCHS
GREGORY ALAN OCHS Digitally
Date: 2024.06.14 07:21:21 -05'00'

Gregory A. Ochs
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
cc:

Eric Amundsen/ SVP Operations eric.amundsen@energytransfer.com
Todd Nardozzi/ Director – Regulatory Compliance todd.nardozzi@energytransfer.com

Enclosures:

Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings

10

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Colt Hub a Compliance Order incorporating the
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Colt Hub with the pipeline safety
regulations:
A.

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice, pertaining to Colt Hub’s failure to have a
procedure to demonstrate compliance for testing any backup SCADA systems at
least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months for the year
2020, Colt Hub must develop a procedure to test their back up SCADA server
once each calendar year not to exceed 15 months. The procedure for the test must
be detailed enough to demonstrate a thorough test of operating on the back up
SCADA server. The documentation of the test must also provide information to
demonstrate thoroughness of the test. Colt Hub must also conduct a test using the
new procedures/plans within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order.
Documentation of compliance must be provided to the Director for review upon
completion.

B.

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice, pertaining to Colt Hub’s failure to follow its
procedure to test and verify their internal communication plan and its inadequate
procedure to provide a detailed plan for safe manual shut down or manual
operation of the pipeline, Colt Hub must develop an internal communication plan
to safely manually operate the pipeline to shut down and if selected manually
move product through the pipeline. A plan must also be developed to test the
internal communication plan at least once each calendar year not to exceed 15
months. Colt Hub’s procedures must be modified to implement the plans. Colt
Hub must train its controllers in these procedures and conduct a test using the new
procedures/plans within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order. Documentation of
compliance must be provided to the Director for review upon completion.

C.

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice, pertaining to Colt Hub’s failure to demonstrate
that it identified at least once each calendar month points affecting safety that had
been taken off scan in the SCADA host, had alarms inhibited, or that had forced
or manual values for periods of time exceeding that required for associated
maintenance or operating activities, Colt Hub must amend its procedures to
provide adequate detail to generate, from the data base or other source, or identify
points affecting safety that had been taken off scan in the SCADA host, had
alarms inhibited, or that had forced or manual values. The procedure also needs to
include how these points will be reviewed and detail how any identified
deficiencies will be quickly addressed to correct the condition. The procedure
must be implemented, and two monthly reviews conducted and documented using
the amended procedure within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order.
Documentation of compliance must be provided to the Director for review upon
completion.

11

D.

In regard to Item 4 of the Notice, pertaining to Colt Hub’s inadequate procedure
due to the lack of a requirement to verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point
values and alarm descriptions when associated field instruments are calibrated or
changed which also did not include documentation and deficiency identification
and correction, Colt Hub must amend its procedures to include a requirement to
verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point values and alarm descriptions
when associated field instruments are calibrated or changed and include
appropriate documentation and correction of any deficiencies identified.
Controllers need to be trained on the amended process and demonstrate
competency through implementation of verification with the field technicians and
records the within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order. Documentation of
compliance must be provided to the Director for review upon completion.

E.

In regard to Item 5 of the Notice, pertaining to Colt Hub’s failure to follow its
procedure in CRMP section 508 for its 2019 and 2020 review of its alarm
management plan to determine the effectiveness of the plan and inadequate
procedure due to a lack of process detailing how to complete annual review and
the inadequate form, Colt Hub must amend its procedures to include details of
how the procedure will be reviewed, criteria for the review, and how effectiveness
will be determined, complete an annual review using the new procedure and
correct any deficiencies identified through the review within 60 days of receipt of
the Final Order. Colt Hub must also amend the form for documentation to match
the requirements of the procedure for the review within 60 days of receipt of the
Final Order. Documentation of compliance must be provided to the Director for
review upon completion.

F.

In regard to Item 6 of the Notice, pertaining to Colt Hub’s inadequate procedure
that failed to demonstrate that it examined all tasks and general activity directed to
the controller, and failed to provide the benchmark to determine controllers had
adequate time that will assure controllers have sufficient time to analyze and react
to incoming alarms, Colt Hub must amend its procedures to identify all tasks and
general activity directed to the controller, the process to conduct the study/review,
and a metric or bench mark to evaluate sufficient time for controllers to analyze and
react to incoming alarms and to conduct a workload study using the new procedure
and associated form within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order. Documentation of
compliance must be provided to the Director for review upon completion.

G.

In regard to Item 8 of the Notice, pertaining to Colt Hub’s inadequate training
program content that failed to provide controllers training related to responding to
abnormal operating conditions likely to occur simultaneously or in sequence, Colt
Hub must amend its procedures to identify abnormal operating conditions likely
to occur simultaneously or in sequence the appropriate controller response to
these conditions. This must be included in the training program content.
Controllers must be trained on these conditions and training documented content
within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order. Documentation of compliance must
be provided to the Director for review upon completion.

12

H.

It is requested that Colt Hub maintain documentation of the safety improvement
costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to
Gregory Ochs, Director, Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in two categories: (1)
total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and
analyses, and (2) total cost associated with replacements, additions and other
changes to pipeline infrastructure.

13

