U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety
Administration

901 Locust Street, Suite 480
Kansas City, MO 64106

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: craig.hoeferlin@spireenergy.com and
Bob.Gardner@spireenergy.com

March 17, 2022
Mr. Craig Hoeferlin
Vice President, Operations Services and SMS
Spire Missouri Inc. East
700 Market Street
St. Louis, Missouri 63101
CPF 3-2022-033-NOPV
Dear Mr. Hoeferlin:
From May 17 to May 21, 2021, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49
United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected your Control Room Management Plans and Procedures in
St. Louis, Missouri.
This Notice is in response to PHMSA’s Control Room Management (CRM) Initiative, which is a
national level program that includes inspectors from every region. As a result, you may have
received this Notice from a different Regional Director than typical because the CRM Initiative
inspections are currently separate from the standard inspection program. Notices and
correspondence from other types of inspections will remain unchanged.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected
and the probable violations are:

1. 195.446 Control Room Management.
(a)….
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each
of the following:
(1) Implement API RP 1165 (incorporated by reference, see §195.3) whenever a
SCADA system is added, expanded or replaced, unless the operator demonstrates
that certain provisions of API RP 1165 are not practical for the SCADA system
used;
Spire failed to verify, through records, it implemented API RP 1165 when the Spire NGL
system was added to the existing console that monitored, operated and controlled the
Spire Gas Transmission system. The operator did not demonstrate that certain provisions
of API RP 1165 are not practical for the SCADA system used.
2.

195.446 Control room management.
(a)….
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each
of the following:
(1)….
(2) Conduct a point-to-point verification between SCADA displays and related field
equipment when field equipment is added or moved and when other changes that
affect pipeline safety are made to field equipment or SCADA displays;
Spire failed to complete an adequate point-to-point verification (PPV) between SCADA
displays and related field equipment when field equipment was added or moved and
when other changes that affect pipeline safety were made to field equipment or SCADA
displays. The point-to-point documentation only captured date, time, tag, description,
field tech, controller, field value, HMI value (auto populate) and notes. The operator
failed to include in the documentation alarm set point verification, alarm description
verification, alarm priority verification, alarm presentation verification, screen(s)
verification (presents properly on all screens). It was explained that this was due to the
auto populate for the electronic form not including these. Additionally, analog values
and status points did not match. Spire failed to provide follow-up and documentation of
an adequate verification following failed PPV.

2

3.

195.446 Control room management.
(a)….
(c) Provide adequate information. Each operator must provide its controllers with
the information, tools, processes and procedures necessary for the controllers to
carry out the roles and responsibilities the operator has defined by performing each
of the following:
(1)….
(2)….
(3) Test and verify an internal communication plan to provide adequate means for
manual operation of the pipeline safely, at least once each calendar year not to
exceed 15 months;
Spire failed to complete a test of their internal communication plan in 2020. The first test
should have been completed in November 2020, one year after anniversary of the
pipeline and control room start up.

4.

195.446 Control room management.
(a)….
(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An
operator’s plan must include provisions to:
(1) Review SCADA safety-related alarm operations using a process that ensures
alarms are accurate and support safe pipeline operations;
Spire failed to adequately implement safety related points in their SCADA system. The
Spire CRM Plan Section 7.2 identified all pressure points and odorizers as safety related
points. The conditions of pressure HH, H, L and LL were identified as safety related
alarms. It also identified pressure Rate of Change (ROC) and odorizer pump failure as
safety related alarms.
A review of the master data base identified valves were not properly implemented as well
as gas detect alarms. Some pressure points were identified as “False” for safety related
point/alarm even though the procedure stated all pressure points were safety related.

5.

195.446 Control room management.
(a)….
(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An
operator’s plan must include provisions to:
(1)…
(2)…

3

(3) Verify the correct safety-related alarm set-point values and alarm descriptions
when associated field instruments are calibrated or changed and at least once each
calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months.
Spire failed to verify between the field and control room correct safety-related alarm setpoint values and alarm descriptions in SCADA when calibrations were performed in the
field. Also, they failed to include in their CRM Plan a procedure to coordinate with the
field to meet all the requirements of this section. Spire did not have a process
implemented to complete the required verifications once they incorporated the hazardous
liquid pipeline in the control room. The operator was performing calibrations in the field,
but these were not in coordination with documentation in the control room.
Proposed Civil Penalty
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed
$225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for a
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before May
3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679. For violation occurring on or after November 2,
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022.
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of $31,100
as follows:
Item number
5

PENALTY
$31,100

Warning Items
With respect to items 2 and 3 we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents
involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty
assessment proceedings at this time. We advise you to promptly correct these items. Failure to
do so may result in additional enforcement action.

4

Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to items 1 and 4 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Spire NGL. Please
refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice.
Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. 552(b).
Following the receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to submit written comments, or request a
hearing under 49 CFR § 190.211. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice,
this constitutes a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the
Associate Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further
notice to you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that
you submit your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. This
period may be extended by written request for good cause.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2022-033-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,
signed by GREGORY ALAN OCHS
GREGORY ALAN OCHS Digitally
Date: 2022.03.17 14:49:07 -05'00'

Gregory A. Ochs
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
cc: Bob Gardner, Director Compliance and Pipeline Integrity Bob.Gardner@spireenergy.com
Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings

5

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Spire NGL a Compliance Order incorporating the
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Spire NGL with the pipeline safety
regulations:
A.

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice, pertaining to verifying Spire implemented API
RP 1165 when the Spire NGL system was added to the existing gas transmission
console, Spire must complete an audit of their SCADA system against the API RP
1165 as incorporated by reference. Any findings from the audit, must be corrected
in the SCADA system to be compliant with §195.446 (c)(2) unless the operator
demonstrates that certain provisions of the API RP 1165 are not practical for the
SCADA system used. This must be completed within 30 days of receipt of the
Final Order.

B.

In regard to Item 4 of the Notice, pertaining to Spire’s failure to adequately
implement safety related points in their SCADA system, Spire must define safety
related points and alarms, review the master SCADA database and correctly
identify those points to designate Safety Related. Additionally, the designation of
safety related must be readily available to the controllers for review and alarm
handling practices within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order.

C.

It is requested (not mandated) that Spire maintain documentation of the safety
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit
the total to Gregory A. Ochs, Director, Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in
two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans,
procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements,
additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure.

6

