U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety
Administration

901 Locust Street, Suite 480
Kansas City, MO 64106

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: troby@bayoumidstream.com;
tnellermoe@bayoumidstream.com
November 8, 2022
Travis Roby
Chief Executive Officer
Bayou Midstream / NST Express, LLC
820 Gessner Road, Suite 1450
Houston, Texas 77024

CPF 3-2022-056-NOPV

Dear Mr. Roby:
On various dates between August 2021 and October 2021, a representative of the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant
to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected Bayou Midstream’s subsidiary NST
Express, LLC’s (NST) crude oil pipeline system between East Fairview and Alexander, North
Dakota.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that NST has committed probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected
and the probable violations are:
1.

§ 195.452 Pipeline integrity management in high consequence areas.
(a) . . . .
(b) What program and practices must operators use to manage pipeline integrity? Each
operator of a pipeline covered by this section must:
(1) Develop a written integrity management program that addresses the risks on
each segment of pipeline . . . .
(5) Implement and follow the program.
NST failed to follow its integrity management procedure for risk analysis in Section 6 of
the Northstar Midstream IMP to evaluate the consequences of a potential pipeline failure,
as required by § 195.452(f)(3).

Specifically, NST failed to evaluate the consequences of a failure at its Alexander Station
and Alexander Junction because it did not estimate the extent of dispersion of hazardous
materials that could result from a failure of the breakout tanks or station piping. During
the inspection covering 2017 through 2020.
2.

§ 195.507 Recordkeeping.
Each operator shall maintain records that demonstrate compliance with this
subpart.
(a) . . . .
(b) Records supporting an individual's current qualification shall be maintained
while the individual is performing the covered task. Records of prior qualification
and records of individuals no longer performing covered tasks shall be retained for
a period of five years.
NST failed to maintain records supporting an individual’s current qualification to
perform a qualified task. On October 5th, 2021, PHMSA observed an active pipeline
excavation site at County Road 13. After PHMSA requested a record of the current
qualification of the individual performing the covered task, NST could not provide one.
The One Call ticket for the location of the excavation showed that the contractor hired by
NST performed the line locate task. A review of additional operations records showed
that the contract individual had performed line locate activities for NST since August
2019.

3.

§ 195.563 Which pipelines must have cathodic protection?
(a) Each buried or submerged pipeline that is constructed, relocated, replaced, or
otherwise changed after the applicable date in §195.401(c) must have cathodic
protection. The cathodic protection must be in operation not later than 1 year after
the pipeline is constructed, relocated, replaced, or otherwise changed, as applicable.
NST failed to demonstrate that it had a functional cathodic protection (CP) system
installed in its terminals within one year of operation for the buried pipeline at Alexander
Station and Alexander Junction. During the inspection NST provided a map of the
existing test points on its mainline pipe, however there were no test points shown within
the stations. Additionally, PHMSA found from observation that electrical isolation kits
had been installed between the mainline and station piping, indicating that the CP system
in place for mainline pipe was not designed for the station piping.
The pipeline was fully operational in 2017, however NST failed to install a CP system
within one (1) year of operation and could not provide a justification for not installing
CP; therefore, NST was operating without adequate CP.

4.

§ 195.573 What must I do to monitor external corrosion control?
(a) Protected pipelines. You must do the following to determine whether cathodic
protection required by this subpart complies with § 195.571:

2

(1) Conduct tests on the protected pipeline at least once each calendar year, but with
intervals not exceeding 15 months. However, if tests at those intervals are
impractical for separately protected short sections of bare or ineffectively coated
pipelines, testing may be done at least once every 3 calendar years, but with
intervals not exceeding 39 months.
NST failed to conduct cathodic protection tests on its mainline pipeline and breakout
tanks in 2019. From a review of records PHMSA found that the monitoring scheduled
for the 26 test points on the mainline pipe and two tanks at the Alexander Station were
overlooked in the 2019 calendar year and not conducted until February 2020.
5.

§ 195.573 What must I do to monitor external corrosion control?
(a) . . . .
(c) Rectifiers and other devices. You must electrically check for proper performance
each device in the first column at the frequency stated in the second column.
Device
Rectifier
Reverse current switch
Diode
Interference bond whose failure would
jeopardize structural protection

Check frequency
At least six times each
calendar year, but with
intervals not exceeding
2 ½ months

Other interference bond

At least once each
Calendar year, but with
intervals not exceeding 15 months.

NST failed to check the proper performance of an electrical bond located in its Alexander
Junction facility. PHMSA found NST pipe electrically bonded to a foreign operator via
an above ground jumper wire during the field inspection. NST was aware that the bond
was installed, however they did not check it for performance or have any documentation
confirming that a failure of the bond would not jeopardize structural protection.
During the inspection PHMSA requested information about the jumper and whether it
was a critical bond for the CP system. NST provided a 2021 annual CP report discussing
the bond and the need to possibly disconnect it. NST also provided a 2021 depolarized
survey report discussing the bond and that it may be supplying protective electrical
current to the Alexander interconnect station. NST could not determine if the bond was
required for its CP system and failed to establish the necessary checking frequency as
required by § 195.573.
6.

§ 195.579 What must I do to mitigate internal corrosion?
(a) . . . .
(b) Inhibitors. If you use corrosion inhibitors to mitigate internal corrosion, you
must—
3

(1) . . . .
(2) Use coupons or other monitoring equipment to determine the effectiveness of the
inhibitors in mitigating internal corrosion; and
NST failed to monitor the effectiveness of internal corrosion control measures in a
segment of pipe at its Alexander station. During the field inspection, PHMSA identified
a segment of pipe with no flow and without a corrosion coupon. Although NST uses
inhibitors to prevent internal corrosion and has coupons in segments with flowing
product, it was not able to properly monitor the no-flow segment.
During a review of records and maps of the Alexander Station, PHMSA found that NST
built a line segment to accommodate a second pump that was not yet installed. There
was no coupon in this section of pipe, and it was not adequately protected or monitored
for internal corrosion.
Proposed Civil Penalty
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed
$239,142 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a
related series of violations. For violations occurring on or after May 3, 2021, and before March
21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after January 11, 2021, and before May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January
11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may
not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.
For violation occurring on or after November 2, 2015 and before November 27, 2018, the
maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not
to exceed $2,090,022.
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of
$132,100 as follows:
Item number
1
3
4

PENALTY
$46,600
$58,400
$27,100

Warning Item(s)
With respect to Item 2, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved
in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty assessment
proceedings at this time. We advise you to promptly correct this item. Failure to do so may
result in additional enforcement action.
4

Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to Items 1, 3, 5, and 6, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to NST Express, LLC.
Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this
Notice.
Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
Following the receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to submit written comments, or request a
hearing under 49 CFR § 190.211. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice,
this constitutes a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the
Associate Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further
notice to you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that
you submit your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. This
period may be extended by written request for good cause.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 3-2022-056-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,
signed by GREGORY ALAN OCHS
GREGORY ALAN OCHS Digitally
Date: 2022.11.08 14:48:20 -06'00'

Gregory A. Ochs
Director, Central Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings
cc:

Travis Nellermoe, Area Operations Manager, Bayou Midstream Bakken,
tnellermoe@bayoumidstream.com

5

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to NST Express, LLC (NST), a Compliance Order
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of NST with the
pipeline safety regulations:
A.

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to the failure to follow its integrity
management procedure for risk analysis at its facilities, NST must, within 90 days
of the receipt of the Final Order:
i. Perform a study to determine the extent of dispersion of hazardous materials
released from its facilities as a result of a possible failure, and evaluate the
severity of consequences of the failure for possible mitigation.
ii. Provide the Director, PHMSA Central Region, a report summarizing the
results of the study.

B.

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice, pertaining to NST’s failure to demonstrate that it
had a functional cathodic protection system within one year of operation at
Alexander Station and Alexander Junction, NST must:
i. Within 30 days of receipt of the Final Order, ensure that cathodic protection
(CP) is applied to the buried pipe in its facilities.
ii. Within 60 days of receipt of the Final Order:
1. Install sufficient test stations within its facilities to monitor cathodic
protection and submit a report to PHMSA of the monitored level of CP
at each test station.
2. Verify that any electrical isolation devices are functioning as intended.
iii. Send monthly reports to the Director, PHMSA Central Region, outlining the
completion of the requirements above, and other actions taken to install
adequate CP and test stations. Additionally, NST shall provide the ongoing
schedule for completion to achieve compliance.

C.

In regard to Item 5 of the Notice pertaining to the electrical bond at the Alexander
Junction, NST shall, within 90 days of receipt of the Final Order, perform a study
to determine if the bond is necessary for protection of the pipeline structure, and,
based on the findings, establish either an annual or 2 ½ month inspection interval,
as outlined by § 195.573(c).

D.

In regard to Item 6 pertaining to internal corrosion mitigation, NST shall, within
90 days of receipt of the Final Order, remove the affected section of pipe or
isolate and purge the pipe of crude oil, or install a means of properly monitoring
internal corrosion with a coupon.

E.

It is requested that NST Express, LLC, maintain documentation of the safety
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order, and submit
the total to Gregory A. Ochs, Director, Central Region, Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in two
categories: 1) total costs associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures,
6

studies and analyses; and 2) total costs associated with replacements, additions
and other changes to pipeline infrastructure.

7

