(1) . . . .
(3) Train controllers and supervisors to recognize the effects of fatigue.
Alliance failed to maintain appropriate records to demonstrate that it had trained controllers to
recognize the effects of fatigue as required by § 192.631(j)(1). Additionally, Alliance failed to
follow its procedures in its CRM Plan section 4.3.5.1.1 that required fatigue management
training once per calendar year, at intervals not to exceed 15 months. A review of Alliance’s
records identified five employees who were not recorded as completing the required refresher
fatigue training: one in 2020 and four in 2022. Alliance indicated during the inspection that in
2022, while the individuals did take the Learning Management System (LMS) course, they did
not complete the associated test, so the training was not completed pursuant to the CRM Plan. As
a result, Alliance was not able to demonstrate that it had trained controllers and supervisors to
recognize the effects of fatigue, in violation of § 192.631(d)(3).
2.

§ 192.631 Control room management.
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
(e) Alarm management. Each operator using a SCADA system must have a written
alarm management plan to provide for effective controller response to alarms. An
operator's plan must include provisions to:
(1) Review SCADA safety-related alarm operations using a process that ensures
alarms are accurate and support safe pipeline operations;

Alliance failed to identify specific points as safety-related points in its CRM Plan section 34.3.3.3, and failed to implement them in its SCADA master database to ensure that alarms are
accurate and support safe pipeline operations.
Alliance was granted a Special Permit in 2006 a to operate under an Alternative Maximum
Operating Pressure (AMAOP). The waiver was subject to, and conditional on 29, supplemental
safety criteria (SSC). The SSC “address the life cycle management of the subject pipeline and
require the operator to adhere to maintenance, inspection, monitoring, control, and reporting
standards exceeding regulatory requirements.” Four SSCs relate to information that is monitored
through an Alliance SCADA system; therefore, these SSCs should have been identified as points
affecting safety and have safety-related alarms associated with them. These were SSC numbers
“(1) Fracture Control Plan,” “(4) Temperature Control,” “(12) Gas Quality Monitoring,” and
“(29) Potential Impact Radius.” The elements included in these SSC elements are pressures,
temperatures, and gas qualities specific to hydrogen sulfide, carbon dioxide, and water, and gas
composition. A review of the CRM Plan section 3-4.3.3.3 revealed that Alliance failed to include
considerations for temperature, gas composition, and gas quality related to hydrogen sulfide,
carbon dioxide, and water. A review of the SCADA master database identified that Alliance did
identify compressor discharge temperatures as safety-related and provided a Hi shutdown set
a

71 Fed. Reg. 39,145 (July 11, 2006).

2

point at 120.2º F. However, Alliance failed to include any gas quality or gas composition values
in its SCADA master database.
In addition to the Special Permit SSC elements, Alliance also failed to consider in its procedure
power failure considerations (AC Power and battery voltage), as well as communication failures.
A review of the master database identified that AC power failures were not considered safetyrelated points, but battery voltage was. It should be noted that not all battery voltages were
identified as safety-related. Additionally, Alliance was inconsistent with its consideration of
safety-related points. For example, communication failures were safety-related but
communication status was not. Also, Alliance failed to consider all ESD points safety-related in
the SCADA database, even though ESD points were identified in the procedure.
Alliance failed to identify specific points as safety-related points in its CRM Plan, and to
implement them in its SCADA master database to assure alarms are accurate and support safe
pipeline operations, in violation of § 192.631(e)(1).
3.

§ 192.631 Control room management.
(a) General. This section applies to each operator of a pipeline facility with a
controller working in a control room who monitors and controls all or part of a
pipeline facility through a SCADA system. Each operator must have and follow
written control room management procedures that implement the requirements of
this section. . . .
(b) . . . .
(h) Training. Each operator must establish a controller training program and review
the training program content to identify potential improvements at least once each
calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15 months. An operator's program
must provide for training each controller to carry out the roles and responsibilities
defined by the operator. In addition, the training program must include the
following elements:

Alliance failed to complete its review of the controller training program content to identify
potential improvements at least once each calendar year, but at intervals not to exceed 15
months, per § 192.631(h). Specifically, Alliance’s 2021 annual review was completed on
October 26, 2021, and its 2022 annual review was completed on January 4, 2023. Alliance failed
to complete a review in calendar year 2022. Alliance indicated it was having difficulty
scheduling various groups to support the review. This caused them to fail the interval
requirement prescribed in § 192.631(h).
Proposed Civil Penalty
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed
$266,015 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,660,135 for a
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 6, 2023, and before
December 28, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $257,664 per violation per day the
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not
3

exceed $239,142 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March
21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January
11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may
not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679.
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time.
Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to Item 2 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Alliance. Please refer to the
Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice.
Warning Items
With respect to Items 1 and 3, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents
involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty
assessment proceedings at this time. We advise you to promptly correct this item. Failure to do
so may result in additional enforcement action.
Response to this Notice
This Notice is issued in accordance with 49 C.F.R. § 190.207(c). Any response you may have
submitted to the original Notice is no longer applicable. You must respond as set forth below.
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes
4

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Alliance a Compliance Order incorporating the
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Alliance with the pipeline safety
regulations:
A.

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice, pertaining to Alliance’s failure to identify
specific points as safety-related points in its CRM Plan Section 3-4.3.3.3 and to
implement them in its SCADA master database to assure alarms are accurate and
support safe pipeline operations. Alliance must review the SCADA points to
determine which apply to the Special Permit and develop SCADA monitoring
points if they are not currently available. These safety-related points must be
identified in its procedure and implemented in the SCADA master database. A
review of all points must be conducted to verify consistent implementation of
points in the SCADA master database, as well as inclusion of points related to
power and communication failure within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order.
Documentation of compliance must be provided to the Director for review upon
completion.

B.

It is requested that Alliance maintain documentation of the safety improvement
costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to
Gregory A. Ochs, Director, Central Region, and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in two categories: (1)
total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and
analyses, and (2) total cost associated with replacements, additions and other
changes to pipeline infrastructure.

6

