U.S. Department of Transportation
8701 S. Gessner, Suite 630
Houston TX 77074

Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
ELECTRONIC MAIL - RETURN RECEIPT REQUESTED
August 18, 2021
Dudley Poston
Chief Executive Officer
Delfin Offshore Pipeline LLC
25 West Cedar Street, Suite 215
Pensacola, Florida 32502
CPF 4-2021-027-NOPV
Dear Mr. Poston:
From October 27, 2020 through March 3, 2021, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA) pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code
(U.S.C.) virtually inspected Delfin Offshore Pipeline LLC’s (Delfin) operations and maintenance
records and written procedures.
Based on the inspection, it is alleged that Delfin has committed probable violations of the Pipeline
Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected and the
probable violations are:
1.

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies.
(a) General. Each operator shall prepare and follow for each pipeline, a manual of
written procedures for conducting operations and maintenance activities and for
emergency response. For transmission lines, the manual must also include
procedures for handling abnormal operations. This manual must be reviewed and
updated by the operator at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each
calendar year. This manual must be prepared before operations of a pipeline system
commence. Appropriate parts of the manual must be kept at locations where
operations and maintenance activities are conducted.

Delfin failed to prepare and follow a written operations and maintenance manual as required by
§ 192.605(a).

2
During the inspection, PHMSA requested Delfin’s written Operation and Maintenance Manual
for review as required by § 192.605(a). Delfin asserted that its pipelines are covered under
another pipeline operator’s, Genesis Energy (Genesis), written Operation & Maintenance
Program per the Interoffice Memorandum (Acceptance of Manta Ray Gathering Company
Plans & Procedures for Delfin Offshore Pipeline), Dated September 4, 2018 (Original), and
August 6, 2020 (Revision 1).
Manta Ray Gathering Company (Manta Ray) is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Genesis, and the
contract provides that Manta Ray is responsible for providing the personnel and equipment
necessary to conduct routine operations and maintenance activities on the Delfin Offshore
Pipeline on behalf of Delfin. These operations and maintenance activities include the periodic
testing and inspecting of the pipeline required by federal and state regulations.
Delfin has accepted Genesis Energy: Operations and Maintenance Procedures Manual-Gas.
This plan includes sections on damage prevention (One-Call) and public awareness programs.
Acceptance of the Genesis Energy: Operations & Maintenance Procedures Manual-Gas shall
be interpreted to include acceptance of the included Genesis Energy Operator Qualification
(OQ) Manual and corresponding OQ procedures and documentation.
Although the Interoffice Memorandum between Delfin and Genesis covers the maintenance and
operation of the offshore assets, the manual fails to reference Delfin or describe any of the assets
covered under its plan.
2.

§ 192.615 Emergency plans.
(a) Each operator shall establish written procedures to minimize the hazard resulting
from a gas pipeline emergency…

Delfin failed to develop and follow written procedures to minimize the hazard resulting from a
gas pipeline emergency that contains the elements described in § 192.615 for its covered
pipeline segments.
Delfin asserted that its pipelines are covered under Genesis's written Operation & Maintenance
Program per the Interoffice Memorandum.
Manta Ray is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Genesis, and the contract provides that Manta Ray
is responsible for providing the personnel and equipment necessary to conduct routine
operations and maintenance activities on the Delfin Offshore Pipeline on behalf of Delfin.
These operations and maintenance activities include the periodic testing and inspecting of the
pipeline required by federal and state regulations.
Delfin has accepted Genesis Energy: Emergency Response Plans as a procedure to minimize
the hazard resulting from a gas pipeline emergency. Although the Interoffice Memorandum

3
between Delfin and Genesis covers the Emergency Response Plans of the offshore assets, the
Delfin assets are not identified within Genesis Energy: Emergency Response Plans.
3.

§ 192.805 Qualification program.
Each operator shall have and follow a written qualification program. The program
shall include provisions to:
(a) Identify covered tasks…

Delfin failed to develop and follow a written qualification program that contains the elements
described in § 192.805 for its covered pipeline segments.
Delfin asserted that its pipelines are covered under Genesis's written Operation & Maintenance
Program per the Interoffice Memorandum.
Manta Ray is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Genesis, and the contract provides that Manta Ray
is responsible for providing the personnel and equipment necessary to conduct routine
operations and maintenance activities on the Delfin Offshore Pipeline on behalf of Delfin.
These operations and maintenance activities include the periodic testing and inspecting of the
pipeline required by federal and state regulations.
Delfin has accepted Genesis Energy: Operations and Maintenance Procedures Manual-Gas.
Acceptance of the Genesis Energy: Operations & Maintenance Procedures Manual-Gas shall
be interpreted to include acceptance of the included OQ Manual and corresponding OQ
procedures and documentation.
Although the Interoffice Memorandum between Delfin and Genesis covers the maintenance and
operation of the offshore assets, the manual fails to reference Delfin or describe any of the assets
covered under its plan.
4.

§ 192.907 What must an operator do to implement this subpart?
(a) General. No later than December 17, 2004, an operator of a covered pipeline
segment must develop and follow a written integrity management program that
contains all the elements described in § 192.911 and that addresses the risks on each
covered transmission pipeline segment. The initial integrity management program
must consist, at a minimum, of a framework that describes the process for
implementing each program element, how relevant decisions will be made and by
whom, a time line for completing the work to implement the program element, and
how information gained from experience will be continuously incorporated into the
program. The framework will evolve into a more detailed and comprehensive
program. An operator must make continual improvements to the program.

4
Delfin failed to develop and follow a written integrity management program that contains the
elements described in § 192.911 for its covered pipeline segments.
During the inspection, PHMSA requested a procedure to demonstrate the identification of
pipeline segments in high consequence areas. Delfin affirmed that its segments are covered
under Genesis's programs (IMP Revision 3 01/08/2020. Procedure 101G Gas-Procedure to
Identify HCA Areas) per the Interoffice Memorandum.
Manta Ray is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Genesis, and the contract provides that Manta Ray
is responsible for providing the personnel and equipment necessary to conduct routine
operations and maintenance activities on the Delfin Offshore Pipeline on behalf of Delfin.
These operations and maintenance activities include the periodic testing and inspecting of the
pipeline required by federal and state regulations.
Delfin has accepted Genesis Energy: Integrity Management Program as an appropriate
guideline for the integrity of its covered pipeline segments. Although the Interoffice
Memorandum between Delfin and Genesis covers the integrity management of the assets, the
Delfin assets are not included, or risk ranked within the Genesis Integrity Management Program.
Proposed Compliance Order
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, Delfin Offshore Pipeline LLC is subject to a
civil penalty not to exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum
of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violations occurring on or after July 31, 2019,
and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $218,647 per violation per
day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for a related series of violations. For
violations occurring on or after November 27, 2018, and before July 31, 2019, the maximum
penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed
$2,132,679. For violations occurring on or after November 2, 2015, and before November 27,
2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per violation per day, with a maximum
penalty not to exceed $2,090,022.
PHMSA has reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case and have
decided not to propose a civil penalty at this time.
Compliance Order Items
With respect to Items 1, 2, 3, and 4 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Delfin Offshore Pipeline
LLC. Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this
Notice.

5
Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators in
Compliance Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If you
believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment under 5
U.S.C. 552(b), along with the complete original document, you must provide a second copy of the
document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted and an
explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential treatment under
5 U.S.C. 552(b).
Following the receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to submit written comments, or request a
hearing under 49 CFR § 190.211. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice,
this constitutes a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the
Associate Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further
notice to you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you
submit your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. This period
may be extended by written request for good cause.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 4-2021-027-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,

signed by MARY
MARY LOUISE Digitally
LOUISE MCDANIEL
2021.08.18 12:51:10
MCDANIEL Date:
-05'00'

Mary L. McDaniel, P.E.
Director, Southwest Region
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
Enclosures:
Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings
cc: William Daughdrill, President, Delfin Offshore Pipeline LLC, w.daughdrill@delfinlng.com

6

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
(PHMSA) proposes to issue to Delfin Offshore Pipeline LLC (Delfin) a Compliance Order
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance with the pipeline
safety regulations:
A.

In regards to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to Delfin failing to prepare and follow a
written operations and maintenance plan that contains the elements described in § 192.605
for its covered pipeline segments, Delfin must prepare and follow an operations and
maintenance plan for its pipelines or have those pipelines incorporated into the manual
provided in its contracted services. Delfin must complete the preparation and
implementation within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order.

B.

In regards to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to Delfin failing to comply with the regulation
to develop and follow written procedure to minimize the hazard resulting from a gas
pipeline emergency that contains the elements described in § 192.615 for its covered
pipeline segments, Delfin must develop and implement an emergency response plan for
its covered pipeline segments within 120 days of receipt of the Final Order.

C.

In regards to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to Delfin failing to comply with the regulation
to develop and follow a written qualification program that contains the elements described
in § 192.805 for its covered pipeline segments, Delfin must develop and implement a
qualification program for its covered pipeline segments within 120 days of receipt of the
Final Order.

D.

In regards to Item 4 of the Notice pertaining to Delfin failing to comply with the regulation
to develop and follow a written integrity management program that contains the elements
described in § 192.911 for its covered pipeline segments, Delfin must develop and
implement an integrity management program for its covered pipeline segments within 120
days of receipt of the Final Order.

It is requested (not mandated) that Delfin Offshore Pipeline LLC maintain documentation of the
safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit the total to
Mary L. McDaniel, Director, Southwest Region, Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) total cost
associated with preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost
associated with replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure.

