U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety
Administration

12300 W. Dakota Ave., Suite 110
Lakewood, CO 80228

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
PROPOSED CIVIL PENALTY
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: dwbritton@fngas.com
March 1, 2023
Mr. Daniel Britton
General Manager
Interior Gas Utility
2525 Phillips Field Road
Fairbanks, AK 99709
CPF 5-2023-009-NOPV
Dear Mr. Britton:
From August 2 through 6, 2021, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49
United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected your distribution system in Fairbanks, Alaska.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected
and the probable violations are:
1.

§ 192.16 Customer notification.
(a) . . . .
(b) Each operator shall notify each customer once in writing of the following
information:
(1) The operator does not maintain the customer’s buried piping.

Interior Gas Utility (IGU) supplied essential natural gas to Fairbanks and North Pole sites in
Alaska at the time of inspection. IGU, a distribution operator, reported over sixteen hundred
natural gas services in 2021. IGU did not have a customer notification process in place that
satisfied the requirements of § 192.16. The operator did not provide any procedures, records, or
documentation demonstrating it had notified customers that it did not maintain the customer's
piping. There was no customer notification process in place, nor had any customers ever been
notified as required by the regulation.
2.

§ 192.283 Plastic pipe: Qualifying joining procedures.
(a) Heat fusion, solvent cement, and adhesive joints. Before any written procedure
established under § 192.273(b) is used for making plastic pipe joints by a heat
fusion, solvent cement, or adhesive method, the procedure must be qualified by
subjecting specimen joints that are made according to the procedure to the
following tests, as applicable:

IGU did not qualify its joining procedures as required in § 192.283. The Operator's Plastic Pipe
Fusion Precautions SOP D-2220 stated, “The Plastic Pipe Fusion Precautions Procedure SOP
2220 is qualified thru the use of the manufactures qualified written procedures Chevron Phillips
Chemical Company Performance Pipe procedures dated 2017.” However, the Operator did not
have a copy of a record demonstrating that testing and qualification of the joining procedures
were completed by either the manufacturer or IGU. Similar statements were made in other
joining procedures and no qualified joining records were produced during the inspection.
3.

§ 192.453 General.
The corrosion control procedures required by § 192.605(b)(2), including those for
the design, installation, operation, and maintenance of cathodic protection systems,
must be carried out by, or under the direction of, a person qualified in pipeline
corrosion control methods.

IGU did not have any personnel who were qualified to conduct atmospheric corrosion
inspections. IGU stated that its eWebOQ course, called 503COAT Protective Coating for
Underground Buried Pipe, provided adequate atmospheric corrosion inspection training.
However, this course was specific to buried pipe, and atmospheric corrosion inspections are
conducted on aboveground pipe. Additionally, this course was not included on the Web EQ list
of courses distribution operators were required to take.
4.

§ 192.481 Atmospheric corrosion control: Monitoring.
(a) Each operator must inspect and evaluate each pipeline or portion of the pipeline
that is exposed to the atmosphere for evidence of atmospheric corrosion, as follows:
Pipeline type:
(1) Onshore other
than a Service Line

Then the frequency of inspection is:
At least once every 3 calendar years, but with intervals not
exceeding 39 months.
2

Pipeline type:
(2) Onshore Service
Line

Then the frequency of inspection is:
At least once every 5 calendar years, but with intervals not
exceeding 63 months, except as provided in paragraph (d) of
this section.

IGU personnel did not inspect and evaluate IGU’s aboveground piping for atmospheric corrosion
at the intervals required. IGU provided a list of all meters as evidence of compliance with this
requirement. However, the list was insufficient to demonstrate compliance because it did not
include the following necessary information: whether an inspection occurred; the date of any
inspection; who completed the inspection; or whether corrosion was looked for or found. IGU
provided some records of meter inspections completed in 2019 that identified if paint was needed
on a meter; however, there was no explicit corrosion inspection noted on the 2019 forms.
Additionally, the 2019 forms encompassed inspections conducted on only 33 meters out of a
system that had 1,206 meters in service in 2019.
5.

§ 192.605 Procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies.
(a) General. Each operator shall prepare and follow for each pipeline, a manual of
written procedures for conducting operations and maintenance activities and for
emergency response. For transmission lines, the manual must also include
procedures for handling abnormal operations. This manual must be reviewed and
updated by the operator at intervals not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each
calendar year. This manual must be prepared before operations of a pipeline system
commence. Appropriate parts of the manual must be kept at locations where
operations and maintenance activities are conducted.

IGU failed to follow its procedural manual for operations, maintenance, and emergencies (O&M)
in two instances.
IGU failed to perform emergency response training as described in its Standard Operating
Procedure (SOP) D-1105. IGU's emergency response training records documented the training
that was completed but did not include company-wide training for "tabletop" emergency
scenarios, as required by SOP D-1105.
Additionally, IGU did not follow its procedures to ensure that it’s Odorator/Detex tools were
calibrated for the sampling completed on the Fairbanks distribution system. SOP D-2125
Natural Gas Odorant and Odorator Procedures section: Periodic Tests described a requirement to
periodically conduct tests to assure that Odorator/Detex tools were correctly calibrated. SOP D2125 required annual calibration for the Odorameter/Detex equipment to be completed by the
manufacturer. IGU did not provide any records demonstrating that either of these maintenance
activities was conducted.
6.

§ 192.625 Odorization of gas.
(a) . . . .
3

(f) To assure the proper concentration of odorant in accordance with this section,
each operator must conduct periodic sampling of combustible gases using an
instrument capable of determining the percentage of gas in air at which the odor
becomes readily detectable. Operators of master meter systems may comply with
this requirement by (1) Receiving written verification from their gas source that the gas has the proper
concentration of odorant; and
(2) Conducting periodic “sniff” tests at the extremities of the system to confirm that
the gas contains odorant.
IGU did not conduct periodic sampling to assure the proper concentration of odorant in the North
Pole distribution system. IGU personnel stated to PHMSA inspectors that they had never
conducted sampling of odorant concentration in the North Pole system. The North Pole system
was commissioned in January 2021, and, at the time of the inspection in August 2021, IGU had
never sampled the odorant levels in the system to ensure the gas was readily detectable.
7.

§ 192.739 Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Inspection and testing.
(a) Each pressure limiting station, relief device (except rupture discs), and pressure
regulating station and its equipment must be subjected at intervals not exceeding 15
months, but at least once each calendar year, to inspections and tests to determine
that it is (1) . . . .
(3) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, set to control or relieve
at the correct pressure consistent with the pressure limits of § 192.201(a); and

IGU did not complete the required inspection and testing at pressure limiting and regulator
station Site 1 in 2020. IGU did not provide records demonstrating that pressure regulators at Site
1 were inspected in 2020.
8.

§ 192.743 Pressure limiting and regulating stations: Capacity of relief devices.
(a) Pressure relief devices at pressure limiting stations and pressure regulating
stations must have sufficient capacity to protect the facilities to which they are
connected. Except as provided in § 192.739(b), the capacity must be consistent with
the pressure limits of § 192.201(a). This capacity must be determined at intervals
not exceeding 15 months, but at least once each calendar year, by testing the devices
in place or by review and calculations.

IGU did not confirm the capacity of overpressure protection blowdown pressure relief valve
PRV-600 by in-place testing or by review and calculations as required by § 192.743(a).
IGU provided records documenting pressure relief valve PRV-600 at Site 1 was lifted on
9/24/2018 and 9/19/2019, but neither of those records indicated that the relief valve capacity was
adequate. IGU operators were aware that the relief device capacity was required to be reviewed
or tested in place annually, but the records did not state that the Operator tested the device in
4

place or that the capacity was reviewed and determined to be sufficient. IGU personnel stated
that they typically pop the relief using nitrogen, which tests the set point of the relief but does not
test capacity. IGU did not produce records demonstrating that the requirements of § 192.743
were met via the review and calculations option offered by § 192.743(b). A record for the 2020
annual inspection or capacity review of PRV-600 was not produced during the inspection. IGU
previously received a warning for this alleged violation in CPF 5-2020-0003W.
9.

§ 192.747 Valve maintenance: Distribution systems.
(a) Each valve, the use of which may be necessary for the safe operation of a
distribution system, must be checked and serviced at intervals not exceeding 15
months, but at least once each calendar year.

IGU did not conduct any distribution valve inspections in 2019. There were some 2020 records
demonstrating that some distribution valves were inspected; however, IGU’s distribution valve
inspections focused on checking the conditions of the areas around valves and ensuring the
valves were accessible but did not include checking the functionality and condition of the valves.
For example, a record called Valve Inspection Form 2020 shows N/A for Valve Exercised
column for each distribution valve listed as having been inspected in the year 2020.
10.

§ 192.756 Joining plastic pipe by heat fusion; equipment maintenance and
calibration.
Each operator must maintain equipment used in joining plastic pipe in accordance
with the manufacturer's recommended practices or with written procedures that
have been proven by test and experience to produce acceptable joints.

IGU did not inspect and maintain their joining equipment as required by § 192.756. IGU failed
to provide any records to demonstrate that the required inspections had been performed and
admitted their joining equipment was not being maintained per manufacturer’s recommended
practices.
11.

§ 192.1007 What are the required elements of an integrity management plan?
(a) . . . .
(c) Evaluate and rank risk. An operator must evaluate the risks associated with its
distribution pipeline. In this evaluation, the operator must determine the relative
importance of each threat and estimate and rank the risks posed to its pipeline. This
evaluation must consider each applicable current and potential threat, the
likelihood of failure associated with each threat, and the potential consequences of
such a failure. An operator may subdivide its pipeline into regions with similar
characteristics (e.g., contiguous areas within a distribution pipeline consisting of
mains, services and other appurtenances; areas with common materials or
environmental factors), and for which similar actions likely would be effective in
reducing risk.

5

IGU did not have a written procedure that described the integrity management risk ranking and
evaluation process, and the IGU Engineering Department personnel who manage and administer
IGU’s Distribution Integrity Management Plan (DIMP) were not familiar with the Simple,
Handy, Risk-based Integrity Management Program (SHRIMP) software and were unable to
explain the risk reranking completed by IGU.
IGU's DIMP began with a document that was titled Appendix F, pages 6&7 of DIMP Part 1,
which provided a procedural overview of the DIMP. Appendix F explained a method for
evaluating and ranking risks by creating Evaluate and Rank Risk tables to be compiled with
historical data and used as an outlining tool to evaluate and rank the risks associated with the
distribution system. This risk ranking process described in the DIMP was not used in the
analysis. Rather, IGU's risk ranking was completed via a software program called SHRIMP
(beginning page 13/40 of DIMP Part 1). IGU reordered the risk ranking provided by the
SHRIMP program but failed to document the reason for the reordering of the risk ranking or
document adequate explanations for why the risk ranking was changed.
12.

§ 192.1007 What are the required elements of an integrity management plan?
(a) . . . .
(d) Identify and implement measures to address risks. Determine and implement
measures designed to reduce the risks from failure of its gas distribution pipeline.
These measures must include an effective leak management program (unless all
leaks are repaired when found).

IGU did not implement measures designed to reduce the risks from failure of its gas distribution
pipelines.
The DIMP did not require additional actions to prevent or mitigate its number 2 risk, identified
as: "Equipment Malfunctions Due to Failing Regulators/relief Valves on the Failing Equipment".
IGU’s DIMP stated additional actions associated with the mitigation of this risk were not
required because "FNG's 1 SOPs adequately provide for the inspection and testing of equipment,
including regulators and relief valves" (page 35/40 of DIMP Part 1). However, no documentation
was provided that demonstrated customer regulators and meters were inspected on a regular
basis.
Additionally, the risk ranked number 5, "Material, Weld or Joint Due to Workmanship Defects
on the Specific_02 section", had an additional action selected of accelerating leakage surveys to
be conducted annually for this section of the system (page 38/40 of DIMP Part 1). When
questioned about this, IGU personnel weren't aware of the Specific_02 section and what part of
the system it represented. No segments of IGU's system were on an accelerated leakage survey
schedule beyond what is required in the code.
Finally, the threat ranked as risk number 6, “Other Outside Forces” stated that IGU had to
perform patrols to ensure proper meter maintenance periodically (page 39/40 of DIMP Part 1).
1 The Operator Interior Gas Utility (IGU) formerly operated the Fairbanks distribution system under operator name
Fairbanks Natural Gas (FNG).

6

However, IGU personnel were unsure whether this was being done and was unable to produce
any records documenting these actions had been taken.
Proposed Civil Penalty
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed
$257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627 for a
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679. For violation occurring on or after November 2,
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022.
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documentation involved for the above
probable violations and recommend that you be preliminarily assessed a civil penalty of
$107,400 as follows:
Item number
4
6
7

PENALTY
$ 20,400
$ 50,200
$ 36,800

Warning Items
With respect to items 2, 5, 10 and 12, we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting
documents involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action
or penalty assessment proceedings at this time. We advise you to promptly correct these items.
Failure to do so may result in additional enforcement action.
Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to items 1, 3, 6, 8, 9, and 11 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Interior Gas
Utility. Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of
this Notice.

7

Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. §552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to
you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. The Region
Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted
demonstrating good cause for an extension.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2023-009-NOPV, and for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,
signed by DUSTIN B HUBBARD
DUSTIN B HUBBARD Digitally
Date: 2023.03.01 09:35:11 -07'00'

Dustin Hubbard
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings
cc:

PHP-60 Compliance Registry
PHP-500 G. St. Pierre (#21-217219)
Mark Rockwell, Interior Gas Utility (via email)
Brendan Kern, Engineer, Interior Gas Utility (via email)

8

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to Interior Gas Utility (IGU) a Compliance Order
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Interior Gas
Utility with the pipeline safety regulations:
A.

In regard to Item Number 1 of the Notice pertaining to IGU not having a customer
notification process in place that satisfied the requirements of § 192.16, IGU must
update their procedures to include a customer notification process that satisfies
the requirement of § 192.16, notify all their customers of the information required
by § 192.16, and submit to PHMSA documentation that customers were given
notice within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order.

B.

In regard to Item Number 3 of the Notice pertaining to qualified personnel
conducting atmospheric corrosion inspections, IGU must properly train and
qualify personnel to conduct atmospheric corrosion inspections and provide
training records to the Director within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order.

C.

In regard to Item Number 6 of the Notice pertaining to odorant sampling, IGU
must complete sampling the North Pole distribution system with properly
calibrated odorant sampling equipment. Please provide calibration and sampling
records to the Director within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order.

D.

In regard to Item Number 8 of the Notice pertaining to capacity of overpressure
protection blowdown pressure relief valve PRV-600, IGU must confirm the
capacity PRV-600 by in-place testing or by review and calculations as required by
§ 192.743(a). Please provide evidence of completion of this task to the Director
within 180 days of receipt of the Final Order.

E

In regard to Item Number 9 of the Notice pertaining to required distribution valve
inspections including functionality checks, IGU must inspect and exercise every
distribution valve, document the inspections appropriately and submit records to
the Director within 270 days of receipt of the Final Order.

F.

In regard to Item Number 11 of the Notice pertaining to the Distribution Integrity
Management Plan (DIMP) risk ranking and evaluation process, IGU must submit
a new risk ranking and evaluation that is completed as described in the operator’s
procedures, with a risk ranking that is adequately defended within 270 days of
receipt of the Final Order.

G.

It is requested (not mandated) that Interior Gas Utility maintain documentation of
the safety improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and
submit the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, Pipeline and
Hazardous Materials Safety Administration. It is requested that these costs be
reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of
plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with
replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure.

9

