U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety
Administration

12300 W. Dakota Ave., Suite 340
Lakewood, CO 80228

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER

VIA ELECTRONIC MAIL TO: michael.delcasale@calpine.com
November 21, 2025
Michael Del Casale
Executive V.P. of Power Operations
CPN Pipeline Company
717 Texas Avenue., Suite 1000
Houston, TX 77002
CPF 5-2025-033-NOPV
Dear Mr. Del Casale:
From September 9 through September 13, 2024, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration (PHMSA), Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS), pursuant to Chapter
601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.) inspected CPN Pipeline Company’s (CPN) Northern CA
Gas System natural gas transmission and gathering pipeline system from Antioch to Yuba City,
California.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that CPN has committed probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected
and the probable violations are:
1.

§ 192.8 How are onshore gathering pipelines and regulated onshore gathering
pipelines determined?
(a) …
(b) Each operator must determine and maintain for the life of the pipeline records
documenting the methodology by which it calculated the beginning and end points

of each onshore gathering pipeline it operates, as described in the second column of
table 1 to paragraph (c)(2) of this section, by:
(1) November 16, 2022, or before the pipeline is placed in operation, whichever is
later; or
CPN failed to determine and maintain for the life of the pipeline records documenting the
methodology by which it calculated the beginning and ending points of each onshore gathering
pipeline it operates, as required. During the PHMSA inspection, CPN provided records for the
determination of its type A and B gathering lines. However, according to CPN’s annual reports
to PHMSA, CPN has 139.5 miles of Type C and 91.2 miles of Type R gathering lines and was
unable to provide any records for the determination of either.
Therefore, CPN failed to determine and maintain for the life of the pipeline records documenting
the methodology by which it calculated the beginning and end points of each onshore gathering
pipeline it operates per § 192.8(b)(1).
2.

§ 192.9 What requirements apply to gathering pipelines?
(a) …
(e) Type C lines. The requirements for Type C gathering lines are as follows.
(1) An operator of a Type C onshore gathering line with an outside diameter greater
than or equal to 8.625 inches must comply with the following requirements:
(i) …
(ii) If the pipeline is metallic, control corrosion according to requirements of
subpart I of this part applicable to transmission lines, except the requirements in
§§ 192.461(f) through (i), 192.465(d) and (f), 192.473(c), 192.485(c), and 192.493;

CPN did not have a cathodic protection system designed to protect its Type C gathering lines in
accordance with subpart I, as required. According the CPN’s records, in 2022, it discovered
deficiencies in the cathodic protection system for its Montezuma Type C gathering line and
Steelhead transmission line. The records indicated that in an effort to continue protection of the
Steelhead Pipeline, the Montezuma Pipeline was removed from the previously shared cathodic
protection system. A review of CPN’s mainline timeline and test reports demonstrated that
while there have been tests conducted and plans to remediate the issues that were discovered in
2022, the Montezuma Pipeline has been operating without a cathodic protection system since
2022. However, § 192.455(a) requires that, unless the operator has demonstrated by tests,
investigations, or experience that a corrosive environment did not exist, each buried or
submerged pipeline installed after July 31, 1971 must be protected from external corrosion with
an external coating meeting the requirements of § 192.461 and a cathodic protection system.
CPN did not provide PHMSA any records during the inspection to show that the Montezuma
Pipeline did not need to comply with the requirements of § 192.455(a) based on tests,
investigations, or experience demonstrating that the pipeline existed in a non-corrosive
environment.

2

Therefore, CPN failed to comply with § 192.9(e)(1)(ii) and the requirements of subpart I by not
protecting the Montezuma Pipeline with a cathodic protection system.
3.

§ 192.463 External corrosion control: Cathodic protection.
(a) Each cathodic protection system required by this subpart must provide a level of
cathodic protection that complies with one or more of the applicable criteria
contained in appendix D of this part. If none of these criteria is applicable, the
cathodic protection system must provide a level of cathodic protection at least equal
to that provided by compliance with one or more of these criteria.
Appendix D to Part 192—Criteria for Cathodic Protection and Determination of
Measurements
I. …
II. Interpretation of voltage measurement. Voltage (IR) drops other than those
across the structure-electrolyte boundary must be considered for valid
interpretation of the voltage measurement in paragraphs A(1) and (2) and
paragraph B(1) of section I of this appendix.

CPN’s cathodic protection system and its Corrosion Control Manual did not comply with the
criteria contained in Appendix D as required for its natural gas transmission and gathering
pipelines. Specifically, the Corrosion Control Manual’s procedures did not require its cathodic
protection system to consider voltage (IR) drops across the structure-electrolyte boundary as
required, as the manual did not provide for the collection of IR free measurement data while
performing Annual Cathodic Protection (CP) Surveys.
During the PHMSA inspection, PHMSA reviewed CPN’s records and manuals. PHMSA
observed while reviewing the Corrosion Control Manual that Section 4 and Appendix D of the
Corrosion Control Manual stated that IR drops other than those across the structure-electrolyte
boundary shall be considered. A common method of obtaining “IR free” pipe to soil potential
measurement is to use a current interrupter. When the protective current is initially interrupted,
an immediate voltage shift, or “instant off” measurement will be obtained. This measurement is
reflective of an IR free pipe-to-soil potential measurement. However, Section 6 of CPN’s
Corrosion Control Manual stated the acceptable pipe-to-soil measurement to be an “on”
measured potential which is not an IR free measurement. In lieu of obtaining “instant off”
measurements, Section 4 of CPN’s Corrosion Control Manual contained a section with several
factors that could affect electrical measurement. However, PHMSA observed that the manual
did not include a method for quantifying these factors. The manual also did not include a
method for considering them by other means when taking measurements for Annual CP Surveys.
Therefore, CPN failed to provide a level of cathodic protection that complies with one or more of
the applicable criteria contained in Appendix D of Part 192 by not considering IR drops other
than those across the structure-electrolyte boundary as required by § 192.463(a) and Appendix D
Section II.

3

Proposed Civil Penalty
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed
$272,926 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,729,245 for a
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after December 28, 2023 and before
December 30, 2024, the maximum penalty may not exceed $266,015 per violation per day the
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,660,135 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after January 6, 2023 and before December 28, 2023, the maximum penalty may
not exceed $257,664 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,576,627
for a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after March 21, 2022 and before
January 6, 2023, the maximum penalty may not exceed $239,142 per violation per day the
violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,391,412 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after May 3, 2021 and before March 21, 2022, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before
May 3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for
a related series of violations.
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time.
Proposed Compliance Order
With respect to Items 1 through 3, pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to CPN Pipeline
Company. Please refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of
this Notice.
Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. All
material you submit in response to this enforcement action may be made publicly available. If
you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for confidential treatment
under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b), along with the complete original document you must provide a second
copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for confidential treatment redacted
and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information qualifies for confidential
treatment under 5 U.S.C. § 552(b).
Following your receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to respond as described in the enclosed
Response Options. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice, this constitutes
a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the Associate
Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further notice to
you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that you submit
your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. The Region

4

Director may extend the period for responding upon a written request timely submitted
demonstrating good cause for an extension.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2025-033-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,
signed by DUSTIN B HUBBARD
DUSTIN B HUBBARD Digitally
Date: 2025.11.21 08:31:53 -07'00'

Dustin Hubbard
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
cc:

PHP-60 Compliance Registry
PHP-500 T. Dickey (#24-297332)
Scott Vickers, CPN Pipeline Company, Compliance Manager, svickers@calpine.com

Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings

5

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 United States Code § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA) proposes to issue to CPN Pipeline Company a Compliance Order
incorporating the following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of CPN with the
pipeline safety regulations:
A.

In regard to Item 1 of the Notice pertaining to CPN’s failure to determine and
maintain for the life of the pipeline records documenting the methodology by
which it calculated the beginning and end points of each onshore gathering
pipeline it operates, CPN must provide onshore gas gathering line determination
documentation for type C and R gathering lines as required by § 192.8(b) within
90 days of receipt of the Final Order and submit this documentation to the
Director, Western Region.

B.

In regard to Item 2 of the Notice pertaining to CPN’s failure to comply with the
requirements of subpart I, specifically § 192.455(a) for corrosion control of
metallic pipelines per § 192.9(e)(1)(ii), CPN must complete and submit
documentation of the following to the Director, Western Region within 1 year of
receipt of the Final Order. CPN must follow § 192.455(a) in regards to the
Montezuma Pipeline including verifying it has a protective coating pursuant to
§ 192.461(a) through(e) and reinstating the cathodic protection unless the
environment is demonstrated to be non-corrosive through tests, investigations or
experience.

C.

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to CPN’s failure to provide a level of
cathodic protection that complies with one or more of the applicable criteria
contained in appendix D of this part by not considering voltage (IR) drops other
than those across the structure-electrolyte boundary as required by § 192.463(a)
and Appendix D Section II, CPN must complete and submit documentation of the
following to the Director, Western Region by the date of the next CP annual
survey,
x Update its Corrosion Control Manual with procedures for obtaining
cathodic protection readings with IR drops other than those across the
structure-electrolyte boundary considered, and
x Obtain cathodic protection readings for each system accurately
representing voltage (IR) drops.

D.

It is requested (not mandated) that CPN maintain documentation of the safety
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit
the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety Administration. It is requested that these costs be reported in
two categories: 1) total cost associated with preparation/revision of plans,

6

procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost associated with replacements,
additions and other changes to pipeline infrastructure.

7

