U.S. Department
of Transportation
Pipeline and Hazardous
Materials Safety
Administration

12300 W. Dakota Ave., Suite 110
Lakewood, CO 80228

NOTICE OF PROBABLE VIOLATION
and
PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER

VIA E-MAIL TO MR. SEAN KOLASSA
March 30, 2022
Mr. Sean Kolassa
President
Harvest Alaska, LLC
1111 Travis Street
Houston, TX 77002
CPF 5-2022-002-NOPV
Dear Mr. Kolassa:
From May 17 through 21, 2021, a representative of the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety
Administration (PHMSA), pursuant to Chapter 601 of 49 United States Code (U.S.C.), inspected
the procedures and records of Harvest Alaska, LLC’s (Harvest) Northstar Liquid Pipeline located
near Prudhoe Bay, Alaska.
As a result of the inspection, it is alleged that you have committed probable violations of the
Pipeline Safety Regulations, Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations (CFR). The items inspected
and the probable violations are:
1.

§ 195.452 Pipeline integrity management in high consequence areas.
(a) . . . .
(f) What are the elements of an integrity management program? An integrity
management program begins with the initial framework. An operator must
continually change the program to reflect operating experience, conclusions drawn
from results of the integrity assessments, and other maintenance and surveillance

data, and evaluation of consequences of a failure on the high consequence area. An
operator must include, at minimum, each of the following elements in its written
integrity management program:
(1) . . . .
(3) An analysis that integrates all available information about the integrity of the
entire pipeline and the consequences of a failure (see paragraph (g) of this section);
Harvest failed to adequately analyze all available information about the integrity of the entire
pipeline during the November 2018 risk assessment review. Specifically, information regarding
the effectiveness of cathodic protection for the subsea portion of the Northstar Liquid Pipeline
had not been adequately analyzed and incorporated into the risk assessment.
A risk assessment review was conducted on November 27, 2018, with the final report
documenting the review dated January 18, 2019 (Risk Assessment). Specific to cathodic
protection, the Risk Assessment indicates that subject matter experts used or reviewed “Annual
CP Surveys records,” but not “Close Interval Survey (CIS) records.”
The Risk Assessment evaluated a corrosion risk factor of "CP system design and effectiveness";
this evaluation resulted in “No” potential risk increase or exposure due to this specific corrosion
risk factor. The “No” potential risk increase or exposure result was supported by comments of
“Good Annual CP readings” and “P&MM: Consider summer CIS in 2022.”
The Risk Assessment also evaluated corrosion evidence and failure history specific to “CP and
CIS results”; this evaluation resulted in “No” increased risk. The “No” increased risk result was
supported by the comments of “The last CIS was performed in 2012” and “Hilcorp [operator at
time of the Risk Assessment] is considering the next CIS in 2022.”
Both of the “No” increased risk results, as indicated above, are based on an inadequate review of
the available information and limitations associated with the available information. For
example:
1. The annual cathodic protection survey reports for 2016, 2017, and 2018 address the
onshore portions of the pipeline and, for the most part, did not include the offshore
portion of the pipeline.
2. The last close interval survey conducted on offshore portions of the pipeline was
conducted in 2012. The 2012 Close Interval Survey report recommended that a close
interval survey of the pipeline be performed on a 5-year basis. Per the Risk
Assessment, the 2012 Close Interval Survey was not used or reviewed.
3. The 2016 and 2017 annual cathodic protection survey reports recommended that the
operator, “Initiate planning to perform a complete offshore cathodic protection survey
on the submerged section of the pipelines . . .” The Risk Assessment listed “Hilcorp
is considering a 2022 CIS” as a preventive and mitigative measure. However,
considering doing something is not a valid preventive and mitigative measure because
no additional actions were ever taken.
2

In summary, the Risk Assessment was devoid of any analysis of information specifically related
to the effectiveness of cathodic protection for the subsea portion of the Northstar Liquid Pipeline.
The Risk Assessment indicated that there was “No” increased risk due to factors associated with
the "CP system design and effectiveness" and "CP and CIS results.” The Risk Assessment based
its finding of no increased risk on “Good Annual CP readings,” as well as the representation that
“Hilcorp is considering the next CIS in 2022.” These results are contrary to the fact that
essentially no data/information had been collected on the effectiveness of cathodic protection for
the subsea portion of the pipeline since the last close interval survey in 2012. It also appeared
that the Risk Assessment did not consider the 2012 close interval survey results. The lack of
information specific to the effectiveness of cathodic protection for the subsea portion of the
pipeline was neither recognized nor considered in the Risk Assessment. As such, information (or
lack thereof) regarding the effectiveness of cathodic protection of the subsea portion of the
Northstar Liquid Pipeline had not been adequately analyzed or incorporated into the risk
assessment.
2.

§ 195.505 Qualification program.
Each operator shall have and follow a written qualification program. The program
shall include provisions to:
(a) . . . .
(b) Ensure through evaluation that individuals performing covered tasks are
qualified;

Harvest failed to ensure through evaluation that individuals performing covered tasks were
qualified. Specifically, Harvest failed to ensure that individuals performing offshore
atmospheric corrosion inspection of the Northstar Liquid Pipeline on February 19, 2021 were
qualified to perform the covered task. The atmospheric corrosion inspection was conducted by
two individuals, neither of whom were qualified to perform the covered task at that time.
3.

§ 195.573 What must I do to monitor external corrosion control?
(a) Protected pipelines. You must do the following to determine whether cathodic
protection required by this subpart complies with § 195.571:
(1) Conduct tests on the protected pipeline at least once each calendar year, but
with intervals not exceeding 15 months. However, if tests at those intervals are
impractical for separately protected short sections of bare or ineffectively coated
pipelines, testing may be done at least once every 3 calendar years, but with
intervals not exceeding 39 months.

3

Harvest failed to conduct tests to determine the adequacy of cathodic protection on the subsea
portion of the Northstar Liquid Pipeline at least once each calendar year, but with intervals not to
exceed 15 months. The buried/submerged Northstar Liquid Pipeline is cathodically protected
with galvanic anodes that are attached directly to the pipeline. There are three environments in
which the buried/submerged portions of the Northstar Liquid Pipeline are located: 1) buried
within the backfill used to create the manmade, artificial production island (Seal Island), which
includes approximately 50 feet of pipe between the Log Cabin and the steel seawall of Seal
Island; 2) buried/submerged in the offshore seabed, which includes approximately 6 miles of
pipe between the steel seawall of Seal Island and the shoreline at Pt. Storkersen; and 3) buried at
the Pt. Storkersen Shore Crossing, which includes approximately 100 feet of pipe between the
shoreline and the below ground/above ground pipeline transition.
Each of the three environments may have different cathodic protection requirements. The 2018,
2019, and 2020 annual cathodic protection surveys determined cathodic protection pipe-toelectrolyte potentials on the buried pipeline segments at Seal Island and at Pt. Storkersen Shore
Crossing. The annual cathodic protection surveys did not determine cathodic protection pipe-toelectrolyte potentials at pipeline locations representative of the buried/submerged subsea pipeline
environment. In addition, the annual cathodic protection survey reports state “. . . onshore closeinterval potentials were obtained . . . from the Log Cabin to the edge of Seal Island and from the
vault at the RTU to the shoreline. The offshore pipelines beyond this point to Seal Island were
not tested.” As such, Harvest failed to determine the adequacy of cathodic protection on the
subsea portion of the Northstar Liquid Pipeline during calendar years of 2018, 2019, and 2020.
Proposed Compliance Order
Under 49 U.S.C. § 60122 and 49 CFR § 190.223, you are subject to a civil penalty not to exceed
$225,134 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,251,334 for a
related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after January 11, 2021 and before May
3, 2021, the maximum penalty may not exceed $222,504 per violation per day the violation
persists, up to a maximum of $2,225,034 for a related series of violations. For violation
occurring on or after July 31, 2019 and before January 11, 2021, the maximum penalty may not
exceed $218,647 per violation per day the violation persists, up to a maximum of $2,186,465 for
a related series of violations. For violation occurring on or after November 27, 2018 and before
July 31, 2019, the maximum penalty may not exceed $213,268 per violation per day, with a
maximum penalty not to exceed $2,132,679. For violation occurring on or after November 2,
2015 and before November 27, 2018, the maximum penalty may not exceed $209,002 per
violation per day, with a maximum penalty not to exceed $2,090,022.
We have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents involved in this case, and have
decided not to propose a civil penalty assessment at this time.
With respect to Item 3 pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials
Safety Administration proposes to issue a Compliance Order to Harvest Alaska, LLC. Please
refer to the Proposed Compliance Order, which is enclosed and made a part of this Notice.

4

Warning Items
With respect to Items 1 and 2 we have reviewed the circumstances and supporting documents
involved in this case and have decided not to conduct additional enforcement action or penalty
assessment proceedings at this time. We advise you to promptly correct these items. Failure to
do so may result in additional enforcement action.
Response to this Notice
Enclosed as part of this Notice is a document entitled Response Options for Pipeline Operators
in Enforcement Proceedings. Please refer to this document and note the response options. Be
advised that all material you submit in response to this enforcement action is subject to being
made publicly available. If you believe that any portion of your responsive material qualifies for
confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. 552(b), along with the complete original document you
must provide a second copy of the document with the portions you believe qualify for
confidential treatment redacted and an explanation of why you believe the redacted information
qualifies for confidential treatment under 5 U.S.C. 552(b).
Following the receipt of this Notice, you have 30 days to submit written comments, or request a
hearing under 49 CFR § 190.211. If you do not respond within 30 days of receipt of this Notice,
this constitutes a waiver of your right to contest the allegations in this Notice and authorizes the
Associate Administrator for Pipeline Safety to find facts as alleged in this Notice without further
notice to you and to issue a Final Order. If you are responding to this Notice, we propose that
you submit your correspondence to my office within 30 days from receipt of this Notice. This
period may be extended by written request for good cause.
In your correspondence on this matter, please refer to CPF 5-2022-002-NOPV and, for each
document you submit, please provide a copy in electronic format whenever possible.
Sincerely,

signed by DUSTIN B HUBBARD
DUSTIN B HUBBARD Digitally
Date: 2022.03.30 11:03:11 -06'00'
Dustin Hubbard
Director, Western Region, Office of Pipeline Safety
Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
Enclosures: Proposed Compliance Order
Response Options for Pipeline Operators in Enforcement Proceedings
cc:

PHP-60 Compliance Registry
PHP-500 D. Johnson (#21-199723)
Andrew Limmer, Vice President, Harvest Alaska, LLC
Harold Colgrove, Integrity and Regulatory Compliance Manager, Harvest Alaska, LLC

5

PROPOSED COMPLIANCE ORDER
Pursuant to 49 U.S.C. § 60118, the Pipeline and Hazardous Materials Safety Administration
(PHMSA) proposes to issue to Harvest Alaska, LLC a Compliance Order incorporating the
following remedial requirements to ensure the compliance of Harvest Alaska, LLC with the
pipeline safety regulations:
A.

In regard to Item 3 of the Notice pertaining to the failure to conduct tests to
determine the adequacy of cathodic protection on the subsea portion of the
Northstar Liquid Pipeline at least once each calendar year, but with intervals not
to exceed 15 months, Harvest Alaska, LLC must develop a plan and schedule for
determining the adequacy of cathodic protection at pipeline locations
representative of the buried/submerged subsea pipeline environment. In addition,
the plan must address periodic close interval potential surveys for assessing the
effectiveness of the subsea pipeline’s cathodic protection system. The plan and
schedule must be submitted, for approval, to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western
Region, PHMSA, within 45 days of receipt of the Final Order.

B.

It is requested that Harvest Alaska, LLC maintain documentation of the safety
improvement costs associated with fulfilling this Compliance Order and submit
the total to Dustin Hubbard, Director, Western Region, PHMSA. It is requested
that these costs be reported in two categories: 1) total cost associated with
preparation/revision of plans, procedures, studies and analyses, and 2) total cost
associated with replacements, additions and other changes to pipeline
infrastructure.

6

