FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
BRANDON BEST GORDON, AKA
Brandon Brooks Gordon,

No. 23-2117
D.C. Nos.
1:19-cr-00046SWS-1
1:22-cv-00104SWS
OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
BRANDON BEST GORDON, AKA
Brandon Brooks Gordon,

No. 24-436
D.C. Nos.
1:19-cr-00046SWS-1
1:23-cv-00072SWS

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Montana
Scott W. Skavdahl, District Judge, Presiding

2

USA V. GORDON

Argued and Submitted May 22, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed August 19, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould, Richard C. Tallman, and
Morgan B. Christen, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Tallman
SUMMARY*
28 U.S.C. § 2255
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of relief
under 28 U.S.C. § 2255 to Brandon Gordon on his jury
conviction and sentence for being a felon in possession of a
firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).
The panel affirmed the district court’s holding that
counsel’s alleged sentencing predictions did not rise to the
level of ineffective assistance, making an evidentiary
hearing on this claim unnecessary.
The panel held that the district court erred by summarily
dismissing Gordon’s other claims of ineffective assistance
of counsel pursuant to Habeas Rule 4 because, under
Browning v. Baker, 875 F.3d 444 (9th Cir. 2017), counsel’s
conduct as a whole must be considered to determine whether
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

USA V. GORDON

3

it was constitutionally adequate. The panel expanded the
certificate of appealability granted to Gordon on the
sentencing advice issue to consider whether he received
effective assistance of counsel during the plea negotiation
stage as a whole. Addressing this question, the panel
concluded that counsel did not provide ineffective assistance
by failing to move to dismiss a fatally defective indictment
under Rehaif v. United States, 588 U.S. 225 (2019), which
requires that a § 922(g)(1) defendant knew he was a felon
when he possessed the firearms in question. Counsel also
was not ineffective for failing to file a motion to suppress
based on the length of a traffic stop or the unconstitutionality
of a search warrant.
The panel concluded that the district court should have
considered Gordon’s second-in-time § 2255 motion as a
permissible motion to amend his first-in-time § 2255 motion
because his pending motion under Fed. R. Civ. P. 59(e) to
alter or amend the district court’s judgment denying him
relief on his first § 2255 motion suspended the finality of the
original decision. However, the panel denied Gordon relief
on this claim because the only argument he raised in his
second-in-time § 2255 motion was foreclosed by this court’s
caselaw, and thus amendment would have been
futile. Specifically, Gordon’s argument that his conviction
violated his rights under the Second Amendment was
foreclosed by United States v. Duarte, 137 F.4th 743 (9th
Cir. 2025) (en banc), which held that § 922(g)(1) is
constitutional as applied to non-violent felons like Gordon.

4

USA V. GORDON

COUNSEL
Timothy A. Tatarka (argued), Assistant United States
Attorney; Jesse A. Laslovich, United States Attorney; Office
of the United States Attorney, United States Department of
Justice, Billings, Montana; Paulette L. Stewart, Assistant
United States Attorney, Office of the United States Attorney,
United States Department of Justice, Helena, Montana; for
Plaintiff-Appellee.
David F. Ness (argued), Assistant Federal Public Defender;
Rachel Julagay, Federal Defender; Federal Defenders of
Montana, Great Falls, Montana; for Defendant-Appellant.

OPINION
TALLMAN, Circuit Judge:
Defendant-Appellant Brandon Gordon was convicted by
a jury for being a felon in possession of a firearm in violation
of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). Gordon appealed, and we upheld
his conviction. Gordon then filed two separate motions1 for
habeas corpus relief with the district court. The district court
denied Gordon’s motions, did not grant him an evidentiary
hearing on either motion, and did not grant him a certificate
of appealability. Gordon now appeals the district court’s
denials of his habeas motions.

1

We use the nomenclature of “motion” interchangeably with “petition”
to reflect the statutory language of 28 U.S.C. § 2255. Courts often do so
in the decisions we discuss herein.

USA V. GORDON

5

We previously certified three questions on appeal:
(1) whether Gordon’s trial counsel was ineffective because
of the discrepancy between counsel’s sentencing predictions
and the sentence Gordon received, and whether the district
court should have held an evidentiary hearing on that issue;
(2) whether the district court improperly dismissed Gordon’s
other ineffective assistance of counsel claims; and
(3) whether the district court improperly dismissed Gordon’s
second-in-time 28 U.S.C. § 2255 motion. We affirm the
district court’s holding that counsel’s alleged sentencing
predictions did not rise to the level of ineffective assistance
of counsel, making an evidentiary hearing unnecessary. We
find the district court erred by summarily dismissing
Gordon’s other ineffective assistance of counsel claims
pursuant to Habeas Rule 4. However, Gordon’s claims
alleging ineffective assistance of counsel at the plea
negotiation stage fail on the merits.
Finally, we hold that the district court should have
considered Gordon’s second-in-time § 2255 motion as a
permissible motion to amend his first-in-time § 2255
motion. Gordon’s pending motion to alter or amend the
district court’s judgment denying Gordon relief on his first
§ 2255 motion suspended the finality of the original
decision. So, the district court should have considered
Gordon’s second-in-time § 2255 motion as a permissible
motion to amend his first § 2255 action. However, we
ultimately deny Gordon relief on this claim as well because
the only argument Gordon raised in his second-in-time
§ 2255 motion is foreclosed by our caselaw, and thus
amendment would be futile.

6

USA V. GORDON

I
On July 17, 2018, two detectives with the Missouri River
Drug Task Force (MRDTF) followed a tan Chevrolet Tahoe
in Livingston, Montana, to a residence because they
suspected that the driver, Danielle Williams, was trafficking
methamphetamine. Later that same day, Livingston Police
dispatch received a 911 call from a local drive-through
coffee shop owner whose shop bordered the residence. The
business owner reported that after law enforcement had left
the residence, she observed a woman in a tan Tahoe circle
the coffee shop’s parking lot for almost an hour, then pull
through the drive-through without ordering anything. The
business owner also reported that she saw a man, later
identified as Gordon, climb over the back fence of the
residence while carrying a black bag and get into the
passenger side of the Tahoe before it drove away. The
business owner provided law enforcement with the Tahoe’s
license plate number.
One of the MRDTF detectives who had been following
Williams earlier that day relayed this information to
Montana Highway Patrol Trooper Erick Fetterhoff.
Fetterhoff was patrolling Interstate 90 east of Livingston and
was familiar with Williams and the tan Tahoe from
Williams’s previous law enforcement encounters. Fetterhoff
observed the Tahoe on the interstate, followed it for several
miles, and saw it violating a Montana state traffic law.
Fetterhoff pulled the car over.
After the stop a variety of suspicious events occurred.
First, Williams identified Gordon as “Jamal,” though
Fetterhoff had already identified Williams’s companion as
Brandon Gordon through his driver’s license. When
Fetterhoff asked Gordon to exit the vehicle, Fetterhoff

USA V. GORDON

7

observed a glass pipe in the passenger’s side door pocket.
Williams and Gordon gave Fetterhoff inconsistent answers
regarding where they were going and what they were doing:
Gordon told Fetterhoff that they were driving to Billings for
his son’s birthday party, but Williams told Fetterhoff that
they were out for a drive looking for rocks. Based on these
interactions and observations, as well as the information he
learned from MRDTF, Fetterhoff believed there was
evidence of drug activity in the Tahoe and seized the car to
obtain a search warrant. He did not arrest Williams and
Gordon, and they walked away from the scene by foot.
While later searching the Tahoe after a warrant was issued,
officers found a black backpack in the passenger side of the
third-row seat, and inside the backpack the officers found
drug paraphernalia, two stolen handguns, ammunition, and a
bullet-resistant vest.
In October 2018, Gordon was interviewed by an agent
with the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives and an MRDTF detective. He agreed to speak to
them and signed a Miranda waiver. In the interview, Gordon
admitted to being a daily methamphetamine user. He also
told the officers that when Trooper Fetterhoff stopped the
Tahoe, they were driving to Billings to see a drug dealer so
that Gordon could use the stolen items found by police in the
Tahoe to pay off a drug debt.
II
In April 2019, Gordon was indicted on one count of
being a felon in possession of a firearm in violation of
18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1), and one count of possessing a stolen
firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(j).
Gordon
proceeded to a jury trial in October 2019, and the jury
acquitted him of possessing a stolen firearm but convicted

8

USA V. GORDON

him of possessing a firearm as a felon. He was sentenced to
87 months of imprisonment and three years of supervised
release.
Gordon appealed, and we upheld his conviction. See
United States v. Gordon, 851 F. App’x 89 (9th Cir. 2021).
Following our decision, Gordon filed a timely pro se motion
under 28 U.S.C. § 2255 to vacate, set aside, or correct his
sentence. In that motion, he set forth eight different claims
of error, mostly involving alleged ineffective assistance of
counsel (IAC) by his trial and appellate attorneys. Those
grounds were that: (1) his trial counsel misinformed him
about his sentencing exposure if he proceeded to trial instead
of pleading guilty; (2) his indictment was fatally defective
because it did not track the statutory language of
18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) and his trial and appellate counsel
failed to raise this issue; (3) his trial counsel failed to
properly investigate his case and did not adequately prepare
for trial; (4) his trial counsel failed to file a motion to
suppress the evidence seized from the Tahoe; (5) his trial
counsel failed to request a “paid informant instruction” for
Williams; (6) the Government violated Brady v. Maryland,
373 U.S. 83 (1963), by failing to disclose that Williams was
a paid informant; (7) his trial counsel failed to file a Federal
Rule of Criminal Procedure 29 motion for acquittal and his
appellate counsel provided IAC by not arguing on appeal
that there was insufficient evidence to support the jury’s
guilty verdict; and finally (8) his appellate counsel omitted
several nonfrivolous claims. Gordon requested that the
district court vacate his § 922(g)(1) conviction and either
dismiss the indictment against him with prejudice, order a
new trial, or conduct a full resentencing hearing and permit
Gordon to accept a plea offer from the Government. He also
requested an evidentiary hearing.

USA V. GORDON

9

The district court performed its gatekeeping obligation
under Rule 4(b) of the Rules Governing § 2255 Proceedings
and dismissed Grounds Two, Three, Four, Five, Seven, and
Eight in part. See 28 U.S.C. § 2255, Rule 4(b). It ordered
briefing from the Government on Grounds One and Six, and
on Ground Eight as it applied to those grounds. Following
briefing, the district court determined that Gordon had “not
carried his burden of establishing his trial attorney provided
ineffective assistance of counsel” on Ground One, nor
Ground Eight as it applied to Ground One, and denied
Gordon relief. 2 The district court did not grant him a
certificate of appealability (COA) as it concluded that, even
accepting Gordon’s assertions as true, Gordon did not satisfy
either prong of the Strickland v. Washington analysis
regarding his attorney’s sentencing predictions. 466 U.S.
668 (1984).
Following the district court’s decision, Gordon filed a
motion to alter or amend the judgment pursuant to Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure 59(e), requesting that the district
court reopen his § 2255 proceedings to conduct an
evidentiary hearing on Ground One, or grant a COA on
Grounds One, Two, Three, Four, Seven, and Eight. While
Gordon’s Rule 59(e) motion was still pending before the
district court, Gordon filed a second-in-time § 2255 motion
attacking his conviction as unconstitutional under New York
State Rifle & Pistol Ass’n, Inc. v. Bruen. 597 U.S. 1 (2022).
The district court denied Gordon’s Rule 59(e) motion
because Gordon did “not allege there [was] any newly
discovered evidence or an intervening change in the law,
thus his only basis for reconsideration [was] that the
[District] Court committed clear error in denying his § 2255
2

Gordon conceded that he was not entitled to relief on Ground Six.

10

USA V. GORDON

motion.” The district court found that it did not commit clear
error because “[e]ven if the allegations in Mr. Gordon’s
§ 2255 motion were proved true, he would not be entitled to
any relief under 28 U.S.C. § 2255 . . . [as] [h]is assertions do
not demonstrate that his trial attorney was unconstitutionally
ineffective.” For the same reasons, it denied Gordon’s
request for a COA. It then dismissed his second-in-time
habeas motion for lack of jurisdiction as an impermissible
second or successive § 2255 motion. It denied the COA for
the same reasons.
Gordon now appeals the district court’s denials of both
of his § 2255 motions. 3 We have certified the following
questions on appeal:
1. [W]hether trial counsel’s advice
regarding appellant’s potential sentence
amounted to ineffective assistance under
the Sixth Amendment, including whether
appellant was entitled to an evidentiary
hearing on this claim;
2. [W]hether the district court erred by
summarily dismissing appellant’s other
claims pursuant to Habeas Rule 4;
3. [W]hether the district court properly
dismissed appellant’s second-in-time
28 U.S.C. § 2255
motion
as
an
unauthorized second or successive
motion, when the second § 2255 motion
was filed (a) before the district court
3

Gordon initially appealed the denials of each § 2255 motion separately,
but we consolidated the cases into one appeal. See 24-436 Dkt. No. 5 at
2.

USA V. GORDON

11

resolved appellant’s Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 59(e) motion challenging the
denial of his first § 2255 motion, and
(b) before appellant filed a notice of
appeal from the district court judgment
denying the first § 2255 motion.
24-436 Dkt. No. 5 at 1–2; 23-2117 Dkt. No. 5 at 1–2. We
now evaluate each question in turn.
III
The district court had jurisdiction over Gordon’s original
criminal proceedings under 18 U.S.C. § 3231 and had
jurisdiction over Gordon’s motion to vacate, set aside, or
correct his sentence under 28 U.S.C. § 2255(d). We have
jurisdiction to review the district court’s denial of Gordon’s
§ 2255 motions pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 2253(a).
IV
We review de novo a district court’s decision to deny a
§ 2255 motion, Mendoza v. Carey, 449 F.3d 1065, 1068 (9th
Cir. 2006), or dismiss a § 2255 motion as an unauthorized
second or successive habeas motion. United States v. VillaGonzalez, 208 F.3d 1160, 1165 (9th Cir. 2000). We review
the district court’s decision to deny a defendant’s request for
an evidentiary hearing for an abuse of discretion. Mendoza,
449 F.3d at 1068.
V
We begin with Gordon’s first certified issue on appeal:
whether his trial counsel acted ineffectively in violation of
the Sixth Amendment by allegedly misadvising him about
his sentencing exposure if he proceeded to trial instead of
accepting a plea, and whether the district court abused its

12

USA V. GORDON

discretion by not holding an evidentiary hearing on the issue.
We hold that Gordon’s counsel did not act ineffectively,
even crediting all of Gordon’s allegations and assertions, and
thus the district court did not abuse its discretion by not
holding an evidentiary hearing on the issue.
In his first § 2255 motion, Gordon alleges that his trial
counsel never explained to him that if he proceeded to trial,
he would likely receive an 87-month sentence and would
lose the opportunity for the three-point sentencing reduction
for acceptance of responsibility. He also alleges that his trial
counsel advised him that the Government had offered him a
plea with an advisory sentencing guideline range of 20–24
months and that if he proceeded to trial, Gordon would face
a 27–33 month sentence. Gordon asserts that these
“sentencing exposure estimate[s] [were] erroneous” and thus
constitutionally defective. Gordon also asserts that, without
his trial counsel’s erroneous sentencing advice, he would not
have insisted on proceeding to trial and instead would have
pleaded guilty.
The district court evaluated the merits of Gordon’s
arguments, denied his motion, and declined to grant him an
evidentiary hearing on the issue. It found that it was
“exceedingly unlikely that trial counsel advised Mr. Gordon
in the way he claims” as there was “no guideline range of
20–24 months” under any offense level for his crime. It also
cited counsel’s affidavit, where he asserted that he never
gave Gordon this advice, and emails between trial counsel
and the Government sent the day before counsel visited
Gordon to discuss the plea. In these emails, the Government
indicated Gordon’s guideline range would either be 57–71
months or 84–105 months, both significantly longer than the
guideline range Gordon alleges his counsel advised. The
district court found that the only piece of evidence that

USA V. GORDON

13

supported Gordon’s assertions was a statement by trial
counsel at sentencing where he stated that at the beginning
of the case the Government had offered Gordon a 24-month
sentence if he pled guilty.
However, the district court correctly held that, “even
assuming Mr. Gordon’s assertions are completely accurate,”
his claim fails because Gordon did not show that his trial
counsel was constitutionally ineffective. It explained that
“[a]n estimated post-trial sentencing range of 27–33 months
versus [Gordon’s] ultimate sentencing range of 70–87
months was not a gross mischaracterization of the likely
outcome sufficient to show deficient performance.”
On appeal, Gordon argues that the district court erred by
not granting Gordon an evidentiary hearing on this issue
because, “[a]t bottom, Gordon’s claim that he was offered a
24-month sentence at the beginning of the case is both
contradicted and supported by his lawyer’s statements.” So,
he argues, “[t]he best way to determine which of counsel’s
representations should be credited ‘would be to hold an
evidentiary hearing and ask counsel.’” The Government
responds that an evidentiary hearing is not necessary
because, as the district court found, Gordon fails to establish
deficient performance even crediting his statements. We
agree with the Government.
To succeed on his IAC claim, Gordon must show both
that (1) his trial counsel’s performance was deficient, and
(2) his trial counsel’s allegedly deficient performance
prejudiced his defense. Harrington v. Richter, 562 U.S. 86,
104–05 (2011) (citing Strickland, 466 U.S. at 687–89, 693–
94). Gordon’s claim rises and falls on Strickland’s
deficiency prong, as he argues that his counsel gave him
deficient sentencing advice by inaccurately predicting the

14

USA V. GORDON

discrepancy between the sentence he would receive if he
accepted the Government’s plea or if he proceeded to trial
and was convicted by a jury. If he cannot prove that his
counsel’s advice was deficient, he cannot prove that it was
constitutionally ineffective.
“A deficient performance is one in which counsel made
errors so serious that [he] was not functioning as the counsel
guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment.” Iaea v. Sunn,
800 F.2d 861, 864 (9th Cir. 1986) (citing Strickland,
466 U.S. at 687). To show that his trial counsel’s incorrect
sentencing predictions rose to the level of constitutionally
deficient conduct, Gordon must show that his trial counsel’s
sentencing prediction was a “gross mischaracterization of
the likely outcome presented in the case, combined with the
erroneous advice on the possible effects of going to trial.”
Id. at 865. And to merit an evidentiary hearing on the issue,
Gordon “must establish that his allegation[s], if proven,
would establish a constitutional deprivation.” Turner v.
Calderon, 281 F.3d 851, 890 (9th Cir. 2002) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).
Gordon does not meet his burden of showing that his
counsel’s representation was constitutionally deficient, even
if we credit all of Gordon’s assertions regarding his trial
counsel’s sentencing advice. Thus, the district court did not
err by not granting Gordon relief and did not abuse its
discretion by not granting him an evidentiary hearing. The
difference between trial counsel’s alleged representation that
Gordon faced sentencing exposure of 27–33 months if he
proceeded to trial, and Gordon’s actual 87-month sentence,
at most a sixty-month discrepancy, is not a “gross
mischaracterization of the likely outcome” of Gordon’s case
under our caselaw. Iaea, 800 F.2d at 865.

USA V. GORDON

15

In cases where we have found deficient performance
based on a gross mischaracterization of a case’s likely
outcome, there were either additional, aggravating factors
present, or the discrepancy between the sentence predicted
and the sentence received was significantly larger than
Gordon’s alleged discrepancy. For example, in Iaea, there
was other evidence of erroneous advice beyond an erroneous
sentencing prediction. Counsel told Iaea and his family “on
several occasions that there was a good chance of his getting
probation if he accepted the plea bargain” and that “the
chance of his getting an extended sentence was ‘almost zero’
and that he ‘could almost not consider it.’” Id. at 863.
Counsel also told Iaea that the state minimum sentencing law
applied when it did not and when she had “obtained the
prosecutor’s promise not to ask for minimum sentencing.”
Id. at 864–65. There was also a large discrepancy between
counsel’s predicted sentence of probation, and Iaea’s
ultimate sentence of multiple life sentences, twenty-year
sentences, and ten-year sentences. Id. at 863, 865. We found
that this combination of a gross mischaracterization of the
likely outcome of the case, probation versus multiple life
sentences, along with counsel’s numerous pieces of
erroneous advice about going to trial, fell “below the level
of competence required of defense attorneys” and was
constitutionally deficient. Id. at 865.
Similarly, in United States v. Manzo, we highlighted
Manzo’s counsel’s “failure to anticipate that the offenses
would be grouped for sentencing purposes,” as well as the
sentencing disparity of almost 160 months between
counsel’s predicted sentence and the sentence Manzo
received in finding that counsel’s representation was
deficient. 675 F.3d 1204, 1208–10 (9th Cir. 2012). Gordon
does not point to any additional factors beyond the alleged

16

USA V. GORDON

sentencing disparity, like the factors present in Iaea and
Manzo, that make his counsel’s alleged sentencing advice a
gross mischaracterization of the sentence he received. Thus,
“there is no other evidence in the record that would elevate
[Gordon’s] attorney’s prediction to the level of Iaea’s
counsel’s patently erroneous advice.” Womack v. Del Papa,
497 F.3d 998, 1003 (9th Cir. 2007).
Nor is the alleged sixty-month discrepancy as egregious
as the discrepancies in cases in which we have found a gross
mischaracterization with no additional aggravating factors.
For example, in Chacon v. Wood, we found a gross
mischaracterization where Chacon’s counsel told him via an
interpreter that if he entered a guilty plea, he would serve
three months in jail, and he actually received ten years.
36 F.3d 1459, 1464–65 (9th Cir. 1994). Similarly, in United
States v. Davis, we affirmed the district court’s finding that
counsel had grossly mischaracterized the outcome of
Davis’s case where counsel advised Davis that he was likely
to receive probation, and he received the statutory maximum
of eight years. 428 F.3d 802, 804–06, 808 (9th Cir. 2005).
See also United States v. Chacon-Palomares,
208 F.3d 1157, 1158–60 (9th Cir. 2000) (remanding for an
evidentiary hearing where counsel allegedly advised
Chacon-Palomares he faced a maximum prison sentence of
six months, and he was sentenced to 108 months).
We have also previously upheld sentencing
discrepancies of sixty months, or more, without finding
counsel’s representation to be deficient. See Sophanthavong
v. Palmateer, 378 F.3d 859, 868–69 (9th Cir. 2004) (finding
no gross mischaracterization where defendant received a
180-month sentence by pleading but faced a 121-month
sentence under state sentencing guidelines); Womack,
497 F.3d at 1002–04 (finding no gross mischaracterization

USA V. GORDON

17

where counsel advised defendant that pleading guilty was his
best chance of receiving a 30–40 year sentence and
defendant received eight terms of life imprisonment without
parole as no other factors were present to make
representation deficient).
The district court did not err by finding no deficiency
because counsel’s sentencing prediction was not a gross
mischaracterization of the sentence Gordon received, and no
other aggravating factors were present. The district court
also did not abuse its discretion by denying an evidentiary
hearing because even if all of Gordon’s allegations were
proven true, he cannot prove that his counsel acted with
constitutional deficiency.4
VI
The second certified question before us is whether the
district court erred by summarily dismissing Gordon’s
remaining IAC claims pursuant to Habeas Rule 4 in light of
4

Gordon also argues against the gross mischaracterization test itself,
arguing that it conflicts with the Supreme Court’s decision in Glover v.
United States, 531 U.S. 198 (2001). However, Glover discusses
prejudice in the context of sentencing calculations and is thus
inapplicable here. See id. at 202–04 (“the question of deficient
performance is not before us”). Gordon further argues that the gross
mischaracterization test is “unworkable.” However, we are bound by
our own precedent that the gross mischaracterization test applies to
determine whether a disparity between counsel’s sentencing prediction
and the sentence received rises to the level of constitutional deficiency.
See Hart v. Massanari, 266 F.3d 1155, 1171 (9th Cir. 2001) (“Circuit
law . . . binds all courts within a particular circuit, including the court of
appeals itself. Thus, the first panel to consider an issue sets the law not
only for all the inferior courts in the circuit, but also future panels of the
court of appeals. Once a panel resolves an issue in a precedential
opinion, the matter is deemed resolved, unless overruled by the court
itself sitting en banc, or by the Supreme Court.”)

18

USA V. GORDON

our decision in Browning v. Baker, 875 F.3d 444 (9th Cir.
2017). In Browning, we held that the constitutional right to
effective counsel is a right “in toto—it promises that counsel
will perform reasonably” and so we should consider
“counsel’s conduct as a whole to determine whether it was
constitutionally adequate.” Id. at 471. In Browning, the
district court had initially limited the COA to particular
claims related to the attorney’s failure to investigate certain
avenues of evidence. Id. However, we found “[t]his
approach was misguided” and that “the IAC portion of the
COA should have been crafted at a higher level of
generality.” Id. We expanded the COA to encompass the
whole of the right that Browning contended was violated—
his right to “effective assistance of counsel by his trial
lawyer[] . . . to investigate and prepare for trial.” Id.
(internal quotation marks omitted). We found that “this
articulation more appropriately frame[d] the constitutional
right” Browning asserted was violated. Id.
In cases following Browning, we have applied
Browning’s logic to broaden COAs in IAC cases so that we
can evaluate the adequacy of counsel’s representation “as a
whole” in a particular phase of the defendant’s criminal case.
Id. In practice, this requires us to examine a defendant’s
uncertified IAC claims to determine if any arise from the
same phase of a defendant’s criminal case as their certified
claims; if so, we evaluate their merits.
For example, in White v. Ryan, we expanded the COA to
include all of White’s claims related to “the penalty phase of
resentencing” where the district court had initially only
certified a claim related to counsel’s failure to investigate
and present mitigating evidence at resentencing.
895 F.3d 641, 645 n.1 (9th Cir. 2018). This is because
“White [had] but a single claim regarding his right to the

USA V. GORDON

19

effective assistance of counsel at the penalty phase of
resentencing.” Id. This claim encompassed White’s
uncertified claims alleging counsel’s various deficiencies at
the penalty phase of resentencing, so we considered those
claims on the merits. Id.
Similarly, in McGill v. Shinn, “McGill’s lone certified
claim [arose] out of counsel’s performance at the penalty
phase of his trial.” 16 F.4th 666, 678 (9th Cir. 2021). So,
we expanded the COA to “consider ‘counsel’s conduct as a
whole’” at the penalty phase of McGill’s trial. Id. (quoting
Browning, 875 F.3d at 471). This allowed us to consider on
the merits McGill’s uncertified IAC claim related to the
trial’s penalty phase. Id. However, it did not allow us to
consider McGill’s uncertified claims alleging “counsel’s
deficient performance at the guilt phase at [McGill’s] trial,”
as these claims arose from a “separate and discrete” phase of
McGill’s criminal proceedings, and thus were not
encompassed by the right McGill asserted in his certified
claim. Id. at 678–79.
Finally, in Montiel v. Chappell, we highlighted that “a
district court errs by limiting a COA to individual
ineffective-assistance subclaims corresponding to particular
instances of an attorney’s conduct within a single trial.”
43 F.4th 942, 958–59 (9th Cir. 2022) (citing Browning,
875 F.3d at 471). There, we expanded the COA to “consider
the broader issue whether [counsel’s] performance,
considered as a whole, amounted to ineffective assistance of
counsel at the 1986 penalty trial.” Id. at 959. This allowed
us to consider on the merits two of Montiel’s uncertified
claims relating to his counsel’s performance at the 1986
penalty trial, as they were encompassed by the broader right
Montiel asserted. Id. at 958. C.f. Creech v. Richardson,
59 F.4th 372, 383 (9th Cir. 2023) (refusing to expand the

20

USA V. GORDON

COA where the record showed the district court analyzed
counsel’s conduct during resentencing “as a whole to
determine whether it was constitutionally adequate”
(quoting Browning, 875 F.3d at 471)).
To determine whether the district court erred under
Browning by not considering Gordon’s right to effective
assistance of counsel “as a whole,” we must first determine
what “general” right to effective assistance of counsel
Gordon asserts in his certified claim. See Browning, 875
F.3d at 471. In his certified claim, Gordon asserts a right to
effective assistance of counsel during plea negotiations,
specifically alleging that his counsel gave him deficient
advice regarding sentencing. So, under Browning, the
district court should have more broadly considered whether
Gordon received ineffective assistance of counsel during the
plea negotiation stage, instead of only considering the
sentencing advice Gordon received during plea negotiations.
We now expand the COA granted to Gordon on the
sentencing advice issue to consider whether Gordon
received effective assistance of counsel at the plea
negotiation stage.
We must determine whether any of Gordon’s uncertified
IAC claims fall under our expanded certified question—
whether Gordon received effective assistance of counsel at
the plea negotiation stage—and if they do, we will consider
them on the merits. Gordon raises numerous uncertified
grounds for relief based on IAC: (2) for failing to move to
dismiss a fatally defective indictment; (3) for providing him
with inadequate pretrial consultation and conducting
inadequate pretrial investigations; (4) for failing to file a
motion to suppress the evidence seized from the Tahoe;
(5) for failing to request a paid informant jury instruction as
Williams was a paid informant; (7) for failing to file a

USA V. GORDON

21

motion to acquit under Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure
29; and (8) alleging his appellate counsel provided him
ineffective assistance of counsel. Gordon concedes that
Ground Seven and Ground Eight have “nothing to do with
[counsel’s] performance during the plea-bargaining stage,”
so we do not consider them. That leaves Grounds Two,
Three, and Four for us to evaluate.5
We look first at Ground Two, Gordon’s assertion that his
trial counsel was ineffective by failing to move to dismiss a
fatally defective indictment. Counsel’s decision whether to
move to dismiss an indictment under Federal Rule of
Criminal Procedure 12(b)(3)(B) may have influenced the
advice he gave Gordon during plea negotiations, so we
evaluate the claim on the merits.
Gordon argues that his counsel was ineffective by not
moving to dismiss his indictment because the indictment did
not track the statutory language of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) nor
did it allege that Gordon knew he was a felon when he
possessed the firearms in question, as required by Rehaif v.
United States. 588 U.S. 225 (2019). On appeal, Gordon
concedes that the wording of the indictment “clearly put
Gordon on notice that his alleged possession of the firearms
was unlawful under federal law” and that the wording of the
indictment “more faithfully tracks that used in § 922(g)(1)”
than his suggested language. Thus, he concedes that “the
district court properly exercised its authority when it rejected
Gordon’s claim that his lawyer was ineffective for failing to
seek dismissal of the Indictment simply because it did not

5

Gordon does not argue that we should consider Ground Five on the
merits, so we do not consider it.

22

USA V. GORDON

include his preferred terminology in count one.” As Gordon
concedes this issue, we do not evaluate it further.
Gordon next argues that his counsel was ineffective by
failing to move to dismiss the indictment as defective
because it did not allege that Gordon was aware of his status
as a felon, as required by Rehaif. This claim faces a variety
of hurdles that it ultimately fails to clear. Looking first at
deficiency, Rehaif was decided after the Government issued
the indictment Gordon challenges, and we have not yet
decided whether Rehaif may be applied retroactively on
collateral review. See White v. Quintana, No. 22-0150, 2022
WL 16587236, at *4 (C.D. Cal. Sept. 2, 2022) (“Neither the
Third Circuit nor the Ninth Circuit appears to have expressly
addressed whether Rehaif recognizes a non-constitutional
right that may be applied retroactively on collateral
review.”); Mujahidh v. United States, No. 19-1852, 2020
WL 1330750, at *1 n.2 (W.D. Wash. Mar. 23, 2020)
(“Although the Ninth Circuit has not ruled on the issue,
numerous other courts have held that Rehaif is not
retroactively applicable on collateral review.”). And,
counsel stipulated to the fact that Gordon knew of his felony
status, though Gordon maintains he did not know about this
stipulation. Thus, it is not clear that counsel’s decision not
to file a Rule 12(b)(3)(B) motion was deficient.
However, even assuming deficiency, Gordon cannot
prove he was prejudiced by his counsel’s failure to file the
Rule 12(b)(3)(B) motion as the jury was explicitly
instructed, twice, that in order to convict him of being a felon
in possession of a firearm, they had to find beyond a
reasonable doubt that Gordon knew he was a felon at the
time he possessed the firearms in question. Court’s Final
Jury Instructions (Complete Packet Read to Jury) at 24, 46,
United States v. Gordon, No. 19-cr-00046 (D. Mont. Oct. 25,

USA V. GORDON

23

2019) (No. 75). The jury found that Gordon knowingly
possessed two firearms “while knowing he was a felon” and
convicted him of being a felon in possession of a firearm.
Redacted Jury Verdict at 1–2, United States v. Gordon, No.
19-cr-00046 (D. Mont. Oct. 24, 2019) (No. 73). Gordon
cannot establish prejudice because, even if counsel was
deficient for failing to move to dismiss the indictment based
on its non-compliance with Rehaif’s requirements, the jury
was instructed in line with Rehaif’s requirements, and it
convicted on the § 922(g)(1) charge.
We next move to Ground Three, Gordon’s assertion that
his counsel provided him with inadequate pretrial
consultation
and
conducted
inadequate
pretrial
investigation. Gordon argues that the COA should be
expanded to include this ground because it relates to
counsel’s pretrial performance and may have influenced
counsel’s advice to accept or reject the plea offer. We
disagree. The specific actions that Gordon lists in Ground
Three, like interviewing opposing witnesses and entering
stipulations with the Government, all relate to the trial phase
of the litigation in this case, not the plea negotiation phase.
We thus do not expand the COA under Browning to consider
the merits of this claim, which occurred at a different stage
in the proceedings.
In Ground Four, Gordon argues that counsel’s failure to
suppress evidence seized by law enforcement during the
traffic stop relates to counsel’s pretrial performance as it
may have affected his advice to accept or reject a plea offer.
The Government concedes that this claim might relate to the
plea negotiation phase, so we could expand the COA to
consider it with Ground One. We agree that counsel’s
decision not to file a motion to suppress may have influenced
counsel’s advice to Gordon during plea negotiations, so we

24

USA V. GORDON

expand the COA to include Ground Four and consider its
merits.
The district court “liberally construe[d]” Gordon’s
arguments on Ground Four “as a challenge to the initial
traffic stop, Trooper Fetterhoff’s decision to extend the
detention to investigate suspected drug activity, and the
actual search of the vehicle.” On appeal, Gordon only
challenges the prolongation of the stop, which he argues was
not supported by reasonable suspicion, and the search of the
vehicle.
In its Rule 4 analysis, the district court evaluated whether
a motion to suppress could have succeeded based on
Fetterhoff’s unlawful prolongation of the traffic stop for
excessive time in the freeway’s passing lane. The district
court found that Fetterhoff lawfully prolonged the traffic
stop based on the reasonable suspicion that the Tahoe was
transporting illegal drugs because of the information
Fetterhoff had previously received from the MRDTF
officers and the suspicious activity he observed. It also
found that any challenge to the search of the vehicle would
have failed because Fetterhoff had a valid search warrant and
Gordon did not argue that the warrant was not based on
probable cause or was based on false or misleading
information. Thus, the district court dismissed this ground
in its Rule 4 analysis because it found that trial counsel was
not deficient for failing to bring an unsuccessful motion to
suppress. We agree.
To show that his trial counsel was ineffective for failing
to file a motion to suppress based on the length of the traffic
stop or the unconstitutionality of the search warrant, Gordon
must show “that (1) the overlooked motion to suppress
would have been meritorious and (2) there is a reasonable

USA V. GORDON

25

probability that the jury would have reached a different
verdict absent the introduction of the unlawful evidence.”
Ortiz-Sandoval v. Clarke, 323 F.3d 1165, 1170 (9th Cir.
2003) (citations omitted).
Gordon has not shown that a motion to suppress based
on either of his arguments would have been successful, so he
has not carried his burden of showing that his attorney’s
performance was deficient. As the district court pointed out,
Fetterhoff had reasonable suspicion of illegal activity: the
MRDTF had given Fetterhoff information about the Tahoe’s
suspicious activity circling the coffee stand and Gordon
jumping into the car from the house with a black bag;
Williams appeared impaired; Williams gave Fetterhoff a
false name for Gordon; Fetterhoff observed drug
paraphernalia in the car; and Gordon and Williams provided
inconsistent stories about where they were going and what
they were doing. This was sufficient to give Fetterhoff
reasonable suspicion, allowing him to extend the vehicle
stop. See United States v. Evans, 786 F.3d 779, 788 (9th Cir.
2015) (“Reasonable suspicion exists when an officer is
aware of specific, articulable facts which, when considered
with objective and reasonable inferences, form a basis for
particularized suspicion.” (citation and internal quotation
marks omitted)). Thus, any motion to suppress based on
these grounds would not have succeeded.
Gordon also has not shown why a motion to suppress
evidence discovered pursuant to a valid search warrant
would have been successful. Gordon alleges that there may
have been deficiencies in the warrant to search the Tahoe,
but does not point to anything specific, and thus has not met
his burden of showing that the motion to suppress the
evidence found pursuant to a lawful search warrant would
have been successful.

26

USA V. GORDON

Thus, we expand the COA under Browning to consider
Gordon’s right to effective assistance of counsel at the plea
negotiation stage “in toto,” but hold that Gordon has not
established that he received ineffective assistance of counsel
at this stage, after considering the merits of his certified and
uncertified claims. 875 F.3d at 471.
VII
The final question we certified was whether the district
court properly dismissed Gordon’s second-in-time
28 U.S.C. § 2255 motion as an unauthorized second or
successive habeas motion when it was filed (a) before the
district court resolved his Rule 59(e) motion challenging the
denial of his first § 2255 motion, and (b) before Gordon filed
a notice of appeal. This question hinges on whether
Gordon’s first § 2255 motion was still pending before the
district court when Gordon filed his second-in-time § 2255
motion.
Gordon argues that it was. Specifically, he argues that
under Banister v. Davis, his Rule 59(e) motion suspended
the finality of the district court’s judgment denying his initial
§ 2255 motion, meaning that his first § 2255 motion was still
pending before the district court when he filed his secondin-time motion. 590 U.S. 504 (2020). So, he argues that the
district court should have interpreted his second-in-time
§ 2255 motion as a permissible motion to amend his first
§ 2255 motion instead of dismissing it as an unauthorized
second or successive motion. He asks us to reverse the
district court’s dismissal and remand this case so the district
court can exercise its discretion under Federal Rule of
Criminal Procedure 15 and determine whether Gordon can
amend his original § 2255 motion.

USA V. GORDON

27

The Government does not address Banister’s effect, if
any, on Gordon’s § 2255 motions, but argues that Gordon’s
second-in-time § 2255 motion must be considered an
impermissible second or successive motion instead of a
motion to amend because the district court “could not have
entertained a motion to amend under Rule 15 unless and until
it reopened or set aside” its judgment on Gordon’s first
§ 2255 motion. This is an issue of first impression for us,
and we agree with Gordon that, under Banister, the district
court should have considered his second-in-time § 2255
motion to be a permissible motion to amend his first § 2255
motion.
Under the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act of 1996 (AEDPA), second or successive § 2255 motions
are generally proscribed unless certain narrow criteria are
met. Gonzalez v. Sherman, 873 F.3d 763, 767 (9th Cir.
2017). “Generally, ‘a petition will not be deemed second or
successive unless, at a minimum, an earlier-filed petition has
been finally adjudicated.’”
Balbuena v. Sullivan,
980 F.3d 619, 635 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting Goodrum v.
Busby, 824 F.3d 1188, 1194 (9th Cir. 2016)). “Thus, when
a petitioner files a new petition while his first petition
remains pending, courts have uniformly held that the new
petition cannot be deemed second or successive.” Id.
(quoting Goodrum, 824 F.3d at 1194).
A motion made under Rule 59(e) is “part and parcel of
the first habeas proceeding.” Banister, 590 U.S. at 507. A
timely Rule 59(e) motion “‘suspends the finality of the
original judgment’ for purposes of an appeal” as “there is no
longer a final judgment to appeal from.” Id. at 508 (quoting
FCC v. League of Women Voters of Cal., 468 U.S. 364, 373
n.10 (1984)).

28

USA V. GORDON

Banister extensively discusses the role and function of
Rule 59(e) motions in habeas proceedings, ultimately
concluding “that Rule 59(e) motions are not second or
successive petitions, but instead a part of a prisoner’s first
habeas proceeding.” Id. at 517. While Banister’s holding is
not directly applicable to Gordon’s claim, its rationale is. In
Banister, the Court explains that “[a] timely Rule 59(e)
motion . . . suspend[s] the finality of any judgment,
including one in habeas—thus enabling a district court to
address the matter again.” Id. at 514 (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted). It continues:
[i]n timing and substance, a Rule 59(e)
motion hews closely to the initial application;
and the habeas court’s disposition of the
former fuses with its decision on the latter.
Such a motion does not enable a prisoner to
abuse the habeas process by stringing out his
claims over the years. It instead gives the
court a brief chance to fix mistakes before its
(single) judgment on a (single) habeas
application becomes final and thereby
triggers the time for appeal.
Id. at 517. Banister’s language focusing on the unity of the
Rule 59(e) motion and the § 2255 motion, and the
suspension of the judgment’s finality on the latter until the
former is resolved, strongly support Gordon’s argument that
the district court’s decision on the first § 2255 motion was
pending when Gordon filed his second-in-time motion. See
also Rivers v. Guerrero, 145 S. Ct. 1634, 1644 (2025)
(reiterating Banister’s Rule 59(e) reasoning).

USA V. GORDON

29

The Government argues that our caselaw forecloses
Gordon’s argument, but we are not convinced. First, it cites
to Beaty v. Schriro, where the defendant “asked the district
court to amend the original habeas petition to include a
plethora of other claims” after the district court ruled against
him following an evidentiary hearing. 554 F.3d 780, 782
(9th Cir. 2009). He also filed a variety of pro se submissions
while his appeal was pending. Id. We held that the
defendant needed to meet 28 U.S.C. § 2244(b)’s standard
for second or successive habeas motions because
“allow[ing] the filing of new claims this late in the process
would essentially nullify the rules about second and
successive petitions created by [AEDPA].” Id. at 783
(citation omitted).
Similar to Gordon, the defendant in Beaty did not try to
amend his claims until after the district court had denied his
motion for habeas relief. However, Beaty does not discuss
the unique situation at play here—what happens when the
defendant files an additional habeas motion while the district
court is considering his Rule 59(e) motion. The defendant
in Beaty filed his additional habeas motion when his appeal
was already before this court. And Beaty highlighted that
the habeas motion could not be amended “after the district
court has ruled and proceedings have begun in this court
(much less after the Supreme Court denied certiorari on the
claims on which we had already ruled).” Id. at 783 n.1.
When Gordon filed his second-in-time motion, he had not
appealed the district court’s denial of his first motion to us,
so Beaty does not foreclose Gordon’s argument.
The Government also points to Balbuena v. Sullivan,
where we found that the district court had properly
determined that a defendant’s Rule 60(b) motion was a
second or successive application for habeas relief.

30

USA V. GORDON

980 F.3d at 636–37. However, in Banister, the Supreme
Court specifically differentiated between Rule 60(b)
motions and Rule 59(e) motions, holding that Rule 59(e)
motions are not second-or-successive habeas motions. 590
U.S. at 518–21. The Government also argues that the district
court is “without power to entertain a motion to amend
because it has already decided the case on the merits and
entered judgment.” However, this does not take into account
Banister’s language declaring that the Rule 59(e) motion
suspends the finality of the district court’s decision, thus
allowing motions to amend to be filed at that time. Thus,
Gordon is correct that, under Banister, the finality of the
district court’s original denial of his § 2255 motion was
suspended while it considered his Rule 59(e) motion,
allowing Gordon to file an additional habeas claim which the
district court could consider as a motion to amend the first
habeas motion.
Nevertheless, it is unnecessary for us to remand this case
to the district court for it to consider whether to allow
Gordon to amend his original motion because the only
argument Gordon raises in his second-in-time § 2255 motion
is foreclosed by our caselaw. In his second-in-time § 2255
motion, Gordon argues only that his § 922(g) conviction is
unconstitutional post-Bruen because it violates his rights
under the Second Amendment. However, our decision in
United States v. Duarte directly forecloses Gordon’s
argument. 137 F.4th 743, 762 (9th Cir. 2025) (en banc). In
Duarte, we held that § 922(g)(1) is constitutional as applied
to non-violent felons like Gordon. Id. Because Duarte
forecloses Gordon’s only argument in his second-in-time
§ 2255 motion, amendment of Gordon’s original motion
would be futile. See Cervantes v. Countrywide Home Loans,
Inc., 656 F.3d 1034, 1041 (9th Cir. 2011).

USA V. GORDON

31

VIII
In conclusion, the district court did not err by finding
that, even crediting Gordon’s assertions, Gordon’s trial
counsel’s representation was not deficient, and thus no
evidentiary hearing was needed on the issue. The district
court should have considered Gordon’s claim broadly as
alleging IAC during the plea negotiation stage. We certified
this broader question, however, all of Gordon’s claims
relating to IAC at the plea negotiation stage fail on the
merits. And finally, the district court erred by dismissing
Gordon’s second-in-time § 2255 motion as an impermissible
second or successive habeas motion because his Rule 59(e)
motion was still pending when he filed it, making Gordon’s
second-in-time motion a permissible motion to amend.
However, we do not remand this case as Gordon’s only
argument in his second motion is foreclosed, making any
amendment futile.
AFFIRMED.

