FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
THE SATANIC TEMPLE,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 24-1243
D.C. No.
1:22-cv-00411DCN

RAUL LABRADOR, in his capacity
as the Attorney General of Idaho;
JAN M BENNETTS, in her capacity
as Ada County Prosecutor; STATE
OF IDAHO,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Idaho
David C. Nye, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 26, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed August 11, 2025
Before: M. Margaret McKeown, Ronald M. Gould, and
John B. Owens, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge McKeown

2

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

SUMMARY *
Article III Standing
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal for lack
of Article III standing of an action brought by The Satanic
Temple
(“TST”),
a
religious
association,
challenging Idaho’s laws criminalizing abortion.
The panel held that TST had not met its burden to show
associational standing. TST, whose sole telehealth abortion
clinic is in New Mexico, had not shown that one of its
members has suffered or will imminently suffer an injury
given that TST has no patients in Idaho, no doctors who are
licensed to treat Idaho patients, and identified no Idaho
citizen who sought an abortion from the organization.
The panel held that TST had not met its burden to show
organizational standing. TST’s argument that it diverted
resources to open its New Mexico clinic to provide abortions
in response to Idaho’s and other states’ abortion bans was
insufficient to establish standing. The panel rejected TST’s
argument that its mission to promote abortions was
frustrated by Idaho’s law.
Because TST did not demonstrate standing, the panel did
not reach the merits of TST’s claims.
Although the panel agreed with the district court that
TST lacked standing, it noted that dismissals for lack of
jurisdiction should generally be without prejudice. Here,
because the district court also rejected TST’s claims on the
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

3

merits, it dismissed the complaint with prejudice. The panel
remanded to the district court for a determination of whether
TST’s complaint clearly could not be saved by any
amendment.

COUNSEL
W. James Mac Naughton (argued), Newton, New Jersey;
Jeremiah Hudson, Fisher & Hudson PLLC, Boise, Idaho; for
Plaintiff-Appellant.
Alan M. Hurst (argued), Solicitor General; Nathan S.
Downey, David A. Leroy Fellow; Michael A. Zarian,
Deputy Solicitor General; Brian V. Church, Deputy
Attorney General; Raul R. Labrador, Idaho Attorney
General; Idaho Office of the Attorney General, Boise, Idaho;
for Defendants-Appellees.

4

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

OPINION
McKEOWN, Circuit Judge:
Abortion laws have faced frequent and wide-ranging
challenges from religious groups throughout the federal
courts. In this appeal, we consider challenges to Idaho’s
laws criminalizing abortion brought by a religious
association—The Satanic Temple (“TST”)—that supports
abortion as an exercise of personal sovereignty and bodily
autonomy, two of the group’s core tenets. But no matter how
crucial these beliefs are to TST, “an organization may not
establish standing simply based on the intensity of the
litigant’s interest or because of strong opposition to the
government’s conduct.” Food & Drug Admin. v. All. for
Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. 367, 394 (2024) (internal
quotation omitted).
Article III standing requires
demonstrating an injury in fact, causation, and redressability.
Id. at 380. TST, whose sole clinic is in New Mexico, has no
patients in Idaho, no clinic in Idaho, no doctors who are
licensed to treat Idaho patients, and has identified no Idaho
citizen who seeks an abortion from the organization.
Because TST has not established standing, we affirm the
district court’s dismissal of its claims.
Background 1
TST is a religious association with “over 1.5 million
members worldwide, including over 3,500 members in
Idaho.” “TST venerates, but does not worship, the
allegorical Satan” as described in Paradise Lost as a
defender of personal sovereignty. Its tenets parallel those of
secular humanism and include the tenet that “[o]ne’s body is
1

This background is based on TST’s complaint.

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

5

inviolable, subject to one’s own will alone.” TST “members
believe the fetal tissue a pregnant woman carries in her
uterus—from conception until viability—is part of her body
and not imbued with any humanity or existence separate and
apart from that of the woman herself.” Consistent with this
principle, members believe those who are involuntarily
pregnant should get abortions, if this can be done safely, “as
an exercise of their religious beliefs pursuant to the Satanic
Abortion Ritual,” which is primarily a ritual of positive
affirmations intended to relieve any guilt or anxiety while
receiving a medical or surgical abortion.
The Supreme Court dramatically changed the landscape
for abortion in Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health
Organization, which held that the Constitution does not
confer a right to abortion. 597 U.S. 215 (2022). Shortly after
the decision, Idaho’s Total Abortion Ban and Fetal Heartbeat
Statute (“abortion laws”) went into effect. 2 Idaho Code
§§ 18-604 et seq.; 18-8801 et seq. These laws criminalize
all abortion, with an affirmative defense against prosecution
available in only some instances, such as rape and incest.
See Idaho Code § 18-8804. The laws allow for the
prosecution of those who receive and those who provide
abortions, and civil actions for damages.
TST challenges Idaho’s abortion laws by suing the
Attorney General of Idaho and the Ada County Prosecutor. 3
TST alleges it “has female TST members residing in Idaho
who are or will become involuntarily pregnant.” It defines
The Idaho Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of both laws.
Planned Parenthood Great Nw. v. State, 522 P.3d 1132 (Idaho 2023).
2

TST also sued the State of Idaho, which the district court dismissed
based on sovereign immunity. TST does not challenge that dismissal on
appeal.
3

6

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

an “Involuntarily Pregnant Woman” as one who “[b]ecame
pregnant without her consent due to the failure of her Birth
Control,” and is a TST member. TST claims that its
members received abortions before Idaho passed its new
abortion laws on August 25, 2022, but now cannot, due to
the criminalization provisions.
TST opened a telehealth abortion clinic (“the Clinic”) in
New Mexico that would provide medical abortions to Idaho
TST members. TST spent over $100,000 to establish and
operate the Clinic, which prescribes abortifacients and
counsels TST members on the Satanic Abortion Ritual. The
Clinic was not operational when TST’s complaint was filed
in September 2022 but became operational as of February
2023.
TST alleges the Idaho abortion laws are unconstitutional
as applied to Involuntarily Pregnant TST members, claiming
that Idaho’s actions have: (1) created a taking of the
economic value of a woman’s uterus by forcing women to
carry unwanted pregnancies without state compensation in
violation of the Fifth Amendment; (2) subjected women
forced to carry unwanted pregnancies to slavery in violation
of the Thirteenth
Amendment;
and (3) given
unconstitutional preferences to survivors of rape or incest,
who are excepted from Idaho’s abortion prohibitions, in
violation of the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment. 4 TST seeks to permanently enjoin Idaho from
enforcing the laws against “Involuntarily Pregnant Women
or anyone who provides an Involuntarily Pregnant Woman

TST initially brought a claim under Idaho’s Exercise of Religious
Freedom Act but later consented to its dismissal; that claim is not before
the panel.
4

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

7

with an abortion[,]” as well as against TST in its provision
of medical abortions in Idaho.
The Idaho defendants moved to dismiss under Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6). The district
court granted the motion, finding TST lacked both
associational and organizational standing. Apart from its
holding on standing, the district court also proceeded to the
merits to provide additional support for dismissal, rejecting
each of TST’s claims. We affirm dismissal of TST’s
complaint on standing grounds and do not reach the merits.
Analysis
We review de novo the dismissal for lack of Article III
standing. Maya v. Centex Corp., 658 F.3d 1060, 1067 (9th
Cir. 2011). We “take as true all material allegations in the
complaint and construe the complaint in favor of the
plaintiff.” Arizona v. Yellen, 34 F.4th 841, 849 (9th Cir.
2022).
To establish Article III standing, TST bears the burden
to demonstrate an injury in fact, causation, and
redressability. Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560–
61 (1992). The injury must be both “(a) concrete and
particularized . . . and (b) actual or imminent, not conjectural
or hypothetical.” Id. at 560 (internal quotations omitted).
The district court correctly found that TST lacks both
associational and organizational standing to challenge
Idaho’s abortion laws.
I. Associational Standing
The Supreme Court laid out the parameters of
associational standing in Friends of the Earth v. Laidlaw:
“An association has standing . . . on behalf of its members
when its members would otherwise have standing to sue in

8

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

their own right, the interests at stake are germane to the
organization’s purpose, and neither the claim asserted nor
the relief requested requires the participation of individual
members . . . .” Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Env’t
Servs. (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 181 (2000). The first
requirement sinks TST’s effort to establish standing.
Remarkably, TST devotes less than ten pages of its
seventy-page brief to standing, and it has not shown that
even one of its members would “have standing to sue in their
own right.” Id. No specific members harmed by the laws
are identified and it is unclear whether such a member exists.
Instead, TST relies on a speculative chain of assumptions to
argue only that it is reasonably probable that one of its
members will be injured. This absence of evidence, coupled
with infirm statistical inferences, does not meet Article III’s
standing requirements.
Despite the general requirement to name affected
members, TST names no member, even by pseudonym, who
would have standing to sue. Associated Gen. Contractors of
Am., San Diego Chapter, Inc. v. Cal. Dep’t of Transp., 713
F.3d 1187, 1194 (9th Cir. 2013) (holding organization failed
to meet standing requirement where it “[did] not identify any
affected members by name nor [had] it submitted
declarations by any of its members attesting to harm they
have suffered or will suffer”); Summers v. Earth Island Inst.,
555 U.S. 488, 498 (2009) (requiring “specific allegations
establishing that at least one identified member had suffered
or would suffer harm”). Several of our sister circuits have
followed Summers in requiring members to be named. See
Religious Sisters of Mercy v. Becerra, 55 F.4th 583, 602 (8th
Cir. 2022) (“[W]e hold that the [organizational plaintiff]
lacks associational standing to sue on behalf of unnamed
members.”); Draper v. Healey, 827 F.3d 1, 3 (1st Cir. 2016)

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

9

(holding advocacy group lacked standing where its
complaint “did not identify any member of the group”
affected by the challenged regulation).
While we have recognized that an organization need not
always “identify by name the member or members injured,”
that flexibility may be invoked only when it is “relatively
clear, rather than merely speculative, that one or more
members have been or will be adversely affected by a
defendant’s action.” Nat’l Council of La Raza v. Cegavske,
800 F.3d 1032, 1041 (9th Cir. 2015); cf. Ga. Republican
Party v. SEC, 888 F.3d 1198, 1203–04 (11th Cir. 2018)
(holding political party lacked standing where it “failed to
allege that a specific member will be injured,” and an
insufficient affidavit did not make it “certain” that a member
would be injured). TST does not meet Cegavske’s standard
of clarity here, as the harm alleged is hardly “relatively
clear.” 800 F.3d at 1041. And of course, Cegavske did not
purport to modify or overrule Summers’s requirement to
concretely allege that at least one member will be injured.
Id.
In lieu of identifying harmed members, or even
submitting Jane Doe declarations, TST submitted two
declarations alleging that, based on probability, one or more
individual members is at risk of harm from Idaho’s laws.
One declaration is from Dr. J.D., an obstetrics and
gynecological osteopath, who provides scant background
qualifications and apparently has no background in statistics
or public health. The doctor concludes that “twenty-seven []
TST members in Idaho are Involuntarily Pregnant Women
during the course of a year.” In reaching this conclusion, the
doctor relies on the following construct of statistic piled
upon statistic: the Idaho fertility rate in 2021 was 60.7 per
1,000 women; the Idaho induced abortion rate in 2021 was

10

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

5.4 induced abortions per 1,000 women; and the national rate
of unintended pregnancy due to failure of birth control is
48%. These numbers are then applied to the 1,750 women
of child-bearing age in Idaho who are TST members. From
this, Dr. J.D. provides an “opinion, to a reasonable degree of
medical probability, that twenty-seven (27) TST members in
Idaho are Involuntarily Pregnant Women during the course
of a year.” Dr. J.D. does not offer an opinion on how many
of these TST members would likely seek an abortion.
This estimate, and the causal chain required to reach it,
are too attenuated and speculative to confer standing. These
twenty-seven involuntarily pregnant TST members may, or
may not, exist. Not only are the cited statewide fertility rates
several years out of date, but it is also unclear that any of the
relevant rates—the Idaho fertility rate, the Idaho induced
abortion rate, or the national rate of unintended pregnancies
due to failure of birth control—is an appropriate proxy for
those rates among Idaho TST members specifically. Nor is
there any evidence or opinion provided that one or more of
these hypothetical involuntarily pregnant TST members
would want to seek an abortion, notwithstanding that it is a
tenet of TST’s belief system. The absence of any evidence
on this last point is, in itself, fatal to the causal chain. Even
assuming the rates applied are apposite, given the nature of
probabilities, there still may be no involuntarily pregnant
Idaho TST member seeking an abortion. This long chain of
speculation cannot confer standing.
TST argues that the district court erred in rejecting Dr.
J.D.’s opinion without a Daubert hearing per the court’s duty
to “ensure that any and all scientific testimony or evidence
admitted is not only relevant, but reliable.” Daubert v.
Merrell Dow Pharms., Inc., 509 U.S. 579, 589
(1993). However, this duty “does not . . . require the court

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

11

to hold a separate Daubert hearing.” United States v.
Jawara, 474 F.3d 565, 582 (9th Cir. 2007). Here, Dr. J.D.’s
declaration does not even suggest that Dr. J.D. is a
statistician or public health expert who has “scientific,
technical, or other specialized knowledge” to qualify as an
expert witness expressing an opinion based on statistics,
making it reasonable for the district court to have assessed
expertise without a separate hearing. Fed. R. Evid. 702.
Thus, any “lack of an explicit finding [regarding] reliability
was harmless.” Jawara, 474 F.3d at 583.
Further, the district court considered rather than
excluded the declaration and concluded—as we do—that it
is insufficient to establish an injury in fact, because the
doctor never asserts that a TST member will become
involuntarily pregnant and wish to seek an abortion. The
declaration’s deficiency does not hinge on expert
qualification, but rather the uncertainty inherent in averages,
which is why the “requirement of naming the affected
members has never been dispensed with in light of statistical
probabilities.” Summers, 555 U.S. at 498–99. Just as in
Summers, here, “[w]hile it is certainly possible—perhaps
even likely—that one individual will meet all of the[]
criteria” necessary to assert an injury, “that speculation does
not suffice.” Id. at 499.
The other declaration, by the TST Executive Director
responsible for the Clinic, is even more speculative and
deficient. Regarding harm to TST Idaho members, the
declaration states only that there have been hundreds of
inquiries to the Clinic and “[g]iven this enthusiastic
reception by TST members, it is highly likely that one or
more [] TST members in Idaho would use the unique
services of the TST Clinic but for the Idaho Abortion Bans.”
But clinic inquiries from unspecified states do not make it

12

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

“relatively clear” that a TST member in Idaho would want
to imminently use the Clinic’s services. This declaration is
insufficient to allege an injury in fact.
Both declarations fall in the classic bucket described in
Lujan: they do not demonstrate concrete, imminent harms
but rather conjectural or hypothetical ones. Lujan, 504 U.S.
at 560. Taking the declarations as true, as we must, Yellen,
34 F.4th at 849, they allege at best the potential for harm,
which is insufficient to demonstrate an injury in fact.
Because TST has not shown that one of its members has
suffered or will imminently suffer an injury, it has not met
the burden to establish associational standing.
II. Organizational Standing
TST has also not shown that it has standing as an
organization. TST argues it has standing as a prescriber of
abortifacients, as well as because it funneled significant
resources to the Clinic and the Idaho laws have frustrated its
organizational mission. Neither theory confers standing.
A. Prescriber Theory
TST’s Clinic does not presently prescribe abortifacients
to TST Idaho members but asserts it would if it could
“lawfully do so.” However, TST can hardly claim injury as
a prescriber because, even absent the challenged laws, it
cannot legally prescribe abortifacients in Idaho: Idaho law
allows only licensed physicians to prescribe abortifacients,
whereas the Clinic employs only nurse practitioners, not
licensed Idaho doctors. Idaho Code §§ 18-617, 18-604(12).
TST does not challenge this law and has not demonstrated

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

13

concrete plans to hire doctors in Idaho, 5 alleging only that it
could pay $300 to license its nurse practitioners in Idaho. 6
This wishful-thinking allegation is insufficient: “Such ‘some
day’ intentions—without any description of concrete plans,
or indeed even any specification of when the some day will
be—do not support a finding of the ‘actual or imminent’
injury that our cases require.” Lujan, 504 U.S. at 564
(emphasis in original). See also Gonzalez v. U.S. Immigr. &
Customs Enf’t, 975 F.3d 788, 803 (9th Cir. 2020) (“[W]e
assess [a plaintiff]’s standing for prospective injunctive
relief as of the time when he commenced suit, relying on the
allegations in the operative amended complaint.”); § 3531
Standing—In General, 13A Fed. Prac. & Proc. § 3531 (3d
ed.) (generally, standing must exist when the action is filed).
Finally, as with its associational argument, TST has not
identified any person in Idaho seeking to use the Clinic’s
TST raises for the first time on appeal that Dr. J.D., licensed in Idaho,
could prescribe abortifacients, but raising this argument in an appellate
brief is too late to serve as evidence of standing. O’Bannon v. Nat’l
Collegiate Athletic Ass’n, 802 F.3d 1049, 1067 n.11 (9th Cir. 2015)
(disregarding challenge to standing raised in a brief because
“[s]tatements in appellate briefs are not evidence”). Notably, Dr. J.D.’s
declaration did not list Idaho as a state of licensure or employment, nor
any association with TST other than as an expert. TST’s Clinic operates
only in New Mexico and requires those receiving abortifacients to have
their telemedicine consult in New Mexico and the drugs delivered to an
address in that state.

5

Even if TST licensed its nurse practitioners in Idaho, this licensing
would not transform them into physicians who can prescribe
abortifacients. See Idaho Code § 18-617. Though TST argues that the
FDA’s “risk evaluation and mitigation strategy” (REMS) for
abortifacients allows nurse practitioners to prescribe abortifacients even
if they are not licensed in the state, it is unclear whether REMS would
preempt the Idaho state law, as TST had argued to the district court but
does not raise on appeal.

6

14

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

services to receive abortifacients.
summarized:

As the district court

No injury will occur to TST unless: (1) TST’s
providers become licensed in Idaho—a
necessary step that neither TST nor any of its
declarants allege is underway or even
planned; (2) a TST member in Idaho
becomes “involuntarily pregnant” due to
failed birth control; (3) that member chooses
to abort her child; and (4) that member
selects the Clinic to help perform the
abortion, rather than some other abortion
provider.
Because TST has not demonstrated that any of these steps
have occurred or are imminent, let alone all four, it cannot
assert an injury as a prescriber of abortifacients.
B. Resources and Mission Theory
It also does not suffice that TST expended resources on
opening the Clinic and that its mission to promote abortion
was frustrated. The Supreme Court clarified and limited the
resources theory of organizational standing in Alliance for
Hippocratic Medicine.
602 U.S. 367.
In denying
organizational standing to plaintiffs opposed to abortion who
challenged the FDA’s relaxed regulatory requirements for
the abortifacient mifepristone, the Court explained:
The medical associations respond that
under Havens Realty Corp. v. Coleman,
standing exists when an organization diverts
its resources in response to a defendant’s
actions . . . . That is incorrect. Indeed, that

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

15

theory would mean that all the organizations
in America would have standing to challenge
almost every federal policy that they dislike,
provided they spend a single dollar opposing
those policies. Havens does not support such
an expansive theory of standing.
Id. at 395. The Court noted that Havens concerned a direct
effect on the organization’s core activities, which the antiabortion associations had not shown, and which TST has not
sufficiently alleged here. Id.
Even before Alliance for Hippocratic Medicine, we held
that an organization “cannot manufacture the injury by
incurring litigation costs or simply choosing to spend money
fixing a problem that otherwise would not affect the
organization at all.” La Asociacion de Trabajadores de Lake
Forest v. City of Lake Forest, 624 F.3d 1083, 1088 (9th Cir.
2010). That precedent is informative here. While limits on
abortion may have always been of concern to TST, the
organizational resources it spent attempting to provide
abortions by opening the Clinic were spent, by its own
admission, “in response to the bans on abortion in Idaho and
other states.” Indeed, the Clinic only became operational on
February 14, 2023, even though TST’s initial complaint was
filed on September 30, 2022, and its first amended complaint
on December 13, 2022.
To the extent that TST’s pre-existing core mission is to
promote abortion, the Idaho statutes at issue do not curtail
TST’s ability to support its members’ beliefs or provide
information or advocacy on abortion.
See All. for
Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. at 394 (“A plaintiff must show
far more than simply a setback to the organization’s abstract
social interests.”) (internal quotations and citations omitted).

16

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

Indeed, TST states that “[p]rior to opening the Clinic, [its]
programs were focused on education and advocacy, not the
practice of medicine” and TST has not alleged that those
activities have been impeded or stopped, only that resources
were diverted from them to the Clinic—a theory that does
not confer standing. See id. at 395–96. The challenged
statutes only criminalize abortion itself, and TST is still not
set up to provide abortion services in Idaho. Thus, TST
cannot establish standing based on a diversion of resources
and frustration of mission theory.
Conclusion
TST’s concern for its members is evident—but it still
bears the burden to demonstrate an injury in fact. TST has
not demonstrated standing, so we do not reach the merits.
See, e.g., All. for Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. at 378 (“Article
III of the Constitution confines the jurisdiction of federal
courts to ‘Cases’ and ‘Controversies.’”) (reversing and
remanding based on lack of standing without reviewing
merits decision below); § 3531 Standing—In General, 13A
Fed. Prac. & Proc. § 3531 (3d ed.) (“Standing doctrines are
employed to refuse to determine the merits of a legal
claim.”).
We agree with the district court that TST lacked
standing. However, because the district court also rejected
TST’s claims on the merits, it dismissed the complaint with
prejudice. Dismissal with prejudice “is improper unless it is
‘clear’ that ‘the complaint could not be saved by any
amendment.’” Harris v. Amgen, Inc., 573 F.3d 728, 737 (9th
Cir. 2009) (internal citation omitted); see also Missouri ex
rel. Koster v. Harris, 847 F.3d 646, 656 (9th Cir. 2017)
(noting dismissal for lack of jurisdiction should generally be
without prejudice and altering dismissal for lack of standing

THE SATANIC TEMPLE V. LABRADOR

17

to be without prejudice). We remand to the district court for
its determination whether TST’s complaint “clear[ly]
. . . could not be saved by any amendment.” Harris v.
Amgen, 573 F.3d at 737. Of course, we take no position on
this issue. We therefore affirm dismissal on standing
grounds and remand with instructions.
AFFIRMED
INSTRUCTIONS.

and

REMANDED

WITH

