FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.

No. 24-1641
D.C. No.
4:20-cr-00265YGR-2

ROBERT ALVIN JUSTUS, Jr.,
Defendant - Appellant.

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Yvonne Gonzalez Rogers, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 6, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed December 19, 2025
Before: Jacqueline H. Nguyen and Daniel A. Bress, Circuit
Judges, and Richard D. Bennett, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Nguyen

The Honorable Richard D. Bennett, United States District Judge for the
District of Maryland, sitting by designation.

*

2

USA V. JUSTUS

SUMMARY **
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed Robert Alvin Justus, Jr.’s convictions
for aiding and abetting the murder of a person assisting a
federal officer and aiding and abetting attempted murder of
a person assisting a federal officer, in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§§ 1114(1), 1114(3), 1111, and 1112.
During a Goerge Floyd protest in 2020, Justus drove a
van while his co-defendant, Steven Carrillo, fired nineteen
rounds from an assault rifle at two Protective Security
Officers on duty at a federal courthouse. One officer died
from his wounds, and the other is permanently disabled.
At trial, the government presented 73 exhibits from
Justus’s social media activity to support its theory that Justus
and Carrillo pre-planned the attack as part of their antigovernment ideology. On appeal, Justus argued that the
district court erred in admitting this evidence because it was
irrelevant, constituted improper character evidence, and was
highly prejudicial. The panel rejected these arguments. The
district court did not abuse its discretion in finding Justus’s
social media posts and communications relevant to the crime
charged and admissible under Fed. R. Evid. 401. The district
court did not abuse its discretion in finding that the evidence
was not impermissible character evidence under Fed. R.
Evid. 404(a), as it was admitted for a non-propensity
purpose: to demonstrate Justus’s state of mind at the time of
the attack. The district court properly reviewed Justus’s
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

USA V. JUSTUS

3

posts before deciding whether the probative value
outweighed the danger of undue prejudice and did not abuse
its discretion in admitting the social media evidence under
Fed. R. Evid. 403.
The panel held that the district court did not err in
instructing the jury that duress is not a defense, where Justus
agreed that a duress defense was unavailable and the district
court granted the government’s request to bar Justus’s
invocation of duress as an affirmative defense. The district
court, which allowed defense counsel to admit duress-like
evidence to establish Justus’s mental state, appropriately
provided an instruction to help guide the jury on the
parameters for which it could consider duress-like evidence.
The panel concluded that sufficient evidence supported
the convictions.

COUNSEL
Anne C. Hsieh (argued) and Jonathan U. Lee, Assistant
United States Attorneys; Merry J. Chan, Chief, Appellate
Section, Criminal Division; Patrick D. Robbins, Acting
United States Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney,
United States Department of Justice, San Francisco,
California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Vicki M. Buchanan (argued), Vicki Marolt Buchanan PC,
Sonoma, California, for Defendant-Appellant.

4

USA V. JUSTUS

OPINION
NGUYEN, Circuit Judge:
On May 29, 2020, during a George Floyd protest in
Oakland, California, defendant Robert Alvin Justus, Jr.
(“Justus”) drove a van while his co-defendant, Steven
Carrillo, fired nineteen rounds from an assault rifle at two
Protective Security Officers on duty at the federal
courthouse. One officer died from his wounds, and the other
is permanently disabled. Following a twelve-day trial, the
jury returned a guilty verdict against Justus on Count One,
aiding and abetting murder of a person assisting a federal
officer, and Count Two, aiding and abetting attempted
murder of a person assisting a federal officer, in violation of
18 U.S.C. §§ 1114(1), 1114(3), 1111, and 1112. The district
court sentenced Justus to life in prison on Count One and
240 months concurrent on Count Two.
Justus appeals his convictions and sentence. We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, and we affirm.
I. Background
Justus was an active Facebook user. From mid-2019
until his arrest in June 2020, Justus liked, commented, and
posted content on Facebook which advocated for violence
against law enforcement and the courts, and conveyed a
general animosity toward the United States Government.
Many of Justus’s posts used terminology related to the
“Boogaloo” movement—a libertarian revolution and
“impending politically-motivated civil war or uprising
against the government” that had become a rallying point for
extremists. For example, Justus referred to “Boogaloo”
through the known shorthand “big igloo” or “big luau,” and

USA V. JUSTUS

5

discussed Boogaloo-related imagery, which included igloos
and Hawaiian shirts. Justus also used the phrase “let’s
boogie” to refer to members’ activities and recognized the
terms “Alphabet Bois” and “Specialty Soup Bois” to
represent various law enforcement agencies. Finally, Justus
discussed engaging in a “hootenanny,” or protest.
In May 2020, Justus shared a flyer for the George Floyd
protest in Oakland on Facebook. Steven Carrillo, whom
Justus had never met, commented that he was interested in
attending. A day before the protest, Justus sent Carrillo a
friend request on Facebook. Justus also commented “Let’s
boogie” on one of Carrillo’s posts which announced that it
was “a great opportunity to target the specialty soup bois,”
and linked to a video showing a large crowd attacking two
law enforcement vehicles. Justus told a friend that he was
meeting with Carrillo for the protest and stated that they
were “gonna play with some creepers and spicy drinks . . .
Maybe some pews and pops.” 1 Although Justus claimed that
his intentions for the night were non-violent, the jury heard
evidence to the contrary.
On May 29, 2020, around 7:00 p.m., Carrillo picked
Justus up from the San Leandro BART station in a white van.
Justus testified that when he entered the van, he noticed that
Carrillo was “fidgety and paranoid.” Carrillo jumped into
the back of the van and began pulling out guns. According
to Justus, when he refused to carry a firearm, Carrillo pointed
a gun at him and asked if he was “a cop or a rat.” Justus
At trial, Justus claimed that “pops” and “creepers” referred to fireworks
and “crackling balls” he had purchased for the protest and that he
assumed “spicy drinks” meant alcohol. Justus also claimed that he
believed “pews” meant that Carrillo was going to “open carry” at the
protest as an act of defiance.
1

6

USA V. JUSTUS

claimed that he felt “panicked” and thought about leaving
but feared that Carrillo would shoot him if he tried to leave.
Carrillo and Justus stayed in the parked van for about
forty-five minutes. When Carrillo finished loading his gun
magazines, he allegedly pointed an AR at Justus and directed
him to drive to the IRS building in Oakland. The pair
stopped once along the way to take the plates off the van.
Over the next two hours, Justus drove the van to and
around downtown Oakland. Carrillo was agitated and, at
various points throughout the night, threatened to shoot an
AC transit bus driver, a couple who were arguing on the
street, three officers in front of the IRS building, and a
helicopter. Despite Carrillo’s unstable state, however,
Justus did not attempt to leave the situation. In fact, Justus
twice left the van on his own but returned both times.
First, at 8:46 p.m., Justus left Carrillo in the van while he
walked alone around the federal courthouse for about seven
minutes. Justus testified that he returned to the van because,
although he had his phone with him, he had left his backpack
in the van with his identification and pictures of his children.
On the second occasion, Justus parked the van at a corner at
9:28 p.m. with a direct view of the security guard shack
outside of the federal courthouse. Justus once again walked
around for about ten minutes near the protest. Although he
had his backpack with him this time, he did not leave the
scene.
Around 9:41 p.m., Justus returned to the van. A few
minutes later, he pulled the van away from the curb and
drove past the security guard shack outside of the federal
courthouse. As the van passed the guard shack, Carrillo slid
open the side rear passenger door and fired nineteen rounds
from an assault rifle at the Protective Service Officers who

USA V. JUSTUS

7

were standing guard. One officer died from his wounds, and
one was seriously injured and became permanently disabled.
According to Justus, he did not know that Carrillo was going
to shoot. However, the video evidence at trial showed that
Justus did not swerve or brake the van when Carrillo opened
fire.
After the shooting, Justus drove back to Millbrae, where
he lived, and parked the van about a mile from his apartment.
The pair then parted ways. After walking back home, Justus
disposed of the clothes and backpack he was wearing that
night, erased all communications with Carrillo from his
phone, and deleted his incriminating Facebook posts. Justus
continued to interact with anti-police Facebook content and
texted with Carrillo after the shooting.
On June 6, 2020, Justus learned that Carrillo had been
arrested in a shootout with deputies in Santa Cruz,
California. A week later Justus turned himself in and
confessed his involvement with Carrillo to the FBI after
realizing that he was being followed by undercover officers.
During his interviews with the FBI, Justus maintained that
he never intended to help Carrillo attack government
officials on the night of May 29, 2020. Justus ultimately
proceeded to trial, and a jury found him guilty on all counts.
The district court sentenced Justus to life in prison.
II. Discussion
A. Justus’s Social Media Posts and Communications
At trial, the government presented 73 exhibits from
Justus’s social media activity to support its theory that Justus
and Carrillo pre-planned the attack as part of their antigovernment ideology. Some of these Facebook posts
included Justus’s comments: “We should abolish the federal

8

USA V. JUSTUS

government;” “If anyone thought we were going to have
meaningful change through peaceful protesting and
petitioning, you need to wake up. #buildabigigloo
#timetodance #buildyournetwork;” “You guys ask why we
have a bloodlust for police…;” and “Now is a good time for
the bay to join in and storm police buildings.” The
government also admitted several posts and images that
Justus had “liked,” including a meme of a person shooting a
police officer which read: “Speak to cops in a language they
understand.” Finally, the government presented evidence of
messages that Justus had sent on Facebook. For example, in
one message Justus stated, “[c]hange is inevitable, but I want
to make a lasting change, not a Headline . . . [t]he correct
violence is necessary,” and in another he sent an image of
two people holding guns on a rooftop which read: “when all
else fails, vote from the rooftops.”
Prior to trial, the district court reviewed each piece of
social media evidence and extensively questioned the
government on its intended use. Justus did not object to the
admission of his social media posts which referenced the
Boogaloo movement or tied him to Carrillo, but objected to
105 other social media posts and six of his social media
conversations. The court ultimately excluded three of the
posts as irrelevant but otherwise denied Justus’s motion to
exclude the posts and communications. The district court
reasoned that the remaining evidence was “plainly relevant
to the events at issue and [] probative circumstantial
evidence of intent.” As for the evidence that did not
explicitly address Justus’s plans to attack federal buildings
and workers, the posts and conversations “nonetheless traffic
in Boogaloo terminology (e.g., the ‘right to boog,’ ‘starting
the boog’) and are therefore relevant to Mr. Justus’s ties to
the Boogaloo movement and probative of intent.” Finally,

USA V. JUSTUS

9

the district court found that the posts and conversations were
temporally relevant because they each occurred within six
months of the shooting.
On appeal, Justus argues that the district court erred in
admitting this social media evidence because it was
irrelevant, constituted improper character evidence, and was
highly prejudicial. See Fed. R. Evid. 401, 403, 404. We
review the district court’s evidentiary rulings for abuse of
discretion and “if the district court erred, [we] usually then
ask[] whether the error was harmless . . . .” United States v.
Preston, 873 F.3d 829, 835 (9th Cir. 2017).
i.
Under Federal Rule of Evidence 401, evidence is
relevant if “it has any tendency to make a fact more or less
probable than it would be without the evidence” and “the fact
is of consequence in determining the action.” Fed. R. Evid.
401. According to Justus, the social media posts were not
relevant to his intent because they did not include any
concrete plans to incite violence. For example, Justus argues
that his statements that he wanted to “burn it all down” are
irrelevant because he was not charged with arson or
destruction of property.
We conclude that Justus’s social media posts and
communications were relevant to the crime charged. First,
Justus’s advocacy for violence and physical attacks of law
enforcement and the courts made it more probable that he
intentionally aided Carrillo in the shooting of the officers.
See United States v. Boulware, 384 F.3d 794, 805 (9th Cir.
2004). Second, the posts in which Justus used “Boogaloo”
language supported the government’s theory that Justus
participated in the attack to further the Boogaloo

10

USA V. JUSTUS

movement. 2 Additionally, the fact that Justus had made
these statements mere months before the attack, and he
increased his social media usage shortly before the incident,
supported the government’s theory that his desire to commit
acts of violence against law enforcement escalated over
time.
Finally, contrary to Justus’s contention, some of his
social posts and conversations evidenced an interest in
inciting violence. For example, in response to one Facebook
user who said he wanted to “go[] out in [sic] style,” Justus
asked: “Are you committed to doing this soon? . . . Like
extremely soon?” Further, Justus claimed that he was
making “seed dispensers” and stated that his friend’s
shotgun will “come in handy.” Justus also expressed that he
was “thinking of starting the boog,” and that he wanted to
“light up every damn federal office and child support/service
building I can get to.” He further posted: “Now is a good
time for the bay to join in and storm police buildings.”
Lastly, a jury could reasonably interpret his statements that
he wanted to “burn it all down” as a metaphor for violence
against the system and not a literal reference to arson.
Because the social media evidence tended to make
Justus’s intent to commit the crime more probable, the
district court did not abuse its discretion in finding the

Justus argues that the Boogaloo movement was seen as a campaign of
protest, rather than a campaign of violence, citing to the government’s
expert witness. But Justus ignores testimony by the same expert witness
that the Boogaloo movement was escalating and expanding at the time
of the attack and there were “some manifestations of violence by
members of the Boogaloo” and criminal incidents where Boogaloo
members confronted law enforcement.

2

USA V. JUSTUS

11

evidence relevant and admissible under Rule 401. See Fed.
R. Evid. 401.
ii.
Justus also argues that the social media posts constituted
improper character evidence because the government used
the evidence to “inform the jury of Justus’s ‘beliefs.’” See
Fed. R. Evid. 404. Under Rule 404(a)(1), “[e]vidence of a
person’s character or character trait is not admissible to
prove that on a particular occasion the person acted in
accordance with the character or trait.” Fed. R. Evid.
404(a)(1).
The district court did not abuse its discretion in finding
that the evidence was not impermissible character evidence
because it established Justus’s growing animosity toward the
federal government and desire to commit violence against
government actors, and not a specific character trait or
criminal propensity. Further, the evidence was not offered
to establish that Justus acted in accordance with a specific
character trait. See Fed. R. Evid. 404(a)(1). Rather, as the
district court found, the evidence was admitted for a nonpropensity purpose: to demonstrate Justus’s “state of mind”
at the time of the attack. Consequently, the district court
properly admitted the evidence under Rule 404.
iii.
Under Federal Rule of Evidence 403, a court “may
exclude relevant evidence if its probative value is
substantially outweighed by a danger of one or more of the
following: unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, misleading
the jury, undue delay, wasting time, or needlessly presenting
cumulative evidence.” Fed. R. Evid. 403. Because Rule 403
requires a case-specific analysis, “[a] district court’s Rule

12

USA V. JUSTUS

403 determination is subject to great deference . . . .” United
States v. Hinkson, 585 F.3d 1247, 1267 (9th Cir. 2009) (en
banc).
Justus claims that the district court did not conduct an
explicit Rule 403 analysis and, even if the court had
conducted such an analysis, it erred in admitting the
evidence because the social media posts were more
prejudicial than probative. According to Justus, because the
posts elicited an emotional reaction from the jury, “[i]t is
likely a jury concluded Justus deserved to be punished for
his beliefs and the memes he ‘liked’ regardless of whether
he intended to help Carrillo . . . .”
Although the district court did not explicitly discuss Rule
403 in its written order regarding the social media evidence,
the record shows that it engaged in this analysis. The district
court extensively reviewed the probative value of the
evidence in the context of the parties’ Rule 403-related
arguments and explicitly acknowledged Justus’s argument
that the evidence “would be unfairly prejudicial if admitted”
when making its ruling. Further, the district court referenced
Rule 403 in its written order on the other motions in limine.
Finally, the court explicitly weighed the probative value and
prejudice of similar evidence found on Justus’s phone during
trial. Thus, the record clearly shows that the district court
considered the potential prejudice of the social media
evidence and implicitly conducted a Rule 403 analysis. See
United States v. Basinger, 60 F.3d 1400, 1408 (9th Cir.
1995) (finding that the district court’s failure to explicitly
conduct a Rule 403 balancing test did “not render admission
of the evidence improper . . ., because the lower court
implicitly made the necessary finding by admitting the
evidence after expressly noting his awareness of Rule 403’s
balancing requirement”).

USA V. JUSTUS

13

Justus’s reliance on United States v. Curtin, 489 F.3d 935
(9th Cir. 2007) (en banc) is unavailing. In Curtin, the district
court allowed the government to admit stories found in the
defendant’s possession that contained graphic descriptions
of sexual acts with minors in a sex trafficking case. 489 F.3d
at 937, 956. We reversed the district court’s evidentiary
ruling because the district court relied on the government’s
offer of proof and did not read the stories itself. Id. at 957.
On retrial, we cautioned the district court to fully read each
of the stories and to consider editing the stories to avoid
redundant material. Id. at 958. Here, unlike in Curtin, the
district court reviewed each post admitted by the
government, extensively questioned the government
regarding the social media posts and conversations, and
excluded three of the posts as irrelevant. And although the
court did not have access to the posts prior to the hearing on
the motion to exclude, defense counsel provided the court
with a chart which quoted the posts verbatim and the court
obtained the posts before issuing its written decision. Thus,
the district court properly reviewed Justus’s posts before
deciding whether the probative value outweighed the danger
of undue prejudice.
Finally, the district court did not abuse its discretion in
admitting the social media evidence under Rule 403. The
government admitted seventy-three posts and conversations,
but they were not redundant. Many of the posts focused on
separate issues related to Justus’s intent, including his
involvement with the Boogaloo movement, his desire to
harm government officials and the courts, and his intent to
take specific action and make or use weapons. Additionally,
the numerous posts supported the government’s theory that
Justus’s statements and animosity toward law enforcement

14

USA V. JUSTUS

escalated over time. The evidence was therefore relevant
and admissible.
B. Duress Jury Instruction
We next address Justus’s challenges to the district
court’s jury instruction on duress. “We review the district
court’s ‘precise formulation’ of jury instructions for abuse of
discretion.” United States v. Smith, 831 F.3d 1207, 1214
(9th Cir. 2016) (quoting United States v. Lloyd, 807 F.3d
1128, 1165 (9th Cir. 2015)). We review de novo whether
the instructions “correctly state the elements of the offense
and adequately cover the defendant’s theory of the case.”
United States v. Liew, 856 F.3d 585, 596 (9th Cir. 2017).
“The relevant inquiry is whether the instructions as a whole
are misleading or inadequate to guide the jury’s
deliberation.” Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted).
Prior to trial, upon Justus agreeing that the defense was
unavailable, the district court granted the government’s
motion to bar the invocation of duress as an affirmative
defense. But the court allowed defense counsel to admit
duress-like evidence to establish Justus’s mental state. To
avoid confusion, the district court instructed the jury as
follows:
The parties dispute the facts. In general,
the same evidence can be used to argue
different factual conclusions.
Duress is not a defense to the particular
crimes charged here. Duress is defined in the
law to exist where (1) there was a present,
immediate, or impending threat of death or
serious bodily injury to the defendant if the

USA V. JUSTUS

15

defendant did not participate in the
commission of the crime; (2) the defendant
had a well-grounded fear that the threat of
death or serious bodily injury would be
carried out; and, (3) the defendant had no
reasonable opportunity to escape the
threatened harm.
While duress is not a defense to the
particular crimes charged here, the
government must still prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that the defendant acted
with the intent to help commit the charged
crime.
The district court did not err in instructing the jury that
duress is not a defense. Given Justus’s testimony that he
acted under Carillo’s threats, there was a risk that the jury
might conclude that Justus could advance a duress defense.
The district court reasonably believed that an instruction was
necessary because “jurors may, on their own, somehow think
that duress is a defense.”
Thus, the district court
appropriately provided an instruction to help guide the jury
on the parameters for which it could consider the duress-like
evidence.
We also conclude that the district court did not abuse its
discretion in its formulation of the jury instruction. Justus
argues that, by listing the elements of a duress defense in the
instruction, the district court implied that Carrillo did not
threaten Justus or that, if he did, Justus was not affected by
the threats. However, unlike in United States v. Haischer,
780 F.3d 1277, 1283 (9th Cir. 2015) and United States v.
Rubio-Villareal, 967 F.2d 294, 299–300 (9th Cir. 1992) (en
banc), which Justus relies upon, nothing in the instruction

16

USA V. JUSTUS

implied that the jury should ignore the duress-like evidence.
On the contrary, the court added the final sentence—“While
duress is not a defense to the particular crimes charged here,
the government must still prove beyond a reasonable doubt
that the defendant acted with the intent to help commit the
charged crime”—to ensure that the jury considered the
duress-like evidence. The district court judge gave the
parties ample time to edit the instruction and added this
language at the request of Justus’s counsel, who responded:
“[a]nother appellate issue resolved.” The jury instruction
also began with the sentence—“In general, the same
evidence can be used to argue different factual
conclusions”—which further emphasized that the instruction
did not preclude the jury from considering the duress-like
evidence. Thus, the jury instructions were not misleading or
inadequate as a whole. Liew, 856 F.3d at 596.
Because the jury instructions accurately stated the law,
adequately covered Justus’s defense, and did not implicitly
tell the jury to ignore any evidence, the district court did not
abuse its discretion in instructing the jury regarding duress.
We hold that the district court did not err in admitting the
social media evidence or giving the duress jury instruction;
thus, we likewise find that cumulative error does not provide
a basis for reversal of Justus’s convictions. See United
States v. Karterman, 60 F.3d 576, 579–80 (9th Cir. 1995);
see also United States v. Rodriguez, 971 F.3d 1005, 1021
(9th Cir. 2020).
C. Sufficiency of the Evidence
Finally, Justus claims that the evidence was insufficient
to support his convictions. We review sufficiency of the
evidence de novo. United States v. Tuan Ngoc Luong, 965
F.3d 973, 980 (9th Cir. 2020). “‘[T]he relevant question is

USA V. JUSTUS

17

whether, after viewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to the prosecution, any rational trier of fact could
have found the essential elements of the crime beyond a
reasonable doubt.’” United States v. Bahena-Cardenas, 70
F.3d 1071, 1072–73 (9th Cir. 1995) (quoting United States
v. Riggins, 40 F.3d 1055, 1057 (9th Cir. 1994)).
“[C]ircumstantial evidence is sufficient to sustain a
conviction.” United States v. Harris, 792 F.2d 866, 868 (9th
Cir. 1986).
Justus falls short of meeting the high standard on
sufficiency-of-the-evidence review.
The government
presented evidence that Justus voluntarily met with Carrillo
and drove the van containing weapons to and around
Oakland on the night of the shooting. According to video
surveillance footage, Justus exited the van alone on two
occasions and walked around downtown Oakland and the
federal courthouse in a manner consistent with scouting the
area. Justus had his phone with him on both occasions, and
his backpack during the second instance, but did not attempt
to leave the situation or alert authorities. Then, Justus drove
the van while Carrillo opened fire on the guard shack and did
not swerve or brake the van during the shooting. Justus later
destroyed evidence of his involvement in the attack and
made alleged post-arrest statements to another inmate, Jose
Lepe, which corroborated his intentional participation.
Finally, Justus expressed his desire to harm federal law
enforcement in the months leading up to the shooting on
social media and admitted that he assumed Carrillo was
going to bring a weapon to the protest.
Although Justus “offers a more innocuous alternative
explanation for [his] conduct, we must view the evidence in
the light most favorable to the government and presume the

18

USA V. JUSTUS

jury resolved all conflicts against [him].” Rodriguez, 971
F.3d at 1011–12 (citing United States v. Nevils, 598 F.3d
1158, 1163–64 (9th Cir. 2010) (en banc)). The jury could
have accepted Justus’s innocent explanations, but it was not
required to do so. See Rodriguez, 971 F.3d at 1012. Further,
although Lepe’s testimony may have contained
inconsistencies, the jury was entitled to weigh Lepe’s
credibility and could have found that Justus intended to aid
Carrillo absent this testimony.
Therefore, sufficient
evidence supported Justus’s convictions.
AFFIRMED.

