FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
RANDEY THOMPSON,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
CENTRAL VALLEY SCHOOL
DISTRICT NO 365; BEN SMALL,
Individually as Superintendent of the
Central Valley School District;
DEBRA LONG, Central Valley
School District No 365 Board of
Education and in their individual
capacity Board of Education
Members and Directors; MYSTI
RENEAU, Central Valley School
District No 365 Board of Education
and in their individual capacity Board
of Education Members and Directors;
KEITH CLARK, Central Valley
School District No 365 Board of
Education and in their individual
capacity Board of Education
Members and Directors; TOM
DINGUS, Central Valley School
District No 365 Board of Education
and in their individual capacity Board
of Education Members and Directors;

No. 24-5263
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-00252SAB

OPINION

2

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

CYNTHIA MCMULLEN, Central
Valley School District No 365 Board
of Education and in their individual
capacity Board of Education
Members and Directors,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Washington
Stanley Allen Bastian, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted September 17, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed December 29, 2025
Before: William A. Fletcher, Ronald M. Gould, and Ana de
Alba, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Gould
SUMMARY *
First Amendment/Retaliation
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment for the Central Valley School District (“CVSD”)
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

3

and individual school administrators in a suit brought by
Randy Thompson, a former middle school assistant
principal, alleging retaliation in violation of the First
Amendment.
Thompson was placed on paid administrative leave and
subsequently transferred to a teaching position as a result of
his posting on Facebook a comment about the Democratic
National Convention that used epithets, slurs, and violent
language.
Applying the two-step Pickering framework, the panel
affirmed the district court’s conclusion that Thompson made
out a prima facie First Amendment retaliation claim for
private speech he made on a matter of public concern. The
panel assumed, without deciding, that a reasonable jury
could conclude that placing Thompson on paid
administrative leave could constitute an adverse
employment action and that the record supported a finding
that the Facebook post was a substantial or motivating factor
in that decision. However, CVSD sufficiently showed a
reasonable prediction of disruption under Pickering Step
Two. CVSD’s interest in creating a safe and inclusive
school environment outweighed the public interest
commentary contained in Thompson’s speech.
Because Thompson’s First Amendment rights were not
violated, the panel affirmed the district court’s finding of
qualified immunity in favor of the individual school
officials.

4

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

COUNSEL
Michael B. Love (argued), Riverside NW Law Group,
Spokane, Washington; Robert F. Greer, Megan C. Clark, and
Samir Dizdarevic-Miller, Etter McMahon Lamberson Van
Wert & Oreskovich PC, Spokane, Washington; for PlaintiffAppellant.
Michael E. McFarland Jr. (argued), Rachel K. Stanley, and
Christopher J. Kerley, Evans Craven & Lackie PS, Spokane,
Washington, for Defendants-Appellees.

OPINION
GOULD, Circuit Judge:
Randey Thompson, a former assistant principal for
Evergreen Middle School in the Central Valley School
District (“CVSD”), brought suit for retaliation in violation
of the First Amendment after he was placed on paid
administrative leave and subsequently transferred to a
teaching position as a result of his posting on Facebook a
comment about the Democratic National Convention that
used epithets, slurs, and violent language.
The district court granted summary judgment in favor of
the CVSD and the individual school administrators,
concluding that Thompson had made a prima facie claim for
retaliation, but that the CVSD met its burden of showing that
its interests outweighed Thompson’s interests in his post.
The district court also concluded that qualified immunity
applied to the individual school administrators. We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We affirm.

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

5

I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A
In August 2020, Randey Thompson was an assistant
principal at Evergreen Middle School in the CVSD. After
watching the Democratic National Convention, Thompson
made a post on his Facebook page. Thompson contends that
the post made on his private Facebook page shared his
personal comments and opinions only with his “friends” on
Facebook.
The post stated verbatim (including its
typographical errors):
Demtard convention opens and the only facts
spoken were the names. Lie after lie. The fact
checkers could retire on Michelle Obama’s
rant alone. What s hatefull racists bitch. If
you need to lie to try and win you are just shit.
If you believe them you are even worse.
Wake the fuck up America. You are being
played by a fake media, athleats and
performers (who are really clueless and flyers
with pedophile man) and the former DNC,
now just the little bitch of Marxist BLM,
Antifa, and Soroas socialist. You are missing
out on a great country and the rest of us are
sick and tired of your act and going to take
you to the woodshed for a proper education.
May God help you to pull your heads out of
your asses so we will not have too. Time for
the red tide. Lets see how long until the FB
liberal defenders take this one down.
While scrolling through Facebook, a CVSD employee
saw the post on her newsfeed. She took a screenshot of the

6

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

post and sent it to her sister, another CVSD employee. The
sister forwarded the screenshot to a CVSD administrator,
who shared the post with another CVSD administrator, who
in turn brought the post to the attention of CVSD
Superintendent Ben Small.
Two days after the post was made, on August 19, 2020,
Thompson received a phone call from then-Assistant
Superintendent Jay Rowell. Rowell asked Thompson if he
had made a Facebook post about the Democratic National
Convention. Thompson confirmed that he had and told
Rowell it was a political post on his private Facebook
account and had been sent only to friends and relatives who
shared his political beliefs. Thompson emphasized that the
post was made on his own time and on his personal device.
Rowell then informed Thompson that he was being placed
on
paid
administrative
leave
effective
immediately. Thompson was not allowed on CVSD
property, nor was he allowed to contact CVSD employees,
teachers, parents, and students. Immediately after this
conversation, Thompson deleted the Facebook post.
On the next day, August 20, 2020, the CVSD retained
attorney Amy Allen to conduct an independent investigation
into the Facebook post. Allen interviewed the employees
who had seen the post. Those employees expressed concern
about the post because they thought it used hateful language.
The employees specifically noted the use of the term
“demtard” was highly offensive and potentially harmful to
students, families, and community members.
Allen then interviewed CVSD administrators to
determine whether this was a unique occurrence or part of a
pattern of behavior. One administrator told Allen that, in a
presentation to staff, Thompson had referred to current

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

7

students as “Tide Pod Challenge Kids” and “snowflakes.”
Another administrator told Allen that Thompson used the
word “short bus” when referring to students enrolled in
special education classes. A third administrator told Allen
that Thompson, while speaking to a focus group of ten
students who self-identified as African-American, asked a
Black student if he felt that teachers had treated him
differently than “normal” students.
On August 22, 2020, Thompson received a letter from
the CVSD dated August 20, 2020, reiterating that he was
being placed on administrative leave because of
unprofessional conduct and that, while on leave, he was
prohibited from having written or verbal contact with
students.
In September 2020, Rowell conducted “impact
interviews” of a sample of Board Members, in-district
administrators, in-district teachers, and parents of current
CVSD students to determine the potential impact of
Thompson’s Facebook post and the incidents reported to
Allen by CVSD administrators. Rowell concluded that the
interviewees were shocked and concerned about the
statements, and many of those interviewed found the
Facebook post and the other comments made by Thompson
during school insensitive and detrimental to Thompson’s
relationship with staff, students, and CVSD community
members.
On September 22, 2020, the school Board held a “noticeand-opportunity meeting” to provide Thompson with the
opportunity to address the allegations against him, which
included his Facebook post and the derogatory comments he
made at school that were discovered during the
investigation.

8

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

In the meeting, Thompson initially said that his
Facebook was “hacked” and that a hacker made the post. 1
The CVSD retained a forensic investigator who found no
evidence of unauthorized use of Thompson’s Facebook
account, noted that Thompson was reluctant to provide his
electronic devices, and reported that Thompson provided
only an incomplete history of his Facebook data. Based on
the forensic investigator’s report, Rowell concluded that
Thompson was not being truthful.
On January 21, 2021, the CVSD offered Thompson a
voluntary transfer to a teaching position if he signed a release
of claims. The agreement said that if Thompson signed the
release, the CVSD would end its investigation and would not
terminate him. Rowell told Thompson and his union
representative that the transfer agreement was proposed in
part to avoid formally alleging that Thompson lied about his
Facebook account being hacked. Thompson rejected the
transfer offer.
A second notice-and-opportunity meeting was held on
May 6, 2021, to address two new allegations against
Thompson. The first new allegation was that Thompson
interfered with the CVSD’s investigation by deleting his
emails and refusing to transfer his data to the forensic
examiner. The second new allegation was that Thompson
was dishonest when he claimed his Facebook was hacked.
At that hearing, Thompson claimed that he deleted his
personal emails as a regular practice but kept anything
Thompson claimed that he had a slightly differently worded version of
the post that he intended to put on his Facebook. While there were minor
spelling and word changes in the version Thompson says he intended to
post, the word “demtard” and language about taking individuals “to the
woodshed for a proper education” were present in both posts.

1

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

9

related to this investigation; that he was reluctant to give the
forensic investigator information for his own privacy and to
protect his friends; and that he wiped and sold his old devices
and could not provide them. He asserted that he had been
hacked but admitted that he had no evidence of the alleged
hack.
On May 10, 2021, Superintendent Small sent a Notice of
Transfer to a Subordinate Position via certified and regular
mail to Thompson. The letter identified seven reasons for
the transfer: (1) Thompson’s behavior as an administrator
had disrupted harmony among building staff and CVSD
representatives, to the point that returning him to his prior
position supported a reasonable prediction of disruption;
(2) his comments were insensitive and contrary to the
CVSD’s mission of creating an inclusive culture, causing
concerns about Thompson’s ability to be an administrator
promoting the CVSD’s best interests; (3) Thompson’s
behavior, including his lack of inclusiveness, caused
decreased confidence of administrators and caused concerns
about his willingness to promote and embrace the CVSD’s
interest in an inclusive learning and working environment;
(4) Thompson’s behavior interfered with his ability to do his
job, especially as a student disciplinarian and staff evaluator;
(5) the CVSD believed that Thompson interfered with a
CVSD investigation about his behavior and he was not
truthful during the investigation; (6) Thompson’s response
to the CVSD’s concerns about his behavior demonstrated a
lack of awareness and insight needed for a school
administrator; and (7) in balancing the totality of
circumstances, the best interests of the CVSD would be
served by transferring Thompson from an administrative
position to a non-administrative certificated teaching
position.

10

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

Thompson asked for another hearing with the school
Board, and that hearing was held on June 14, 2021. See
Wash. Rev. Code § 28A.405.230. On June 25, 2021,
Thompson received a letter saying that the Board upheld the
Superintendent’s decision to transfer him to a certified
teaching position.
B
Thompson sued the CVSD and several individual school
administrators on August 23, 2021, pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
§ 1983, alleging in part that his First Amendment rights had
been violated. On January 12, 2022, the individual
administrators moved for summary judgment on the sole
question of qualified immunity. On February 24, 2022, the
district court denied the motion, concluding that there were
genuine questions of material fact. On interlocutory appeal,
we affirmed the denial of summary judgment. See
Thompson v. Small, No. 22-35192, 2023 WL 3580744, at *1
(9th Cir. May 22, 2023).
After discovery, the parties filed cross-motions for
summary judgment. The district court granted summary
judgment in favor of the CVSD. It concluded that although
Thompson made out a prima facie First Amendment
retaliation claim, the CVSD met its burden under
Pickering. The court determined that the CVSD’s interests
in fostering a safe and inclusive school environment
outweighed Thompson’s First Amendment interests, and
that the CVSD would have transferred Thompson absent his
Facebook post. The district court also found that the
individual school administrators were entitled to qualified
immunity. Thompson timely appealed.

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

11

II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review de novo the district court’s grant of summary
judgment and its determinations of qualified immunity.
Furnace v. Sullivan, 705 F.3d 1021, 1026 (9th Cir. 2013);
Benavidez v. Cnty. of San Diego, 993 F.3d 1134, 1141 (9th
Cir. 2021). “Summary judgment is appropriate when,
viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party, there is no genuine dispute as to any
material facts.” United States v. JP Morgan Chase Bank
Account No. Ending 8215, 835 F.3d 1159, 1162 (9th Cir.
2016) (quotation marks omitted).
III. DISCUSSION
We review a public employee’s First Amendment
retaliation claim against their government employer under
the two-step Pickering framework. See Pickering v. Bd. of
Ed. of Twp. High Sch. Dist. 205, 391 U.S. 563, 568 (1968).
At Step One, the plaintiff must show that (1) he spoke on a
matter of public concern, (2) he suffered an adverse
employment action, and (3) his protected expression was a
substantial or motivating factor for the adverse action.
Riley’s Am. Heritage Farms v. Elsasser, 32 F.4th 707, 721
(9th Cir. 2022). If the plaintiff satisfies Step One, he has
established a prima facie claim for First Amendment
retaliation. The burden then shifts to the public employer at
Pickering Step Two to demonstrate either: (1) that its
legitimate administrative interests in promoting an efficient
workplace and avoiding workplace disruption outweigh the
plaintiff’s First Amendment interests; or (2) alternatively,
the government would have taken the same actions absent
plaintiff’s expressive conduct. Id.

12

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

A
First, we affirm the district court’s conclusion that
Thompson made a prima facie claim of retaliation for private
speech he made on a matter of public concern. “Speech
involves a matter of public concern when it can fairly be
considered to relate to ‘any matter of political, social, or
other concern to the community.’” Johnson v. Multnomah
Cnty., 48 F.3d 420, 422 (9th Cir. 1995) (quoting Connick v.
Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 146 (1983)). To determine whether
the speech in question was on “a matter of public concern,”
we consider the “content, form and context of a given
statement, as revealed by the whole record.” Id. (quoting
Connick, 461 U.S. at 147–48).
Thompson’s Facebook post was made on his private
Facebook account and criticized the Democratic National
Convention. It was private speech on a matter of public
concern. We are not persuaded by the CVSD’s arguments
that Thompson’s use of slurs or violent language in the
Facebook post took the political post outside the realm of
public concern. 2 See Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378,
387 (1987) (“[T]he inappropriate or controversial character
of a statement is irrelevant to the question whether it deals
with a matter of public concern.”).
Second, we assume, without deciding, that a reasonable
jury could conclude that placing Thompson on paid
administrative leave could constitute an adverse
2
Because we hold that Thompson’s speech was private speech on a
matter of public concern sufficient to establish a prima facie claim, we
do not reach Thompson’s arguments that the CVSD conceded these
Pickering elements or that the doctrines of judicial admission or waiver
should apply. See Thompson v. Small, No. 22-35192, 2023 WL
3580744, at *1 (9th Cir. May 22, 2023).

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

13

employment action given that Thompson was cut off from
CVSD property and contact with other CVSD staff, and
therefore may have suffered “general stigma.” See Dahlia
v. Rodriguez, 735 F.3d 1060, 1078–79 (9th Cir. 2013)
(“[U]nder some circumstances, placement on administrative
leave can constitute an adverse employment action.”).
Third, the record supports that the Facebook post was a
substantial or motivating factor in placing Thompson on
administrative leave. The CVSD placed Thompson on
administrative leave within only a few days after discovering
the Facebook post, and the individual administrators’
testimony confirmed that Thompson’s Facebook post was
the catalyst to opening the investigation of Thompson’s
practices and conduct when he taught at the school. The
temporal proximity between the speech and the placement
on administrative leave supports Thompson’s prima facie
claim for retaliation. See Anthoine v. N. Cent. Cntys.
Consortium, 605 F.3d 740, 750 (9th Cir. 2010) (evidence
that an action was a substantial or motivating factor in an
adverse employment action can be found from the fact that
the speech and the action were proximate in time, or that the
employer expressed opposition to the speech). Furthermore,
that the CVSD admitted the Facebook post’s language—
including Thompson’s use of the word “demtard”—was the
sole reason for Thompson’s placement on administrative
leave supports Thompson’s prima facie claim for retaliation.
B
We nonetheless affirm the district court’s grant of
summary judgment in favor of the CVSD because the CVSD
met its burden under Pickering Step Two. The CVSD was
justified in putting Thompson on paid administrative leave
because of its reasonable prediction of disruption, and the

14

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

record supports that the CVSD showed its interests in
ensuring its administrators foster a safe and inclusive
educational environment outweigh Thompson’s First
Amendment interests. Therefore, Thompson’s claim fails.
The Pickering balancing test “recognizes that a
government employer has ‘broader discretion to restrict
speech when it acts in its role as employer, but the
restrictions it imposes must be directed at speech that has
some potential to affect the entity’s operations.’” Moser v.
L.V. Metro. Police Dep’t, 984 F.3d 900, 906 (9th Cir. 2021).
When we balance competing interests, we use a “sliding
scale” in which the state’s burden to justify a particular
discharge or adverse employment action “varies depending
upon the nature of the employee’s expression.” Id. at 905–
06 (quoting Connick, 461 U.S. at 150); see also Hyland v.
Wonder, 972 F.2d 1129, 1139 (9th Cir. 1992) (holding that
the government’s burden to show disruption “varies with the
content of the speech”). The Pickering balancing inquiry
ultimately poses a question of law. Moser, 984 F.3d at 905.
1. Thompson’s First Amendment Interests
We have recognized that although speech about matters
of public concern “occupies the highest rung of the hierarchy
of First Amendment values,” Dodge v. Evergreen Sch. Dist.
#114, 56 F.4th 767, 782 (9th Cir. 2022) (quotation marks
omitted), “not all statements of ‘public concern’ are treated
equally under the Pickering balancing test,” Moser, 984
F.3d at 905. That speech touches upon an issue of “public
concern” at Step One of the Pickering balancing test does
not end our “inquiry into the content of [the] speech” for
purposes of determining “how much weight to give the
government employee’s First Amendment interests” at Step

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

15

Two. Moser, 984 F.3d at 906; see also Damiano v. Grants
Pass Sch. Dist. No. 7, 140 F.4th 1117, 1140 (9th Cir. 2025).
The “apex” of First Amendment protection is reserved
for political speech that addresses problems at the
government agency where the employee works. Moser, 984
F.3d at 906; Damiano, 140 F.4th at 1140. But we have also
recognized that the protection afforded to government
employee’s speech may be lessened where the speech is
derogatory in nature. For instance, we have previously
suggested in dicta that “racially charged comments that have
no connection to the government employee’s workplace
arguably receive less First Amendment protection under the
Pickering balancing test[.]” Id. at 906 (citing Grutzmacher
v. Howard Cnty., 851 F.3d 332 (4th Cir. 2017)). In Moser,
we cited a Fourth Circuit case, Grutzmacher v. Howard
Cnty., for the proposition that derogatory speech that touches
on a matter of public concern as a whole, but is unrelated to
an individual’s workplace or expertise, might be entitled to
less weight under Step Two of the Pickering balancing test.
But we did not decide precisely how the use of derogatory
language in such speech would affect the Pickering Step
Two analysis because the plaintiff’s use of a derogatory term
was not at issue. Moser, 984 F.3d at 903 n.1; see also
Hernandez v. City of Phoenix, 43 F.4th 966, 978–79 (9th Cir.
2022) (“Speech that expresses hostility toward racial or
religious minorities may be of particularly low First
Amendment value at [Step Two] of the Pickering balancing
test . . . , but its distasteful character alone does not strip it of
all First Amendment protection.” (emphasis added)).
Because the derogatory speech is at issue here, we do so
now.
Grutzmacher is instructive. In Grutzmacher, the Fourth
Circuit held that at least some of a county fire department

16

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

employee’s string of Facebook posts, comments, and “likes”
were on a matter of public concern because the posts as a
whole addressed gun control. 851 F.3d at 342–43. At issue
there, as here, was that some comments that the plaintiff
“liked” or used on Facebook were derogatory, raciallycharged or violent. Id. at 337–38. The Grutzmacher court
held that the Pickering balancing test favored the county at
Step Two because the plaintiff’s Facebook activity was “not
of the same ilk” as cases where a government official’s
speech was “grounded . . . in specialized knowledge,” and
that the county’s interest in efficiency and preventing
disruption “outweighed the public interest commentary
contained in [p]laintiff’s Facebook activity.” Id. at 347–48.
We similarly reasoned in Hernandez v. City of Phoenix,
without deciding, that an employee’s speech was of
“comparatively low value” under Pickering Step Two when
the employee’s speech addressed a matter of public concern,
but did so in a way expressing racial and religious hostility.
43 F.4th at 979.
As in Grutzmacher and Hernandez, Thompson’s
Facebook post was not grounded in specialized knowledge,
nor based on insight he had gained into the school system
while acting as an assistant principal. See Damiano, 140
F.4th at 1140 (“[W]e have long recognized ‘the importance
of allowing teachers to speak out on school matters,’ . . .
because ‘[t]eachers are, as a class, the members of a
community most likely to have informed and definite
opinions’ on such matters.” (quoting Settlegoode v. Portland
Pub. Schs., 371 F.3d 503, 514 (9th Cir. 2004))). Although
Thompson’s post, read broadly, touched on a matter of
public concern, Thompson’s use of disability-related slurs
like “demtard” and his use of violent language suggesting
taking individuals “to the woodshed for a proper education”

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

17

are not speech entitled to the highest constitutional
protection. See Hernandez, 43 F.4th at 979 (remarking that
speech that expresses hostility toward racial or religious
minorities may receive less protection under Pickering);
Grutzmacher, 851 F.3d at 345 (finding that a government
employer’s interest in efficiency and preventing disruption
outweighed the plaintiff’s interest in speaking in a violent
manner regarding gun control). Stated another way, the
“demtard” slur was not comparable in speech value to
comments of teachers that are based on knowledge they
gained as educators. For these reasons, we give Thompson’s
interest in his Facebook post speech little weight under
Pickering Step Two.
2. The CVSD’s Interests
For “the government’s interest as an employer in a
smoothly-running office” to outweigh “an employee’s [F]irst
[A]mendment right[s], [the government] must demonstrate
actual, material and substantial disruption, or reasonable
predictions of disruption in the workplace.” Robinson v.
York, 566 F.3d 817, 824 (9th Cir. 2009) (cleaned up). We
have determined that the extent of disruption the CVSD must
show under Pickering Step Two is based on a “sliding scale”
when balanced against the weight we give Thompson’s First
Amendment interests. Moser, 984 F.3d at 905. Because we
hold here that Thompson’s First Amendment interests are not
entitled to the “apex” of First Amendment protection, the
CVSD need not show as much potential disruption to
prevail. The CVSD cannot rely on “mere speculation” or
“bare assertions of future conflict” at the summary judgment
stage. See Nichols v. Dancer, 657 F.3d 929, 933–34 (9th Cir.
2011). Instead, the CVSD must provide evidence sufficient
for us to evaluate fully and fairly whether claims or
predictions of disruption are reasonable. Id.; see also Craig

18

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

v. Rich Twp. High Sch. Dist. 227, 736 F.3d 1110, 1119 (7th
Cir. 2013) (“[A]n employer’s assessment of the possible
interference caused by the speech must be reasonable—the
predictions must be supported with an evidentiary
foundation and be more than mere speculation.” (quotation
marks and citation omitted)).
The Supreme Court has told us that several factors are
relevant to assessing the impact of a public employee’s
speech on a public employer’s operations, including:
whether the statement impairs discipline by
superiors or harmony among co-workers, has
a detrimental impact on close working
relationships for which personal loyalty and
confidence are necessary, or impedes the
performance of the speaker’s duties or
interferes with the regular operation of the
enterprise.
Rankin, 483 U.S. at 388.
These factors weigh in favor of the CVSD. The CVSD
reasonably predicted that a Facebook post by a school
administrator using disability-related slurs and violent
language was likely to disrupt CVSD operations. The
predictable disruption was intensified and reinforced by
Thompson engaging in speech while serving in a publicfacing role as an assistant principal that undermined the
CVSD’s written resolution to foster a safe and supportive
educational environment. As an employee of the CVSD,
Thompson had a responsibility to uphold the district’s
formal commitment to equity and inclusion. As evidenced
by his Facebook post and workplace comments, Thompson
did not uphold his commitment, and we accordingly find that

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

19

Thompson’s derogatory and violent language could
substantially disrupt the orderly operation of the school.
Interviewees’ statements about Thompson confirmed the
CVSD’s earlier prediction that the Facebook post was
reasonably likely to disrupt school operations. Specifically,
other CVSD administrators expressed concern about their
ability to work with Thompson based on his language in the
Facebook post, and questioned his ability to be in a
leadership position. Many interviewees expressed that the
disability-related slur and violent language did not reflect the
CVSD’s core values, negatively portrayed the CVSD, and
ran counter to the CVSD’s Resolution Recommitting to
Equity and Inclusion. Additionally, interviewees confirmed
that they believed Thompson’s ability to discipline students
would be impacted if students learned of the Facebook post.
Ultimately, interviewees questioned Thompson’s ability to
work effectively with students and parents, or to act as a
representative of the school.
As such, Thompson’s
statements can be fairly viewed as creating disharmony
among co-workers and detrimentally impacting his close
working relationships requiring loyalty and confidence.
Finally, Thompson’s position in a public-facing,
supervisory role as an assistant principal is relevant in
assessing likely disruption. The “extent of an employee’s
authority and interactions with the public also bears on the
degree of government interest in preventing disruption.”
Rankin, 483 U.S. at 392. The government’s interest in
“avoiding disruption is magnified when the employee
asserting [a First Amendment] right serves in a ‘confidential,
policymaking, or public contact role.’” Moran v. State of
Washington, 147 F.3d 839, 846 (9th Cir. 1998) (quoting
Rankin, 483 U.S. at 390–91). And, we have recognized that
public school employment “is precisely the type of

20

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

employment relationship” to which “a wide degree of
deference to the employer’s judgment is appropriate.”
Brewster v. Bd. of Educ. of Lynwood Unified Sch. Dist., 149
F.3d 971, 981 (9th Cir. 1998) (quoting Connick, 461 U.S. at
151–52).
The CVSD contended and put forth evidence that
Thompson worked in a supervisory and disciplinary role,
and that his comments and language conflict with the
CVSD’s resolution recommitting the CVSD to equity and
inclusion and to “fostering an equitable school culture.”
Moreover, interviewees raised the specific concern that
Thompson engaged in speech inconsistent with the CVSD’s
values while he served as a representative of the school
leadership. Recognizing the “wide degree of deference” we
afford the CVSD’s judgment when making employment
decisions, this evidence sufficiently shows that the CVSD’s
prediction of disruption from the Facebook post was
reasonable and not based on “rank speculation or bald
allegation.” Damiano, 140 F.4th at 1138; see also Nichols
v. Dancer, 657 F.3d 929, 933–34 (9th Cir. 2011) (holding
that “mere speculation” and “bare assertions of future
conflict” are insufficient for summary judgment under
Pickering Step Two); Brewster, 149 F.3d at 981.
We hold that the CVSD sufficiently showed a reasonable
prediction of disruption under Pickering Step Two. Because
we give Thompson’s speech little weight under the
Pickering balancing test, we hold that the CVSD’s interest
in creating a safe and inclusive school environment
outweighs the public interest commentary contained in
Thompson’s speech. In so holding, we caution that the
Pickering balancing test is a “particularized balancing on the
unique facts presented in each case,” and we do not suggest
that every time employee speech contains slurs or violent

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

21

language, the government interest will automatically prevail
at Pickering Step Two. See Brewster, 149 F.3d at 980
(quoting Voigt v. Savell, 70 F.3d 1552, 1560–61 (9th Cir.
1995)). Each case should be examined in its unique context,
considering the totality of circumstances. We must strive to
reach “the most appropriate possible balance of competing
interests.” Connick, 461 U.S. at 150. In this case, we are
particularly mindful of the extreme import of ensuring the
maintenance of a safe and supportive school environment
where children have a chance to reach their full potential.
Because we conclude that the CVSD met its burden to
show that its interests outweigh Thompson’s First
Amendment interests, we decline to reach the alternative
ground as to whether the CVSD would have taken the same
actions absent Thompson’s expressive conduct. Riley’s, 32
F.4th at 721. We therefore affirm that the CVSD correctly
met its burden under Pickering Step Two.
C
Because we hold that Thompson’s First Amendment
rights were not violated, we affirm the district court’s finding
of qualified immunity in favor of the individual school
officials. See Cuevas v. City of Tulare, 107 F.4th 894, 898
(9th Cir. 2024) (“Qualified immunity protects government
officials from liability under § 1983 unless (1) they violated
a federal statutory or constitutional right, and (2) the
unlawfulness of their conduct was clearly established at the
time.” (internal citations and quotation marks omitted)).
IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district court’s
grant of summary judgment in favor of the CVSD and affirm

22

THOMPSON V. CVSD NO 365

the district court’s grant of qualified immunity to the
individual school administrators.
AFFIRMED.

