FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ROBERT PLATT, individually and on
behalf of all others similarly situated,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
SODEXO, S.A. and SODEXO, INC.,

No. 23-55737
D.C. No.
8:22-cv-02211DOC-ADC
OPINION

Defendants - Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
David O. Carter, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted September 12, 2024
Pasadena, California
Filed August 4, 2025
Before: Michelle T. Friedland and Roopali H. Desai,
Circuit Judges, and Karen E. Schreier, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Desai

The Honorable Karen E. Schreier, United States District Judge for the
District of South Dakota, sitting by designation.
*

2

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

SUMMARY **
Arbitration / ERISA
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s judgment against Robert Platt, and remanded,
in a case in which Platt sued his employer, Sodexo, Inc. and
Sodexo, S.A. (collectively, “Sodexo”), claiming that a
monthly tobacco surcharge on his employee health insurance
premiums violated the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act (ERISA).
Platt brings claims on behalf of himself and other plan
participants to recover losses under ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B)
and § 502(a)(3), and a breach of fiduciary duty claim on
behalf of the employer-sponsored health insurance plan
(“the Plan”) for losses under ERISA § 502(a)(2). Sodexo
seeks to compel arbitration pursuant to an arbitration
provision that it unilaterally inserted into the Plan after Platt
joined the Plan. The district court denied Sodexo’s motion
to compel arbitration and held that there was no enforceable
arbitration agreement because Sodexo impermissibly
unilaterally modified the Plan to add the arbitration
provision, and Platt never agreed to arbitrate his claims.
The panel agreed that an employer does not create a valid
arbitration agreement by unilaterally modifying an ERISAgoverned plan to add an arbitration provision. Instead, the
employer must obtain consent from the relevant party to
form a valid arbitration agreement.
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

3

The panel held that Platt is the relevant consenting party
for claims under ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3) in
which he seeks to recover losses by plan participants. Platt
did not consent to arbitration because he did not receive
sufficient notice of the addition of the arbitration provision
or that his continued participation in the Plan would
constitute consent to arbitration.
The panel held that the Plan is the relevant consenting
party for the breach of fiduciary duty claim under ERISA
§ 502(a)(2) in which Platt seeks redress for losses by the
Plan. The Plan consented to arbitration because its terms
cede broad authority to Sodexo to amend the Plan’s terms.
Platt argued in the alternative that even if the Plan
consented to the arbitration provision, the provision is still
unenforceable because a prohibition on representative
actions, which are statutorily guaranteed under §§ 502(a)(2)
and 409(a), violates the effective vindication doctrine. The
panel held that the provision prohibiting representative
actions is invalid under the effective vindication doctrine.
Platt also argued that certain clauses in the arbitration
agreement are unconscionable. The panel held that ERISA
does not preempt Platt’s unconscionability defenses, which
are rooted in federal common law.
The panel thus affirmed the district court’s denial of
Sodexo’s motion to compel arbitration as to Platt’s claims
under ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3). The panel
reversed in part the district court’s denial of Sodexo’s
motion to compel arbitration as to Platt’s breach of fiduciary
duty claim under ERISA § 502(a)(2), and remanded with
instructions for the district court to consider, in the first
instance, Platt’s unconscionability defenses, and the

4

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

severability of both the representative action waiver and any
of the arbitration clauses that it may find unconscionable.

COUNSEL
George A. Hanson, Caleb Wagner, Alexander T. Ricke, and
Yasmin Zainulbhai, Stueve Siegel Hanson LLP, Kansas
City, Missouri; Jason S. Hartley, Hartley LLP, San Diego,
California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Michael M. Kowsari, Jackson Lewis PC, Irvine, California;
René E. Thorne, Ryan M. Tucker, and Sean Paisan, Jackson
Lewis PC, New Orleans, Louisiana; for DefendantsAppellants.
Julie Pittman, Trial Attorney, Plan Benefits Security
Division, Office of the Solicitor, United States Department
of Labor, New York, New York; Alyssa George, Trial
Attorney; Jefferey M. Hahn, Counsel for Appellate and
Special Litigation; Wayne R. Berry, Associate Solicitor for
Plan Benefits Security; Plan Benefits Security Division;
Seema Nanda, Solicitor of Labor; Office of the Solicitor,
United States Department of Labor, Washington, D.C.; for
Amicus Curiae United States Secretary of Labor.
Leah M. Nicholls, Public Justice PC, Washington, D.C., for
Amicus Curiae Public Justice.

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

5

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
Robert Platt sued his employer, Sodexo, Inc. and
Sodexo, S.A. (collectively, “Sodexo”), claiming that a
monthly tobacco surcharge on his employee health insurance
premiums violated the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act (“ERISA”), 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq. He brings
claims on behalf of himself and other plan participants to
recover losses under ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3),
and a breach of fiduciary duty claim on behalf of the
employer-sponsored health insurance plan (“the Plan”) for
losses under ERISA § 502(a)(2). 29 U.S.C. § 1132. Sodexo
seeks to compel arbitration pursuant to an arbitration
provision that it unilaterally inserted into the Plan after Platt
joined the Plan. The district court denied Sodexo’s motion
to compel arbitration and held that there was no enforceable
arbitration agreement because Sodexo impermissibly
unilaterally modified the Plan to add the arbitration
provision, and Platt never agreed to arbitrate his claims.
Sodexo timely appealed.
We agree that an employer does not create a valid
arbitration agreement by unilaterally modifying an ERISAgoverned plan to add an arbitration provision. Instead, the
employer must obtain consent from the relevant party to
form a valid arbitration agreement. Thus, we start by asking:
(1) who is the relevant consenting party, and (2) did that
party consent to the arbitration agreement? First, we hold
that Platt is the relevant consenting party for claims under
ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3) in which he seeks to
recover losses by plan participants. Platt did not consent to
arbitration because he did not receive sufficient notice of the

6

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

addition of the arbitration provision or that his continued
participation in the Plan would constitute consent to
arbitration. Second, we hold that the Plan is the relevant
consenting party for the breach of fiduciary duty claim under
ERISA § 502(a)(2) in which Platt seeks redress for losses by
the Plan. The Plan consented to arbitration because its terms
cede broad authority to Sodexo to amend the Plan’s terms.
Platt argues in the alternative that the prohibition on
representative actions, which are statutorily guaranteed
under §§ 502(a)(2) and 409(a), violates the effective
vindication doctrine. We now hold that the provision
prohibiting representative actions is invalid under the
effective vindication doctrine. Platt also argues that certain
clauses in the arbitration agreement are unconscionable. But
the district court did not address Platt’s unconscionability
defenses, nor did it consider whether the challenged
arbitration clauses—to the extent they are invalid—can be
severed from the arbitration agreement.
We thus affirm the district court’s denial of Sodexo’s
motion to compel arbitration as to Platt’s claims under
ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3). We reverse in part
the district court’s denial of Sodexo’s motion to compel
arbitration as to Platt’s breach of fiduciary duty claim under
ERISA § 502(a)(2), and remand with instructions for the
district court to consider, in the first instance, Platt’s
unconscionability defenses, and the severability of both the
representative action waiver and any of the arbitration
clauses that it may find unconscionable.
BACKGROUND
Robert Platt is an employee of Sodexo, Inc., a wholly
owned subsidiary of Sodexo, S.A. In 2016, Platt enrolled in
the Plan, which is governed by ERISA. The Plan required

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

7

Platt to pay a monthly tobacco surcharge. In 2021, Sodexo
unilaterally amended the Plan’s governing document to add
an arbitration provision. The provision states that “[a]ny
claim under ERISA or otherwise with respect to the Plan,
other than a claim for benefits [brought] under
[§] 502(a)(1)(B) of ERISA[,] shall be submitted to binding
arbitration.” The arbitration provision also prohibits claims
brought “as a plaintiff or class member in any purported
class or representative proceeding.”
Platt filed a class action lawsuit against Sodexo in 2022.
He asserts two claims under ERISA § 502(a)(3) on behalf of
himself and the class, arguing that the tobacco surcharge
violated ERISA by failing to provide a “reasonable
alternative standard” for plan participants to avoid paying
the surcharge and requisite notice of such an alternative
standard. He also asserts a claim under § 502(a)(1)(B) on
behalf of himself and the class for violation of the Plan’s
terms in implementing the tobacco surcharge. Finally, Platt
asserts a claim under § 502(a)(2) on behalf of the Plan for
breach of fiduciary duty.
Sodexo moved to compel arbitration. Platt opposed the
motion, arguing that (1) there was no enforceable arbitration
agreement because he did not consent to arbitration; (2) even
if he consented, the arbitration agreement is still
unenforceable because the representative action waiver
violates the effective vindication doctrine and because there
are multiple unconscionable provisions, including a clause
that improperly reduces the statute of limitations (“SOL”)
for breach of fiduciary duty claims and a clause that
impermissibly bars the recovery of attorneys’ fees; and
(3) his claim under ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) is expressly
outside of the scope of the arbitration provision.

8

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

The district court denied Sodexo’s motion to compel,
holding that the employer’s right to unilaterally amend an
ERISA plan did not extend to adding arbitration provisions.
In addition, the district court held that Platt did not consent
to the arbitration provision, and thus the arbitration
agreement is not enforceable. Because the district court
concluded that Platt was not subject to a valid arbitration
agreement, it did not reach Platt’s alternative arguments that
the arbitration agreement is unenforceable because the
representative waiver clause violates the effective
vindication doctrine and several provisions are
unconscionable.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review the validity and scope of an arbitration
provision and the denial of a motion to compel arbitration de
novo. See Nagrampa v. MailCoups, Inc., 469 F.3d 1257,
1267 (9th Cir. 2006) (en banc); Holley-Gallegly v. TA
Operating, LLC, 74 F.4th 997, 1000 (9th Cir. 2023). We
review the district court’s factual findings for clear error. See
Holley-Gallegly, 74 F.4th at 1000. When reviewing the
motion to compel arbitration de novo, we assume all the
facts in favor of the nonmoving party. See Hansen v. LMB
Mortg. Servs., Inc., 1 F.4th 667, 670 (9th Cir. 2021); Knapke
v. PeopleConnect, Inc., 38 F.4th 824, 831–32 (9th Cir.
2022).
ANALYSIS
I.

An employer may not unilaterally amend an ERISA
plan to add an arbitration provision unless the
relevant party consents to arbitration.

There must be a valid arbitration agreement to compel
arbitration. See Ahlstrom v. DHI Mortg. Co., 21 F.4th 631,

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

9

634 (9th Cir. 2021). The Federal Arbitration Act (“FAA”), 9
U.S.C. § 1 et seq., requires that parties consent to arbitration
to form a valid arbitration agreement. See Stolt-Nielsen S.A.
v. AnimalFeeds Int’l Corp., 559 U.S. 662, 681 (2010)
(“[T]he FAA imposes certain rules of fundamental
importance, including . . . that arbitration is a matter of
consent, not coercion.” (quotation omitted)). As an initial
matter, Sodexo contends that consent is not required because
employers are free to unilaterally amend the terms of an
ERISA plan. We disagree.
Courts have recognized that an employer is “generally
free . . . for any reason at any time, to adopt, modify, or
terminate welfare benefits unless it contractually cedes its
freedom” to do so, Alday v. Raytheon Co., 693 F.3d 772, 782
(9th Cir. 2012) (cleaned up), because “ERISA does not
create any substantive entitlement to employer-provided
health benefits or any other kind of welfare benefits,”
Curtiss-Wright Corp. v. Schoonejongen, 514 U.S. 73, 78
(1995). But “[t]here is no provision of ERISA or its
implementing regulations that specifically governs the
administration of arbitration clauses.” Chappel v. Lab’y
Corp. of Am., 232 F.3d 719, 726 (9th Cir. 2000).
Moreover, nothing in the language of ERISA displays a
“clearly expressed congressional intention” to displace the
FAA’s requirement of consent for a valid arbitration
agreement. See Epic Sys. Corp. v. Lewis, 584 U.S. 497, 510
(2018) (explaining that the party who suggests that one
statute “displaces the other, bears the heavy burden of
showing a clearly expressed congressional intention that
such a result should follow” (quotation omitted)). To the
contrary, ERISA expressly states that it shall not be
“construed to alter, amend, modify, invalidate, impair, or
supersede any law of the United States,” subject to

10

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

exceptions not relevant here. 29 U.S.C. § 1144(d). Indeed,
“this is a strong, comprehensive, express statement that
ERISA is not to be read as displacing by implication any preexisting federal legislation,” including the FAA. Air Line
Pilots Ass’n, Int’l v. Nw. Airlines, Inc., 627 F.2d 272, 276
(D.C. Cir. 1980). Because ERISA does not conflict with or
displace the FAA’s requirement of consent for a valid
arbitration agreement, we hold that Sodexo may not
unilaterally amend the Plan to include an arbitration
provision without the relevant party’s consent.
Because consent is required for a valid arbitration
agreement, we must determine the relevant consenting party
for each of Platt’s claims. For each claim, the consenting
party is either the plan participants—including Platt—or the
Plan itself. To determine the consenting party, we consider
whether the specific claim exists for the benefit of the plan
participants or the Plan. See Munro v. Univ. of S. Cal., 896
F.3d 1088, 1092–94 (9th Cir. 2018); see also id. at 1092
(holding that a claim brought on behalf of a Plan cannot be
arbitrated “[b]ecause the parties consented only to arbitrate
claims brought on their own behalf”); Bowles v. Reade, 198
F.3d 752, 760 (9th Cir. 1999) (holding that ERISA claims
brought on behalf of a Plan could not be settled without that
Plan’s consent).
II.

The arbitration agreement is not enforceable as to
Platt.
A. Platt is the relevant consenting party for his
ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3) claims.

In his § 502(a)(1)(B) claim, Platt alleges that the Plan
document does not authorize or permit Sodexo to assess a
nicotine surcharge on plan participants as a condition to

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

11

maintain medical coverage. 1 Hence, according to Platt,
imposing the nicotine surcharge unlawfully creates an
unenumerated basis for establishing contribution levels for
plan participants that is not found in the Plan document. “As
a result, Sodexo’s assessment and collection of the nicotine
surcharge violates the terms of the plan” and Sodexo is liable
to Platt and other plan participants “for all losses resulting
therefrom.” In the First Amended Complaint (“FAC”), Platt
also expressly brings this claim on behalf of himself and
other plan participants. Because Platt alleges harms against
plan participants including himself, seeks to recover losses
incurred by plan participants, and seeks to enforce the rights
of plan participants under Plan terms, Platt is the consenting
party for the § 502(a)(1)(B) claim. See 29 U.S.C.
§ 1132(a)(1)(B).
Platt asserts two claims under ERISA § 502(a)(3),
alleging that the nicotine surcharge program is
impermissible because it did not provide for a reasonable
alternative standard that would reimburse the participant for
surcharge payments already made during a plan year. Thus,
Platt contends that Sodexo’s nicotine surcharge “has
discriminated against, and continues to discriminate against,
plan participants based on a health status-related factor i[n]
assessing premiums or contributions.” Platt also alleges that
the Plan materials described the nicotine surcharge program
Sodexo agrees that the plain text of the arbitration provision excludes a
“claim for benefits under ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B),” but it argues that
Platt’s claim should not qualify under that exception because it is not
truly a “claim for benefits” and it is thus subject to arbitration. Even
assuming that Platt’s § 502(a)(1)(B) claim is not excluded from the
arbitration provision, the arbitration agreement is still unenforceable as
to that claim because Platt is the relevant consenting party to arbitrate
such a claim, and Platt did not consent to arbitration.

1

12

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

without providing adequate notice of a reasonable
alternative standard by which the surcharge could be
avoided. In the FAC, Platt explicitly brings the § 502(a)(3)
claims on behalf of himself and other plan participants.
Because Platt and other plan participants were allegedly
forced to pay an illegal fee, and Platt seeks the return of those
funds to plan participants, he is the consenting party for the
§ 502(a)(3) claims.
B. Platt did not consent to arbitration.
The party moving to compel arbitration must prove “the
existence of an agreement to arbitrate by a preponderance of
the evidence.” Norcia v. Samsung Telecomms. Am., LLC,
845 F.3d 1279, 1283 (9th Cir. 2017) (quotation omitted).
The parties do not dispute that we should look to California
law on contract formation to analyze whether the parties
formed an agreement to arbitrate. 2 Under California law,
mutual consent “may be manifested by written or spoken
words, or by conduct.” Knutson v. Sirius XM Radio Inc., 771
F.3d 559, 565 (9th Cir. 2014) (quotation omitted). Whether
mutual assent exists is “determined under an objective
standard applied to the outward manifestations or
expressions of the parties,” DeLeon v. Verizon Wireless,
Although federal courts typically “apply ordinary state-law principles
that govern the formation of contracts to decide whether an agreement to
arbitrate exists,” Norcia, 845 F.3d at 1283 (quotation omitted), the
district court reasoned that because the agreement is within an ERISA
plan, the appropriate source of law is federal common law, which looks
to state law for guidance. The district court concluded that California law
is relevant here. Sodexo’s argument, raised for the first time in a footnote
in its reply brief, that Maryland law rather than California law applies, is
forfeited, and the parties have otherwise left unchallenged the district
court’s choice-of-law analysis. See Indep. Towers of Wash. v.
Washington, 350 F.3d 925, 929 (9th Cir. 2003).
2

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

13

LLC, 143 Cal. Rptr. 3d 810, 820 (Ct. App. 2012) (quotation
omitted), and “silence or inaction does not constitute
acceptance of an offer,” Norcia, 845 F.3d at 1284 (quotation
omitted).
Sodexo argues that Platt consented to the arbitration
agreement for his § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3) claims due
to his continued participation in the Plan after Sodexo
provided notice that the arbitration provision was added.
Specifically, Sodexo claims that it sent an email to all plan
participants in 2021, notifying participants of changes to the
Plan document and linking a 25-page summary of material
modifications (“SMM”). It also claims that it mailed Platt a
copy of the 2021 SMM. But Platt does not recall receiving
the SMM. And Sodexo was unable to produce the 2021
email it sent to Platt, even after the district court adjourned
the hearing on the motion to compel arbitration for several
hours to let Sodexo look for it. By contrast, it is undisputed
that Platt received a short email from Sodexo in 2022 with a
hyperlink to the “new [Summary Plan Description
(“SPD”)],” which was 170 pages long. The email noted that
all “previously issued versions of the SPD are obsolete.”
Hidden within the 170 pages was the arbitration provision
on page 153.
We disagree with Sodexo’s argument that Platt
consented to the arbitration agreement through his continued
participation in the Plan. Viewing all facts and drawing
reasonable inferences in favor of Platt, as we must, we
assume that Platt never received the 2021 SMM. See
Hansen, 1 F.4th at 670; Sanford v. MemberWorks, Inc., 483
F.3d 956, 963 & n.9 (9th Cir. 2007). Assuming that Platt
only received the 2022 email containing the new SPD, this
email did not provide sufficient notice of the arbitration
provision because the provision was buried on page 153 of

14

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

the 170-page SPD. It is unreasonable to expect that Platt
would notice a new arbitration provision hidden in a lengthy
document. See Monster Energy Co. v. Schechter, 444 P.3d
97, 102 (Cal. 2019) (noting that the existence of consent
under California law is “determined by objective rather than
subjective criteria, the test being what the outward
manifestations of consent would lead a reasonable person to
believe” (quotation omitted)). Further, the 2022 email
contained no express language that Sodexo was adding the
new arbitration provision or that his continued participation
in the Plan constituted consent or agreement to the new
provision. Indeed, Sodexo does not contest the district
court’s determination that the 2022 SPD email was
insufficient to provide such notice; rather, Sodexo only
argues that the district court erred in focusing on the
“irrelevant” SPD email rather than the “relevant” SMM.
Even if Platt received the 2021 SMM in addition to the
2022 SPD email, he still did not receive sufficient notice to
establish consent. “Mutual assent requires, at a minimum,
that the party relying on the contractual provision establish
that the other party had notice and gave some indication of
assent to the contract.” Jackson v. Amazon.com, Inc., 65
F.4th 1093, 1099 (9th Cir. 2023). Sodexo concedes that it
never “prompt[ed] [Platt] to take any affirmative action to
demonstrate assent,” Nguyen v. Barnes & Noble Inc., 763
F.3d 1171, 1179 (9th Cir. 2014), but instead argues that
Platt’s continued participation in the Plan manifested assent
to the arbitration agreement. Similar to the 2022 email,
however, the 2021 SMM failed to explicitly state that Platt’s
continued participation in the Plan would constitute consent
to the arbitration agreement. Thus, Sodexo failed to
demonstrate that Platt manifested assent or agreement to the
arbitration provision. See Norcia, 845 F.3d at 1285–86

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

15

(“Under California law, an offeree’s inaction after receipt of
an offer is generally insufficient to form a contract,” even
where “the offer states that silence will be taken as consent.”
(quotation omitted)); cf. DeLeon, 143 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 820
(holding that the employee had consented to agreement
where the agreement identified that “continued
performance” constituted consent, so the employee
“understood that the terms in the compensation plans
governed his employment”). Thus, the district court did not
err in finding that Platt did not consent to the arbitration
agreement. 3
Without Platt’s consent, the arbitration provision is
unenforceable as to his § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3)
claims. See Ahlstrom, 21 F.4th at 634; Stolt-Nielsen, 559
U.S. at 681. Because no agreement to arbitrate exists
between Platt and Sodexo, we need not reach any further
issues with respect to the § 502(a)(1)(B) and § 502(a)(3)
claims. We affirm the district court’s denial of Sodexo’s
motion to compel arbitration as to Platt’s claims under
ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and ERISA § 502(a)(3).

Sodexo also argues that Platt consented to the arbitration agreement
through a provision in the 2018 version of the SPD—predating the
insertion of the arbitration agreement—that bound plan participants to
any future amendments. But Sodexo forfeited this argument because it
never argued in the district court that, due to this provision, plan
participants consented to the later added 2021 arbitration provision. See
Tarpey v. United States, 78 F.4th 1119, 1126 (9th Cir. 2023) (noting that
“an issue will generally be deemed waived on appeal if the argument was
not raised sufficiently for the trial court to rule on it.” (quotation
omitted)).
3

16

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

III. The district court must determine the
enforceability of the arbitration agreement between
Sodexo and the Plan in the first instance.
A. The Plan is the relevant consenting party for
Platt’s ERISA § 502(a)(2) breach of fiduciary
duty claim.
For his § 502(a)(2) claim, Platt alleges that Sodexo, the
Plan administrator, improperly collected nicotine surcharges
from plan participants to “forestall[]” its own obligations to
make contributions to the Plan and to “diminish[]” the
amount Sodexo had to contribute to the Plan. He argues that
“[a]s a result of the imposition of the nicotine surcharge,
Sodexo enriched itself at the expense of the [P]lan, thereby
resulting in [Sodexo] receiving a windfall” and breaching its
fiduciary duty under ERISA. Because Platt specifically
seeks redress for losses that the Plan incurred from Sodexo’s
alleged fiduciary breaches and for profits that Sodexo
improperly obtained using Plan assets, the relevant
consenting party for this claim is the Plan.
Notably, claims under § 502(a)(2) are understood as
claims “brought in a representative capacity on behalf of the
plan as a whole.” Mass. Mut. Life. Ins. Co. v. Russell, 473
U.S. 134, 142 & n.9 (1985). Indeed, we have previously held
that § 502(a)(2) claims belong to the Plan, rather than the
individual plan participant, because the plan participant is
not seeking relief for themselves but rather recovery “only
for [the] injury done to the plan.” Munro, 896 F.3d at 1093.
In other words, the alleged fiduciary breaches by Sodexo
impair the value of Plan assets overall, so the Plan benefits
from a winning claim for breach of fiduciary duty, and the
claim “does not exist for the . . . plaintiff’s primary benefit.”
Id.

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

17

Here, Platt is seeking redress for grievances against the
Plan. Thus, the Plan’s consent alone, absent applicable
defenses, is sufficient to form an agreement to arbitrate a
§ 502(a)(2) claim. See Hawkins v. Cintas Corp., 32 F.4th
625, 631–35 (6th Cir. 2022) (concluding that the Plan’s
consent was necessary to subject a § 502(a)(2) claim to
arbitration based on our reasoning in Munro). 4
B. The Plan consented to the arbitration agreement.
The Plan document states that it “may be amended at any
time” by Sodexo through its Senior Vice President and Chief
Human Resources Officer. Because the terms of the Plan
expressly cede broad authority to Sodexo to amend its terms,
a reasonable person would believe that the Plan consented to
the arbitration provision that was added by Sodexo. See
Monster Energy, 444 P.3d at 102. Thus, absent an applicable
defense, there is a valid agreement to arbitrate the
§ 502(a)(2) claim based on the Plan’s consent. See 9 U.S.C.
§ 2 (noting that arbitration agreements are enforceable “save
upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the
revocation of any contract”).

Platt relies on Comer v. Micor, Inc., 436 F.3d 1098 (9th Cir. 2006), to
argue that while Plan consent is necessary to arbitrate the § 502(a)(2)
claim, it is not sufficient. But Comer is distinguishable because Platt is
not a “nonsignatory” beneficiary to the document that the arbitration
provision arises from—unlike in Comer, where the arbitration provision
existed in a separate investment management agreement between the
company and the plan, to which the ERISA claimant was not a party. Id.
at 1099–1101. Platt concedes that he was a participant in the Plan, and
that the challenged arbitration provision is located in the Plan document.
4

18

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

C. The enforceability of the arbitration agreement as
to the Plan turns on Platt’s effective vindication
and unconscionability defenses.
Platt alternatively argues that even if the Plan consented
to the arbitration provision, the provision is still
unenforceable. Platt specifically challenges three clauses in
the arbitration provision and argues that (1) the
representative action waiver clause violates the effective
vindication doctrine and is therefore unenforceable; (2) the
clause that reduces the SOL for breach of fiduciary duty
claims is unconscionable; and (3) the clause that bars the
recovery of attorneys’ fees is unconscionable.
1. The representative action waiver clause in the
arbitration provision violates the effective
vindication doctrine.
Under the effective vindication doctrine, an arbitration
provision is unenforceable if it “operate[s] as a prospective
waiver of a party’s right to pursue statutory remedies,”
including a prohibition on “the assertion of certain statutory
rights.” Am. Express Co. v. Italian Colors Rest., 570 U.S.
228, 235–36 (2013) (cleaned up). Platt argues that the
arbitration provision violates the effective vindication
doctrine by prohibiting him from bringing a § 502(a)(2)
breach of fiduciary duty claim. We agree.
Section 502(a)(2) permits plan participants to bring
actions for relief under § 409(a) of ERISA, which provides
that fiduciaries “shall be personally liable to make good to
such plan any losses to the plan resulting from each such
breach, and to restore to such plan any profits of such
fiduciary which have been made through use of assets of the
plan by the fiduciary, and shall be subject to such other
equitable or remedial relief.” 29 U.S.C. § 1109(a) (emphasis

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

19

added). Section 502(a)(2) thus acts as the vehicle for plan
participants to obtain the relief made available by § 409(a).
And because § 409(a) provides relief “singularly to the plan”
rather than an individual plaintiff, § 502(a)(2) claims are
understood as claims “brought in a representative capacity
on behalf of the plan as a whole.” Mass. Mut., 473 U.S. at
142 & n.9; see also Hawkins, 32 F.4th at 635.
Here, the Plan’s arbitration provision contains a
representative action waiver, which expressly precludes
Platt from bringing claims in a representative capacity on the
Plan’s behalf. This precludes Platt from bringing a
§ 502(a)(2) claim and, in turn, prevents him from obtaining
the plan-wide relief available under § 409(a). Because Platt
is unable to pursue “a number of remedies that were
specifically authorized by Congress” under §§ 502(a)(2) and
409(a), we hold that the Plan’s representative action waiver
violates the effective vindication doctrine and is
unenforceable. Harrison v. Envision Mgmt. Holding, Inc.
Bd. of Dirs., 59 F.4th 1090, 1107 (10th Cir. 2023).
Our holding is consistent with our sister circuits, which
have similarly concluded that arbitration provisions
preventing individuals from obtaining the plan-wide relief
available under § 409(a) violate the effective vindication
doctrine. See id. at 1106–07 (finding an arbitration provision
unenforceable where the plaintiff was prohibited from
obtaining plan-wide relief); Parker v. Tenneco, Inc., 114
F.4th 786, 798 (6th Cir. 2024) (same), cert. denied, 145 S.
Ct. 1060 (2025); Cedeno v. Sasson, 100 F.4th 386, 400–06
(2d Cir. 2024) (finding an arbitration provision that
prohibited any remedies providing relief to someone other
than the claimant unenforceable), cert. denied sub nom.
Argent Tr. Co. v. Cedeno, 145 S. Ct. 447 (2024); Smith v.
Bd. of Dirs. of Triad Mfg., Inc., 13 F.4th 613, 615 (7th Cir.

20

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

2021) (same); Henry ex rel. BSC Ventures Holdings, Inc.
Emp. Stock Ownership Plan v. Wilmington Tr. NA, 72 F.4th
499, 507–08 (3d Cir. 2023) (same).
2. ERISA
does
not
preempt
Platt’s
unconscionability defenses, which are rooted
in federal common law.
Sodexo argues that Platt’s unconscionability defenses
are foreclosed because those defenses are based in California
law and therefore preempted by ERISA. Sodexo points to
ERISA’s preemption clause, which states that it “shall
supersede any and all State laws insofar as they may now or
hereafter relate to any employee benefit plan.” 29 U.S.C.
§ 1144(a). We disagree with Sodexo and hold that the
availability of the unconscionability defenses does not turn
on state law.
Rather, Platt’s unconscionability defenses are rooted in
and arise from federal statutes and federal common law, not
California law. The alleged unconscionable clauses are
located within the arbitration provision, which is enforced
under the FAA. The FAA permits “generally applicable
contract defenses, such as fraud, duress, or
unconscionability,” to invalidate arbitration agreements.
AT&T Mobility LLC v. Concepcion, 563 U.S. 333, 339
(2011) (quotation omitted); see also Viking River Cruises,
Inc. v. Moriana, 596 U.S. 639, 650 (2022). Further, while
“interpretation of an arbitration agreement is generally a
matter of state law,” Stolt-Nielsen, 559 U.S. at 681, the Plan
is governed by ERISA, a federal statute. The Plan expressly
requires compliance with ERISA and the primary purpose of
the Plan is to address medical benefits, coverage, and
eligibility for employees, all of which fall under ERISA.

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

21

Because “ERISA does not contain a body of contract law
to govern the interpretation and enforcement of employee
benefit plans,” we must “fashion a body of federal common
law to govern ERISA suits,” “borrowing from state law
where appropriate, and guided by the policies expressed in
ERISA and other federal labor laws.” Scott v. Gulf Oil Corp.,
754 F.2d 1499, 1501–02 (9th Cir. 1985), overruled on other
grounds as recognized by Golden Gate Rest. Ass’n v. City &
Cnty. of S.F., 546 F.3d 639 (9th Cir. 2008); see also Evans
v. Safeco Life Ins. Co., 916 F.2d 1437, 1439 (9th Cir. 1990)
(per curiam) (holding that “the interpretation of ERISA
insurance policies is governed by a uniform federal common
law”). Accordingly, the source of law for Platt’s
unconscionability defenses is federal common law, and we
reject Sodexo’s contention that those defenses are foreclosed
by ERISA’s preemption of state law. Platt may therefore
raise unconscionability defenses.
3. We do not decide whether the other clauses
are unconscionable, or whether any of the
challenged clauses may be severed from the
arbitration agreement.
The Plan also contains a severability clause, which states
that “[i]f any of the provisions of the Plan shall be invalid or
unenforceable for any reason, the remaining provisions shall
nevertheless remain in full force and effect.” 5 The arbitration
provision may still be enforceable as to Platt’s § 502(a)(2)
claim if the representative action waiver can be severed from
the rest of the provision. For the same reasons that federal
common law governs Platt’s unconscionability defenses, we
Because the parties failed to adequately address how the severability
clause affects the arbitration provision, we ordered supplemental briefing
on the issue after oral argument. Dkt. 64.

5

22

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

likewise hold that the source of law for severability is federal
common law, with the court “borrowing” from state law
where appropriate. See Scott, 754 F.2d at 1501–02; see also
Hengle v. Treppa, 19 F.4th 324, 344 (4th Cir. 2021)
(applying federal common law to analyze a severability
clause in an arbitration agreement).
We do not reach the merits of Platt’s unconscionability
arguments for the SOL and attorneys’ fees clauses. We
remand for the district court to consider, in the first instance,
the unconscionability of those clauses and the severability,
under federal common law, of both the representative action
waiver and any clauses that the district court may find
unconscionable.
CONCLUSION
We conclude that no arbitration agreement exists
between Platt and Sodexo for the ERISA § 502(a)(1)(B) and
§ 502(a)(3) claims because Platt did not consent to
arbitration. But a valid arbitration agreement may exist
between the Plan and Sodexo for the ERISA § 502(a)(2)
claim because the Plan consented. Still, for the ERISA
§ 502(a)(2) claim, Platt may raise unconscionability
defenses to arbitration under federal common law. We hold
that the representative action waiver in the arbitration
agreement violates the effective vindication doctrine, but we
do not reach Platt’s unconscionability arguments. And it is
possible that the representative action waiver—and any
other unconscionable clauses—are severable from the rest of
the arbitration provision. We thus remand to allow the
district court to consider, in the first instance, the
unconscionability of the SOL and attorneys’ fees clauses and
the severability of the representative action waiver and any
other invalid clause(s) under federal common law.

PLATT V. SODEXO, S.A.

23

AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND
REMANDED.

