FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
No. 24-2287

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC.,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.

D.C. No.
2:19-cv-01667ART-MDC

SHELDON ADELSON; PATRICK
DUMONT; NEWS+MEDIA
CAPITAL GROUP, LLC; LAS
VEGAS REVIEW-JOURNAL, INC.;
INTERFACE OPERATIONS, LLC
d/b/a ADFAM,

OPINION

Defendants-Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Anne R. Traum, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted December 5, 2024
San Francisco, California
Filed August 4, 2025
Before: Daniel P. Collins, Lawrence VanDyke, and
Salvador Mendoza, Jr., Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Collins

2

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

SUMMARY *
Newspaper Preservation Act
The panel reversed the district court’s order denying
Defendants’ motion to dissolve a stipulated injunction
requiring Defendants, the current owners of the Las Vegas
Review-Journal and affiliated persons, to continue to
perform under a 2005 joint operating arrangement (JOA)
between them and the owner of the Las Vegas Sun; and
remanded for further proceedings.
The 2005 JOA amended a 1989 JOA entered into by the
owner of the Sun and the previous owners of the ReviewJournal pursuant to the Newspaper Preservation Act (NPA),
which seeks to preserve otherwise failing newspapers by
granting them an exemption from the antitrust laws allowing
them, with the Attorney General’s prior written consent, to
combine publishing operations with another newspaper
while preserving the independence of the respective
newspapers’ editorial and reportorial staffs. In the absence
of such advance approval, the NPA generally provides that
such JOAs are “unlawful.”
When the current owners of the Review-Journal sought
in 2019 to terminate the 2005 JOA on state-law grounds, the
owner of the Sun (LVSI) brought this suit alleging that
Defendants’ efforts to terminate the 2005 JOA violated
antitrust laws.
Although the parties initially stipulated to an order
requiring them to continue to perform under the 2005 JOA
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

3

pending this litigation, Defendants later moved to dissolve
the injunctive order on the ground that the 2005 JOA was
unlawful and unenforceable because it had not been
approved by the Attorney General. The district court denied
Defendants’ motion to dissolve the injunction, concluding
that the Attorney General’s approval was not required by the
NPA.
The panel concluded that it has jurisdiction to review the
district court’s order denying Defendants’ motion to dissolve
the stipulated preliminary injunction, rejecting LVSI’s
arguments that (1) the appeal is not authorized under 28
U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1) (covering interlocutory orders refusing
to dissolve or modify injunctions); and (2) Defendants are
not “aggrieved” by the order and thus lack standing.
Turning to the merits, the panel rejected the reading
adopted by the district court that the lack of Attorney
General approval merely meant that the parties lacked any
antitrust exemption under the NPA but did not invalidate the
JOA or render it unenforceable. The panel wrote that the
language of § 4(b) of the NPA is clear and unequivocal. It
declares an unapproved agreement to be unlawful to enter
and unenforceable.
Under the plain language of § 4(b), the 2005 JOA would
be unlawful and unenforceable if it counts as (1) “a joint
operating arrangement,” (2) “not already in effect.”
The panel observed that the phrase “joint operating
arrangement” and “joint newspaper operating arrangement”
are used interchangeably in the NPA and must be given the
same meaning. Because the 2005 JOA meets all the
requirements of a “joint newspaper operating arrangement”
set forth in § 3(2) of the NPA, the panel concluded that it is

4

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

a “joint operating arrangement” within the meaning of
§ 4(b).
The panel also concluded that the 2005 JOA was “not
already in effect.” In doing so, the panel rejected the district
court’s holding that, by limiting its applicability to JOAs
“not already in effect,” § 4(b) reaches only new JOAs and
does not apply to amended JOAs. Section 4(b)’s exclusion
of JOAs “already in effect” is unmistakably a reference to
JOAs that predate the enactment of the NPA. A JOA
adopted before the NPA is one that is “already in effect,” and
a JOA entered into after the NPA, even if it amends a prior
JOA, is one that is “not already in effect.”
The panel therefore concluded that the 2005 JOA is
covered by § 4(b) and required the prior written consent of
the Attorney General. Because it did not receive that prior
written consent, the 2005 JOA is unlawful and
unenforceable. The district court thus erred in reaching a
contrary conclusion and in denying on that basis Defendants’
motion to dissolve the stipulated preliminary injunction.

COUNSEL
E. Leif Reid (argued), Nicole S. Scott, Lucy C. Crow, and
Kristen L. Martini, Lewis Roca Rothgerber Christie LLP,
Las Vegas, Nevada; James J. Pisanelli, Todd L. Bice, and
Jordan T. Smith, Pisanelli Bice PLLC, Las Vegas, Nevada;
Joseph M. Alioto Sr., Alioto Law Firm, San Francisco,
California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Ian H. Gershengorn (argued) and Illyana A. Green, Jenner &
Block LLP, Washington, D.C.; David R. Singer, and Amy

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

5

M. Gallegos, Jenner & Block LLP, Los Angeles, California;
Gabriel K. Gillett, Jenner & Block LLP, Chicago, Illinois; J.
Randall Jones, Mona Kaveh, and Michael J. Gayan, Kemp
Jones LLP, Las Vegas, Nevada; Richard L. Stone, Los
Angeles, California; for Defendants-Appellants.
OPINION
COLLINS, Circuit Judge:
In 1990, the U.S. Attorney General approved a 1989 joint
operating arrangement (“JOA”) between the owners of the
Las Vegas Review-Journal and the Las Vegas Sun, pursuant
to the Newspaper Preservation Act (“NPA” or “the Act”). 15
U.S.C. § 1801 et seq. The NPA seeks to preserve otherwise
failing newspapers by granting them an exemption from the
antitrust laws allowing them, with the Attorney General’s
“prior written consent,” to combine publishing operations
with another newspaper while preserving the independence
of the respective newspapers’ “editorial [and] reportorial
staffs.” Id. §§ 1802(2), 1803(b). In the absence of such
advance approval, however, the NPA generally provides that
such JOAs are “unlawful.” Id. § 1803(b).
In 2005, the parties to the 1989 JOA submitted an
amended JOA to the U.S. Department of Justice, but they
neither sought nor obtained written approval from the
Attorney General. When the new owners of the Las Vegas
Review-Journal later sought in 2019 to terminate the 2005
JOA on state-law grounds, the owner of the Las Vegas Sun
brought this suit against those owners and several affiliated
persons, alleging that Defendants’ efforts to terminate the
2005 JOA violated the antitrust laws. Although the parties

6

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

initially stipulated to an order requiring them to continue to
perform under the 2005 JOA pending the litigation,
Defendants later moved to dissolve that injunctive order on
the ground that the 2005 JOA was unlawful and
unenforceable because it had not been approved by the
Attorney General under the NPA. The district court denied
Defendants’ motion to dissolve the injunction, concluding
that the Attorney General’s approval was not required by the
NPA. Defendants have timely appealed that order pursuant
to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1). We reverse.
I
We begin by providing a brief overview of the relevant
statutory background, which provides important context for
the ensuing discussion of the factual and procedural history
of this case.
A
In Citizen Publishing Co. v. United States, 394 U.S. 131
(1969), the Supreme Court affirmed a decree invalidating,
under §§ 1 and 2 of the Sherman Act and § 7 of the Clayton
Act, a JOA between two Tucson, Arizona newspapers, as
well as the subsequent merger of the two newspaper
companies. Id. at 134–35. The Tucson JOA was one of
nearly two dozen such arrangements throughout the United
States. Committee for an Indep. P-I v. Hearst Corp., 704
F.2d 467, 473 (9th Cir. 1983). The Tucson JOA, like those
in other jurisdictions, was ostensibly an effort to maintain
editorial diversity by allowing an otherwise failing
newspaper to preserve its “own news and editorial
department,” while “end[ing] any business or commercial
competition between the two papers.” Citizen Publ’g, 394
U.S. at 133–34. But the Supreme Court held that, in the
Government’s enforcement action against the Tucson JOA,

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

7

the district court correctly concluded that the defendants had
failed to satisfy the requirements of the so-called “‘failing
company’ defense—a judicially created doctrine.” Id. at
136. Specifically, the Court agreed that there was no
showing that the assertedly failing newspaper was “then on
the verge of going out of business” or that, if that newspaper
was to be sold, its cross-town rival was “the only available
purchaser.” Id. at 137–38 (citation omitted).
Congress promptly responded to Citizen Publishing by
enacting the NPA, see Pub. L. No. 91-353, 84 Stat. 466
(1970), which has been classified as Chapter 43 of the
unenacted Title 15 of the United States Code. See 15 U.S.C.
§ 1801 et seq. The declared policy of the Act is to
“maintain[] a newspaper press” that is “editorially and
reportorially independent and competitive in all parts of the
United States” by “preserv[ing] the publication of
newspapers” in any area “where a joint operating
arrangement has been heretofore entered into because of
economic distress or is hereafter effected in accordance with
the provisions” of the NPA. Id. § 1801. The Act seeks to
accomplish this goal by creating a limited express exemption
from the antitrust laws for certain existing and future
newspaper JOAs.
Specifically, § 4(a) of the Act generally exempts thenexisting newspaper JOAs from certain antitrust laws—
including the provisions at issue in Citizen Publishing—if,
at the time the JOA “was first entered into, . . . not more than
one of the newspaper publications involved in the
performance of such arrangement was likely to remain or
become a financially sound publication.” 15 U.S.C.
§ 1803(a). This requirement to show only that the weaker
newspaper was likely to remain financially unsound was
intended to be a less stringent standard than Citizen

8

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

Publishing, which we have described as essentially requiring
a showing that “the financially troubled newspaper [was] on
its deathbed.” Committee for an Indep. P-I, 704 F.2d at 474.
For JOAs entered into after the Act’s passage, § 4(b) of
the Act grants a comparable antitrust exemption, if the
parties obtain “the prior written consent of the Attorney
General of the United States.” 15 U.S.C. § 1803(b). That
consent may be granted, under the Act, if the Attorney
General determines (1) that the weaker newspaper is a
“failing newspaper,” i.e., that it “is in probable danger of
financial failure,” id. § 1802(5); see also id. § 1803(b); and
(2) “that approval of such arrangement would effectuate the
policy and purpose” of the NPA, id. § 1803(b). Although
this, too, was intended to be a less stringent standard than
Citizen Publishing, we have held that it is nonetheless
stricter than the “financially sound standard” applicable to
then-existing JOAs under § 4(a). Committee for an Indep.
P-I, 704 F.2d at 477; see also id. at 480 (holding that the
“probable danger” standard requires a showing that, if
“analyzed as a free-standing entity,” the “failing newspaper”
would probably “be closed and an editorial voice lost”).
Section 4(b) states, however, that, in the absence of the
Attorney General’s “prior written consent,” it “shall be
unlawful for any person to enter into, perform, or enforce a
joint operating arrangement, not already in effect.” 15
U.S.C. § 1803(b).
With respect to pre-NPA JOAs that are amended or
renewed after the enactment of the NPA, the statute provides
that the “terms” of any such renewed or amended JOA “must
be filed with the Department of Justice” and that no such
amendment may “add a newspaper publication or newspaper
publications to such arrangement.” 15 U.S.C. § 1803(a).

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

9

Several years after the NPA’s passage, the U.S.
Department of Justice (“DOJ”) promulgated regulations
implementing the Act, and those regulations remain in effect
today in substantially unchanged form. See 28 C.F.R. § 48.1
et seq. Even though the statute explicitly states that it “shall
be unlawful” to enter into or enforce a post-NPA JOA
“except with the prior written consent of the Attorney
General,” 15 U.S.C. § 1803(b), the DOJ’s regulations took
the position that post-NPA JOAs were not required by the
Act to obtain the prior approval of the Attorney General, see
28 C.F.R. § 48.1. Rather, the regulations opine that the NPA
merely “provide[s] a method for newspapers to obtain the
benefit of a limited exemption from the antitrust laws if they
desire to do so.” Id. The regulations adopting that
construction were upheld, by a divided vote, in Newspaper
Guild v. Levi, 539 F.2d 755, 755–56 (D.C. Cir. 1976).
B
In June 1990, Attorney General Dick Thornburgh
approved a 1989 JOA between the owner of the Las Vegas
Review-Journal (then Donrey of Nevada, Inc. (“Donrey”))
and the owner of the Las Vegas Sun (i.e., Las Vegas Sun, Inc.
(“LVSI”)). In his written opinion explaining his approval,
Attorney General Thornburgh briefly sketched the history of
the two papers. The newspaper now known as the Las Vegas
Review-Journal began publication in 1909 and “was the only
daily newspaper serving the area” until the Las Vegas Sun
was introduced in 1950. Both papers continued publication
for many years, but by the late 1980s, the Sun was in
substantial financial trouble. The Sun had “lost money every
year since 1981”; its advertising revenues had declined
“every year since 1982, without exception”; and it had total
debts of $11 million. In addition, the Sun’s circulation had
dropped “considerably.” Attorney General Thornburgh

10

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

concluded that “the Sun’s losses are, in all likelihood,
irreversible,” and that the Sun therefore had “been shown to
be a ‘failing newspaper’ within the meaning of the NPA.”
Attorney General Thornburgh also found that approval
of the terms of the proposed JOA “would effectuate the
policy and purpose” of the NPA. 15 U.S.C. § 1803(b).
Under the JOA, the “business operations of the two
newspapers” would be combined, “while preserving the
newspapers’ editorial and reportorial independence.” The
Review-Journal’s owner (i.e., Donrey) would “take
responsibility for the management, printing, and other
commercial functions of the newspapers,” with the ReviewJournal publishing a morning edition, the Sun publishing an
afternoon edition, and both papers publishing a “joint edition
on Saturdays, Sundays, and holidays.” The parties agreed
that 90% of the “profits from operations” would be allocated
to the Review-Journal and 10% to the Sun. After reviewing
these and other details of the JOA, Attorney General
Thornburgh concluded that “there appears to be no feasible
alternative to the JOA that would preserve the Sun in
operation” and that, by allowing the Sun’s independent
editorial voice to survive, “the JOA would serve the statutory
goal of maintaining an independent and competitive
newspaper press.”
Over the years, various disputes emerged over the proper
application of the JOA, and the owners of the newspapers
(who were then, respectively, “DR Partners,” as successor to
Donrey, and LVSI) ultimately sought to resolve these
disputes by negotiating and executing an “Amended and
Restated” JOA on June 10, 2005. Under the terms of the
2005 JOA, the Sun would cease publication as an afternoon
paper and would instead be distributed as a six-to-ten-page
freestanding insert to the Review-Journal. The prior JOA’s

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

11

profit-sharing split was replaced by a more complex formula
based on earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and
amortization (“EBITDA”). LVSI was entitled to request an
annual audit of the relevant EBITDA calculations, and in the
event of a dispute, the issue would be resolved by arbitration.
DR Partners and LVSI did not seek the Attorney
General’s approval of the amended JOA. Instead, in June
2005, they delivered the amended JOA to the DOJ, together
with a cover letter stating that the JOA was being submitted
under “28 CFR § 48.16,” which is the regulation that applies
to amendment of pre-NPA JOAs. See 28 C.F.R. § 48.16
(providing for the filing of JOAs amending “the terms of an
existing arrangement”); id. § 48.2(d) (defining “existing
arrangement” to mean “any joint newspaper operating
arrangement entered into before July 24, 1970”); see also 15
U.S.C. § 1803(a).
The DOJ promptly initiated an investigation into the
2005 JOA, sending a civil investigative demand to DR
Partners in August 2005. The DOJ ultimately sent a letter to
the parties in April 2008 stating that it was closing its
investigation without having taken any action. According to
the letter, the DOJ’s decision “was not based on a conclusion
that the 2005 amendments to the parties’ Joint Operating
Agreement are protected by the antitrust immunity afforded
by the Newspaper Preservation Act” and that the 2005 JOA
therefore “remains subject to antitrust scrutiny.”
C
Over the ensuing years, disputes continued to arise
among the parties to the 2005 JOA, leading to various
lawsuits and arbitration proceedings. One such suit was
brought in 2018 by LVSI in Nevada state court against the
current owner of the Review-Journal, the Las Vegas Review-

12

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

Journal, Inc. (“LVRJI”) and its parent company,
News+Media Capital Group, LLC (“NMCG”). In August
2019, LVRJI and NMCG sought and obtained leave in that
case to file an amended answer in which they asserted
breach-of-contract counterclaims against LVSI and also
sought a declaration that they could terminate the 2005 JOA
for the alleged breach.
In response to this counterclaim, LVSI filed this action
in federal court against LVRJI, NMCG, and two of the
officers and owners of NMCG, Sheldon Adelson and his
son-in-law Patrick Dumont. 1 LVSI alleged, inter alia, that
LVRJI’s efforts to terminate the 2005 JOA amounted to an
attempt to monopolize the Las Vegas newspaper market in
violation of § 2 of the Sherman Act, 15 U.S.C. § 2. A few
days later, LVSI informed Defendants that it was planning to
seek a preliminary injunction against the termination of the
2005 JOA, and it asked whether Defendants would be
willing to avoid the need for such a motion by instead
agreeing to a joint stipulation to maintain the status quo. The
parties ultimately agreed to do so, while simultaneously
preserving their respective rights and arguments. Under the
terms of the stipulation and proposed order, LVRJI agreed to
“continue to perform under the 2005 JOA,” and Defendants
agreed to “refrain from taking any non-judicial steps to
terminate the 2005 JOA until after the entry of final
judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction permitting
such termination.” The district court entered the stipulated
order on October 9, 2019.
The complaint was later amended to add, as an additional defendant,
Interface Operations, LLC, which was alleged to be an Adelson-familycontrolled entity through which the family members controlled the
affairs of LVRJI. The respective defendants who were parties to the
action at any given time are collectively referred to as “Defendants.”

1

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

13

At some point prior to the filing of LVSI’s federal
lawsuit, Defendants became aware of the DOJ’s April 2008
letter indicating that the DOJ did not consider the 2005 JOA
to be protected by the special immunity granted by the NPA.
In late October 2019, LVRJI and NMCG moved to dismiss
LVSI’s federal complaint on the grounds, inter alia, that the
2005 JOA never received the requisite approval; that it was
therefore unlawful under the NPA; and that LVSI’s claims
that it would be an antitrust violation to abrogate that
agreement necessarily failed as a result. In its order partially
denying the motion to dismiss, the district court declined to
resolve this issue. Noting that the complaint specifically
alleged that the DOJ had “permitted” the 2005 JOA, the
court viewed the motion to dismiss as an improper effort to
go outside the pleadings to dispute this factual allegation.
After several years of discovery, the parties filed crossmotions for summary judgment in May 2023. In particular,
both sides sought summary judgment with respect to
Defendants’ assertion that the 2005 JOA was unlawful under
the NPA and unenforceable. Defendants filed a further
motion arguing that, for the same reason, the stipulated
preliminary injunction requiring them to continue to perform
under the 2005 JOA should be dissolved.
In March 2024, the district court granted summary
judgment to LVSI on the issue of the enforceability of the
2005 JOA, concluding that the agreement was not invalid
merely because it had not been approved by the Attorney
General. On that same ground, the court also denied
Defendants’ motion to dissolve the stipulated preliminary
injunction.

14

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

II
Defendants appealed the denial of their motion to
dissolve the stipulated preliminary injunction, asserting that
the appeal was authorized under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1).
LVSI disputes that contention, and alternatively asserts that
Defendants lack standing to take the appeal. We conclude
that we have jurisdiction over Defendants’ appeal.
Under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1), we have jurisdiction to
review, inter alia, “[i]nterlocutory orders . . . refusing to
dissolve or modify injunctions.” Here, there can be no doubt
that the October 2019 stipulated order was an injunction: on
its face, the order was entered by agreement of the parties
“[i]n lieu of litigating” LVSI’s anticipated “motion for
preliminary injunction,” and the order provisionally granted
the exact relief that that motion would have sought, namely,
an order “to prevent the termination of the 2005 JOA and to
maintain the status quo through the pendency of this
dispute.” The order, however, explicitly clarified that
Defendants could take judicial steps to terminate the 2005
JOA and that, in all events, both sides reserved their
respective “rights [and] arguments” notwithstanding the
stipulation agreeing to the order.
After Defendants’ initial effort to raise the enforceability
of the 2005 JOA at the pleading stage was rebuffed by the
district court on the ground that it contradicted the
complaint’s allegations, Defendants subsequently re-raised
the issue after substantial discovery was completed. They
did so, inter alia, by filing a motion explicitly requesting that
the October 2019 stipulated preliminary injunction be
dissolved on the ground that, in light of the relevant facts,
the 2005 JOA was unlawful and unenforceable. The district
court then expressly denied Defendants’ “motion to dissolve

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

15

preliminary injunction” in March 2024 on the sole ground
that, based on the undisputed facts, the 2005 JOA was
enforceable.
Because the district court’s March 2024 order explicitly
denied an express request to dissolve an injunctive order,
Defendants’ appeal of that denial “falls squarely within the
language of section 1292(a)(1),” and we therefore have
jurisdiction over this appeal without the need for any further
showing. Natural Res. Def. Council v. County of Los
Angeles, 840 F.3d 1098, 1101 (9th Cir. 2016) (citation
omitted). Consequently, LVSI is wrong in contending that
our jurisdiction here depends upon the sort of further
showing that is required when an order sought to be appealed
under § 1292(a)(1) does not explicitly deny an injunction but
“only has the practical effect of denying an injunction.” Id.
(emphasis added) (simplified). In the latter circumstance,
the appellant must make the further showing that the order
will “have serious, perhaps irreparable consequences” that
can only be redressed by an immediate appeal. Negrete v.
Allianz Life Ins. Co., 523 F.3d 1091, 1097 (9th Cir. 2008)
(citing Carson v. American Brands, Inc., 450 U.S. 79, 83–84
(1981)). But our caselaw has squarely held “that Carson’s
‘requirement of irreparable injury’ does not apply to ‘appeals
from the direct denial of a request for an injunction,’” but
only to non-injunctive orders that are claimed to have the
“‘practical effect’ of denying an injunction.” Natural Res.
Def. Council, 840 F.3d at 1101 (emphasis added) (citations
omitted); see also Paige v. State of California, 102 F.3d
1035, 1038 (9th Cir. 1996) (holding that, where a party has
appealed “from the specific grant of a request for an
injunction,” “Carson is simply irrelevant, and we have
jurisdiction over the [party’s] appeal under § 1292 even
though the [party] has not alleged irreparable harm”); Shee

16

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

Atika v. Sealaska Corp., 39 F.3d 247, 249 (9th Cir. 1994)
(holding that Carson does not apply “to appeals from orders
specifically denying injunctions”); United States v. Phillip
Morris USA Inc., 840 F.3d 844, 849 (D.C. Cir. 2016)
(holding that § 1292(a) jurisdiction exists, without any
showing of irreparable harm under Carson, “where the
district court order ‘clearly grants or denies a specific request
for injunctive relief,’ such as a request to dissolve an
injunction” (emphasis added) (citation omitted)).
LVSI alternatively contends that, even if there is
statutory jurisdiction under § 1292(a)(1), Defendants lack
standing to appeal the March 2024 order because they have
not been “aggrieved” by it. This argument is somewhat
difficult to fathom, because Defendants are self-evidently
aggrieved by an order that, they contend, unlawfully
compels them to maintain a relationship with the Sun that
they no longer want. See, e.g., ACF Indus. Inc. v. California
State Bd. of Equalization, 42 F.3d 1286, 1288–89 (9th Cir.
1994) (exercising jurisdiction over a defendant’s appeal
from an order denying a motion to modify a stipulated
preliminary injunction). So far as we can discern from
LVSI’s brief, the argument that Defendants have not been
aggrieved is merely a repackaging of LVSI’s contention that
Defendants are not suffering any irreparable injury from the
court’s order. We reject this effort to evade our abovedescribed precedent holding that irreparable injury need not
be shown when, as here, an explicit request to dissolve an
injunction is denied.
Accordingly, we conclude that we have jurisdiction to
review the district court’s order denying Defendants’ motion
to dissolve the stipulated preliminary injunction.

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

17

III
In declining to dissolve its injunction requiring
Defendants to continue carrying out the 2005 JOA, the
district court relied solely on the ground that the JOA did not
violate the NPA and that Defendants were wrong in
contending otherwise. We turn, then, to whether the JOA
was lawful and enforceable under the NPA, which is a legal
question that we review de novo. See United States v.
Hughes, 113 F.4th 1158, 1161 (9th Cir. 2024). 2
In challenging the 2005 JOA, Defendants rely on § 4(b)
of the NPA, which provides, in relevant part, that “[i]t shall
be unlawful for any person to enter into, perform, or enforce
a joint operating arrangement, not already in effect, except
with the prior written consent of the Attorney General of the
United States.” 15 U.S.C. § 1803(b). Here it is both
LVSI argues that we should not reach this issue but should instead
affirm on the alternative ground that Defendants failed to show “a
significant change in facts or law” that would “warrant[] revision or
dissolution of the injunction.” Sharp v. Weston, 233 F.3d 1166, 1170 (9th
Cir. 2000). We reject this contention. As we have explained, the
stipulated preliminary injunction here expressly reserved the parties’
respective “rights [and] arguments” concerning the validity of the 2005
JOA, and it also explicitly recognized Defendants’ right to seek judicial
termination of the JOA. Accordingly, this is not a situation in which the
existing injunctive order was based on a judicial resolution of a disputed
issue, thereby requiring the party seeking dissolution to make a threshold
showing that this already-resolved issue should be revisited. On the
contrary, the stipulated order here effectively deferred resolution of the
JOA’s validity until a later date. After Defendants’ first attempt to raise
that issue at the pleading stage was rejected by the district court, both
sides then reasonably waited until after the completion of discovery to
seek a ruling on that unresolved issue. Under these circumstances,
Defendants were not required to make any further showing of a change
in the facts or the law before requesting that the district court dissolve
the injunction based on a resolution of this deferred issue.
2

18

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

undisputed and indisputable that the Attorney General did
not provide “prior written consent” approving the 2005 JOA.
Accordingly, if the 2005 JOA counts as “[1] a joint operating
arrangement, [2] not already in effect,” then, under the plain
language of § 4(b), “[i]t shall be unlawful” for the parties “to
enter into, perform, or enforce” that JOA. Id. We therefore
must consider whether the 2005 JOA meets the two abovenoted criteria necessary to trigger § 4(b)’s operative rule that
the specified agreements are “unlawful.” Before doing so,
however, we first address a threshold issue concerning the
scope of that rule.
A
The district court held (and LVSI agrees) that, even
assuming arguendo that the 2005 JOA counted as a “joint
operating arrangement, not already in effect,” that agreement
still “would be enforceable without the Attorney General’s
signature.” The lack of Attorney General approval, the
district court concluded, merely meant that the parties lacked
any antitrust exemption under the NPA and were therefore
“expose[d] . . . to antitrust liability,” but it did “not invalidate
the JOA or render [it] unlawful or unenforceable.” The
district court noted that this reading of § 4(b) was upheld in
1976 by a divided panel of the D.C. Circuit in Newspaper
Guild, which rejected a challenge to the DOJ’s 1974
implementing regulations expressly adopting that view. 539
F.2d at 760–61; see also News Weekly Sys., Inc. v.
Chattanooga News-Free Press, 1993 WL 47197, at *2 (6th
Cir. 1993) (adopting Newspaper Guild’s interpretation of
§ 4(b) without conducting any independent analysis). We
reject this reading as squarely foreclosed by the plain
language of the statute.

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

19

As always, “[s]tatutory construction must begin with the
language employed by Congress and the assumption that the
ordinary meaning of that language accurately expresses the
legislative purpose.” Gross v. FBL Fin. Servs., Inc., 557 U.S.
167, 175 (2009) (citation omitted). Here, as noted, the
relevant language of § 4(b) states that “[i]t shall be unlawful
for any person to enter into, perform, or enforce a joint
operating arrangement, not already in effect, except with the
prior written consent of the Attorney General of the United
States.”
15 U.S.C. § 1803(b) (emphasis added).
Accordingly, when an agreement is covered by § 4(b) (i.e.,
it is a “joint operating arrangement, not already in effect”),
and it lacks the “prior written consent of the Attorney
General,” the result expressly decreed by the statute is that it
is “unlawful” to “enter into, perform, or enforce” that
agreement. Id. (emphasis added). This language is clear and
unequivocal: § 4(b) declares such an unapproved agreement
to be unlawful to enter into and unenforceable.
This plain-language reading is further confirmed by
comparing the wording of § 4(b) with that of § 4(a). As
noted earlier, § 4(a) addresses JOAs “entered into prior to
the effective date of this Act,” Pub. L. No. 91-353, § 4(a), 84
Stat. at 467, while § 4(b) generally addresses post-NPA
JOAs. See supra at 7–8; see also infra section III(B)(2). In
sharp contrast to § 4(b), the language of § 4(a) notably
avoids declaring anything to be “unlawful.” Instead, § 4(a)
states that “[i]t shall not be unlawful under any antitrust law
for any person to perform, enforce, renew, or amend” any
pre-NPA JOA if, at the time the JOA “was first entered into,”
the weaker newspaper was likely to remain financially
unsound. 15 U.S.C. § 1803(a) (emphasis added). Congress
could easily have used the same verbal formulation in § 4(b)
and declared that “it shall not be unlawful under any antitrust

20

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

law” to “enter into, perform, or enforce” a JOA that has
received the “prior written consent of the Attorney General.”
Had Congress done so, that would have produced the reading
adopted by the district court: under that phrasing, which
simply declares that approved JOAs are “not . . . unlawful
under any antitrust law,” the lack of such prior approval
would simply mean that this exemption from the antitrust
laws would not apply. But Congress did not replicate in
§ 4(b) the phrasing used in § 4(a). Instead, Congress
affirmatively declared that it “shall be unlawful” to “enter
into, perform, or enforce” a post-NPA JOA without prior
approval. Id. § 1803(b). Moreover, the language of § 4(b)
does not make that unlawfulness depend upon the
applicability of any pre-existing antitrust law, but instead
declares such unapproved agreements to be unlawful
The district court’s reading of § 4(b)
simpliciter. 3
We note, however, that, when the Attorney General grants prior
approval to a JOA under § 4(b), the result is not merely an exemption
from § 4(b)’s prohibition, but also an exemption from the relevant
“antitrust law[s]” described in the NPA. Because § 4(b) declares postNPA JOAs to be “unlawful” “except” when the Attorney General has
granted prior written approval under the new standards set forth in the
NPA, the scope of the unlawfulness that is thereby removed by the
Attorney General’s approval must be understood as also extending to the
antitrust laws that have been effectively displaced by the NPA’s
standards. (It would make no sense to read § 4(b) as requiring the
Attorney General to grant approval based on standards that explicitly
differ from those otherwise applicable under Citizen Publishing only to
then subject such approved agreements to Citizen Publishing.)
Accordingly, the scope of the exemption granted by Attorney General
approval under § 4(b) should be read in pari materia with the scope of
the exemption granted under § 4(a) and therefore must be understood as
likewise extending to the “antitrust law[s]” described in § 3(1) of the Act.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1802(1) (defining “antitrust law,” for purposes of the
NPA, as meaning specified antitrust statutes “and such statutes and any
other Acts in pari materia” to those specified antitrust statutes); see also
3

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

21

improperly fails to give any effect to these striking
differences in language between the two provisions. See
Russello v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23 (1983) (“[W]here
Congress includes particular language in one section of a
statute but omits it in another section of the same Act, it is
generally presumed that Congress acts intentionally and
purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion.” (alteration
in original) (citation omitted)).
Indeed, neither the district court nor the panel majority
in Newspaper Guild were able to point to any statutory
language that would support their view that the effect of
§ 4(b) is not to require the prior approval of the Attorney
General but merely to deny the antitrust exemption that
would follow from obtaining that approval. On the contrary,
the D.C. Circuit majority candidly conceded that “[a] rigidly
literal reading of section 4(b) undeniably provides support”
for the view—adopted by the district court in Newspaper
Guild—that “all joint newspaper operating arrangements not
in effect on July 24, 1970, must obtain the Attorney
General’s consent before they may be put into effect.” 539
F.2d at 757 (quoting Newspaper Guild v. Saxbe, 381 F. Supp.
48, 53 (D.D.C. 1974)). But the majority rejected “rigid
reliance upon the literal text of the statute” in favor of
“delving more deeply into the congressional purpose” as
reflected in the NPA’s “[l]egislative history.” Id. at 761.
After extensively reviewing that legislative history, as
reflected in the various committee reports and floor
statements, the majority held that the plain-language reading
of § 4(b) was, in its view, “at odds with the ‘object and
Hawaii Newspaper Agency v. Bronster, 103 F.3d 742, 745 (9th Cir. 1996)
(stating that approval from the Attorney General under § 4(b) yields the
“same immunity” as under § 4(a)). Notably, such “other Acts in pari
materia” would include the prohibition in § 4(b) of the NPA itself.

22

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

policy’ of the Congress.” Id. (citation omitted). Newspaper
Guild’s wholesale disregard of the statutory text is a “relic
from a ‘bygone era of statutory construction’” that
“inappropriately resort[ed] to legislative history” in lieu of
“the statute’s text and structure,” and its “casual disregard of
the rules of statutory interpretation” is flatly contrary to
current Supreme Court authority. Food Mktg. Inst. v. Argus
Leader Media, 588 U.S. 427, 436–37 (2019) (citation
omitted); see also Newspaper Guild, 539 F.2d at 761 (Tamm,
J., dissenting) (explaining that the majority’s reading of
§ 4(b) reflected a “patent disregard of the plain and
unambiguous language of [the] statute”). Where, as here, “a
careful examination of the ordinary meaning and structure of
the law itself . . . yields a clear answer, judges must stop,”
and they should not use legislative history “to ‘muddy’ the
meaning of ‘clear statutory language.’” Food Mktg., 588
U.S. at 436 (citation omitted).
LVSI also notes that the view of § 4(b) endorsed in
Newspaper Guild has been enshrined in the DOJ’s
implementing regulations since 1974. But after Loper
Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369 (2024), we no
longer give deference to “‘permissible’ agency
interpretations of the statutes those agencies administer,” id.
at 378. Thus, even assuming arguendo that the DOJ’s
construction of § 4(b) would have been given controlling
deference under Chevron U.S.A. Inc. v. Natural Resources
Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), but cf.
Newspaper Guild, 539 F.2d at 761 (Tamm, J., dissenting)
(arguing that, “[a]though great deference is due an
interpretation of a statute by the agency or department
charged with its enforcement,” the DOJ regulation’s reading
of § 4(b) was contrary to the “plain and unambiguous
language” of the NPA), that no longer matters, because

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

23

“Chevron [has been] overruled.” Loper Bright, 603 U.S. at
412.
We instead “must exercise [our] independent
judgment” as to the meaning of the NPA, id., and for the
reasons we have explained, we conclude that the reading of
§ 4(b) reflected in the DOJ regulations and endorsed in
Newspaper Guild is directly contrary to the statutory
language and must be rejected. 4
B
It follows from what we have said thus far that, if the
2005 JOA counts as “[1] a joint operating arrangement,
[2] not already in effect,” then, under the plain language of
§ 4(b), that JOA would be unlawful and unenforceable. We
next address whether those two respective requirements
have been met.
1
As LVSI notes, the phrase “joint operating arrangement”
in § 4(b) does not exactly align with the wording of the
phrase that is expressly defined in NPA § 3(2), namely, “joint
newspaper operating arrangement.” 15 U.S.C. § 1802(2)
4
Newspaper Guild also expressed the concern that, under a literal
reading of § 4(b), “a joint operating agreement between two healthy,
non-competitive newspapers” would be unlawful without the Attorney
General’s approval, but that approval could not be given under § 4(b)
because neither would qualify as a “failing newspaper.” 539 F.2d at 759
(emphasis added). This concern is misplaced. The NPA’s expressly
declared purpose is “to preserve the publication of newspapers in any
city, community, or metropolitan area” where JOAs already exist or are
“hereafter effected” under the NPA. 15 U.S.C. § 1801 (emphasis added).
Moreover, the immunity granted by § 4(b) is an immunity from specific
antitrust laws, which presumes, of course, that the relevant newspapers
both operate in the same relevant market. Accordingly, it seems clear, in
context, that the JOAs covered by § 4(b) are only those involving
otherwise competing newspapers.

24

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

(emphasis added). But an examination of the statute as a
whole confirms that the two phrases are used
interchangeably throughout and that the use of one versus
the other in any given instance is of no significance. The
phrase “joint newspaper operating arrangement” is used
exactly five times in the text of the statute (including in the
definitional section in § 3(2)), while the phrase “joint
operating arrangement” appears four times, and a third
phrase—“joint operating agreement”—appears once. See
id. §§ 1801, 1802(2), 1803(a)–(c), 1804(a)–(b). Notably,
there are two sections in which both of the relevant phrases
are used, and in each of these sections, the two phrases selfevidently mean the same thing. Thus, for example, § 4(a)
establishes a general rule that certain pre-NPA “joint
newspaper operating arrangement[s]” are exempt from
specified antitrust laws, while § 4(a)’s proviso to that rule
imposes certain additional requirements that apply to any
amendment to a “joint operating arrangement.”
Id.
§ 1803(a) (emphasis added). Likewise, § 5(a) provides that,
if any pre-NPA “joint operating arrangement” is the subject
of a “final judgment” holding it “unlawful under any
antitrust law” in “any action brought by the United States,”
“any party to such final judgment may reinstitute said joint
newspaper operating arrangement to the extent permissible”
under § 4(a). Id. § 1804(a) (emphasis added). Given that
there is no discernible rhyme or reason as to which phrase is
used in any given instance, and there are two instances that
affirmatively confirm that the phrases are interchangeable,
we conclude that the two phrases must be given the same
meaning.
Consequently, we apply § 3(2)’s definition of a “joint
newspaper operating arrangement” in determining whether
the 2005 JOA counts as a “joint operating arrangement” for

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

25

purposes of § 4(b). Section 3(2)’s definition, in its entirety,
is as follows:
The term “joint newspaper operating
arrangement”
means
any
contract,
agreement, joint venture (whether or not
incorporated), or other arrangement entered
into by two or more newspaper owners for the
publication of two or more newspaper
publications, pursuant to which joint or
common production facilities are established
or operated and joint or unified action is taken
or agreed to be taken with respect to any one
or more of the following: printing; time,
method, and field of publication; allocation
of production facilities; distribution;
advertising
solicitation;
circulation
solicitation;
business
department;
establishment
of
advertising
rates;
establishment of circulation rates and
revenue distribution: Provided, That there is
no merger, combination, or amalgamation of
editorial or reportorial staffs, and that
editorial
policies
be
independently
determined.
15 U.S.C. § 1802(2).
Here, the 2005 JOA is plainly a “contract, agreement, . . .
or other arrangement,” and it was indisputably “entered into
by two or more newspaper owners for the publication of two
or more newspaper publications.” Id. LVSI contends,
however, that the 2005 JOA does not meet the further
statutory requirement that the agreement be one “pursuant to

26

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

which [1] joint or common production facilities are
established or operated and [2] joint or unified action is
taken or agreed to be taken with respect to” certain
enumerated publishing activities. Id. (emphasis added).
LVSI does not contest that the second subclause is satisfied
here, given that the 2005 JOA, on its face, establishes new
terms for taking “joint or unified action” with respect to
several of the enumerated publishing activities. However,
according to LVSI, the first subclause is not met: the 2005
JOA “cannot be the agreement ‘pursuant to which joint or
common production facilities are established or operated,’ as
that was already done in the original JOA.” But even
assuming arguendo that it was the original JOA, and not the
2005 JOA, that “established” the “joint or common
production facilities,” it nonetheless remains true that, after
the 2005 JOA, those facilities are thereafter “operated”
“pursuant” to that amended agreement. 15 U.S.C. § 1802(2)
(emphasis added). And because the relevant clause requires
only that the facilities be “established or operated” pursuant
to the agreement, id. (emphasis added), that clause’s
requirement is satisfied here. See United States v. Woods,
571 U.S. 31, 45–46 (2013) (noting that the “ordinary use” of
“the conjunction ‘or’” is “almost always disjunctive” and
signifies that the “items are alternatives”).
Moreover, the parties do not dispute that § 3(2)’s proviso
is satisfied here. Under the 2005 JOA, “there is no merger,
combination, or amalgamation of editorial or reportorial
staffs,” and the “editorial policies” of the two papers are
“independently determined.” 15 U.S.C. § 1802(2). The
2005 JOA expressly states that each newspaper will maintain
its own “staff of news and editorial employees,” and it
contains additional provisions preserving “the news and
editorial independence and autonomy” of both papers.

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

27

Because the 2005 JOA meets all of the elements of the
definition of a “joint newspaper operating arrangement” in
§ 3(2), we conclude that it is a “joint operating arrangement”
within the meaning of § 4(b).
2
We next consider whether the 2005 JOA counts as a joint
operating arrangement that is “not already in effect.” 15
U.S.C. § 1803(b).
The district court held that, by limiting its applicability
to JOAs “not already in effect,” § 4(b) reaches “[o]nly new
JOAs” and does not apply to amended JOAs. We reject this
reading as contrary to the statutory language. As we have
already indicated, § 4(b)’s exclusion of JOAs “already in
effect” is unmistakably a reference to JOAs that predate the
enactment of the NPA: a JOA adopted before the NPA is one
that is “already in effect,” and a JOA entered into after the
NPA, even if it amends a prior JOA, is one that is “not
already in effect.” That conclusion is reinforced by § 4(a),
which expressly grants a limited antitrust exemption to JOAs
“entered into prior to the effective date” of the NPA, which
was July 24, 1970. Pub. L. No. 91-353, § 4(a), 84 Stat. at
467; see also 15 U.S.C. § 1803(a). By expressly excluding
JOAs “already in effect” from its otherwise flat prohibition
on performing or enforcing any JOA without the Attorney
General’s consent, § 4(b) thus avoids a conflict with § 4(a)’s
special rules for pre-NPA JOAs. 15 U.S.C. § 1803(b).
Likewise, by including a special rule for amendments of preNPA JOAs, § 4(a) confirms that they are not governed by
§ 4(b). See RadLAX Gateway Hotel, LLC v. Amalgamated
Bank, 566 U.S. 639, 645 (2012) (applying the canon that “a
more limited, specific authorization” may be construed as an
exception to a more “general authorization” in the same

28

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

statute). And, unlike § 4(a), § 4(b) has no analogous express
carve-out for amended JOAs.
Furthermore, the district court’s narrow construction of
§ 4(b) would seemingly create an odd gap in the statute in
which amendments to post-NPA JOAs—no matter how
significant—would not be subject to any limitations or
requirements at all. The district court sought to fill this gap
by engrafting onto post-NPA JOA amendments certain
provisions of § 4(a) that govern pre-NPA JOA amendments.
Specifically, the district court held that all amended JOAs—
whether they are amendments of pre-NPA JOAs or of postNPA JOAs—are covered by a proviso concerning
amendments that is contained in § 4(a). The full text of
§ 4(a), including this proviso, is as follows:
It shall not be unlawful under any antitrust
law for any person to perform, enforce,
renew, or amend any joint newspaper
operating arrangement entered into prior to
the effective date of this Act [i.e., July 24,
1970], if at the time at which such
arrangement was first entered into, regardless
of ownership or affiliations, not more than
one of the newspaper publications involved
in the performance of such arrangement was
likely to remain or become a financially
sound publication: Provided, That the terms
of a renewal or amendment to a joint
operating arrangement must be filed with the
Department of Justice and that the
amendment does not add a newspaper

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

29

publication or newspaper publications to
such arrangement.
Pub. L. No. 91-353, § 4(a), 84 Stat. at 467, 15 U.S.C.
§ 1803(a). Although the language of the proviso, read in
isolation, could be construed as reaching any amendment to
any JOA, including a post-NPA JOA, there are several
textual reasons why that reading must be rejected.
As an initial matter, it is a well-established canon of
construction that “a proviso usually is construed to apply to
the provision or clause immediately preceding it.”
Pacificorp. v. Bonneville Power Admin., 856 F.2d 94, 97 (9th
Cir. 1988) (quoting 2A SUTHERLAND ON STATUTES AND
STATUTORY CONSTRUCTION § 47.33, at p.245 (4th ed.
1984)); see also ANTONIN SCALIA & BRYAN A. GARNER,
READING LAW: THE INTERPRETATION OF LEGAL TEXTS at 154
(2012) (stating that, under the “proviso canon,” a “proviso
conditions the principal matter that it qualifies—almost
always the matter immediately preceding”). Under this
canon, the proviso in § 4(a) should be construed as applying
only to the matter that precedes it, namely, § 4(a)’s rules
about pre-NPA JOAs. Section 4(b) contains no comparable
proviso limiting its sweep, and nothing in the language or
placement of § 4(a)’s proviso suggests that it applies to
§ 4(b).
Moreover, there are additional textual clues that further
confirm that § 4(a)’s proviso applies only to the pre-NPA
JOAs covered by § 4(a) and not to the post-NPA JOAs
covered by § 4(b). In particular, there are two notable
relevant differences in the language used in § 4(a) and
§ 4(b). First, as we have already noted, § 4(b) is phrased as
a prohibition that declares unapproved post-NPA JOAs to
“be unlawful,” while § 4(a) is not similarly worded: § 4(a)

30

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

instead says that “[i]t shall not be unlawful under any
antitrust law” to take certain specified actions concerning
pre-NPA JOAs. 15 U.S.C. § 1803(a)–(b) (emphasis added);
see also supra at 19–21. Second, as we have also noted,
§ 4(a) expressly addresses amendments, whereas § 4(b) does
not. Compare 15 U.S.C. § 1803(a) (stating that “[i]t shall
not be unlawful under any antitrust law for any person to
perform, enforce, renew, or amend” any pre-NPA JOA
(emphasis added)), with id. § 1803(b) (stating that “[i]t shall
be unlawful for any person to enter into, perform, or enforce”
a post-NPA JOA without the Attorney General’s approval).
Taken in context, these two differences in language between
§ 4(a) and § 4(b) are clearly interrelated, and they confirm
that § 4(a)’s proviso should be construed as applying only to
§ 4(a).
As we have explained, § 4(b)’s flat prohibition on any
post-NPA JOA without Attorney General approval is broad
enough to include, by its plain terms, both brand-new postNPA JOAs and amended post-NPA JOAs. Because § 4(b)’s
language is already broad enough to cover amendments, it is
understandable that § 4(b) makes no specific reference to
amended JOAs. By contrast, § 4(a)’s use of authorizing
language, rather than prohibitory language, would not reach
amended pre-NPA JOAs unless they are specifically
mentioned. That is, if § 4(a) merely used the same relevant
verbs as § 4(b)—namely, “perform” and “enforce”—§ 4(a)
would not cover amendments: if § 4(a) had only provided
that “[i]t shall not be unlawful” to “perform” or “enforce” a
“joint newspaper operating arrangement entered into prior to
July 24, 1970,” § 4(a)’s antitrust-exemption rule would
apply only to unamended JOAs. It is therefore unsurprising
that § 4(a) adds an explicit affirmative antitrust exemption
for “renew[ing] or amend[ing]” pre-NPA JOAs, which

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

31

Congress then expressly conditioned by adding a proviso
limiting the types of “renewal[s] or amendment[s]” that are
allowed and imposing a reporting requirement concerning
such renewals or amendments. The district court overlooked
these carefully nuanced and interrelated differences in
language between § 4(a) and § 4(b) by instead taking the
language of § 4(a)’s proviso out of context and treating it as
a freestanding, across-the-board rule that applies equally to
both § 4(a) and § 4(b). 5
LVSI alternatively argues that § 4(b) cannot reasonably
be read to apply to amendments to post-NPA JOAs, because
amendments inherently cannot satisfy § 4(b)’s approval
requirements. Section 4(b) states that, in order to approve a
post-NPA JOA, the Attorney General must “determine
[1] that not more than one of the newspaper publications
involved in the arrangement is a publication other than a
failing newspaper, and [2] that approval of such arrangement
would effectuate the policy and purpose” of the NPA. 15
U.S.C. § 1803(b). LVSI contends that, once an initial JOA
is approved, the first of these two requirements can never be
satisfied, because the previously troubled newspaper will

We do not rely, however, on Defendants’ argument that the scope of
§ 4(a) is confirmed by the temporally limited heading assigned to that
section when it was classified as § 1803(a) of Title 15 of the United
States Code. See 15 U.S.C. § 1803(a) (adding the following heading to
§ 1803(a): “Joint operating arrangements entered into prior to July 24,
1970”). Title 15 has never been enacted as positive law, and so the
headings added to it “are merely editorial additions made by [the]
congressional office” that “by statute has the task of assembling the
United States Code, ‘including those titles which are not yet enacted into
positive law.’” United States v. Ehmer, 87 F.4th 1073, 1112 (9th Cir.
2023) (quoting 2 U.S.C. § 285b(3)). As such, these headings “are
entitled to no weight.” Id.
5

32

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

then no longer be a “failing newspaper.” This argument is
meritless.
The NPA states that, in addressing whether the weaker
newspaper is a “failing newspaper,” the Attorney General
must determine whether that newspaper “is in probable
danger of financial failure” “regardless of its ownership or
affiliations.” 15 U.S.C. § 1802(5) (emphasis added). As we
have held, the latter clause “means simply that the ailing
newspaper should be analyzed as a free-standing entity, as if
it were not owned by a corporate parent.” Committee for an
Indep. P-I, 704 F.2d at 480 (emphasis added). Thus, in the
case of an amended JOA, the question for the Attorney
General would be whether, apart from the JOA, the weaker
newspaper “is in probable danger of financial failure” if
considered as a freestanding entity. 15 U.S.C. § 1802(5). If
nothing has changed to suggest that the weaker paper could
now survive as a freestanding entity, then this requirement
will easily be met and the question will be simply whether
the amended JOA “would effectuate the policy and purpose”
of the NPA. Id. § 1803(b). Contrary to what LVSI contends,
the statutory standard is thus readily applicable in the context
of amended JOAs. 6
The district court alternatively suggested that an
amended post-NPA JOA would count as a JOA “not already
in effect” only if the amended JOA constituted a “novation”
of the prior JOA under the applicable state law. The district
court held that this rule did not apply here, however, because
LVSI also asserts that the review process for JOAs under the relevant
regulations is too cumbersome to be applied to amended JOAs. Even
assuming that this were true, it would not be an argument for ignoring
the plain text of the statute; it would instead be an argument for revising
the regulatory procedures to better conform to the text. Cf. Loper Bright,
603 U.S. at 412.
6

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

33

the 2005 JOA did not amount to a novation under Nevada
law. We need not address the parties’ dispute over the latter
point, because we conclude that the 2005 JOA is covered by
§ 4(b) even if it is not a novation. Nothing in the text of the
NPA supports engrafting a “novation” limitation onto § 4(b),
and we lack the authority “to add words to the law to produce
what is thought to be a desirable result.” EEOC v.
Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, Inc., 575 U.S. 768, 774 (2015).
By its terms, § 4(b) applies to all post-NPA JOAs, including
amended post-NPA JOAs. 7
We therefore conclude that, because the 2005 JOA is a
“joint newspaper operating arrangement” as described in
§ 3(2) and was “not already in effect” when the NPA was
enacted, it is covered by § 4(b) and required the “prior
written consent of the Attorney General.” 15 U.S.C.
§ 1803(b).
IV
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that, because it
did not receive the required “prior written consent of the
Attorney General,” the 2005 JOA is unlawful and
unenforceable. 15 U.S.C. § 1803(b). The district court erred
in reaching a contrary conclusion and in denying on that
LVSI contends that, in Mahaffey v. Detroit Newspaper Agency, 1998
WL 739902 (6th Cir. 1998), the Sixth Circuit adopted its view that
amendments of post-NPA JOAs are not covered by § 4(b)’s approval
requirement. That is wrong. In Mahaffey, the Sixth Circuit rejected the
view that the “failure to seek and obtain approval” of the amended postNPA JOA in that case “stripped even the original joint operating
agreement of antitrust immunity.” Id. at *2 (emphasis added). As to
whether the parties to the JOA in Mahaffey had immunity for
“implementation of any unapproved amendment,” the Sixth Circuit
expressly declined to decide that issue, because it concluded that the
private plaintiffs lacked standing to assert the antitrust claims that were
based on those amendments. Id.

7

34

LAS VEGAS SUN, INC. V. ADELSON

basis Defendants’ motion to dissolve the stipulated
preliminary injunction. We therefore reverse the district
court’s order denying that motion, and we remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

