FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
PAUL SCHWARTZ,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
D MILLER, P.A., Acting HSA;
Unknown UNKNOWN TATAD,
named as Ms. Tatad, M.L.P; BECKY
CLAY, Warden; Unknown
UNKNOWN AKINS, named as Ms.
Akins, M.D.; THOMAS
LONGFELLOW, M.D., Clinical
Director; Unknown UNKNOWN
LAMB, named as Mr. Lamb,
Associate Warden; UNKNOWN
ENGLAND, named as Ms. England,
Acting Hospital Administrator;
UNKNOWN ASH, named as Ms.
Ash, M.D.,

No. 23-1343
D.C. No.
4:14-cv-02013JAS

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
James Alan Soto, District Judge, Presiding

2

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

Argued and Submitted November 8, 2024
Phoenix, Arizona
Filed August 28, 2025
Before: Richard A. Paez and John B. Owens, Circuit
Judges, and Richard Seeborg, Chief District Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Paez
SUMMARY**
Prisoner / Bivens
The panel reversed the district court’s judgment on the
pleadings for federal prison officials in Paul Schwartz’s
Bivens action alleging that the prison officials were
deliberately indifferent to his serious medical needs in
failing to treat adequately a litany of serious symptoms over
the course of eighteen months.
Applying the first step of the two-step framework set
forth in Ziglar v. Abasi, 582 U.S. 120 (2017), the panel held
that Schwartz’s claim was “identical in all meaningful
respects” to Carlson v. Green, 446 U.S. 14 (1980), in which
the Supreme Court first recognized a Bivens claim under the
Eighth Amendment for deliberate indifference to serious
*

The Honorable Richard Seeborg, United States Chief District Judge for
the Northern District of California, sitting by designation.
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

3

medical needs. Because this case does not meaningfully
differ from Carlson, Schwartz has a Bivens remedy under
that precedent.
The panel rejected defendants’ arguments that the Prison
Litigation Reform Act (PLRA), the availability of the
Bureau of Prisons’ Administrative Remedy Program (ARP),
and certain factual features of Schwartz’s claims were
meaningfully different from Carlson and therefore
constituted special factors at step one that placed Schwartz’s
claim within a new Bivens context. First, the PLRA did not
eliminate existing Bivens claims but rather was intended to
govern such claims. Second, the ARP was in place when
Carlson was decided and is only relevant at step two of the
Ziglar framework. Third, the severity of harm or
misconduct was not a meaningful difference distinguishing
the context of Schwartz’s claims from the context presented
in Carlson.
Because Schwartz’s claims arose from the same context
presented in Carlson, they are cognizable under Bivens, and
no step two analysis is required.
Finally, the panel held that the district court abused its
discretion in denying Schwartz leave to amend his complaint
without providing adequate written findings and with no
clear basis for the denial in the record.

4

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

COUNSEL
Joshua M. Wesneski (argued), Crystal L. Weeks, and Mark
A. Perry, Weil, Gotshal & Manges LLP, Washington, D.C.,
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Sara E. Margolis (argued), MoloLamken LLP, New York,
New York; Melissa M. Kroeger and Gabriel A. Peraza,
Assistant United States Attorneys; Gary M. Restaino, United
States Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United
States Department of Justice, Tucson, Arizona; Jeffrey A.
Lamken and Christian I. Bale, MoloLamken LLP,
Washington, D.C.; for Defendants-Appellees.
OPINION
PAEZ, Circuit Judge:
Paul Schwartz alleges that federal prison officials were
deliberately indifferent to his serious medical needs in
failing to treat adequately a litany of serious symptoms over
the course of eighteen months while he was incarcerated at
the Federal Correction Institute, Tucson (“FCI-Tucson”). He
filed his pro se complaint under Bivens v. Six Unknown
Agents of the Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S. 388
(1971), naming mid-level practitioner Ofelia Tatad and other
defendants. After Schwartz’s claims against Tatad
proceeded through discovery, she moved for judgment on
the pleadings, which the district court denied. On Tatad’s
motion for reconsideration, the district court granted the
motion and entered judgment for the defendants, concluding
that the Prison Litigation Reform Act (“PLRA”) was a
special factor that placed Schwartz’s claims within a new

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

5

Bivens context and foreclosed judicial extension of a
damages remedy to that context. See Ziglar v. Abbasi, 582
U.S. 120, 140 (2017).
We reverse. Schwartz’s claim is “identical . . . in all
meaningful respects” to Carlson v. Green, 446 U.S. 14
(1980), in which the Supreme Court first recognized a Bivens
claim under the Eighth Amendment for deliberate
indifference to serious medical needs. Watanabe v. Derr,
115 F.4th 1034, 1036 (9th Cir. 2024). The PLRA, which did
not eliminate the Bivens causes of action available at the
time, but instead governs them, is not a special factor
creating a new context at step one of the Bivens analytical
framework. Tatad also asserts that the availability of the
Bureau of Prisons’ Administrative Remedy Program and
certain factual features of Schwartz’s claim are additional
meaningful differences, but we hold that neither suffices to
engender a new context at step one in this case. Finally, the
district court erred in denying Schwartz leave to amend his
complaint.
I.
In April 2014, Paul Schwartz filed a pro se complaint
naming eight defendants employed at FCI-Tucson, where he
was incarcerated. Describing insufficient medical treatment
for a wide array of serious symptoms over a period of
approximately eighteen months, Schwartz’s complaint
alleged the following facts.
Beginning in September 2012, Schwartz experienced
inability to concentrate, weakness, severe tremors,
tachycardia, irregular heartbeat, profuse sweating, dizziness,
chest pain, rapid weight loss, change in urination frequency,
blood in urine, severe fatigue, shortness of breath, bulging
eyes, headaches, blurred vision, daily diarrhea, and loss of

6

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

bowel control. Testing performed in October 2012
confirmed Schwartz’s tachycardia and the presence of blood
in his urine and indicated “severe” thyroid dysfunction and
“possible left atrial enlargement of the heart.”
Schwartz received inadequate and untimely medical
care, despite his many attempts to contact the defendants
through various means and his repeated visits to “sick call.”
Specifically, Schwartz alleged a three-month delay in
receiving diagnostic testing for his thyroid, a five-month
delay in receiving medicine to control “daily thyroid storms
that were causing dysfunction to multiple organs,” and
failure to provide the further medical treatments his thyroid
condition required. The reason for the blood in his urine was
never “completely diagnosed,” and his thyroid issue was
never “stabilized.”
Schwartz alleged that Ms. Tatad, a mid-level care
provider at FCI-Tucson, refused to provide him medical
treatment or access to a physician and instructed other nurses
to deny him treatment. When Schwartz made repeated visits
to sick call to seek care for his symptoms, Tatad refused to
answer his questions, replying only that he should “watch
the call out,” though he was never listed on the call out to
receive medical attention. Schwartz continued to inquire,
prompting Tatad to delete him from sick call. On other
occasions, Tatad prescribed only water and exercise to treat
Schwartz’s severe tremors, chest pain, and shortness of
breath, even though another provider had indicated that
Schwartz should receive medication for those symptoms.
Schwartz’s original complaint also stated claims against
seven other defendants. Relevant to the instant appeal, he
alleged that Warden Clay and Associate Warden Lamb

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

7

ignored multiple emails and other attempts to alert them to
the deficient care he was receiving.
Defendants’ alleged failure to provide adequate and
timely medical care caused Schwartz irreversible kidney
injury in the form of “polycystic kidney disease” resulting in
“constant pain in the kidneys, constant chest pain,” and
potential future harms including “long-term damage to heart
muscles,” “premature heart failure,” “early renal failure,”
and “other kidney and liver related issues.”
Shortly after receiving Schwartz’s complaint, the district
court screened it under 28 U.S.C. § 1915 and dismissed sua
sponte five defendants for failure to state a claim for
deliberate indifference. At that point, the remaining
defendants were Daniel Miller, Acting Health Services
Administrator; Thomas Longfellow, Clinical Director; and
Tatad. Several months later, the district court granted
defendant Miller’s motion to dismiss. With respect to
Longfellow and Tatad, the case proceeded through
discovery.
In September 2017, the district court granted Longfellow
and Tatad’s motion for summary judgment. In February
2020, we reversed the district court’s dismissal only as to
Tatad, holding that the evidence viewed in the light most
favorable to Schwartz showed that “Tatad repeatedly failed
to record [Schwartz’s] visits to FCI-Tucson’s clinic or refer
him for further care, even though he reported—and was
documented as having—serious symptoms, such as
tachycardia and blood in his urine.” Schwartz v. Tatad, 787
F. App’x 408, 409 (9th Cir. 2019). We remanded the case
for further proceedings and noted that Schwartz could seek
leave to amend his claims against the warden and associate

8

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

warden of FCI-Tucson, Defendants Clay and Lamb. Id. at
408.
Three months after remand, Schwartz filed a motion to
amend his complaint, which the district court denied for
failure to attach the proposed amended pleading. Schwartz
refiled the motion five days later, attaching the proposed
amended complaint. 1 The district court denied the motion
again, reasoning only that it was “unduly delayed,
prejudicial, and futile,” and that Schwartz could not satisfy
the elements of the relation-back doctrine.
In January 2023, Tatad moved for judgment on the
pleadings, arguing that Egbert v. Boule, 596 U.S. 482
(2022), foreclosed a Bivens action for the claims Schwartz
alleged. Rejecting Tatad’s motion, the district court found
“no meaningful difference between this case and Carlson [v.
Green],” so Schwartz’s claims were cognizable under the
Supreme Court’s Bivens framework. In both Carlson and
this case, the plaintiffs alleged that the defendants were
medical providers whose deficient treatment and failure to
provide treatment violated the Eighth Amendment within the
context of federally operated prisons. Moreover, the district
court concluded that the seriousness of the alleged
constitutional violation (e.g., whether Tatad’s misconduct or
Schwartz’s injuries were less severe than those in Carlson)
was not relevant to the “new context” inquiry, but rather
spoke to the merits of the claims. Therefore, Schwartz’s
1

Schwartz’s proposed amended complaint would have added that the
lack of adequate medical treatment caused his Graves’ disease to
progress to Graves’ ophthalmopathy and his kidney issues to progress to
stage 3 renal failure. He also would have elaborated on Clay and Lamb’s
awareness of his condition and deficient treatment and their responses or
lack thereof.

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

9

claims were not foreclosed by Supreme Court precedent
disfavoring the expansion of Bivens actions. See Ziglar, 582
U.S. at 140.
Tatad moved for reconsideration, which the district court
granted in June 2023. Revisiting its analysis of Ziglar and
Egbert, the district court concluded that “despite no
meaningful factual differences . . . , this case still extends
Bivens to a new context because it presents a special factor
not considered in previous Bivens cases.” In the district
court’s view, the PLRA “will always be a special factor [that
Carlson] did not consider” “because it did not exist when
Carlson was decided.” At the second step of the Bivens
analysis, the district court wrote only that “the PLRA is a
special factor which indicates ‘that the Judiciary is at least
arguably less equipped than Congress’ to fashion a remedy
in this case.” See Egbert, 596 U.S. at 492.
II.
We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We
review de novo the district court’s decision to grant or deny
a motion for judgment on the pleadings, accepting the
complaint’s factual allegations as true and viewing them in
the light most favorable to the plaintiff. LeGras v. AETNA
Life Ins. Co., 786 F.3d 1233, 1236 (9th Cir. 2015). We
review the denial of leave to amend a complaint for abuse of
discretion, but review de novo the futility of amendment.
United States v. United Healthcare Ins. Co., 848 F.3d 1161,
1172 (9th Cir. 2016).
III.
A.
In Bivens, the Supreme Court held that there was an
implied private right of action against a federal agent who

10

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

violated the Fourth Amendment in arresting the plaintiff and
searching his home. 403 U.S. at 396–97. Within a decade,
the Court extended the implied private right of action to two
other contexts: a Fifth Amendment employment
discrimination claim against a congressman, see Davis v.
Passman, 442 U.S. 228, 234 (1979), and an Eighth
Amendment claim for deliberate indifference to an
incarcerated individual’s serious medical needs, see
Carlson, 446 U.S. at 18. Since Carlson, the Supreme Court
has twelve times declined to extend Bivens further. Harper
v. Nedd, 71 F.4th 1181, 1185 (9th Cir. 2023). “[E]xpanding
the Bivens remedy is now a ‘disfavored’ judicial activity.”
Ziglar, 582 U.S. at 135 (quoting Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S.
662, 675 (2009)).
In Ziglar v. Abbasi, the Supreme Court clarified the twostep framework that courts must use to decide whether to
recognize an implied cause of action against federal agents
for constitutional violations. See 582 U.S. at 135–37. In the
first step, courts ask whether “the case is different in a
meaningful way from previous Bivens cases decided by [the
Supreme] Court.” Ziglar, 582 U.S. at 139. Meaningful
differences might include:
the rank of the officers involved; the
constitutional right at issue; the generality or
specificity of the official action; the extent of
judicial guidance as to how an officer should
respond to the problem or emergency to be
confronted; the statutory or other legal
mandate under which the officer was
operating; the risk of disruptive intrusion by
the Judiciary into the functioning of other
branches; or the presence of potential special

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

11

factors that previous Bivens cases did not
consider.
Ziglar, 582 U.S. at 139–40. If the case does not
meaningfully differ from one of the three recognized Bivens
contexts, then the plaintiff has a Bivens remedy under that
precedent. Id. If the case does differ, then courts must
consider whether “there are special factors counselling
hesitation in the absence of affirmative action by Congress.”
Id. at 136 (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting
Carlson, 446 U.S. at 18). This second step focuses on
“whether the Judiciary is well suited, absent congressional
action or instruction, to consider and weigh the costs and
benefits of allowing a damages action to proceed.” Id.
“[E]ven one” step-two special factor is sufficient to
foreclose courts from extending a Bivens remedy in a new
context. Egbert, 596 U.S. at 496. Indeed, the second step will
resolve against a new Bivens remedy “in all but the most
unusual circumstances,” id. at 486, because “in most every
case,” Congress is better positioned to provide a damages
remedy, id. at 492. Because a distinguishing feature is likely
to implicate some “reason to think that Congress might be
better equipped to create a damages remedy” the two steps
“often resolve to [that] single question.” Id. at 492.
“Special factors” are therefore relevant at both steps, but
the term’s significance differs. At step one, special
differentiating factors that previous Bivens cases did not
consider can engender a new context. At step two, “special
factors counselling hesitation” in the absence of
congressional action foreclose extension of a Bivens remedy
to that new context.

12

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

B.
Schwartz’s claim arises from the same context presented
in Carlson. Schwartz’s case cannot be distinguished from
Carlson by the “meaningful differences” enumerated in
Ziglar or any other “special factor[] that previous Bivens
cases did not consider.” See Ziglar, 582 U.S. at 139–40. The
district court erred in finding the PLRA to be one such stepone special factor. While the PLRA did not create any new
causes of action against federal prison officials, neither did
it foreclose existing Bivens claims. Rather, Congress
intended the statute to govern such claims. See Ziglar, 582
U.S. at 148–49.
Tatad identifies several other features purportedly
distinguishing Schwartz’s case from Carlson, but none
suffices. First, she argues that the Bureau of Prisons’
Administrative Remedy Program (“ARP”), 28 C.F.R. § 542,
is a special factor at step one, but the ARP is only relevant at
step two. Second, she argues that certain factual features of
Schwartz’s claim engender a new context: the chronic nature
of his medical condition and the lesser severity of his
medical mistreatment. Tatad avers that these factual
questions also implicate Ziglar’s fourth and sixth
differentiating factors—the “extent of judicial guidance as to
how an officer should respond” and the “risk of disruptive
intrusion by the Judiciary into the functioning of other
branches.” But she provides little support for either
proposition. Ultimately, severity of the harm or misconduct
is not a “meaningful difference” distinguishing the context
of Schwartz’s claims from Carlson. We address Tatad’s
arguments in turn.

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

13

1. The PLRA
Sixteen years after Carlson, Congress passed the Prison
Litigation Reform Act, which imposed procedural
restrictions on prisoner lawsuits. See 42 U.S.C. § 1997e; 18
U.S.C. § 3626; 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g). The PLRA requires
administrative exhaustion, 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a), bars suits
for purely mental and emotional injuries, 42 U.S.C.
§ 1997e(e), requires indigent prisoners to pay filing fees in
full, 28 U.S.C. § 1915, excludes prisoners from in forma
pauperis status if they have previously filed three suits that
were dismissed for being frivolous, malicious, or for failure
to state a claim, 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g), and requires that any
injunctive relief concerning prison conditions be “narrowly
drawn,” 18 U.S.C. § 3626(a)(1)(A). Because the PLRA
addressed prisoner litigation without creating a damages
remedy against federal officials, Tatad argues that it
constitutes a “special factor that previous Bivens cases did
not consider” under Ziglar. The district court granted
Tatad’s motion for judgment on the pleadings on similar
grounds, reasoning that the Carlson court could not have
considered the PLRA because Congress adopted it after that
case was decided.
As Ziglar made clear, the PLRA may be relevant in
determining whether to extend Bivens to a new context at
step two, but it is not a special factor at step one. This is
because Congress intended the PLRA to govern Bivens
actions in existence at the time of its enactment, not to
abolish them. Ziglar, 582 U.S. at 149 (noting that the Court
“has said in dicta that the [PLRA’s] exhaustion provisions
would apply to Bivens suits” (citing Porter v. Nussle, 534

14

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

U.S. 516, 524 (2002))). 2 In fact, Ziglar noted that the
absence of a “standalone damages remedy against federal
jailers” in the PLRA represented Congress’s decision “not to
extend the Carlson damages remedy to cases involving other
types of prisoner mistreatment.” Id. at 149 (emphasis added).
Thus, the Court clearly implied that the PLRA
acknowledged and did not disturb the availability of a
damages remedy to address the same type of prisoner
mistreatment at issue in Carlson.
Our cases follow Ziglar in treating the PLRA as a special
factor only at step two. In Marquez v. C. Rodriguez, we held
that the PLRA counselled hesitation in extending Carlson to
a new Eighth Amendment context involving prison officials’
failure to protect the plaintiff from abuse by other prisoners.
81 F.4th 1027, 1033 (9th Cir. 2023). Likewise, in Chambers
v. C. Herrera, the PLRA counselled hesitation in extending
Carlson to an Eighth Amendment claim for failure to protect
the plaintiff from assaults by a prison official, although we
noted that the plaintiff may have been able to state a viable
claim for deliberate medical indifference that followed the
assaults. 78 F.4th 1100, 1106–07, 1108 (9th Cir. 2023).
Because the PLRA did not foreclose Carlson claims but was
instead intended to govern them, it is only relevant at step
two of the Bivens analysis.

2

Tatad’s contrary argument relies on the proposition that the PLRA
would have provided a damages remedy for Eighth Amendment medical
difference if Congress had deemed it appropriate. But first, the PLRA is
a procedural statute which neither created nor destroyed substantive
rights. See 42 U.S.C. § 1997e; 18 U.S.C. § 3626; 28 U.S.C. § 1915(g).
And second, providing prisoners with such a remedy through the PLRA
would have been unnecessary given that Carlson actions were already
available.

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

15

2. Administrative Remedy Program
The Bureau of Prisons’ (“BOP”) Administrative
Remedy Program, 28 C.F.R. § 542, is likewise not a “special
factor[] that previous Bivens cases did not consider,” capable
of distinguishing a new Bivens context at step one. Ziglar,
582 U.S. at 140. Step-one special factors are “meaningful”
differences that render a context “new.” Id. at 139. The ARP
is not a special factor at step one because it was in place
when Carlson was decided. See Administrative Remedy
Program, 44 Fed. Reg. 62,250 (Oct. 29, 1979) (to be codified
at 28 C.F.R. § 542); Carlson, 446 U.S. at 14. Moreover,
alternative remedies are not typically relevant at step one
where they do not distinguish the context of the violation,
but merely speak to the appropriateness of a judicial remedy.
The ARP is a four-step procedure for resolving prisoner
grievances. At the first step, the prisoner must raise his
grievance informally with a member of the institution’s staff.
28 C.F.R. § 542.13(a). If the informal process does not
resolve his grievance, he may escalate it formally, using
standardized forms which must be submitted and reviewed
within specified time periods. Id. §§ 542.14–542.18.3 Under
the PLRA, use of the ARP is a mandatory prerequisite to
filing suit in federal court. 42 U.S.C. § 1997e(a).
3

Specifically, the second step of the ARP requires the prisoner to submit
a form BP-9 to a designated staff member, within 20 days of the incident
giving rise to the grievance. 28 C.F.R. § 542.14(a),(c). If the prisoner is
unsatisfied with the warden’s response or receives no response within 20
days, then he has another 20 days to appeal to the appropriate BOP
Regional Director using form BP-10. Id. §§ 542.15, 542.18. If the
prisoner is unsatisfied with the Regional Director’s response or receives
no response within 30 days, he may seek a final review from the BOP’s
General Counsel by submitting a form BP-11 within 30 days. Id.
§§ 542.15, 542.18.

16

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

In Watanabe v. Derr, we held that the ARP did not create
a new context at step one in a Carlson action. 115 F.4th at
1043. In that case, the plaintiff alleged that BOP officials
were deliberately indifferent to his serious medical needs in
failing to treat adequately his bone-related injuries from a
prison fight. Id. at 1036–37. The district court found that “the
BOP’s administrative remedy program was not considered
by the Court in Carlson, and thus concluded that its
existence offered another reason that Watanabe’s claim
arises in a new context.” Id. at 1042 (internal quotations
omitted). We reversed, holding that “the existence of
alternative remedial structures does not render this case a
new context.” Id.
Watanabe’s holding is supported by the structure of the
two-step Bivens analysis laid out by Ziglar. First, Ziglar
instructs courts to evaluate whether a “case is different in a
meaningful way from previous Bivens cases” to determine
whether the context is “new.” 582 U.S. at 139. The final rule
creating the ARP was published and became effective in
October and November of 1979, while Carlson was decided
in 1980. See Administrative Remedy Program, 44 Fed. Reg.
62,250 (Oct. 29, 1979) (to be codified at 28 C.F.R. § 542).
Although the program has been amended since, those
changes did not alter its nature or basic mechanisms. See,
e.g., Administrative Remedy Program, 61 Fed. Reg. 88 (Jan.
2, 1996) (to be codified at 28 C.F.R. § 542). Because the
ARP was in place when Carlson was decided, it is not a
“meaningful difference” and does not create a “new” context
at step one.
Second, Ziglar’s two-step analysis gives alternative
remedies a greater role at step two. Step one focuses on the
alleged violation, examining the right violated, the
mechanism of injury, the identity of the federal official and

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

17

the guidance available to that official, and the factual and
legal context within which the alleged violation is
interpreted. See Ziglar, 582 U.S. at 139–40. Step two, by
contrast, focuses on remedies. In asking whether the
judiciary ought to provide a remedy, it considers whether
Congress or the Executive has already done so. See Egbert,
596 U.S. at 492–93. When the alleged violation can be
established and analyzed without reference to the alternative
remedial structure at issue, that structure has little import at
step one.
Harper v. Nedd illustrates this principle. 71 F.4th 1181
(9th Cir. 2023). In that case, we held that the alternative
remedies afforded by the Civil Service Reform Act
(“CSRA”) 4 made for a new Bivens context where the
plaintiff alleged that officials violated his right to due
process as they performed their duties in affording him those
remedies. See id. at 1187; see also id. at 1188 (noting that
Harper “alleged that Defendants took ‘ultra vires actions’
that ‘corrupted’ the CSRA process and violated his Fifth
Amendment rights”); id. at 1187 n.1 (noting that Harper
alleged “that Defendants conspired to deprive him of an
appeal to the [Merit Systems Protection Board]”). The
CSRA was therefore an alternative remedy uniquely relevant
at step one because it constituted a distinct “statutory or other
legal mandate under which the officer was operating.” Id. at

4

The CSRA is a comprehensive legal scheme governing federal
employment. See Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 (CSRA), Pub. L. 95454, 92 Stat. 1111 (1978) (codified in various sections of 5 U.S.C.); id.
§ 4303 (requiring detailed notice of and opportunities to challenge
adverse employment actions based on unacceptable performance); id.
§ 7501 (allowing an employee to be suspended without pay for 14 days,
as Harper was); id. §§ 7512, 7513(d), 7703(b)(1) (appeal procedures).

18

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

1187. The alternative remedy was an inextricable component
of the alleged due process violation.
By contrast, Schwartz complained of conduct entirely
separate from the administration of the ARP. Unlike in
Harper, the ARP played no role in the Eighth Amendment
violation Schwartz alleged. It is not then appropriately
considered at the first step of the Bivens analysis, which
focuses on the context of the alleged violation.
Consistent with Ziglar’s analytical structure, the
Supreme Court and this court have otherwise considered
alternative remedies only when deciding whether to extend
Bivens to a new context. See Watanabe, 115 F.4th at 1042
(noting that Egbert “clarified that the existence of alternative
remedial structures can be one ‘special factor,’ to be
considered at the second step of the Bivens analysis”). In
Ziglar, the Court laid out a comprehensive Bivens
framework without suggesting that alternative remedies,
such as the ARP, generally have a role at step one. See 582
U.S. at 136–37, 139–40. Ziglar consistently treated
alternative remedies as step-two special factors. For
instance, the Court stated that “the existence of alternative
remedies usually precludes a court from authorizing a Bivens
action,” referring to the step-two decision concerning
whether to extend Bivens into a new context. Id. at 148
(emphasis added).
In keeping with Ziglar, our cases are also uniform in
treating the ARP as a special factor only at step two. See,
e.g., Stanard v. Dy, 88 F.4th 811, 818 (9th Cir. 2023);
Chambers, 78 F.4th at 1106; Pettibone v. Russell, 59 F.4th
449, 456 (9th Cir. 2023); Mejia v. Miller, 61 F.4th 663, 669
(9th Cir. 2023); Vega v. United States, 881 F.3d 1146, 1154

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

19

(9th Cir. 2018); Lanuza v. Love, 899 F.3d 1019, 1032 (9th
Cir. 2018).
In sum, while alternative remedies may play a role at step
one in specific cases, the ARP does not distinguish a new
context here.
3. Severity of Injury and Misconduct
Tatad argues that factual differences concerning the
nature and severity of Schwartz’s medical needs create a
new context distinguishable from Carlson. She argues that
these differences constitute “special factors that previous
Bivens cases did not consider” and also implicate “the risk
of disruptive intrusion by the Judiciary into the functioning
of other branches” and the “extent of judicial guidance as to
how an officer should respond.”
Our precedents foreclose Tatad’s argument. For
instance, in Watanabe, the plaintiff was denied medical
treatment for over a year for severe pain resulting from a
fractured coccyx. 115 F.4th at 1042. Rejecting the
defendant’s arguments that Watanabe’s claims were
distinguishable from Carlson because his condition was not
life threatening, we held that “a plaintiff need not allege a
harm as severe as the one in Carlson . . . because the
underlying harm was still a failure to provide medical
attention evidencing deliberate indifference to serious
medical needs.” Id. at 1041–42 (cleaned up). We further
made clear that “even if [the plaintiff’s medical need] is not
technically life-threatening,” his Carlson claim could
proceed. Id. at 1042.
Similarly, in Stanard v. Dy, the plaintiff unsuccessfully
sought treatment for Hepatitis C (“HCV”) for months before
eventually receiving medication that rendered his HCV

20

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

undetectable. 88 F.4th at 814. We held that “even assuming
that Stanard received less deficient care than the inmate in
Carlson, that difference in degree is not a meaningful
difference giving rise to a new context.” Id. at 817. Rather,
“‘[a]long every dimension the Supreme Court has identified
as relevant to the inquiry,’ Stanard’s case is a ‘replay’ of
Carlson.” Id. (quoting Hicks v. Ferreyra, 965 F.3d 302, 311
(4th Cir. 2020)).
Finally, in Chambers v. C. Herrera, we held that an
incarcerated person who alleged deliberate medical
indifference resulting in a broken wrist and arm may be able
to bring a viable Carlson claim. See 78 F.4th at 1108
(holding that the plaintiff’s complaint alleged insufficient
factual detail to make out a medical indifference claim under
Carlson, but that it was possible that “more detailed factual
allegations could cure the deficiencies”).
In sum, in recent years we have thrice ruled that
deliberate indifference to chronic and non-life-threatening
conditions can support a Carlson action. In those cases, we
explicitly rejected arguments that the severity—of the
medical condition or the officers’ conduct—constituted a
meaningful difference under Ziglar’s framework for
analyzing Bivens claims. Schwartz’s medical condition,
which he alleges is life-threatening, cannot be the basis on
which to distinguish Carlson.
Asserting that Schwartz’s claimed injuries “pale in
comparison to [the Carlson plaintiff’s],” Tatad argues that
the chronic and less severe nature of Schwartz’s condition
“profoundly affects” the “costs and benefits” of affording a
Bivens action because chronic medical conditions are
“presumably more ‘common’ than life-threatening health
emergencies.” For that reason, she argues that the allegedly

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

21

lesser severity also implicates “the risk of disruptive
intrusion by the Judiciary into the functioning of other
branches.”
As a preliminary matter, Tatad offers no factual support
for the proposition that chronic conditions arise more
frequently such that allowing a Bivens remedy is “likely to
impose a significant expansion of government liability.”
And as Schwartz points out, “[c]ourts have been
adjudicating Carlson claims for years without any indication
that such suits have interfered with the orderly
administration of the prison system.”
Finally, Tatad’s argument that there is less judicial
guidance concerning non-emergent or chronic medical
issues is utterly unsupported. 5 In Carlson, the “judicial
guidance” available to the officers was the principle set out
in Estelle v. Gamble, 429 U.S. 97, 104 (1976), which
established that “deliberate indifference to serious medical
needs of prisoners” violates the Eighth Amendment. See
Carlson, 446 U.S. at 17 & n.3. In the intervening years since
Carlson, courts have only further developed that caselaw.
See, e.g., Jett v. Penner, 439 F.3d 1091 (9th Cir. 2006);
Colwell v. Bannister, 763 F.3d 1060 (9th Cir. 2014); Gordon
v. County of Orange, 888 F.3d 1118 (9th Cir. 2018).
“To conclude that a claim extends Carlson because it is
weaker than the claim in Carlson is to undermine Carlson
itself—the very thing the Supreme Court has asked us not to
do.” Waltermeyer v. Hazlewood, 136 F.4th 361, 371 (1st Cir.
2025) (Breyer, J., dissenting).

5

For one thing, the asthma that afflicted the Carlson plaintiff was a
chronic condition, although it became emergent.

22

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

4. Opportunity for Prospective Relief
Lastly, Tatad argues that the chronic, rather than
emergent, nature of Schwartz’s medical issues allowed him
to access prospective remedies that the Carlson decedent
could not, including the ARP and injunctive relief. In her
view, the different relationship between the harm and
remedy places Schwartz’s claims within a new context.
As noted above, this circuit has repeatedly upheld a
Carlson cause of action for individuals with chronic, nonemergent illnesses. The plaintiffs in Watanabe, who suffered
from a bone injury, and Stanard, who suffered from
Hepatitis C, had ample time to seek alternative remedies and
did so. Tatad’s argument is accordingly foreclosed by this
court’s precedents. Watanabe, 115 F.4th at 1042; Stanard,
88 F.4th at 814, 818. Moreover, this argument appears to
simply reframe Tatad’s earlier argument that newly
available remedies like the ARP can make for a new context
at step one. As discussed above, alternative remedies are
typically relevant at step two.
***
Schwartz’s claim involves the same officer rank,
institutional setting, judicial guidance, and governing legal
mandate as Carlson. His claim challenges the exact same
type of conduct: acts and omissions constituting improper
medical care resulting from alleged deliberate indifference
to serious—indeed, life-threatening—medical needs.
Because Schwartz’s claims arise in the same context as
Carlson, they are cognizable under Bivens. No step two
analysis is required.

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

23

IV.
In our prior decision in this case, we stated that on
remand Schwartz could seek leave to amend his complaint
with respect to Defendants Clay and Lamb. Schwartz, 787 F.
App’x at 409. In denying Schwartz leave to amend, the
district court abused its discretion by failing to sufficiently
support its decision under the analytical framework provided
by Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 15(a)(2) and Foman v.
Davis, 371 U.S. 178, 182 (1962).
Under Rule 15(a)(2), courts should freely give leave to
amend when justice so requires. Amendment should be
permitted unless the opposing party makes a showing of
“undue delay, bad faith . . . , undue prejudice . . . , [or] futility
of amendment.” Foman, 371 U.S. at 182. Courts should also
consider the number of times the plaintiff has already been
allowed to amend. Id. These factors are evaluated as a whole,
but the consideration of prejudice to the opposing party
carries the greatest weight and delay cannot be individually
decisive. DCD Programs, Ltd. v. Leighton, 833 F.2d 183,
185–86 (9th Cir. 1987); Eminence Cap., LLC v. Aspeon, Inc.,
316 F.3d 1048, 1052 (9th Cir. 2003). The standard governing
leave to amend is especially permissive where, as here, the
plaintiff is pro se. See Lopez v. Smith, 203 F.3d 1122, 1131
(9th Cir. 2000) (en banc).
If a district court denies a motion for leave to amend, the
record must “clearly indicate[] reasons for the district court’s
denial,” or the court must “provide written findings” of
“prejudice to the opposing party, bad faith by the moving
party, or futility of amendment.” DCD Programs, 833 F.2d
at 186–87. Where there are no adequate “written findings”
and no clear basis for denial in the record, denial of leave to
amend will be reversed. Id. at 186; Hurn v. Ret. Fund Tr. of

24

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

Plumbing, Heating & Piping Indus. of S. Cal., 648 F.2d
1252, 1254 (9th Cir. 1981). Here, while the district court’s
order cited undue delay, prejudice, and futility, it did not
provide any explanation to support those findings.
Nor does the record provide a clear basis for denial. In
Schwartz’s prior appeal, we held that Schwartz could seek
leave to amend his complaint against Clay and Lamb,
because “[t]here is at least some evidence in the record . . .
that Clay and Lamb knew of the violations alleged by
Schwartz and failed to act to prevent them.” Schwartz, 787
F. App’x at 409 (cleaned up). Schwartz appears to have
worked diligently to amend his complaint after we put him
on notice that he could do so. See id. at 408. Moreover, the
claims which Schwartz seeks to add would not “greatly
alter[] the nature of the litigation” or “require[] defendants
to [] undertake[], at a late hour, an entirely new course of
defense.” Morongo Band of Mission Indians v. Rose, 893
F.2d 1074, 1079 (9th Cir. 1990). Tatad’s strategy is unlikely
to be affected if Clay and Lamb rejoin her as codefendants.
And any relevant evidence is likely to be readily available
given that the litigation in this matter has been ongoing for
more than a decade.
Contrary to the district court’s ruling, Schwartz’s
proposed amended claims would not be barred by the statute
of limitations because the relation-back doctrine applies.
Under Rule 15(c), an amendment to a pleading can “relate[]
back to the date of the original pleading” when “the
amendment asserts a claim or defense that arose out of the
conduct, transaction, or occurrence set out—or attempted to
be set out—in the original pleading.” Fed. R. Civ. P.
15(c)(1)(B). Where those circumstances apply, relation back
is allowed as long as the defendants were on notice, Fed. R.
Civ. P. 15(c)(3), which may be imputed to someone who

SCHWARTZ V. MILLER

25

shares an attorney or an “identity of interest” with an existing
defendant in the case. Both conditions are likely satisfied
here because DOJ jointly represented the defendants 6 and
because Clay and Lamb share a close institutional
relationship with Tatad as her superiors at FCI-Tucson. See
Singletary v. Pa. Dept. of Corr., 266 F.3d 186, 195–96 (3d
Cir. 2001).
Conclusion
In concluding that the PLRA “has the effect of
destroying the Bivens remedy for Eighth Amendment claims
brought by federal prisoners,” the district court contradicted
decades of Supreme Court precedent confirming the validity
of Carlson after the enactment of the PLRA. See Ziglar, 582
U.S. at 131, 147–48; Minneci, 565 U.S. at 126; Malesko, 534
U.S. at 740; Egbert, 596 U.S. at 490–91. Our decisions have
also repeatedly and expressly affirmed Carlson, most
recently in Watanabe, 115 F.4th 1034. Schwartz’s claim
arises in the same context as Carlson, notwithstanding the
PLRA, ARP or factual features of his case, and may
therefore proceed under Bivens.
REVERSED.

6

The district court dismissed Clay and Lamb after its sua sponte review
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1915(a), before service was executed on the U.S.
Attorney’s Office. However, as Schwartz argues, it is unlikely that the
U.S. Attorney’s Office did not make Clay and Lamb aware of the
litigation, as they were named in the initial suit, described in the
complaint as having actual knowledge of the relevant events, and were
in a leadership position as the warden and associate warden of the prison
within which the events transpired.

