FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LYDIA GALVEZ,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.

No. 24-3569
D.C. No.
1:23-cv-03143EFS

FRANK BISIGNANO,
Commissioner of Social Security,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Washington
Edward F. Shea, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 20, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed September 10, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould, Richard C. Tallman, and
Morgan B. Christen, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Christen

2

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

SUMMARY*
Social Security
The panel vacated the district court’s order remanding to
the Social Security Administration Lydia Galvez’s claim for
disability insurance benefits for the period from 2008 to
2018 on the ground that the agency’s decision denying
benefits was tainted with a violation of the Appointments
Clause.
The district court held that the agency’s decision denying
Galvez benefits was tainted with an Appointments Clause
violation because the decision relied, in part, on a prior
opinion entered by an Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) who
had not been properly appointed.
The panel held that the new ALJ’s opinion, which
incorporated part of a prior, tainted opinion, was not tainted
by an Appointments Clause violation. Some similar, or even
identical, text in a subsequent decision is not automatically
disqualifying. A district court’s inquiry should focus on
whether the new decision reflects that the newly assigned
ALJ provided the independent assessment required by Cody
v. Kijakazi, 48 F.4th 956 (9th Cir. 2022). After reviewing
the opinion entered on remand by a newly assigned ALJ who
held additional hearings and heard additional testimony, the
panel concluded that the opinion reflected the newly
assigned ALJ’s independent view of the case. Accordingly,
the panel vacated the district court’s order and remanded to

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

3

the district court for consideration of the merits of Galvez’s
claim.

COUNSEL
D. James Tree (argued), Tree Law Office, Yakima,
Washington, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Sonia Carson (argued), Daniel Aguilar, and Joshua M.
Salzman, Attorneys, Appellate Staff; Brian M. Boynton,
Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General; Civil
Division, United States Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; Asim H. Modi, Special Assistant United States
Attorney; Joseph J. Langkamer, Assistant Regional Counsel;
Office of the General Counsel, Office of Program Litigation,
Social Security Administration, Baltimore, Maryland; Brian
M. Donovan, Assistant United States Attorney; Vanessa R.
Waldref, United States Attorney; Office of the United States
Attorney, United States Department of Justice, Spokane,
Washington; for Defendant-Appellant.

4

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

OPINION
CHRISTEN, Circuit Judge:
The Commissioner of the Social Security Administration
appeals a district court order remanding Lydia Galvez’s
claim for Social Security disability insurance benefits for the
period from 2008 to 2018. The court held that the agency’s
decision denying Galvez benefits was tainted with an
Appointments Clause violation because the decision relied,
in part, on a prior opinion entered by an Administrative Law
Judge who had not been properly appointed.
We have previously decided that the remedy for a Social
Security adjudication issued in violation of the
Appointments Clause is a de novo hearing held before a
different and properly appointed Administrative Law Judge
(ALJ). Cody v. Kijakazi, 48 F.4th 956, 961–63 (9th Cir.
2022). This case presents a related question of first
impression: is a new ALJ’s opinion tainted by an
Appointments Clause violation if it incorporates part of the
prior, tainted opinion? After closely reviewing the opinion
entered on remand by a newly assigned ALJ who held
additional hearings and heard additional testimony, we
conclude that it reflects the newly assigned judge’s
independent view of the case. Accordingly, we vacate the
district court’s order and remand to the district court for
consideration of the merits of Galvez’s claim.
I
A
Because this case arises in the wake of recent case law
addressing violations of the Appointments Clause, we first
describe the legal landscape.

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

5

In Lucia v. Securities and Exchange Commission, the
Supreme Court held that an ALJ who presided over a
Securities and Exchange Commission enforcement
proceeding qualified as an officer subject to the
Appointments Clause of the United States Constitution. 585
U.S. 237, 251 (2018). Because the ALJ had been appointed
by agency staff rather than by the Commission directly, the
Court concluded the ALJ had adjudicated Lucia’s case
“without the kind of appointment the [Appointments] Clause
requires.” Id. The Court went on to hold that the
“‘appropriate’ remedy for an adjudication tainted with an
appointments violation” is a new hearing before a different,
properly appointed official. Id. (quoting Ryder v. United
States, 515 U.S. 177, 183 (1995)).
In 2018, the Acting Commissioner of the Social Security
Administration responded to Lucia by preemptively
ratifying the appointments of all Social Security
Administration ALJs and approving “those appointments as
her own.” SSR 19-1p, 84 Fed. Reg. 9582, 9583 (Mar. 15,
2019). The Acting Commissioner anticipated challenges to
the ALJs’ pre-ratification decisions, and in 2019 the agency
announced that if a claimant timely raised an Appointments
Clause challenge to the agency, it would “either remand the
case to an ALJ other than the ALJ who issued the decision
under review, or issue its own new decision about the claim
covering the period before the date of the ALJ’s decision.”
Id.
The Supreme Court subsequently invalidated the
agency’s requirement that claimants exhaust their
Appointments Clause challenges at the administrative level
in Carr v. Saul, 593 U.S. 83, 88–96 (2021). In doing so, the
Supreme Court observed that ALJs are not “capable of
remedying any defects in their own appointments.” Id. at 94.

6

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

Thus, the Court held that claimants may raise Appointments
Clause challenges for the first time before the district court.
Id. at 95.
In Cody v. Kijakazi, we considered the appropriate
remedy where an improperly appointed Social Security
Administration ALJ denied a claim for disability benefits.
Cody’s claim was initially denied in 2017. 48 F.4th at 958–
59. He appealed in 2018 shortly after the Supreme Court
decided Lucia, but he did not raise an Appointments Clause
challenge. Id. at 959. On a different issue, the district court
remanded Cody’s claim for a new hearing and directed the
ALJ to consider certain evidence. Id. By the time the case
was back before the original ALJ, the Acting Commissioner
had ratified the ALJ’s appointment and, as the district court
directed, the ALJ held a new hearing. Id. The ALJ denied
Cody’s claim for a second time in 2019, and Cody appealed
again in 2020. This time, he raised an Appointments Clause
challenge.
Id.
The district court denied Cody’s
Appointments Clause challenge on the basis that the original
ALJ had been properly appointed by the time she entered her
2019 decision. Id. at 960. Cody then appealed to our court.
Id.
The government argued on appeal that Cody’s
Appointments Clause challenge was untimely because he
failed to raise it in his first appeal to the district court. Id. at
962. We disagreed, explaining that Cody’s second appeal
was his first opportunity to challenge the 2019 decision, and
therefore, his first chance to argue that the new decision was
tainted because it incorporated some of the 2017 decision.
Id. On the merits, we reasoned that remand for a new
hearing before the same ALJ did not cure the taint, even
though the Acting Commissioner had since ratified the
ALJ’s appointment. Id. at 962–63. Relying on Lucia, we

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

7

held that only upon “reassignment to a new, independent
ALJ [would] Cody receive a fresh look and ‘the new hearing
to which [he] is entitled.’” Id. at 962 (quoting Lucia, 585
U.S. at 251). We vacated the 2019 decision and remanded
for an independent adjudication. Id. at 963. In the years
since we issued Cody, district courts have disagreed about
how to apply its holding.
B
Turning to the facts before us, Lydia Galvez filed for
Social Security disability insurance benefits and
supplemental security income in 2011. Galvez claimed that
she had been disabled since 2008 due to a variety of medical
conditions, including fibromyalgia, chronic right shoulder
injuries, and chronic depression, which left her unable to
perform her prior work as a Certified Nurse Assistant. ALJ
Kennedy held a hearing in 2013 and concluded that Galvez
was not disabled because she retained the Residual
Functional Capacity (RFC) to perform light work. Galvez
appealed that decision to the district court and the district
court remanded to the agency in 2017 to further evaluate
Galvez’s fibromyalgia diagnosis. The court held that the
ALJ failed to consider the correct diagnostic criteria to
determine whether Galvez’s fibromyalgia was a severe
medically determinable impairment. The district court
discussed the inconsistencies between the opinion of Dr.
Wendy Eider, an examining rheumatologist who had
prepared a report finding multiple tender points consistent
with fibromyalgia, and the ALJ’s assessment of Galvez’s
fibromyalgia. The court concluded that remand was
appropriate because if the ALJ concluded that Galvez’s
fibromyalgia was a severe impairment, then a reweighing of
medical evidence and new RFC analysis would be
necessary.

8

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

On remand, Galvez’s case returned to ALJ Kennedy
after his appointment had been ratified in 2018. ALJ
Kennedy held another hearing and again ruled that Galvez
was not disabled. In his 2019 decision, ALJ Kennedy
“adopt[ed] and incorporate[ed]” his 2013 decision “to the
extent not inconsistent with the direction of the District
Court.” As the district court directed, ALJ Kennedy
assessed whether Galvez met the diagnostic criteria for
fibromyalgia and found that while Galvez had a severe
impairment of fibromyalgia, she still had the RFC to perform
light work. ALJ Kennedy weighed the four new written
expert opinions added to the record on remand, but he did
not discuss Dr. Eider’s earlier opinion.
After Galvez appealed again, the parties agreed to a
remand and in a stipulated order, the district court directed
the agency to conduct a de novo hearing, reconsider the
medical evidence, and weigh Dr. Eider’s opinion. The order
also directed the agency to reweigh the other expert opinions
and issue a new decision. On remand, the case was assigned
to a different ALJ, ALJ Meyers. The Appeals Council
explained its view that the 2019 decision did “not entirely
comply with the court’s remand order to further evaluate the
claimant’s fibromyalgia, as reweighing of the medical
evidence of record was not complete.”
ALJ Meyers held a hearing in January 2021 and
concluded that on January 1, 2019, Galvez became disabled
due to a new and severe left shoulder injury that was not part
of Galvez’s medical history when ALJ Kennedy entered his
2019 decision. Regarding Galvez’s claim for disability for
the period from 2008 through December 31, 2018, ALJ
Meyers concluded that Galvez was not disabled because she
retained the residual capacity to perform light work. Galvez
appealed this portion of ALJ Meyers’s decision. The

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

9

Appeals Council affirmed the ruling that Galvez became
disabled on January 1, 2019, but remanded to ALJ Meyers
to consider whether Galvez was disabled from 2008 to 2018.
The Council instructed ALJ Meyers to further clarify the
limiting impact of Galvez’s “severe” fibromyalgia on her
RFC and to address the report of Debra Titus, ARNP, which
expressed Titus’s opinion that Galvez could not meet the
demands of full-time sedentary work. This conflicted with
ALJ Meyers’s earlier conclusion regarding Galvez’s RFC.
In June 2022 and November 2022, ALJ Meyers
convened two additional evidentiary hearings. At the June
hearing, a new vocational expert testified, but Galvez was
not present. ALJ Meyers continued the hearing. At the
hearing held in November, Galvez and another new
vocational expert testified. ALJ Meyers issued a ruling in
December 2022 that again concluded Galvez was not
disabled during the period from November 16, 2008 through
December 31, 2018 and Galvez appealed a fourth time.
C
Back in the district court, Galvez advanced several
arguments, including that ALJ Meyers erred by relying on
portions of a decision tainted with an Appointments Clause
violation. The district court agreed. Citing Cody, the court
first determined that ALJ Kennedy’s 2019 decision was
tainted with the original Appointments Clause violation
because ALJ Kennedy first heard the case in 2013 before his
appointment had been ratified, and his 2019 opinion
incorporated his 2013 decision. The court next evaluated
ALJ Meyers’s 2022 decision and decided that it was also
tainted. The court reasoned that the 2022 decision was
tainted because it adopted and incorporated several pages of
findings from ALJ Kennedy’s 21-page 2019 decision,

10

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

particularly with respect to the evaluation of various expert
opinions addressing Galvez’s physical impairments. The
district court remanded Galvez’s claim to the agency for a
de novo hearing with a different ALJ. The government
timely appealed.
II
We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We
review de novo the legal conclusions in a district court’s
decision on a denial of Social Security disability benefits.
Cody, 48 F.4th at 960 (citation omitted).
III
The government argues the district court erred when it
ruled that ALJ Meyers’s 2022 decision remains tainted
because it incorporated portions of ALJ Kennedy’s 2019
decision, which incorporated the tainted 2013 decision by
reference. The government does not challenge the district
court’s determination that the 2013 and 2019 decisions were
issued in violation of the Appointments Clause.
We first observe that, although the district court relied on
Cody to rule that ALJ Meyers’s 2022 decision was not
independent of the 2019 decision, Cody addressed a readily
distinguishable scenario. In Cody, the same ALJ who had
adjudicated a claim without a constitutionally compliant
appointment, but whose appointment had since been ratified,
issued a decision on remand that incorporated, verbatim, key
portions of the opinion she issued before her appointment
was ratified. Id. at 962–63. Here, the challenged decision
was issued by an ALJ who was assigned to Galvez’s case on
remand after an Appointments Clause violation. There is no
challenge to ALJ Meyers’s appointment, and ALJ Meyers
conducted additional hearings and received additional

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

11

evidence. Thus, this case presents the opportunity to further
consider how to evaluate whether a different, newly
appointed ALJ took an “independent look” at a claim on
remand sufficient to cure an Appointments Clause violation.
The parties advance very divergent positions. The
government argues that Lucia requires only a new hearing
by a different ALJ. As long as that occurs, the government’s
view is that the Appointments Clause violation is remedied.
Galvez counters that this is not enough. Even when there
has been a new hearing with a different ALJ, Galvez argues
that if any text from a tainted opinion appears in the opinion
issued on remand, the subsequent decision remains tainted.
As noted, district courts in our circuit have taken
markedly different approaches when applying Cody to
similar sets of facts. In at least four cases, including
Galvez’s, district courts have concluded that subsequent
decisions issued by newly assigned ALJs were not
sufficiently independent. Relying on Cody’s discussion that
the decision issued on remand in that case “copied verbatim”
language from the tainted decision, 48 F.4th at 962, some
district courts have concluded that if a new decision
incorporates parts of the previous decision or uses similar
language, that decision is tainted with the prior
Appointments Clause violation. Brian B. v. Comm’r of Soc.
Sec., No. 3:23-CV-06075-TLF, 2024 WL 4356249, at *2–3
(W.D. Wash. Oct. 1, 2024); Navarre L. v. Comm’r of Soc.
Sec., No. 3:24-CV-5008-DWC, 2024 WL 3409381, at *3
(W.D. Wash. July 15, 2024); Lydia G. v. O’Malley, No.
1:23-CV-03143-EFS, 2024 WL 1556358, at *3 (E.D. Wash.
Apr. 10, 2024); Jennifer H. v. Comm’r of Soc. Sec., No. 2:22CV-1845-DWC, 2023 WL 6571418, at *3–4 (W.D. Wash.
Oct. 10, 2023). But in at least two cases, district courts have
concluded that a decision entered by a different ALJ,

12

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

coupled with a new hearing, fresh testimony, the opportunity
to present new evidence, or the opportunity to cross-examine
witnesses, resulted in an independent decision even though
the new decision reached the same conclusion and contained
some of the text from the original decision. James M. v.
Comm’r of Soc. Sec., No. C23-5067-SKV, 2023 WL
6823198, at *9–10 (W.D. Wash. Sep. 20, 2023), aff’d on
other grounds sub nom., McPhetridge v. Colvin, No. 233604, 2024 WL 5040993 (9th Cir. Dec. 9, 2024); Kimberly
D. v. Comm’r of Soc. Sec., No. C22-5588-BAT, 2023 WL
3001405, at *2 (W.D. Wash. Apr. 19, 2023).
Striking a middle ground between the two positions put
forth by the parties, we largely agree with the approach taken
by the latter group of district courts. Some similar, or even
identical, text in a subsequent decision is not automatically
disqualifying. Rather, a district court’s inquiry should focus
on whether the new decision as a whole reflects that the
newly assigned ALJ provided the independent assessment
that Cody requires. 48 F.4th at 963. As we explain, in some
cases, the process afforded to the claimant on remand will be
an important consideration. Here, we conclude that “in spite
of similarities and, in places, identical language” ALJ
Meyers’s 2022 decision satisfies Cody. James M., 2023 WL
6823198, at *9.
A
To determine what constitutes an appropriate remedy for
an adjudication tainted by an Appointments Clause
violation, we begin with Lucia. Lucia concluded that
remand to a new ALJ is necessary to vindicate violations of
the Appointments Clause because, without a different ALJ,
remand would give the original judge “no reason to think
[she] did anything wrong on the merits” and thus leave little

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

13

possibility of a different result in a second hearing. 585 U.S.
at 251, n.5. The Supreme Court explained that if ALJs were
free to reissue decisions entered pursuant to improper
appointments by merely reissuing them after follow-on
hearings, litigants would not be incentivized to pursue
Appointments Clause challenges and violations of the
Clause could go unchecked. Id. In Cody, our court
emphasized that “[a]n Appointments Clause violation is
. . . no mere technicality or quaint formality—it weakens our
constitutional design.” 48 F.4th at 960. This is because, as
Cody explained, the proper appointment of executive branch
officials connects them to the authority of the President and
therefore connects those officials to the President’s
accountability to the electorate. Id. Cody re-iterated the
importance of incentivizing claimants to raise Appointments
Clause challenges by providing a real remedy. Id. at 960–
61.
This rationale from controlling precedent defeats the
government’s strenuous argument that courts need look no
further than whether a second decision was issued by a
newly assigned and properly appointed ALJ to determine
whether an Appointments Clause violation has been
remedied. A different ALJ is necessary to cure such
violations, but it is not enough. Id. at 961–62. Litigants
whose claims are denied in adjudications issued in violation
of the Appointments Clause are entitled to a “fresh look” and
an independent decision by a properly appointed ALJ. Id. at
962.
That said, we are unpersuaded by Galvez’s argument,
which advances a rule that requires redundant effort that may
be unnecessary in many cases. Our view is closer to the one
expressed by the Sixth Circuit in Jones Bros., Inc. v.
Secretary of Labor, Mine Safety & Health Administration,

14

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

68 F.4th 289, 303 (6th Cir. 2023). Jones Brothers
considered a challenge to the independence of a decision
entered on remand by a newly assigned ALJ after an
Appointments Clause violation. Id. at 294–95. There, one
party argued that the subsequent decision should be deemed
tainted because the newly appointed ALJ had read the first
decision, and the new decision was consistent with the one
issued by the improperly appointed ALJ. Id. at 302–03. The
Sixth Circuit held that “an independent evaluation of the
merits does not require an ALJ to ignore all past
proceedings.” Id. at 303 (citation omitted). A contrary rule,
the court reasoned, would create “cumbersome, repetitive
processes throughout the executive branch simply to
produce findings and orders that would often be identical the
second time around.” Id.
In our view, it is inevitable that new decisions issued on
remand after Appointments Clause violations in Social
Security disability cases will overlap with the prior decisions
to some degree. The pre-remand procedural histories of
these cases will not vary, and the second ALJ will
undoubtedly consider the same treatment records and expert
opinions that existed pre-remand. Both ALJs will consider
the direct and cross-examination testimony offered at
hearings held by the prior ALJ. It is not a red flag that two
ALJs may find similar parts of the record to be relevant or
even dispositive, see id., and we see little utility in requiring
ALJs to re-write or re-phrase portions of a prior decision
solely to demonstrate their independence. Therefore, we
reject Galvez’s position that if any text from a tainted
opinion appears in the subsequent opinion, the court should
presume that an earlier Appointments Clause violation has
not been remedied.

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

15

To assess the independence of a decision issued under
the circumstances discussed here, district courts should first
verify that the new decision complies with Lucia’s
requirement that it be issued by a different ALJ. 585 U.S. at
251. Second, a de novo hearing on remand is required
because this will allow the opportunity for the newly
assigned ALJ to independently consider the credibility of the
claimant. In most cases, this will require providing the
claimant with an opportunity to appear and provide
additional testimony. 1 In some cases—like this one—a
newly assigned ALJ may have been directed to convene a
new hearing for the purpose of considering or reconsidering
specific evidence, including previously admitted evidence.
The specific procedures necessary to facilitate an
independent review will vary based on the posture of each
case and the subject matter. We do not suggest that it is
necessary for the parties to recreate the evidentiary record on
remand.
Where new evidence is admitted, a district court’s
review should consider the extent to which the process on
remand afforded an opportunity for the parties to present or
cross-examine additional witnesses, or to argue the
significance of the new evidence. District courts should also
consider whether the transcript of any de novo hearing
shows that the newly assigned ALJ was engaged in the
hearing by demonstrating familiarity with the record or
asking questions of her own.

1

The exception may be cases in which a video recording of the
claimant’s testimony is available, or if the claimant waives the
opportunity to appear and present testimony.
See 20 C.F.R.
§ 404.948(b).

16

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

Of course, consistent with Cody, district courts must be
alert to similar or identical language in the subsequent
opinion that may signal a lack of independence. See 48 F.4th
at 962. Where a side-by-side comparison shows that the new
opinion adopted some parts from the original, district courts
must analyze the passages carefully. Passages that recite
uncontested facts, such as a claimant’s employment or
educational history, are not likely to bear significantly on
independence. The same may be true of summaries of
witness testimony or even medical chronologies, particularly
if they pertain to issues that were not central to the parties’
dispute. The focus must be on the opinion as a whole, and
whether it demonstrates that a petitioner received the “fresh
look” that our precedent requires.
B
Applying this framework to Galvez’s case, we conclude
that ALJ Meyers’s 2022 decision was independent. Id.
First, ALJ Meyers was new to this case when it was
remanded in 2021, satisfying the first step of this analysis.
Second, consistent with directions issued by the district court
and the Appeals Council, ALJ Meyers held new hearings in
2021 and in 2022. Galvez testified at two of these hearings,
new vocational experts testified at all three hearings, and the
transcripts show that ALJ Meyers asked questions regarding
Galvez’s part-time work at a motel and her medical history.
Galvez had the opportunity to present new evidence on
remand, and ALJ Meyers had an opportunity to hear Galvez
testify and to evaluate her credibility for himself. As is often
the case in Social Security disability determinations,
Galvez’s credibility was an important part of assessing the
extent to which her medically determinable impairments
impede her RFC. James M., 2023 WL 6823198, at *10–11;
cf. Treichler v. Comm’r of Soc. Sec. Admin., 775 F.3d 1090,

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

17

1100 (9th Cir. 2014) (noting the importance of a hearing
officer’s assessment of credibility and fact-finding role in
ensuring consistent and fair Social Security disability
determinations). The new process afforded to Galvez, and
ALJ Meyers’s engagement in it, strongly indicate that ALJ
Meyers took a fresh look at this claim.
While ALJ Meyers ultimately agreed with ALJ
Kennedy’s determination that Galvez was not disabled from
2008 to 2018, ALJ Meyers’s 2022 decision included new
sections for material portions of the decision and reached
different intermediate conclusions. Perhaps most probative
of ALJ Meyers’s independence is an entirely new and
detailed summary of Galvez’s physical impairments,
including her spine complaints, orthopedic injuries, reports
of pain, and fibromyalgia diagnosis. The new description of
Galvez’s physical impairments demonstrates that ALJ
Meyers fully reviewed Galvez’s entire medical history and
treatment records. As ALJ Meyers noted, Galvez’s
“allegations primarily concern physical limitations” rather
than mental impairments, and therefore, his thorough
discussion of her physical impairments was critical.
In his 2022 opinion, ALJ Meyers evaluated two
additional expert opinions, including the opinion of Debra
Titus, ARNP, and Dr. Eider, that were not discussed in the
2019 decision. These witnesses opined on the impact that
Galvez’s fibromyalgia and pain levels had on her ability to
work, which was central to Galvez’s claims and a part of the
analysis the Appeals Council and district court consistently
found lacking. ALJ Meyers gave different weight to some
of the expert opinions that he and ALJ Kennedy both
addressed. For example, ALJ Meyers gave “some weight”
to the June 2013 opinion by Heather McClure, ARNP,
because he concluded that she was “not a medically

18

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

acceptable source.” ALJ Kennedy, by contrast, had given
McClure’s opinion concerning Galvez’s mental functions
“significant weight” in light of the fact that she regularly
treated Galvez. Similarly, ALJ Meyers gave “little weight”
to the psychological evaluation prepared by Tae Im Moon,
Ph.D., because this expert opinion appeared to be based on
Dr. Moon’s review of one medical record without an
examination of Galvez. ALJ Kennedy, by contrast, gave this
opinion “some weight” because it was “consistent with the
medical evidence of record.”
ALJ Meyers also arrived at a different RFC for Galvez
than ALJ Kennedy. He determined that she could lift 10
pounds occasionally rather than 20 pounds, reached a
different conclusion regarding the frequency with which she
could do certain physical activities, and specifically noted
her ability to have frequent contact with co-workers and the
public, which the 2019 decision had not addressed. In all,
the new analysis of Galvez’s physical impairments,
consideration of additional experts, new weights for
particular experts, and a new RFC all show that ALJ Meyers
applied his independent judgment to Galvez’s claim.
Galvez points to several sections of ALJ Meyers’s
decision that, in her estimation, demonstrate he did not take
an independent look at her claim. She provides a table in her
brief comparing ALJ Meyers’s 2022 decision to ALJ
Kennedy’s 2019 decision and argues that ALJ Meyers
incorporated portions of the 2019 decision. These quoted
sections fall into two general categories: (1) summaries of
historic facts, including Galvez’s work history and activities,
mental impairments, and previous hearing testimony; and
(2) summaries of expert opinions. After close review, we
conclude that these sections do not show a “sufficient
continuing taint arising from the [earlier] proceeding” such

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

19

that ALJ Meyers’s decision was not an independent, de novo
decision. Jones Bros., 68 F.4th at 303 (citation omitted).
The summaries of Galvez’s prior work history, activities,
and mental impairments reflect historical facts that did not
change after ALJ Kennedy’s 2019 decision. In Galvez’s
case, these facts are not contested nor are they central to her
primary complaint for disability insurance. Galvez’s
complaint is primarily focused on her physical limitations,
not her mental health concerns. We hesitate to require ALJs
to rewrite summaries of the historical record solely to
demonstrate independence.2
ALJ Meyers adopted and incorporated several of ALJ
Kennedy’s summaries of expert opinions, and these portions
of his opinion require a closer look. But as described, ALJ
Meyers independently analyzed the weight afforded to each
expert opinion and his assessment varied from ALJ
Kennedy’s for several experts. Where the ALJs did agree on
the weight to be given to expert reports, disagreement would
have been surprising. For example, both ALJs gave “no
weight to . . . McClure’s statements regarding pain as she did
not conduct any physical examinations and relied solely on
claimant’s report of physical symptoms.” And both ALJs
gave “little weight” or “little to no weight” to opinions issued
by experts who did not perform physical examinations or
longitudinally review Galvez’s conditions. See 20 C.F.R.
§ 404.1527(c)(1), (2) (requiring, for claims filed before
2

This determination is context specific. For example, in a case where
the claimant’s chief complaint for disability is based on mental
impairments, a verbatim recitation of a claimant’s mental health history
may indicate a lack of independent review. The inquiry should focus on
whether the written decision reflects whether the ALJ applied her
independent reasoning to the specific claim before her.

20

GALVEZ V. BISIGNANO

March 27, 2017, that generally, more weight must be given
to examining physicians’ opinions if they had a long-term
treatment relationship with claimants). While we leave the
merits of Galvez’s challenge to the district court, we note
that the similar or even identical conclusions the two ALJs
reached on these expert opinions do not establish that ALJ
Meyers failed to independently consider Galvez’s claim.
See Jones Bros., 68 F.4th at 303.
Having considered ALJ Meyers’s 2022 opinion as a
whole, the process afforded to Galvez on remand, and the
extent to which the 2022 opinion reflects ALJ Meyers’s
independent reasons for reaching the conclusions he
reached, we conclude that ALJ Meyers took the required
fresh look at Galvez’s claim.
We reverse the district court’s conclusion that ALJ
Meyers’s 2022 decision was tainted with a continuing
Appointments Clause violation. We remand for the district
court to consider Galvez’s substantive challenges to ALJ
Meyers’s 2022 decision.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

