FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
KYLE HANDLEY,

No. 24-499

Petitioner - Appellant,
v.
SEAN MOORE,
Respondent - Appellee.

D.C. No.
8:22-cv-01423MCS-GJS

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Mark C. Scarsi, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 7, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed July 29, 2025
Before: Gabriel P. Sanchez and Holly A. Thomas, Circuit
Judges, and James Donato, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge H.A. Thomas;
Dissent by Judge Donato
The Honorable James Donato, United States District Judge for the
Northern District of California, sitting by designation.

*

2

HANDLEY V. MOORE

SUMMARY **
Habeas Corpus
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of Kyle
Handley’s federal habeas petition challenging his conviction
and sentence on two counts of kidnapping for ransom in
violation of California Penal Code section 209(a).
Section 209(a) provides for a sentence of life without
possibility of parole if a victim of the kidnapping “suffers
death or bodily harm, or is intentionally confined in a
manner which exposes that person to a substantial likelihood
of death.” The statute otherwise provides for a sentence of
life with the possibility of parole. The information filed in
Handley’s case did not specifically allege that his victims
suffered bodily harm or were confined in a manner that
exposed them to a substantial likelihood of death. But
during trial, Handley consented to jury instructions and a
verdict form requiring special findings on those allegations
and, following conviction, the state trial court sentenced him
to life without parole.
On direct appeal, the California Court of Appeal rejected
Handley’s claim that the jury’s findings on those special
allegations, as well as his sentence, must be reversed because
he was never formally charged with those allegations. The
state court held that the Constitution does not require an
information to charge punishment-enhancing facts—facts
that serve only to increase the prescribed punishment to
which a defendant is exposed. In the alternative, the state
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

HANDLEY V. MOORE

3

court held that Handley was afforded constitutionally
sufficient notice of the special allegations through informal
amendment of the information because he received notice of
and consented to those allegations during a jury instruction
conference at trial.
Handley’s federal habeas petition alleged the denial of
his Sixth Amendment right to be informed of the nature and
cause of the accusation. He argued that he lacked adequate
notice of the special allegations because they were omitted
from the written information. The district court denied the
petition.
The panel held that at the time of the California Court of
Appeal’s decision, it was not clearly established that the
Sixth Amendment requires state charging documents to
allege punishment-enhancing facts such as the special
allegations at issue here. Nor was it clearly established that
the notice required by the Sixth Amendment must be
provided by the written information itself and that it cannot
be provided through informal amendment of the
information. The record accordingly does not support
Handley’s contention that the state court’s decision was
“contrary to” clearly established federal law as required for
relief under 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1).
The panel rejected Handley’s contention that the state
court’s factual findings regarding informal amendment of
the information were objectively unreasonable under 28
U.S.C. § 2254(d)(2). The state court reasonably found that
Handley received notice of and consented to the special
allegations during the jury instruction conference.
The panel also rejected Handley’s contention that the
state court’s decision was “contrary to” clearly established
federal law because he was never expressly informed that the

4

HANDLEY V. MOORE

special allegations exposed him to a sentence of life without
parole. Handley was informed of the special allegations, and
section 209(a) itself states that the punishment triggered by
a jury’s true findings on those allegations is life without the
possibility of parole.
District Judge Donato dissented. He wrote that
§ 2254(d)(1) is satisfied because the California Court of
Appeal’s core conclusion—that section 209(a) may properly
be understood to state a single offense for purposes of the
Sixth Amendment—was the fruit of an objectively
unreasonable application of Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530
U.S. 466 (2000), and Alleyne v. United States, 570 U.S. 99
(2013). He wrote that the California Court of Appeal also
unreasonably applied Supreme Court precedent when it
determined that Handley was given constitutionally
adequate notice of the aggravated kidnapping for ransom
charge in a whirlwind of jury instruction conferences at the
tail end of his prosecution. Judge Donato would reverse and
remand with instructions to issue a conditional writ of
habeas corpus directing vacatur unless Handley is retried
within 60 days.

COUNSEL
Cliff Gardner (argued) and Daniel J. Buffington, Law
Offices of Cliff Gardner, Berkeley, California, for
Petitioner-Appellant.
Warren J. Williams (argued), Deputy Assistant Attorney
General, Division of Medi-Cal Fraud and Elder Abuse;
Christopher P. Beesley, Supervising Deputy Attorney
General; Charles C. Ragland, Senior Assistant Attorney

HANDLEY V. MOORE

5

General; Lance E. Winters, Chief Assistant Attorney
General; Rob Bonta, Attorney General of California; Office
of the Attorney General, San Diego, California; for
Respondent-Appellee.

OPINION
H.A. THOMAS, Circuit Judge:
Kyle Handley was charged with two counts of
kidnapping for ransom in violation of California Penal Code
section 209(a). Section 209(a) provides for a sentence of life
without possibility of parole if a victim of the kidnapping
“suffers death or bodily harm, or is intentionally confined in
a manner which exposes that person to a substantial
likelihood of death.” Cal. Penal Code § 209(a) (2012). 1 The
statute otherwise provides for a sentence of life with the
possibility of parole. Id. The information filed in Handley’s
case did not specifically allege that his victims suffered
bodily harm or were confined in a manner that exposed them
to a substantial likelihood of death. But during trial, Handley
consented to jury instructions and a verdict form requiring
special findings on those allegations and, following
conviction, the state trial court sentenced him to life without
parole.
On direct appeal, the California Court of Appeal rejected
Handley’s claim that the jury’s findings on those special
allegations, as well as his sentence, must be reversed because
he was never formally charged with those allegations.
We rely on the version of the California Penal Code in effect when the
crimes were committed.

1

6

HANDLEY V. MOORE

People v. Handley (Handley II), No. G056608, 2021 WL
1138353, at *4–12 (Cal. Ct. App. Mar. 25, 2021). The state
court held that the Constitution does not require an
information to charge punishment-enhancing facts—facts
that serve only to increase the prescribed punishment to
which a defendant is exposed. Id. at *5–9. In the alternative,
the state court held that Handley was afforded
constitutionally sufficient notice of the special allegations
through informal amendment of the information because he
received notice of and consented to those allegations during
a jury instruction conference that took place at trial. Id. at
*9–12.
Handley subsequently filed a federal habeas petition
alleging the denial of his Sixth Amendment right “to be
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation.” U.S.
Const. amend. VI. He argues that he lacked adequate notice
of the special allegations because they were omitted from the
written information. The district court denied Handley’s
habeas petition. We now affirm.
At the time of the California Court of Appeal’s decision,
it was not clearly established that the Sixth Amendment
requires state charging documents to allege punishmentenhancing facts such as the special allegations at issue here.
Nor was it clearly established that the notice required by the
Sixth Amendment must be provided by the written
information itself and that it cannot be provided through
informal amendment of the information. The record
accordingly does not support Handley’s contention that the
state court’s decision was “contrary to” clearly established
federal law under 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1). We also reject
Handley’s contention that the state court’s factual findings
regarding informal amendment of the information were
objectively unreasonable under § 2254(d)(2). The state court

HANDLEY V. MOORE

7

reasonably found that Handley received notice of and
consented to the special allegations during the jury
instruction conference. Finally, we reject Handley’s
contention that the state court’s decision was “contrary to”
clearly established federal law because he was never
expressly informed that the special allegations exposed him
to a sentence of life without parole. Handley was informed
of the special allegations, and section 209(a) itself states that
the punishment triggered by a jury’s true findings on those
allegations is life without the possibility of parole. Handley
does not point to any Supreme Court decision requiring more
explicit notice of the prescribed punishment.
I
In 2012, Michael S. and Mary B. were asleep in their
Newport Beach, California, home when they were awakened
at gunpoint, tied up, gagged, and blindfolded by three
intruders. Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *1–2. The men
demanded $1 million from Michael, and when he told them
he did not have that kind of money, they carried him and
Mary to a van outside and drove to the Mojave Desert, where
the men believed Michael had buried cash. Id. at *2. Along
the way, one man drove the van while the other two stomped
Michael with their boots, beat him with a rubber hose,
shocked him with a taser, and burned him with a blowtorch.
Id. “All told, the tasering, burning and beating went on for
about two and a half hours before the van finally pulled over
on a deserted road out near Rosamond.” Id. “Michael and
Mary were still tied up and blindfolded when the men carried
them out of the van and put them down on the desert sand.”
Id. Eventually, the men gave up on finding the money, cut
off Michael’s penis, doused him with bleach, and drove off
in the van, leaving Michael and Mary behind. Id. Michael

8

HANDLEY V. MOORE

and Mary survived, and the police ultimately identified
Handley as one of the kidnappers. Id. at *2–3.
The Orange County District Attorney filed a five-count
criminal complaint against Handley in October 2012. The
complaint charged Handley with two counts of kidnapping
for ransom, a form of aggravated kidnapping, in violation of
California Penal Code section 209(a); one count of
aggravated mayhem, in violation of Penal Code section 205;
one count of torture, in violation of Penal Code section 206;
and one count of first-degree residential burglary, in
violation of Penal Code sections 459 and 460(a). In
connection with the torture count, the complaint also
charged an enhancement under Penal Code section
12022.7(a), alleging that Handley “personally inflicted great
bodily injury” on Michael. 2
In October 2014, the prosecution filed a motion to
consolidate Handley’s case with the case against another
defendant. The prosecution noted in its moving papers that
“[t]he penalty if convicted is life without parole.”
In March 2015, the prosecution filed an information
against Handley and a codefendant. 3 The information, which
Under section 12022.7(a), “[a]ny person who personally inflicts great
bodily injury on any person other than an accomplice in the commission
of a felony or attempted felony shall be punished by an additional and
consecutive term of imprisonment in the state prison for three years.”
Cal. Penal Code § 12022.7(a) (2012).

2

3
The California Constitution “authorizes prosecution of a felony by
information ‘after examination and commitment by a magistrate.’” 4
B.E. Witkin, Cal. Crim. Law, Pretrial § 171 (5th ed. 2024) (quoting Cal.
Const. art. I, § 14). “Before an information is filed there must be a
preliminary examination of the case against the defendant and an order

HANDLEY V. MOORE

9

superseded the October 2012 complaint, included the same
charges as the complaint, including two counts of
kidnapping for ransom under Penal Code section 209(a). 4 At
the time, section 209(a) stated as follows:
Any person who seizes, confines, inveigles,
entices, decoys, abducts, conceals, kidnaps or
carries away another person by any means
whatsoever with intent to hold or detain, or
who holds or detains, that person for ransom,
reward or to commit extortion or to exact
from another person any money or valuable
thing, or any person who aids or abets any
such act, is guilty of a felony, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by
imprisonment in the state prison for life
without possibility of parole in cases in which
any person subjected to any such act suffers
death or bodily harm, or is intentionally
confined in a manner which exposes that
person to a substantial likelihood of death, or
shall be punished by imprisonment in the
holding the defendant to answer. The proceeding (commonly called a
‘preliminary hearing’) must be commenced by a written complaint.” Id.
“In contrast, a charge of a felony by indictment may only be made after
an inquiry and determination by a grand jury.” Id. “[A] preliminary
hearing is not required where the defendant has been indicted.” People
v. Superior Ct. (Persons), 128 Cal. Rptr. 314, 315 (Ct. App. 1976). “[A]
district attorney is free to use either of the two vehicles”—indictment or
information—“to bring a defendant to trial.” People v. Schlosser, 144
Cal. Rptr. 57, 58 (Ct. App. 1978).
Only the first four counts ultimately went to the jury. The prosecution
dropped the burglary count during voir dire and the section 12022.7(a)
enhancement during trial.

4

10

HANDLEY V. MOORE

state prison for life with the possibility of
parole in cases where no such person suffers
death or bodily harm.
Cal. Penal Code § 209(a) (2012).
The penalties under this provision depend on the
circumstances of the offense. The baseline penalty for
violating section 209(a) is “imprisonment in the state prison
for life with the possibility of parole.” Id. But a penalty of
“life without possibility of parole” applies when a victim of
the kidnapping “suffers death or bodily harm, or is
intentionally confined in a manner which exposes that
person to a substantial likelihood of death.” Id. In Handley’s
case, neither the complaint nor the information specifically
alleged that either victim suffered bodily harm or was
intentionally confined in a manner exposing that person to a
substantial likelihood of death. Nor did the complaint or
information indicate whether the prosecution was seeking a
sentence of life without possibility of parole. 5
5

The information alleged:
COUNT 1: On or about October 02, 2012, in violation
of Section 209(a) of the Penal Code (KIDNAPPING
FOR RANSOM), a FELONY, KYLE SHIRAKAWA
HANDLEY and HOSSEIN NAYERI, who had the
intent to hold and detain, did unlawfully seize, confine,
inveigle, entice, decoy, abduct, conceal, kidnap, carry
away, hold, and detain JOHN DOE for ransom,
reward, extortion, and to exact from another person
money and other valuable things.
COUNT 2: On or about October 02, 2012, in violation
of Section 209(a) of the Penal Code (KIDNAPPING
FOR RANSOM), a FELONY, KYLE SHIRAKAWA

HANDLEY V. MOORE

11

Handley’s separate trial began in December 2017. At
trial, Handley “did not present any evidence in his defense,
nor did he dispute the prosecution’s portrayal of Michael and
Mary as the victims of a brutal kidnapping scheme. Rather,
he claimed there was insufficient evidence tying him to that
scheme.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *4.
At the time of Handley’s trial, California’s pattern jury
instruction for Penal Code section 209(a), CALCRIM No.
1202, required the following instruction to be given “[i]f the
prosecution alleges that the kidnapping resulted in death or
bodily harm, or exposed the victim to a substantial likelihood
of death”:
If you find the defendant guilty of kidnapping
for (ransom [,]/ [or] reward[,]/ [or] extortion),
you must then decide whether the People
have proved the additional allegation that the
defendant (caused the kidnapped person to
(die/suffer bodily harm)/ [or] intentionally
confined the kidnapped person in a way that
created a substantial likelihood of death).
Jud. Council of Cal., Crim. Jury Instructions (CALCRIM),
No. 1202, at 953–54 (2017) (brackets in original).
During a jury instruction conference held on December
21, 2017, the state trial court asked defense counsel whether
he had any objection to the court instructing the jury on
HANDLEY and HOSSEIN NAYERI, who had the
intent to hold and detain, did unlawfully seize, confine,
inveigle, entice, decoy, abduct, conceal, kidnap, carry
away, hold, and detain JANE DOE for ransom, reward,
extortion, and to exact from another person money and
other valuable things.

12

HANDLEY V. MOORE

California’s pattern jury instruction for Penal Code section
209(a). Defense counsel stated that he had no objection.
Counsel “also informed the court he was not requesting
instructions on any lesser included offenses to aggravated
kidnapping. Since his theory of the case was that [Handley]
was not actually involved in the alleged kidnappings, he felt
there was no need for any such instructions, and [Handley]
said he agreed with that decision.” Handley II, 2021 WL
1138353, at *5.
At a second conference held on January 3, 2018, the trial
court informed the parties that it had prepared jury
instructions on the section 209(a) counts—Counts 1 and 2—
“asking the jury to make findings on both the substantive
crime and then whether or not that crime, if committed, great
bodily injury was inflicted.” The court stated that, “[t]he way
that the CALCRIMS read, it should be a special finding, but
it’s not technically a sentencing enhancement and the like.” 6
The court misspoke by referring to “great bodily injury” rather than
“bodily harm.” While enhancement under section 12022.7(a) requires
“great bodily injury,” special allegations under section 209(a) require
either “bodily harm” or intentional confinement in a manner which
exposes the victim to a substantial likelihood of death. Cal. Penal Code
§ 209(a) (2012).

6

By contrast, the court did not misspeak by pointing out that special
allegations under section 209(a) are not sentencing enhancements. See
People v. Jones, 213 P.3d 997, 1004 (Cal. 2009) (“Unlike an
enhancement, which provides for an additional term of imprisonment, [a
penalty provision] sets forth an alternate penalty for the underlying
felony itself, when the jury has determined that the defendant has
satisfied the conditions specified in the statute.” (alteration in original)
(quoting People v. Jefferson, 980 P.2d 441, 451 (Cal. 1999))); 3 B.E.
Witkin, Cal. Crim. L., Punishment § 393 (5th ed. 2024) (“An
enhancement is an additional term of imprisonment added to the base

HANDLEY V. MOORE

13

After informing the parties that it was “preparing to instruct
consistent with what I have just said,” the court asked, “Is
there any objection by the defense? There was not when we
went over jury instructions.” Defense counsel responded that
there was no objection.
One of the prosecutors then clarified that the prosecution
was seeking different special findings with respect to the two
victims—bodily harm with respect to Michael and
confinement exposing the victim to a substantial likelihood
of death with respect to Mary. The court asked defense
counsel whether he had any objection to the prosecution
proceeding under that theory, and defense counsel stated that
he had no objection.
“During closing arguments, the prosecutor argued there
was ample evidence to support those allegations, and
defense counsel did not disagree. Defense counsel instead
took the position that [Handley] had nothing to do with the
kidnapping plan that led to Michael suffering bodily harm
and Mary being exposed to a substantial likelihood of
death.” Id. at *6. Defense counsel “voiced no objection when
the prosecutor argued those allegations.” Id. at *11.
On January 4, 2018, the jury returned verdicts of guilty
on all four counts, including the two kidnapping counts
under section 209(a). On Count 1, the jury also made a
special finding that Michael “suffered bodily harm” during
the course of the kidnapping. On Count 2, the jury made a
special finding that Mary “was intentionally confined in a
manner that exposed her to a substantial likelihood of death.”
term. . . . An aggravating circumstance that is relied on to impose the
upper term is not an enhancement. Rather, it is a factor that is used in
determining the base term to which enhancements are added.”).

14

HANDLEY V. MOORE

Defense counsel voiced no objection to these special
findings. Id.
As noted by the state court, in his sentencing brief,
defense counsel fully acknowledged . . . that
[Handley] was facing a potential sentence of
LWOP based on those findings. Defense
counsel made the argument that imposition of
an LWOP sentence would be cruel and
unusual under the Eighth Amendment, but—
to his credit—he never so much as suggested
that an LWOP sentence was improper on due
process grounds for lack of notice. Nor did he
ever suggest that [Handley’s] plea decisions
or trial strategy were impacted by the manner
in which the case was charged. There would
have been no support for either argument.
Id. 7 The trial court rejected Handley’s cruel-and-unusualpunishment argument and sentenced Handley to life
imprisonment without the possibility of parole on each of the
kidnapping counts.
On direct appeal, Handley argued for the first time that
the jury’s findings on the special allegations and his lifewithout-parole sentence violated his constitutional right to
notice of the charges against him because the special
allegations were not charged in the written information. In
January 2020, the California Court of Appeal rejected that
claim. See People v. Handley (Handley I), No. G056608,
Handley actually claimed cruel and unusual punishment under the
California Constitution, not the Eighth Amendment. The distinction has
no bearing on the issues presented in this appeal.

7

HANDLEY V. MOORE

15

2020 WL 58048 (Cal. Ct. App. Jan. 6, 2020). The California
Supreme Court subsequently granted review of that decision
and returned the case to the court of appeal with directions
to vacate Handley I and reconsider Handley’s notice claim
in light of People v. Anderson, 470 P.3d 2 (Cal. 2020). In
March 2021, the court of appeal issued a superseding
decision rejecting Handley’s notice claim on two
independent grounds. Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *4–
12.
First, the state court concluded that Handley received
constitutionally sufficient notice of the special allegations
and his exposure to a sentence of life without possibility of
parole because the March 2015 information cited Penal Code
section 209(a). Id. at *8. The court concluded that this
citation alone was sufficient to place Handley on notice of
the charges because section 209(a) “plainly states that if the
victim of an aggravated kidnapping dies, suffers bodily harm
or is exposed to a substantial likelihood of death, the
defendant must be sentenced to LWOP.” Id.
In reaching this conclusion, the court relied on the
California Supreme Court’s decision in People v. Britton, 56
P.2d 494 (Cal. 1936). Id. at *8–9. In that case, which
involved an earlier version of section 209, the defendant
argued that the trial court was “without authority to sentence
him ‘without possibility of parole’ because the indictment
contains no allegation that in the course of the commission
of the crime of kidnaping for the purpose of robbery to which
he entered his plea, the victim thereof suffered ‘bodily
harm.’” People v. Britton, 56 P.2d at 495. The state supreme
court disagreed:
Section 209 of the Penal Code, as amended,
for the purpose of this case, defines but one

16

HANDLEY V. MOORE

criminal act or offense, viz., kidnaping for
purpose of robbery, for which any one of
several punishments may be imposed,
depending entirely upon the circumstances
surrounding its commission. A charge in the
language of the statute that the accused had
kidnaped his victim for the purpose of
robbery in violation of the statute apprises the
accused of what he will be expected to meet
and of the several punishments prescribed
therefor, any one of which, upon conviction,
may be imposed upon him. The indictment
here involved charged the offense in the
language of the statute and referred thereto.
It is well settled in this state that an
indictment or information need not allege the
particular mode or means employed in the
commission of an offense, except when of the
essence thereof. In other words, particulars as
to manner, means, place, or circumstances
need not in general be added to the statutory
definition. The indictment or information
need only charge the essential elements of the
statutory offense. It then fairly apprises the
defendant of what he is to meet at the trial.
So far as the present case is concerned, the
essence of the offense denounced in section
209, as amended, as a felony is the seizing,
confining, kidnaping, etc., of the victim for
the purpose of robbery. If upon the trial of
such offense, or upon plea of guilty, it
develops that the victim suffered bodily
harm, the jury or the court, as the case may

HANDLEY V. MOORE

17

be, may in its discretion fix the punishment at
death or life imprisonment without
possibility of parole or, should the victim not
have suffered bodily harm, life imprisonment
with possibility of parole is prescribed as
punishment.
Id. at 496 (citations omitted).
After noting that People v. Britton was controlling in
Handley’s case, the court of appeal rejected Handley’s
contention that People v. Britton had been “overruled sub
silentio by the United States Supreme Court’s decision in
Apprendi v. New Jersey (2000) 530 U.S. 466 (Apprendi) and
its progeny.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *8. Relying
on post-Apprendi California Supreme Court decisions, the
court reasoned that “Apprendi was not a notice case” but
instead “considered whether the rights to trial by jury and
proof beyond a reasonable doubt extend to facts that can be
used to enhance a defendant’s punishment above the
statutory maximum.” Id. at *8–9 (citing People v. Contreras,
314 P.3d 450, 470 (Cal. 2013); People v. Houston, 281 P.3d
799, 829 (Cal. 2012); People v. Famalaro, 253 P.3d 1185,
1211 (Cal. 2011)).
Second, even assuming People v. Britton were not
controlling, the court of appeal concluded that reversal was
unwarranted because Handley received constitutionally
sufficient notice of the special allegations—and his potential
sentence of life without parole—through informal
amendment of the information. Id. at *9. The court explained
that under California’s informal amendment doctrine, “due
process will be deemed satisfied if the record, considered as
whole, shows the defendant received adequate notice of the
prosecution’s intent to charge him with a particular crime or

18

HANDLEY V. MOORE

enhancement, and the defendant, by word or conduct,
acquiesced to the charge.” Id. at *10. The court concluded
that Handley received adequate notice of the special
allegations at the January 3 jury instruction conference and
that Handley consented to those charges when the trial court
asked defense counsel whether he objected to the allegations
and defense counsel stated repeatedly that he did not. Id. at
*11. The court of appeal therefore concluded that “the
conditions for an informal amendment of the charges have
been met” and that Handley “was afforded sufficient notice
of the charges.” Id.
The court of appeal acknowledged that Handley “was
never expressly informed he could be sentenced to LWOP if
the jury found the special allegations true.” Id. at *12. But
the court concluded that Handley received adequate notice
because “once the aggravated kidnapping charges were
informally amended to include allegations of bodily harm
and substantial likelihood of death, [Handley] was
sufficiently apprised of this possibility.” Id. The court
affirmed the judgment, id. at *17, and the California
Supreme Court denied review without comment.
Handley subsequently filed a federal habeas petition
under 28 U.S.C. § 2254, arguing that his kidnapping
convictions and sentences violated his Sixth Amendment
right to notice of the charges against him. The district court
denied the petition. The court concluded that habeas relief
was barred under § 2254(d) because clearly established
federal law did not require the special allegations to be
charged in the information. In the alternative, assuming
arguendo that § 2254(d) was satisfied and that Handley’s
Sixth Amendment rights were violated, the court concluded
that Handley failed to “demonstrate[] that any constitutional
error was structural or resulted in any prejudice to his

HANDLEY V. MOORE

19

defense” under Brecht v. Abrahamson, 507 U.S. 619 (1993).
The district court dismissed Handley’s petition with
prejudice. Handley timely appealed.
II
“We review de novo a district court’s decision to grant
or deny a writ of habeas corpus.” Kipp v. Davis, 971 F.3d
939, 948 (9th Cir. 2020). Because Handley’s petition was
filed after April 24, 1996, our review is governed by the
Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996
(AEDPA). Marks v. Davis, 106 F.4th 941, 948 (9th Cir.
2024). Under AEDPA, federal habeas relief may not be
granted unless the state court’s adjudication of a claim
“(1) resulted in a decision that was contrary to, or involved
an unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal
law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the United
States; or (2) resulted in a decision that was based on an
unreasonable determination of the facts in light of the
evidence presented in the State court proceeding.” 28 U.S.C.
§ 2254(d). “A petitioner who satisfies § 2254(d)(1) or (d)(2)
is entitled to de novo review of the merits of the claim.”
Marks, 106 F.4th at 950.
“Section 2254(d)(1)’s ‘clearly established’ phrase ‘refers
to the holdings, as opposed to the dicta, of th[e Supreme]
Court’s decisions as of the time of the relevant state-court
decision.’” Lockyer v. Andrade, 538 U.S. 63, 71 (2003)
(quoting Williams v. Taylor, 529 U.S. 362, 412 (2000)). “In
other words, ‘clearly established Federal law’ under
§ 2254(d)(1) is the governing legal principle or principles set
forth by the Supreme Court at the time the state court renders
its decision.” Id. at 71–72. “When th[e Supreme] Court relies
on a legal rule or principle to decide a case, that principle is

20

HANDLEY V. MOORE

a ‘holding’ of the Court for purposes of AEDPA.” Andrew
v. White, 604 U.S.___, 145 S. Ct. 75, 81 (2025) (per curiam).
“Under the ‘contrary to’ clause, a federal habeas court
may grant the writ if the state court arrives at a conclusion
opposite to that reached by th[e Supreme] Court on a
question of law or if the state court decides a case differently
than th[e Supreme] Court has on a set of materially
indistinguishable facts.” Williams, 529 U.S. at 412–13.
“Under the ‘unreasonable application’ clause, a federal
habeas court may grant the writ if the state court identifies
the correct governing legal principle from th[e Supreme]
Court’s decisions but unreasonably applies that principle to
the facts of the prisoner’s case.” Id. at 413. “If this standard
is difficult to meet, that is because it was meant to be.”
Harrington v. Richter, 562 U.S. 86, 102 (2011). “As a
condition for obtaining habeas corpus from a federal court,
a state prisoner must show that the state court’s ruling on the
claim being presented in federal court was so lacking in
justification that there was an error well understood and
comprehended in existing law beyond any possibility for
fairminded disagreement.” Id. at 103.
Under § 2254(d)(2), “a state-court factual determination
is not unreasonable merely because the federal habeas court
would have reached a different conclusion in the first
instance.” Wood v. Allen, 558 U.S. 290, 301 (2010). “[E]ven
if ‘[r]easonable minds reviewing the record might disagree’
about the finding in question, ‘on habeas review that does
not suffice to supersede the trial court’s . . . determination.’”
Id. (first alteration added) (quoting Rice v. Collins, 546 U.S.
333, 341–42 (2006)). “This is a daunting standard—one that
will be satisfied in relatively few cases.” Taylor v. Maddox,
366 F.3d 992, 1000 (9th Cir. 2004), abrogated on other

HANDLEY V. MOORE

21

grounds as stated in Murray v. Schriro, 745 F.3d 984, 999–
1000 (9th Cir. 2014).
When the last state court decision adjudicating a claim is
unreasoned, “the federal court should ‘look through’ the
unexplained decision to the last related state-court decision
that does provide a relevant rationale.” Wilson v. Sellers, 584
U.S. 122, 125 (2018). “It should then presume that the
unexplained decision adopted the same reasoning,” although
“the State may rebut the presumption by showing that the
unexplained affirmance relied or most likely did rely on
different grounds.” Id.
III
We now address whether the California Court of
Appeal’s decision “was contrary to, or involved an
unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law,
as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States,”
28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1), or “was based on an unreasonable
determination of the facts in light of the evidence presented
in the State court proceeding,” id. § 2254(d)(2).
A
We begin with Handley’s contention that the California
Court of Appeal’s decision, and the California Supreme
Court’s decision in People v. Britton upon which the
California Court of Appeal relied, were “contrary to” a series
of nineteenth-century Supreme Court cases requiring
criminal pleadings to allege the essential elements of the
offense charged.
Handley relies on the Supreme Court’s decisions in Blitz
v. United States, 153 U.S. 308 (1894), United States v.
Britton, 107 U.S. 655 (1883), United States v. Carll, 105
U.S. 611 (1881), and United States v. Simmons, 96 U.S. 360

22

HANDLEY V. MOORE

(1877), contending that these decisions clearly established
the principle that the Sixth Amendment requires state
charging documents to allege facts that increase the
prescribed range of penalties to which a defendant is
exposed (which we refer to as “punishment-enhancing
facts”). He argues that:
(1) these cases adopted a common law rule
that “where a factual element of a criminal
charge exposes a defendant to punishment
not available in the absence of that fact, the
fact must be pled in the charging document in
order to give proper notice”;
(2) “the notice provisions of the Sixth
Amendment codified th[is] common law
[rule]”; and
(3) “the Sixth Amendment applies to the
states.”
It is true that the decisions Handley cites, along with
others from the same era, require the essential elements of
an offense to be charged in a federal indictment. See Blitz,
153 U.S. at 315 (holding that an indictment must “set forth
all the elements necessary to constitute the offense intended
to be punished” (quoting Carll, 105 U.S. at 612)); United
States v. Britton, 107 U.S. at 669 (“The intent to injure and
defraud is an essential ingredient to every offense specified
in the section, and the failure to aver the intent is a fatal
defect in the counts in which it occurs.”); Simmons, 96 U.S.
at 362–63 (deeming defective an indictment that failed to
allege the elements of the offense with sufficient certainty);
see also United States v. Hess, 124 U.S. 483, 486 (1888)
(“The general, and with few exceptions, of which the present

HANDLEY V. MOORE

23

case is not one, the universal, rule, on this subject, is that all
the material facts and circumstances embraced in the
definition of the offense must be stated, or the indictment
will be defective. No essential element of the crime can be
omitted without destroying the whole pleading.”). 8
We also agree with Handley that the Supreme Court
traced these pleading requirements to the common law. See,
e.g., Simmons, 96 U.S. at 362 (citing the principle,
“fundamental in the law of criminal procedure, that the
accused must be apprised by the indictment, with reasonable
certainty, of the nature of the accusation against him, to the
end that he may prepare his defence, and plead the judgment
as a bar to any subsequent prosecution for the same
offence”); see also 5 Wayne R. LaFave, Criminal Procedure
§ 19.3(b) (4th ed. 2024) (characterizing the requirement that
a pleading allege each essential element of the offense
charged as “a cornerstone of common law pleading”).
Third, we will assume without deciding that the Sixth
Amendment codified this common law principle. In United
States v. Cruikshank, 92 U.S. 542 (1875), the Supreme Court
held that the Sixth Amendment requires an indictment to set
forth “every ingredient of which the offence is composed.”

“[T]hese basic principles of fundamental fairness retain their full
vitality under modern concepts of pleading, and specifically under Rule
7(c) of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.” Russell v. United
States, 369 U.S. 749, 765–66 (1962); see Fed. R. Crim. P. 7(c)(1) (“The
indictment or information must be a plain, concise, and definite written
statement of the essential facts constituting the offense charged and must
be signed by an attorney for the government.”).
8

24

HANDLEY V. MOORE

Id. at 558 (quoting United States v. Cook, 84 U.S. (17 Wall.)
168, 174 (1872)). The Court stated:
In criminal cases, prosecuted under the laws
of the United States, the accused has the
constitutional right ‘to be informed of the
nature and cause of the accusation.’ Amend.
VI. In United States v. Mills, 7 Pet. 142, this
was construed to mean, that the indictment
must set forth the offence ‘with clearness and
all necessary certainty, to apprise the accused
of the crime with which he stands charged;’
and in United States v. Cook, 17 Wall. 174,
that ‘every ingredient of which the offence is
composed must be accurately and clearly
alleged.’
Id. at 557–58. 9
The parties have not cited Cruikshank, and some have questioned its
reasoning. See LaFave, supra, § 19.3(b) (“[V]arious courts have
suggested that the pleading of all essential elements is mandated by the
notice requirement of the Sixth Amendment, although that is a dubious
proposition.” (footnote omitted)). But Cruikshank relies explicitly on the
Sixth Amendment, and the Supreme Court’s more recent decision in
Russell—which the parties also do not cite—supports the proposition
that the Sixth Amendment incorporates these common law principles. In
Russell, a federal indictment charged the defendants with violating
2 U.S.C. § 192, which made it unlawful for a congressional witness to
“refuse[] to answer any question pertinent to the question under inquiry.”
369 U.S. at 752 n.2. The Court held that the indictment was insufficiently
specific because it “failed to identify the subject under congressional
subcommittee inquiry at the time the witness was interrogated.” Id. at
752. In reaching this conclusion, the Court relied on both the grand jury
requirements of the Fifth Amendment and “the guaranty of the Sixth

9

HANDLEY V. MOORE

25

Finally, we agree with Handley that the notice
requirement of the Sixth Amendment applies to the states.
See Gray v. Raines, 662 F.2d 569, 571 (9th Cir. 1981) (“The
notice provision of the Sixth Amendment is incorporated
within the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment and is therefore fully applicable to the states.”
(citing Cole v. Arkansas, 333 U.S. 196, 201 (1948) (“No
principle of procedural due process is more clearly
established than that notice of the specific charge, and a
chance to be heard in a trial of the issues raised by that
charge, if desired, are among the constitutional rights of
every accused in a criminal proceeding in all courts, state or
federal.”))).
We are not persuaded, however, by Handley’s
contention that these nineteenth-century decisions clearly
established that punishment-enhancing facts—facts serving
solely to increase the prescribed range of penalties to which
a defendant is exposed—must be alleged in a charging
document. In Blitz, Hess, United States v. Britton, Carll,
Simmons, and Cruikshank, the indictment omitted—or failed
to allege with sufficient certainty—a basic element required
for the commission of the offense. None of these cases
involved the omission of a fact going solely to punishment.
These decisions, therefore, cannot have clearly established
the principle that punishment-enhancing facts must be
charged in an indictment or information.

Amendment that ‘In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy
the right . . . to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation.’”
Id. at 751 (alteration in original) (quoting U.S. Const. amend. VI). Given
Cruikshank and Russell, we assume for purposes of our analysis that the
Sixth Amendment incorporates the common law principle that an
indictment must charge the essential elements of the crime.

26

HANDLEY V. MOORE

Handley argues otherwise, relying on United States v.
Britton, but that decision does not bear the weight Handley
places on it. In United States v. Britton, the defendant was
charged in a federal indictment with violating section 5209
of the Revised Statutes of the United States, which made it a
crime for the president of a national banking association to
willfully misapply funds of the association. 107 U.S. at 655–
56. “[T]he indictment charged that the defendant being
president of the association, paid to a certain person
unknown the sum of $2,400 of the moneys of the association
in the purchase of 40 shares of its capital stock, which stock,
so purchased, was held by the defendant in trust for the use
of the association.” Id. at 666. The Court held that, “to
constitute the offense of willful misapplication, there must
be a conversion to his own use or the use of some one else
of the moneys and funds of the association by the party
charged.” Id. at 666–67. “This essential element of the
offense” was not only “not averred in the counts under
consideration” but also
negatived by the averment that the shares
purchased by the defendant w[ere] held by
him in trust for the use of the association, and
there is no averment of a conversion by the
defendant to his own use or the use of any
other person of the funds used in the purchase
of the shares. The counts, therefore, charge
maladministration of the affairs of the bank,
rather than criminal misapplication of its
funds.
Id. at 667.

HANDLEY V. MOORE

27

Handley argues that this decision stands for the
proposition that punishment-enhancing facts must be alleged
in a charging document because the fact omitted from the
indictment in the case “went only to the punishment which
could be imposed.” Handley’s premise is incorrect. The fact
omitted from the indictment in United States v. Britton—
willful misapplication through conversion—was a basic
element required for the commission of the offense. Without
conversion, there was no violation of the statute at all. Here,
by contrast, Handley could be convicted under section
209(a) regardless of whether the prosecution could prove
that his victims suffered bodily harm or were confined in a
manner exposing them to a substantial likelihood of death.
United States v. Britton, therefore, does not speak to the
issue presented in this case—whether punishmentenhancing facts must be alleged in a charging instrument. 10
To summarize, we assume without deciding that Blitz,
United States v. Britton, Carll, Simmons, and similar cases,
read in light of Cruikshank and Russell, clearly established
that the Sixth Amendment requires the essential elements of
a crime to be alleged in a charging document. These cases
do not clearly establish, however, that punishmentenhancing facts are among the essential elements that must
be charged. Accordingly, we reject Handley’s contention
that People v. Britton, and the California Court of Appeal
decision in Handley’s case relying on People v. Britton, were
It is true that, as Handley emphasizes, conversion was relevant to the
punishment in United States v. Britton, as in the absence of proving
conversion the government would only have been able to charge the
defendant with violating section 5239, maladministration of the affairs
of a bank, which carried a lesser penalty than section 5209. But this does
not make conversion a punishment-enhancing fact, which is a fact
relevant only to punishment.
10

28

HANDLEY V. MOORE

“contrary to” clearly established federal law under these
nineteenth-century decisions. 11
B
We next address Handley’s contention that the
California Court of Appeal’s decision was “contrary to”
more recent Supreme Court decisions stating that any fact
(other than a prior conviction) that increases the prescribed
range of penalties to which a criminal defendant is exposed
must be charged in an indictment.
In Jones v. United States, 526 U.S. 227 (1999), a federal
indictment charged the defendant with carjacking, in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2119. Id. at 230. Section 2119(1)
prescribes a maximum sentence of 15 years; § 2119(2),
which applies when serious bodily injury results from the
offense, prescribes a maximum sentence of 25 years; and
§ 2119(3), which applies when death results from the
offense, imposes a maximum sentence of life. Id. The
indictment and the jury instructions made no mention of the
statute’s numbered subsections or serious bodily injury, but
the district court imposed a 25-year sentence under
subsection (2) after finding by a preponderance of the
evidence that serious bodily injury resulted from the offense.
Id. at 230–31. After noting that a different construction
would raise serious constitutional questions under the Due
Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the notice and
jury trial guarantees of the Sixth Amendment, the Supreme
11
We agree with our dissenting colleague that punishment-enhancing
facts are “elements” under Apprendi and Alleyne. But nothing in the
nineteenth-century cases upon which Handley relies establishes that the
Sixth Amendment requires these Apprendi-type elements to be alleged
in state charging documents. Nor, as we explain below, do the Apprendi
line of decisions squarely address this question.

HANDLEY V. MOORE

29

Court “constru[ed] § 2119 as establishing three separate
offenses by the specification of distinct elements, each of
which must be charged by indictment, proven beyond a
reasonable doubt, and submitted to a jury for its verdict.” Id.
at 252. A footnote in Jones stated that “under the Due
Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the notice and
jury trial guarantees of the Sixth Amendment, any fact (other
than prior conviction) that increases the maximum penalty
for a crime must be charged in an indictment, submitted to a
jury, and proven beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at 243 n.6.
In Apprendi, a New Jersey indictment charged the
defendant with several state criminal offenses but made no
mention of the state’s hate crimes statute or the defendant’s
allegedly racially-motivated purpose in committing the
crimes. 530 U.S. at 469. After the defendant pleaded guilty,
the state trial court applied the hate crimes statute, found by
a preponderance of the evidence that the defendant acted
with a racially-motivated purpose, and sentenced the
defendant accordingly. Id. at 469–71. On review, the
Supreme Court quoted Jones’s statement that “‘under the
Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the notice
and jury trial guarantees of the Sixth Amendment, any fact
(other than prior conviction) that increases the maximum
penalty for a crime must be charged in an indictment,
submitted to a jury, and proven beyond a reasonable doubt’”
and stated that “[t]he Fourteenth Amendment commands the
same answer in this case involving a state statute.” Id. at 476
(quoting Jones, 526 U.S. at 243 n.6). The Court noted,
however, that the petitioner “has not here asserted a
constitutional claim based on the omission of any reference
to sentence enhancement or racial bias in the indictment. . . .
We thus do not address the indictment question separately
today.” Id. at 477 n.3. The Court ultimately held only that

30

HANDLEY V. MOORE

“[o]ther than the fact of a prior conviction, any fact that
increases the penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed
statutory maximum must be submitted to a jury, and proved
beyond a reasonable doubt.” Id. at 490. The holding made
no reference to pleading requirements.
In United States v. Cotton, 535 U.S. 625 (2002), the
Court quoted Apprendi’s holding that, “[o]ther than the fact
of a prior conviction, any fact that increases the penalty for
a crime beyond the prescribed statutory maximum must be
submitted to a jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt,”
id. at 627 (quoting Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490), before adding
that “[i]n federal prosecutions, such facts must also be
charged in the indictment,” id. (citing Apprendi, 530 U.S. at
476). 12
In Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296 (2004), which
involved a state prosecution, the defendant pleaded guilty to
kidnapping. Id. at 298–99. At sentencing, the trial court
imposed an exceptional sentence, beyond the standard
maximum, based on a judicial finding that the defendant
acted with deliberate cruelty—“a statutorily enumerated
ground for departure in domestic-violence cases.” Id. at 300.
Applying Apprendi, the Court reversed the defendant’s
sentence on the ground that the fact of deliberate cruelty
“While the Supreme Court has not been entirely consistent in
explaining the exact grounding for requiring that such Apprendielements be alleged in federal indictments, that requirement generally is
assumed to rest on the grand jury clause of the Fifth Amendment.”
LaFave, supra, § 19.3(b) (footnote omitted). The grand jury clause does
not apply to state prosecutions. See Hurtado v. California, 110 U.S. 516,
538 (1884); Gautt v. Lewis, 489 F.3d 993, 1003 n.10 (9th Cir. 2007)
(“[O]ne’s Fifth Amendment right to presentment or indictment by a
grand jury . . . has not been incorporated into the Fourteenth Amendment
so as to apply against the states.”).
12

HANDLEY V. MOORE

31

should have been submitted to a jury. Id. at 313–14. In
reaching this conclusion, the Court cited the “longstanding
tenet[] of common-law criminal jurisprudence” that “‘an
accusation which lacks any particular fact which the law
makes essential to the punishment is . . . no accusation
within the requirements of the common law, and it is no
accusation in reason.’” Id. at 301–02 (quoting 1 J. Bishop,
Criminal Procedure § 87 (2d ed. 1872)).
In Southern Union Co. v. United States, 567 U.S. 343
(2012), the Court held that the “rule of Apprendi applies to
the imposition of criminal fines.” Id. at 360. The federal
indictment in the case charged the defendant with violations
of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976,
which authorizes a criminal fine for each day of violation.
Id. at 346–47. After the jury convicted the defendant, “the
District Court made factual findings that increased both the
‘potential and actual’ fine the court imposed.” Id. at 352.
Applying Apprendi, the Court held that the Sixth
Amendment right of jury trial requires that “juries . . .
determine facts that set a fine’s maximum amount.” Id. at
356. In reaching this conclusion, the Court cited the common
law principle that “the indictment must, in order to inform
the court what punishment to inflict, contain an averment of
every particular thing which enters into the punishment.” Id.
(quoting 1 J. Bishop, Criminal Procedure § 540 (2d ed.
1872)).
In Alleyne v. United States, 570 U.S. 99 (2013), a federal
indictment charged the defendant with using or carrying a
firearm in relation to a crime of violence, in violation of 18
U.S.C. § 924(c)(1)(A). Id. at 103. Neither the indictment nor
the verdict form mentioned § 924(c)(1)(A)(ii), which
increases the statute’s minimum sentence to seven years’
imprisonment if the firearm is brandished, and the jury,

32

HANDLEY V. MOORE

which convicted the defendant, made no finding that the
defendant brandished a weapon. Id. at 103–04. The district
court, however, found that the defendant brandished a
weapon and applied the seven-year statutory minimum. Id.
at 104. Applying Apprendi and the Sixth Amendment right
to jury trial, the Court reversed, holding that “facts that
increase mandatory minimum sentences must be submitted
to the jury.” Id. at 116. In reaching this conclusion, the Court
cited the common law principle that “if ‘a statute prescribes
a particular punishment to be inflicted on those who commit
it under special circumstances which it mentions, or with
particular aggravations,’ then those special circumstances
must be specified in the indictment.” Id. at 112 (quoting 1 J.
Bishop, Criminal Procedure § 598 (2d ed. 1872)).
The question presented here is whether the foregoing
decisions clearly established that the Sixth Amendment
requires punishment-enhancing facts to be alleged in a state
charging instrument. As a threshold matter, Handley
concedes that these decisions did not hold that such facts
must be charged in a state criminal pleading; he states that
“these consistent descriptions of the notice and pleading
requirements of the Sixth Amendment were not holdings of
the Supreme Court but were, instead, dicta.” Quoting Frye
v. Broomfield, 115 F.4th 1155, 1163 (9th Cir. 2024),
however, he contends that “habeas relief can be granted
based on ‘ancient’ and ‘deeply embedded’ legal principles
recognized by the Supreme Court even in the absence of a
specific holding.”
The issue we confronted in Frye was whether it was
clearly established in 2001 that the Constitution forbids the
unjustified use of visible shackles during the guilt phase of a
criminal trial. Id. at 1158. It was not until 2005 that the
Supreme Court squarely held that “the Fifth and Fourteenth

HANDLEY V. MOORE

33

Amendments prohibit the use of physical restraints visible to
the jury absent a trial court determination, in the exercise of
its discretion, that they are justified by a state interest
specific to a particular trial.” Deck v. Missouri, 544 U.S. 622,
629 (2005). We nevertheless held in Frye that “[t]he
prohibition on routine guilt-phase shackling was . . . ‘clearly
established Federal law’ within the meaning of § 2254(d)(1)
well before the state court’s decision in 2001.” Frye, 115
F.4th at 1163. In arriving at this conclusion, we relied on pre2001 Supreme Court decisions plainly stating that
unjustified shackling was prohibited. See Holbrook v. Flynn,
475 U.S. 560, 568–69 (1986) (“[S]hackling[] should be
permitted only where justified by an essential state interest
specific to each trial.”); Illinois v. Allen, 397 U.S. 337, 344
(1970) (“[N]o person should be tried while shackled and
gagged except as a last resort.”). We also looked at Deck’s
characterization of previous Supreme Court cases as clearly
establishing the right in question. See Deck, 544 U.S. at 626
(“We first consider whether, as a general matter, the
Constitution permits a State to use visible shackles routinely
in the guilt phase of a criminal trial. The answer is clear: The
law has long forbidden routine use of visible shackles during
the guilt phase . . . .”). Finally, we relied on the fact that
“[f]ollowing Allen and Holbrook, the courts of appeals,
including ours, widely applied ‘these statements as setting
forth a constitutional standard’ barring unjustified
shackling.” Frye, 115 F.4th at 1164 (quoting Deck, 544 U.S.
at 628).
We are not persuaded that similar reasoning applies here.
First, in Frye there was a Supreme Court decision—Deck—
that looked back at earlier precedents and characterized them
as being “clear” that it was “forbidden” to use visible
shackles absent special need. Deck, 544 U.S. at 626. Here,

34

HANDLEY V. MOORE

by contrast, there is no Supreme Court decision looking back
at the Apprendi line of cases and characterizing them as
clearly requiring state charging documents to allege
punishment-enhancing facts.
Second, the Apprendi-era decisions upon which Handley
relies do not clearly state that the notice requirement of the
Sixth Amendment requires state charging documents to
allege punishment-enhancing facts. Jones involved a federal
prosecution rather than a state prosecution. Apprendi
expressly declined to “address the indictment question.” 530
U.S. at 477 n.3. Blakely, Southern Union, and Alleyne
discussed common law principles requiring charging
documents to allege each element of an offense, including
punishment-enhancing facts, but none of those cases
specifically stated that the Sixth Amendment notice
requirement incorporates those common law principles. 13
Cotton, moreover, appears to have drawn a distinction
between federal and state prosecutions and to have read

13
The Court made clear in these cases that the Sixth Amendment right
to jury trial incorporates certain common law principles. See Southern
Union, 567 U.S. at 353 (“[T]he scope of the constitutional jury right must
be informed by the historical role of the jury at common law.” (quoting
Oregon v. Ice, 555 U.S. 160, 170 (2009))); Blakely, 542 U.S. at 313
(“Our Constitution and the common-law traditions it entrenches . . . do
not admit the contention that facts are better discovered by judicial
inquisition than by adversarial testing before a jury.”). But the Court has
not squarely addressed whether, or to what extent, the Sixth Amendment
notice requirement incorporates common law pleading requirements. See
Gautt, 489 F.3d at 1004 n.11 (noting that “the Supreme Court has written
relatively sparingly on a defendant’s right to notice in the Sixth and
Fourteenth Amendment contexts”).

HANDLEY V. MOORE

35

Jones’s discussion of pleading requirements as applying
only to the former:
In Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466
(2000), we held that “[o]ther than the fact of
a prior conviction, any fact that increases the
penalty for a crime beyond the prescribed
statutory maximum must be submitted to a
jury, and proved beyond a reasonable doubt.”
Id., at 490. In federal prosecutions, such facts
must also be charged in the indictment. Id., at
476 (quoting Jones v. United States, 526 U.S.
227, 243, n. 6 (1999)).
535 U.S. at 627.
Third, the federal circuits have not, to our knowledge,
widely applied Jones, Apprendi, Blakely, Southern Union,
and Alleyne as setting forth a Sixth Amendment standard
requiring state charging documents to allege punishmentenhancing facts. 14
Nor have state courts construed the Apprendi line of authorities as
establishing that the Sixth Amendment requires punishment-enhancing
facts to be alleged in a state charging document:

14

More than dozen state courts so far have addressed the
question of whether the federal constitution requires a
state pleading to allege an Apprendi-type element.
Only a few appear to have concluded that there is such
a requirement. The vast majority have directly held
that there is no such requirement. Some have focused
primarily on the Fifth Amendment’s grand jury clause
not being applicable to the states. Others have cited the
need to take account of a possible Sixth [Amendment]

36

HANDLEY V. MOORE

In sum, we reject Handley’s contention that the Apprendi
line of decisions clearly established that the Sixth
Amendment requires punishment-enhancing facts to be
alleged in state charging documents. The California Court of
Appeal’s decision was not “contrary to” clearly established
federal law on this theory. 15
In so holding, we emphasize that we have no occasion
here to address the question whether Handley’s
understanding of the Sixth Amendment’s notice requirement
is correct. The question presented—and the one we
answer—is whether, at the time of the state court’s decision,
Handley’s proposed rule constituted “clearly established
federal law, as determined by the Supreme Court of the
United States.” 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1). In footnote 3 of
Apprendi and in Cotton, the Court reserved the question
whether the Constitution requires Apprendi-type elements to
be alleged in state charging documents. AEDPA does not
permit us to dispense habeas relief as if those reservations
had not occurred. Cf. Mitchell v. Esparza, 540 U.S. 12, 17
requirement of notice, but concluded that adequate
notice can be provided without alleging the Apprenditype element in the charging instrument.
LaFave, supra, § 19.3(b) (footnotes omitted).
At oral argument, Handley invoked a recent Supreme Court decision
holding that “[w]hen th[e Supreme] Court relies on a legal rule or
principle to decide a case, that principle is a ‘holding’ of the Court for
purposes of AEDPA.” Andrew, 145 S. Ct. at 81. Handley, however, does
not identify a Supreme Court decision relying on the principle that the
Sixth Amendment requires punishment-enhancing facts to be alleged in
charging documents. The closest case is Jones, but Apprendi declined to
extend Jones’s pleading requirement to state prosecutions, 530 U.S. at
477 n.3, and Cotton appears to have limited Jones’s pleading
requirement to federal prosecutions, 535 U.S. at 627.
15

HANDLEY V. MOORE

37

(2003) (per curiam) (“A federal court may not overrule a
state court for simply holding a view different from its own,
when the precedent from this Court is, at best, ambiguous.”).
C
We consider Handley’s alternative contention that the
California Court of Appeal’s decision was “contrary to”
clearly established federal law because the state court—
relying on California law allowing informal amendment of
an information—looked beyond the written information to
conclude that he received adequate notice of the special
allegations.
Handley’s argument is without merit. The Supreme
Court has never held that a Sixth Amendment notice inquiry
is limited to the written charging document. Handley points
to our statement in Gautt that “for purposes of AEDPA’s
‘clearly established Federal law’ requirement, it is ‘clearly
established’ that a criminal defendant has a right, guaranteed
by the Sixth Amendment and applied against the states
through the Fourteenth Amendment, to be informed of any
charges against him, and that a charging document, such as
an information, is the means by which such notice is
provided.” 489 F.3d at 1004. But Gautt did not hold that the
inquiry is limited to the information, let alone that clearly
established federal law embodies such a limitation. On the
contrary, Gautt recognized that “[o]ur circuit has held that in
certain circumstances—for example, when a defendant has
argued that he received insufficient notice of a particular
theory of the case—a court can examine sources other than
the information for evidence that the defendant did receive
adequate notice,” id. at 1009, and Gautt “assume[d]—
without deciding—that such sources can be parsed for
evidence of notice to the defendant,” id. at 1010.

38

HANDLEY V. MOORE

Handley not only overreads Gautt but also disregards
circuit authority expressly stating that the Sixth Amendment
inquiry reaches beyond the written charging document. In
Sheppard v. Rees, 909 F.2d 1234 (9th Cir. 1989), for
example, we stated:
This case does not involve a claim that
adequate notice was provided by a source
other than the primary charging document.
An accused could be adequately notified of
the nature and cause of the accusation by
other means—for example, a complaint, an
arrest warrant, or a bill of particulars.
Similarly, it is possible that an accused could
become apprised of the particular charges
during the course of a preliminary hearing.
Any or all of these sources—or perhaps
others—might provide notice sufficient to
meet the requirements of due process,
although precise formal notice is certainly the
most reliable way to comply with the Sixth
Amendment. The Constitution itself speaks
not of form, but of substance.
Id. at 1236 n.2 (citation omitted); accord Calderon v. Prunty,
59 F.3d 1005, 1009 (9th Cir. 1995) (“[A] defendant can be
adequately notified of the nature and cause of the accusation
against him by means other than the charging document.”).
The existence of these decisions undermines Handley’s
contention that clearly established federal law proscribes
consideration of sources other than the written information.
Even if it were clearly established as a general
proposition that the Sixth Amendment notice inquiry is

HANDLEY V. MOORE

39

limited to the written information, the Supreme Court has
never addressed whether a defendant may be afforded notice
through informal amendment of the information, as the
California Court of Appeal concluded occurred here. The
state court found that Handley “was apprised of the
prosecutor’s intent to prove the special allegations required
to impose a sentence of LWOP” and “consented to the
inclusion of those allegations in the jury instructions and
verdict form.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *11; see
Anderson, 470 P.3d at 11–12 (describing the notice and
consent requirements applicable where, as here, informal
amendment authorizes increased punishment). The court
therefore concluded that “the conditions for an informal
amendment of the charges have been met” and, accordingly,
that Handley “was afforded sufficient notice of the charges.”
Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *11. Handley cites no
Supreme Court decision precluding this form of notice.
Handley argues that notice through informal amendment
of the information is insufficient because “[t]he Sixth
Amendment notice requirement is designed to permit
defendants to prepare a defense prior to trial.” We agree
generally with the proposition that notice afforded at the end
of trial is insufficient. See Gautt, 489 F.3d at 1002 (“The
Sixth Amendment guarantees a criminal defendant the
fundamental right to be informed of the nature and cause of
the charges made against him so as to permit adequate
preparation of a defense.”); id. at 1010 (“[J]ury instructions
or closing arguments—sure signs that the end of a trial is
drawing near—. . . cannot . . . serve as the requisite notice of
the charged conduct, coming as [they do] after the defendant
has settled on a defense strategy and put on his evidence.”);
cf. In re Gault, 387 U.S. 1, 33 (1967) (“Notice, to comply
with due process requirements, must be given sufficiently in

40

HANDLEY V. MOORE

advance of scheduled court proceedings so that reasonable
opportunity to prepare will be afforded . . . .”). But where, as
here, the defendant agrees to the amendment, these concerns
do not appear to be present. Again, Handley points to no
Supreme Court precedent holding that notice provided
through informal amendment of the information—with the
defendant’s consent—cannot satisfy the Sixth Amendment’s
notice requirement. 16
To conclude, the California Court of Appeal’s decision
was not “contrary to” clearly established federal law because
the state court looked beyond the written information to
conclude that Handley received adequate notice of the
special allegations. The Supreme Court has not held that the
notice inquiry is limited to the information, and even if the
inquiry were so limited, the Court has not held that notice
may not be provided through consensual amendment of the
information.
D
Handley also argues that the California Court of
Appeal’s application of the state’s informal amendment

For this reason, our dissenting colleague’s reliance on Gault is
misplaced. It is true that the parents of the minor child subject to juvenile
court proceedings in Gault did not object to late notice of the charges.
Gault, 387 U.S. at 34 n.54. But those parents, unlike Handley, were not
represented by counsel; indeed, they were not even informed of their
right to such counsel. See id. It was under those circumstances that the
Court held that it could not consider the parents’ “failure to object to the
lack of constitutionally adequate notice as a waiver of their rights.” Id.
Accordingly, Gault does not address the circumstances of this case,
where Handley was represented by counsel and—rather than merely
failing to object to late notice—affirmatively consented to amendment
of the information during trial.
16

HANDLEY V. MOORE

41

doctrine “was based on an unreasonable determination of the
facts” under § 2254(d)(2).
Applying California law, the court of appeal concluded
that “the conditions for an informal amendment of the
charges have been met” because Handley “was apprised of
the prosecutor’s intent to prove the special allegations
required to impose a sentence of LWOP” at the second jury
instruction conference and “consented to the inclusion of
those allegations.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *11.
Handley maintains that the second jury instruction
conference was too riddled with errors to provide him proper
notice of the special allegations or his life-without-parole
sentence. We quote the relevant portion of the transcript in
full:
THE COURT: Counts 1 and 2, the 209
contains a special, additional factor if great
bodily injury was inflicted. The people also
allege a 12022.7, great bodily injury,
sentencing enhancement, as to Count 4,
which I understand they have a pending
motion regarding.
The court prepared jury instructions
asking the jury to make findings on both the
substantive crime and then whether or not
that crime, if committed, great bodily injury
was inflicted.
The way that the CALCRIMS read, it
should be a special finding, but it’s not
technically a sentencing enhancement and the
like.

42

HANDLEY V. MOORE

On behalf of the defense, have you had an
opportunity to see the verdict forms, sir?
DEFENSE COUNSEL: I have not
finished reviewing them, Your Honor.
THE COURT: I am preparing to instruct
consistent with what I have just said.
Is there any objection by the defense?
There was not when we went over jury
instructions.
DEFENSE COUNSEL: No, there is not.
THE COURT: Next there is a People’s
motion as to that sentencing enhancement.
PROSECUTOR MURPHY: Yes, Your
Honor. We would—we moved to strike that.
THE COURT: Any objection, sir?
DEFENSE COUNSEL: No.
THE COURT: That request is granted and
the court will then remove the great bodily
injury jury instruction from that making sure
that it’s still contained in Counts 1 and 2
when—which I believe it is, but I’ll just be
double-checking on that.
PROSECUTOR BROWN: Your Honor,
in regards to the second count involving
Mary . . . , if the court could take a look at the
actual verdict form that the people drafted in
regards to Count 2, there is kind of an “or”
within the Penal Code. “There is GBI

HANDLEY V. MOORE

43

inflicted on the person or” and our theory of
liability is the “or” part.
So I know the court just drafted a special
instruction regarding that finding. It’s a little
different with regards to our theory on
Mary . . . .
PROSECUTOR
MURPHY:
We
apologize for the lateness, Your Honor. We
were actually dealing with this up until last
night.
THE COURT: Noted.
So your theory is intent to confine, a
manner in which exposes that person to a
substantial likelihood of death?
PROSECUTOR MURPHY: Yes.
THE COURT: Any objection to the
people proceeding under that theory?
DEFENSE
[Michael]? 17
PROSECUTOR
[Mary].

COUNSEL: As
MURPHY: No.

to
To

THE COURT: [Mary].
DEFENSE COUNSEL: I have no
objection to proceeding on that theory.

The brackets here and below in this colloquy replace the victims’ last
names, as recited by the district court, with their first names.
17

44

HANDLEY V. MOORE

THE COURT: Thank you. Then the court
will be modifying the instruction as to Count
2.
Handley argues that this discussion denied him notice of
the special allegations for two reasons. First, he emphasizes
that both the trial court and the prosecution confused the
standard applicable to special allegations under section
209(a) (“death,” “bodily harm,” or “intentionally confined in
a manner which exposes that person to a substantial
likelihood of death”) with the standard applicable to a
sentencing enhancement under section 12022.7(a) (“great
bodily injury”). 18 While discussing the special allegations
under section 209(a), both the trial court and the prosecution
mistakenly referred to “great bodily injury” or “GBI” instead
of “bodily harm.” Handley argues that this muddling of the
elements denied him notice of the special allegations
because “telling petitioner that jurors would be asked to
‘make findings’ on whether ‘great bodily injury’ had been
inflicted did not necessarily give notice that anything new
was going to the jury.”
Second, Handley highlights the trial court’s statement
that a special finding under section 209(a) is “not technically
a sentencing enhancement.” Handley argues that this
As noted, the information charged an enhancement under section
12022.7(a) on Count 4, the torture count, alleging that Handley
“personally inflicted great bodily injury” on Michael. The prosecution
dropped the enhancement charge at the January 3, 2018 hearing. We do
not know why the prosecution dropped the enhancement charge. The
theory the prosecution chose to present to the jury during closing
argument was that Handley drove the van while the other two kidnappers
tortured Michael in the back of the vehicle. See Handley II, 2021 WL
1138353, at *4 (noting that “the prosecution maintained” that Handley
“played an integral role as the driver of the van”).

18

HANDLEY V. MOORE

45

statement denied him notice of the special allegations
because it suggested that those allegations would not
increase his sentence. He says that “he would have had no
idea he was now facing an aggravated kidnapping charge
and a life without parole term.” 19
The state court of appeal’s finding that Handley received
notice that the prosecution was alleging special allegations
under section 209(a) was not objectively unreasonable. To
be sure, the trial court confused “great bodily injury” with
“bodily harm.” But the court also referred to Counts 1 and 2
and to section 209. And the court and counsel discussed the
two prongs of section 209(a)’s special allegation—bodily
harm and confinement exposing a person to a substantial
likelihood of death—and clarified that the prosecution was
alleging the latter theory with respect to Count 2 (Mary).
There was therefore a reasonable basis for the state court to
find that Handley was on notice that the prosecution was
alleging special allegations under section 209(a) rather than
pursuing an enhancement under section 12022.7(a). Handley
suggests that the trial court’s statement that special
allegations under section 209(a) are not technically
enhancements was misleading. The court, however,

Handley and our dissenting colleague also cite the California Court of
Appeal’s discussion of this issue in Handley I. But the court of appeal
vacated Handley I at the California Supreme Court’s direction, see
Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *1, rendering Handley I “a nullity.”
See People v. Hamilton, 753 P.2d 1109, 1117 (Cal. 1988); City of Santa
Clarita v. NTS Tech. Sys., 40 Cal. Rptr. 3d 244, 247 n.5 (Ct. App. 2006);
Venegas v. County of Los Angeles, No. B218948, 2011 WL 3672932, at
*8 (Cal. Ct. App. Aug. 23, 2011).

19

46

HANDLEY V. MOORE

accurately stated California law. See Jones, 213 P.3d at
1004. 20
The state court of appeal’s finding that Handley
affirmatively consented to the new charges was also
objectively reasonable. The trial court asked defense counsel
if he had any objection to instructing the jury on the special
allegations and counsel responded that he had no objection.
After the prosecution made clear that it was alleging a
confinement theory on Count 2, as to Mary, the trial court
asked defense counsel whether he had any objection to the
People proceeding under that theory, and defense counsel
stated that he had “no objection to proceeding on that
theory.”
Handley’s suggestion that he lacked notice of, or failed
to consent to, the special allegations is also difficult to
reconcile with his subsequent conduct. As the court of appeal
pointed out, defense counsel
voiced no objection when the prosecutor
argued those allegations in closing argument
20
As our dissenting colleague observes, Handley, as a layperson, may
not have understood the distinction California law draws between
sentencing factors and sentencing enhancements. But Handley’s attorney
understood that the prosecution was seeking life without possibility of
parole under section 209(a), and courts have long presumed that defense
attorneys explain the nature of the charges to their clients. See, e.g.,
Henderson v. Morgan, 426 U.S. 637, 647 (1976) (“[I]t may be
appropriate to presume that in most cases defense counsel routinely
explain the nature of the offense in sufficient detail to give the accused
notice of what he is being asked to admit.”); Panuccio v. Kelly, 927 F.2d
106, 111 (2d Cir. 1991) (“The trial court could also appropriately assume
that Panuccio understood the charges against him since he was
represented by counsel who had presumably explained the charges to
him.”).

HANDLEY V. MOORE

47

or when the jury returned true findings
thereon. . . .
And later on, defense counsel fully
acknowledged in his sentencing brief that
[Handley] was facing a potential sentence of
LWOP based on those findings. Defense
counsel made the argument that imposition of
an LWOP sentence would be cruel and
unusual under the Eighth Amendment, but—
to his credit—he never so much as suggested
that an LWOP sentence was improper on due
process grounds for lack of notice. Nor did he
ever suggest that [Handley]’s plea decisions
or trial strategy were impacted by the manner
in which the case was charged.
Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *11. 21
In sum, the record does not show that the state court’s
decision was based on an unreasonable determination of the
facts under § 2254(d)(2).
E
Handley argues that informal amendment of the
information failed to afford him adequate notice under the
Sixth Amendment because he “was never expressly
Although Handley argues in this court that he might have chosen to
plead guilty if the written information had included the special
allegations, he does not appear to have made that argument, or to have
presented any evidence in support of it, in the state court. See Handley
II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *11 (noting that Handley never suggested that
his plea decisions were impacted by the manner in which the case was
charged and that “[t]here would have been no support for [that]
argument” if it had been presented).

21

48

HANDLEY V. MOORE

informed he could be sentenced to LWOP if the jury found
the special allegations true.” Id. at *12. The court of appeal
rejected this argument, reasoning that “once the aggravated
kidnapping charges were informally amended to include
allegations of bodily harm and substantial likelihood of
death, [Handley] was sufficiently apprised of this
possibility.” Id.
We reject Handley’s suggestion that the state court’s
decision was “contrary to” or “involved an unreasonable
application of” clearly established Supreme Court precedent.
The state court concluded that Handley had sufficient notice
that he was exposed to a sentence of life without possibility
of parole because he had explicit notice that the prosecution
was charging special allegations under section 209(a), and
section 209(a) itself plainly states that a sentence of life
without possibility of parole applies when such allegations
are proven. The Sixth Amendment guarantees a defendant
the right “to be informed of any charges against him.” Gautt,
489 F.3d at 1004 (emphasis added). Handley cites no
Supreme Court decision clearly establishing that the Sixth
Amendment affords the defendant the additional right to
have the applicable sentence spelled out in the charging
document.
IV
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the California
Court of Appeal’s decision denying Handley’s Sixth
Amendment notice claim was not “contrary to,” or “an
unreasonable application of, clearly established Federal law,
as determined by the Supreme Court of the United States,”
or “based on an unreasonable determination of the facts in
light of the evidence presented in the State court
proceeding.” 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d). Because AEDPA is not

HANDLEY V. MOORE

49

satisfied, Handley is not entitled to de novo review of his
Sixth Amendment claim and we do not address his
arguments pertaining to the merits of that claim. The district
court’s judgment is AFFIRMED.
DONATO, District Judge, dissenting:
Petitioner Kyle Handley was convicted of a crime he was
never charged with, and sentenced to life in prison without
the possibility of parole. The California Court of Appeal
upheld this injustice on the basis of an unreasonable
application of clearly established precedent from the
Supreme Court of the United States. See People v. Handley
(Handley I), No. G056608, 2020 WL 58048 (Cal. Ct. App.
Jan. 6, 2020); People v. Handley (Handley II), No. G056608,
2021 WL 1138353 (Cal. Ct. App. Mar. 25, 2021). The
majority leaves Handley behind bars without a lawful
prosecution under Penal Code Section 209(a) and gives the
imprimatur of the federal courts for California to make the
same grave error in future kidnapping cases. I dissent.
I
A
A deeper dive into the state court proceedings is useful
to fully capture the fundamental unfairness of Handley’s
prosecution. On October 12, 2012, the Orange County
District Attorney filed a felony complaint against Handley,
charging two counts of kidnapping for ransom, in violation
of California Penal Code Section 209(a); one count of
aggravated mayhem, in violation of Penal Code Section 205;
one count of torture, in violation of Penal Code Section 206;

50

HANDLEY V. MOORE

and one count of first-degree residential burglary, in
violation of Penal Code Sections 459 and 460(a).
As Section 209(a) stated at that time:
Any person who seizes, confines, inveigles,
entices, decoys, abducts, conceals, kidnaps or
carries away another person by any means
whatsoever with intent to hold or detain, or
who holds or detains, that person for ransom,
reward or to commit extortion or to exact
from another person any money or valuable
thing, or any person who aids or abets any
such act, is guilty of a felony, and upon
conviction thereof, shall be punished by
imprisonment in the state prison for life
without possibility of parole in cases in which
any person subjected to any such act suffers
death or bodily harm, or is intentionally
confined in a manner which exposes that
person to a substantial likelihood of death, or
shall be punished by imprisonment in the
state prison for life with the possibility of
parole in cases where no such person suffers
death or bodily harm.
Cal. Pen. Code § 209(a) (2012). 1 The plain language of the
statute makes clear that a defendant charged with kidnapping
for ransom faced two very different sentences, depending on
the facts of the kidnapping. For a conviction of “simple”
kidnapping for ransom, a defendant would be sentenced to
Unless otherwise noted, all citations are to the 2012 version of the
California Penal Code, which was in effect when the crimes were
committed.

1

HANDLEY V. MOORE

51

life in prison with the possibility of parole (LWP). For
“aggravated” kidnapping for ransom, which involved bodily
harm or a substantial likelihood of death, the penalty was a
life sentence without the possibility of parole (LWOP). For
Handley, this meant the difference between spending the rest
of his natural life in custody versus the possibility of being
eligible for parole after seven years of custody. See Cal. Pen.
Code § 3046(a)(1).
For the kidnapping counts, the complaint alleged that
Handley “had the intent to hold and detain, [and] did
unlawfully seize, confine, . . . detain [Michael and Mary] for
ransom, reward, extortion, and to exact from another person
money and other valuable things.” For the torture count, the
complaint “alleged pursuant to Penal Code section
12022.7(a) (GREAT BODILY INJURY) . . . that [Handley]
personally inflicted great bodily injury on [Michael], who
was not an accomplice during the commission and attempted
commission of the above offense.” This allegation exposed
Handley to an “additional and consecutive term of
imprisonment in the state prison for three years.” Cal. Pen.
Code § 12022.7(a).
Two years later, the prosecution moved to consolidate
Handley’s case with the case against Hossein Nayeri, who
was said to have been the mastermind behind the scheme.
See Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *3-4. In the
consolidation motion, the prosecution said that Handley was
“accused of Two counts of PC 209(a) Kidnap for Ransom,
Once [sic] Count of Aggravated Mayhem, Once [sic] Count
of Torture, and one count of First Degree Residential
Burglary. There is additionally an allegation that Great
Bodily injury was inflicted during the course of Torture as
well as during the course of the Kidnap for Ransom,
Extortion. The penalty if convicted is life without parole.”

52

HANDLEY V. MOORE

Even so, on October 23, 2014, the prosecution filed a
consolidated criminal complaint, which alleged the same
counts against Handley, with identical language as in the
original 2012 complaint. To be clear, the amended
complaint again charged Handley only with kidnapping for
ransom under Penal Code Section 209(a), and not with
aggravated circumstances of bodily harm or death. The
motion to consolidate had included language about “great
bodily injury” in connection with the kidnapping for ransom
count, but the consolidated complaint itself alleged only that
Handley ‘had the intent to hold and detain, [and] did
unlawfully seize, confine, . . . and detain [Michael and
Mary] for ransom, reward, extortion, and to exact from
another person money and other valuable things.” The
consolidated complaint repeated the allegation of “great
bodily injury” solely “[a]s to Count(s) 4,” the torture count.
In March 2015, Handley appeared for a preliminary
examination. The prosecution sought “to hold both Mr.
Hossein Nayeri and Kyle Handley to answer to all the crimes
that are charged in the amended complaint.” For Handley,
that meant the kidnapping charge without aggravating
circumstances. After the state’s presentation of the facts it
believed supported the charges, the state court said “it does
appear to the court that there is sufficient and probable cause
to believe that defendant Handley . . . committed the felonies
charged in counts 1 through 5, and the related enhancements
as charged in the complaint. Therefore, [Handley is] . . .
hereby ordered held to answer as to those counts and
enhancements.”
Six days later, the final and operative criminal
information was filed against Handley. It alleged two counts
of kidnapping for ransom with language identical to the 2012
and 2014 charging documents, as well as “great bodily

HANDLEY V. MOORE

53

injury” “[a]s to Count(s) 4” for torture. Aggravating
circumstances of bodily harm or death were not charged with
respect to Penal Code Section 209(a).
In sum, the record establishes that for several years,
across multiple charging documents and a preliminary
examination, Handley was never charged with the
circumstances of bodily harm or substantial likelihood of
death in connection with the kidnapping counts. All the
charging documents alleged only simple kidnapping for
ransom under Penal Code Section 209(a), with a sentence of
life with the possibility of parole.
B
How then did Handley’s prosecution end in a conviction
of aggravated kidnapping for ransom and a sentence of life
in prison without the possibility of parole? It happened on
the fly as the trial court drafted jury instructions during the
final days of trial.
Handley was tried on December 18-21, 2017, and
January 3-4, 2018. The prosecution’s theory was that
Handley “played an integral role [in the kidnapping scheme]
as the driver of the van.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at
*4. Handley elected not to present evidence in his defense
or contest the prosecution’s portrayal of the scheme.
Instead, he argued that there was not enough evidence to tie
him to the crime. See id.
On December 21, 2017, the trial court held a conference
on jury instructions. With respect to the kidnapping counts,
the court said it would give instruction “1202” for
“Kidnapping for Extortion.” Defense counsel said he had
“no objection.” The record does not contain a copy of the
precise instructions referenced in this conference, but the

54

HANDLEY V. MOORE

model instruction states that the jury must find the defendant
(1) kidnapped, detained, or intended to detain; (2) for
ransom or reward or extortion; and (3) the person did not
consent to the detainment or kidnapping. See Jud. Council
of Cal., Crim. Jury Instructions (CALCRIM), No. 1202, at
952 (2017). Under a heading called “Sentencing Factor,” the
model instruction notes the different sentences in Section
209(a) and states that:
If you find the defendant guilty of kidnapping
for (ransom [,]/ [or] reward[,]/ [or] extortion),
you must then decide whether the People
have proved the additional allegation that the
defendant (caused the kidnapped person to
(die/suffer bodily harm)/ [or] intentionally
confined the kidnapped person in a way that
created a substantial likelihood of death).
Id. at 953 (brackets in original). This “Sentencing Factor”
instruction appears in the model instruction after separate
instructions about the elements of the crime and various
possible defenses. See id. at 952-53. It is unclear if this
“Sentencing Factor” instruction was in the trial court’s
proposed instruction being discussed with the parties on
December 21, 2017.
On January 3, 2018, the day on which the presentation of
evidence closed, the trial court held a second conference to
“briefly formalize” some matters. “Counts 1 and 2,” the trial
judge said, “the 209 contains a special, additional factor if
great bodily injury was inflicted. The people also allege a
12022.7, great bodily injury, sentencing enhancement, as to
count 4, which I understand they have a pending motion
regarding. The Court prepared jury instructions asking the

HANDLEY V. MOORE

55

jury to make findings on both the substantive crime and then
whether or not that crime, if committed, great bodily injury
was inflicted. The way that the CALCRIMS read, it should
be a special finding, but it’s not technically a sentencing
enhancement and the like” (emphasis added).
The trial court got the law wrong in these remarks, as
Respondent forthrightly agrees, and the California Court of
Appeal concluded. See Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at
*6. The trial judge repeatedly referred to “great bodily
injury” in connection with the kidnapping charge, but
Section 209(a) states that “bodily harm” is the factual
circumstance required for an LWOP sentence. The
prosecution, too, repeatedly made the same mistake. “Great
bodily injury” is a separate sentencing enhancement that was
alleged for the torture count, and if successful would have
resulted in an “additional and consecutive term of
imprisonment in the state prison for three years.” Cal. Pen.
Code § 12022.7(a).
The majority says the trial judge “did not misspeak by
pointing out that special allegations under Section 209(a) are
not sentencing enhancements.” But the Court of Appeal
itself called the allegations “enhancement factors” and
“sentencing factors.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *8.
If the majority means to suggest that the trial judge did not
misspeak because Handley should have understood in the
moment that “great bodily injury” meant “bodily harm” and
a sentence of life without parole under Section 209(a), they
ask too much. Perhaps “a person trained in the arcana of
California sentencing law would understand the judge was
attempting to draw” a legal distinction, but “a layperson such
as [Handley] might well construe the judge’s comment
simply to mean that a true finding on the bodily harm
allegation would not result in [his] sentence being enhanced

56

HANDLEY V. MOORE

or increased.” Handley I, 2020 WL 58048, at *7. 2 As the
California Court of Appeal stated, Handley “was never
expressly informed he could be sentenced to LWOP if the
jury found the special allegations true.” Handley II, 2021
WL 1138353, at *12.
After telling Handley that the new instruction language
regarding “great bodily injury” was “not technically a
sentencing enhancement and the like,” the trial judge asked
if defense counsel had reviewed the verdict forms. Counsel
answered, “I have not finished reviewing them, your
Honor.” The trial judge said, “I am preparing to instruct
consistent with what I have just said. Is there any objection
by the defense? There was not when we went over jury
instructions.” Counsel answered, “No, there is not.”
After that, the prosecution moved to strike the “great
bodily injury” allegation made in connection with the torture
count. The request was granted. The prosecution then asked
to modify the new language the trial judge had just added to
the kidnapping count as to the victim Mary to say that she
was exposed to a “substantial likelihood of death” rather
than “GBI” (great bodily injury). It is unclear if Handley or
his counsel had a copy of the modified instructions at the end
of the conference, as the trial judge told the parties, “I’ll do
my best to get those instructions to you as quickly as
possible.”
Approximately two hours after these discussions, the
prosecution began closing arguments. The next day, on
January 4th, the trial court instructed the jury, and the jury
As the majority notes, Handley I was vacated by the California
Supreme Court on other grounds, but this commonsense point still stands
in the Court of Appeal’s well-phrased formulation. I do not cite it here
as precedent.
2

HANDLEY V. MOORE

57

completed its deliberations. The jury found Handley
“GUILTY as to count 1 as charged in the Original
Information” and “GUILTY as to count 2 as charged in the
Original Information.” The jury further found “IT TO BE
TRUE that during the course of the above kidnapping for
Ransom/Robbery/Extortion/or to Exact Money or a valuable
thing that Michael . . . suffered bodily harm” and that
“Mary . . . was intentionally confined in a manner that
exposed her to a substantial likelihood of death.”
At sentencing, defense counsel “fully acknowledged . . .
that [Handley] was facing a potential sentence of LWOP
based on” the jury’s findings but “made the argument that
imposition
of
[such
a]
sentence
would
be
[unconstitutionally] cruel and unusual.” Handley II, 2021
WL 1138353, at *11. The trial court rejected the argument
and sentenced Handley to LWOP on each of the kidnapping
counts. For the mayhem and torture counts, on which
Handley was also found guilty, the trial court sentenced him
to “two consecutive terms of life with the possibility of
parole after a minimum of 7 years.”
Overall, the record establishes that Handley was
convicted of “aggravated” kidnapping for ransom and
sentenced to LWOP based on circumstances of bodily harm
and substantial likelihood of death that were never alleged in
any charging documents against him, and were injected into
his case at a jury instruction conference held two hours
before the close of evidence.
II
A
Handley raises a straightforward proposition in his
habeas petition: If a fact exposes a defendant to additional

58

HANDLEY V. MOORE

punishment, it is an element of the crime that the state must
allege so that the defendant has fair notice of the charge
against him. The clearly established precedents of the
Supreme Court command no less.
In Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S. 466 (2000), the
Supreme Court concluded that facts which increase the
maximum punishment an accused faces, other than the fact
of prior conviction, must be proven to a jury beyond a
reasonable doubt. This holding was “foreshadowed” by a
prior decision in which the Court had said that “under the
Due Process Clause of the Fifth Amendment and the notice
and jury trial guarantees of the Sixth Amendment, any fact
(other than prior conviction) that increases the maximum
penalty for a crime must be charged in an indictment,
submitted to a jury, and proven beyond a reasonable doubt.”
Id. at 476 (quoting Jones v. United States, 526 U.S. 227, 243
n.6 (1999)). “The Fourteenth Amendment command[ed] the
same answer in th[at] case involving a state statute.” Id.
Apprendi was based on an application of two principles
in Jones: (1) the Due Process Clause guarantees to every
criminal defendant “a jury determination that [he or she] is
guilty of every element of the crime with which [he or she]
is charged, beyond a reasonable doubt,” id. at 477 (quoting
United States v. Gaudin, 515 U.S. 506, 510 (1995)); and
(2) any fact which increases the punishment a defendant may
suffer is, for purposes of the Sixth Amendment’s notice and
jury trial guarantees, an element of the crime for which the
defendant is being held to account, id. at 483 n.10, 491, 494.
The Due Process principle was well established. See id. at
476-77; id. at 499 (Scalia, J., concurring); id. at 499-500
(Thomas, J., concurring); id. at 524 (O’Connor, J.,
dissenting). The Court devoted much of its discussion to the
second principle, namely why a fact that increases the

HANDLEY V. MOORE

59

maximum punishment is an “element” of the charged
offense.
To that point, the Court detailed the long-standing and
“invariable linkage of punishment with crime” in the
common law. Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 478. “As a general
rule,” the distinction between “an ‘element’ of a felony
offense and a ‘sentencing factor’” was nonexistent because
“criminal proceedings were submitted to a jury after being
initiated by an indictment.” Id. at 478. The accusation was
to contain “all the facts and circumstances which constitute
the offence, . . . stated with such certainty and precision,” in
order that “[the defendant] may prepare his defence
accordingly” and so “that there may be no doubt as to the
judgment which should be given, if the defendant be
convicted.” 3 Id. at 478 (omission and emphasis in original)
(quoting J. Archbold, Pleading and Evidence in Criminal
Cases 44 (15th ed. 1862)).
“This practice at common law held true” for offenses
defined by statute as well. Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 480. The
Court stated that “the circumstances mandating a particular
punishment” were like “the circumstances of the crime and
the intent of the defendant at the time of commission,” and
were “often essential elements to be alleged in the
indictment.” Id. This example illustrated the point:
Where a statute annexes a higher degree of
punishment to a common-law felony, if
committed under particular circumstances, an
indictment for the offence, in order to bring
“Judgment” here means “the stage approximating in modern terms the
imposition of sentence.” Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 478 n.4 (citing 4 W.
Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England 368 (1769)).

3

60

HANDLEY V. MOORE

the defendant within that higher degree of
punishment, must expressly charge it to have
been committed under those circumstances,
and must state the circumstances with
certainty and precision. If, then, upon an
indictment under the statute, the prosecutor
prove the felony to have been committed, but
fail in proving it to have been committed
under the circumstances specified in the
statute, the defendant shall be convicted of
the common-law felony only.
Id. at 480-81 (cleaned up) (quoting Archbold at 51, 188).
This and other evidence established the “historic link
between verdict and judgment.” Id. at 482. In effect, the
Court concluded that the long tradition in the common law
linking pleading, crime, and punishment established that
facts which increase punishment are essential to, and so are
elements of, an “offense” for purposes of the Sixth
Amendment’s notice and jury trial guarantees. Id. at 483,
n.10, 494 n.19.
The Court emphasized its adherence to this traditional
linkage. See id. at 480-90. It underscored a prior
determination that Due Process guarantees are not “limited
to those facts that constitute a crime as defined by state law.”
Mullaney v. Wilbur, 421 U.S. 684, 698 (1975); see Apprendi,
530 U.S. at 485-86. This is so because nothing would
otherwise stop a state from circumventing the Constitution’s
procedural guarantees “merely by ‘redefin[ing] the elements
that constitute different crimes, characterizing them as
factors that bear solely on the extent of punishment.’”
Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 486 (alteration in original) (quoting
Mullaney, 421 U.S. at 698); see also id. at 486

HANDLEY V. MOORE

61

(“[C]onstitutional limits exist to States’ authority to define
away facts necessary to constitute a criminal offense.”).
The Supreme Court extended Apprendi and refined the
Sixth Amendment framework in Alleyne v. United States,
570 U.S. 99 (2013). The Court concluded that facts which
increase the minimum punishment an individual is to suffer
must be tried to a jury and found beyond a reasonable doubt
under the Sixth Amendment and Due Process Clause. Id. at
104, 116-18. Alleyne was based on the same principles
stated in Apprendi: Due Process requires proof to a jury
beyond a reasonable doubt of all elements of a crime, and
any fact which aggravates the punishment to which an
individual may be exposed is an “element” of the offense for
purposes of the Sixth Amendment’s procedural guarantees.
Alleyne applied the determination in Apprendi that
“‘facts that increase the prescribed range of penalties to
which a criminal defendant is exposed’ are elements of the
crime” to conclude that “[i]t is impossible to dissociate the
floor of a sentencing range from the penalty affixed to the
crime.” Id. at 111-12 (quoting Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 490).
There is no basis for distinguishing between a fact that
increases the maximum punishment and a fact that increases
the minimum punishment, because both “aggravate the
punishment.” Id. at 113 (emphasis in original). Apprendi
established that any “fact that increases a sentencing floor,
thus, forms an essential ingredient of the offense” and “each
element . . . must be submitted to the jury.” Id. at 113.
Alleyne clarified that “the essential Sixth Amendment
inquiry is whether a fact is an element of the crime.” Id. at
114. Apprendi compelled the conclusion that any “finding
of fact” which “alters the legally prescribed punishment so

62

HANDLEY V. MOORE

as to aggravate it . . . necessarily forms a constituent part of
a new offense.” Id. at 114-15.
These rulings clearly established that a fact which
aggravates the legally prescribed punishment is an
“element” of the offense for purposes of the Sixth
Amendment. This principle was “indispensable” to the
conclusions in Apprendi and Alleyne that the defendants’
Sixth Amendment rights were violated and so constitutes a
holding of the Supreme Court for purposes of AEDPA.
Andrew v. White, 604 U.S. ---, 145 S. Ct. 75, 81 (2025) (per
curiam); see also id. (“When this Court relies on a legal rule
or principle to decide a case, that principle is a ‘holding’ of
the Court for purposes of AEDPA.” (citing Lockyer v.
Andrade, 538 U.S. 63, 71-72 (2003)).
B
The Court of Appeal mentioned the right cases but
unreasonably applied them to deny Handley relief. It
essentially ignored Apprendi and its progeny in a wholly
unreasonable fashion. It said that a criminal pleading “need
only charge the essential elements of the statutory offense”
to comply with constitutional requirements, for “then [it]
fairly apprises the defendant of what he is to meet at the
trial.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *8 (citation
omitted). There was no problem with the operative
information because Section 209(a) “defines but one crime”
and, under California law, bodily harm and substantial
likelihood of death “are special factors pertaining to the issue
of punishment.” Id. at *5. Consequently, because “the
relevant enhancement factors . . . are embedded in a single
statute,” the citation to Section 209(a) sufficed to give
Handley constitutionally adequate notice of the “one crime”
for which he was charged and convicted. Id. at *5, 8. The

HANDLEY V. MOORE

63

parties agree the state court’s basis for this conclusion was
the Supreme Court of California’s decision in People v.
Britton, 6 Cal. 2d 1 (1936).
The state court made little effort to square these
conclusions with Apprendi, Alleyne, and the long tradition of
due process on which they were built. Its core conclusion -that Section 209(a) may properly be understood to state a
single offense for purposes of the Sixth Amendment -- was
the fruit of an unreasonable application of Apprendi and
Alleyne. Consequently, the denial of relief to Handley was
not only wrong but “objectively” so. White v. Woodall, 572
U.S. 415, 419 (2014) (citation omitted).
A comparison of Section 209(a) and the statute in
Alleyne puts a finer point on this error. Alleyne concerned
Section 924(c) of title 18 of the United States Code, which
assigned a penalty of imprisonment of “not less than 5 years”
for “us[ing] or carr[ying] a firearm” in relation to a “crime
of violence” but “imprisonment of not less than 7 years” if
“the firearm is brandished.” Alleyne, 570 U.S. at 1003-04
(quoting 18 U.S.C. §§ 924(c)(1)(A)(i)-(ii)). Alleyne held
that “the fact of brandishing” is “an element of a separate
aggravated offense.” Id. at 115.
Section 209(a) is similarly structured. It assigns a
penalty of LWP for kidnapping for ransom, and an enhanced
penalty of LWOP if it is proved that the victim suffered
bodily harm or faced a substantial likelihood of death. For
both Section 209(a) and Section 924(c), specific facts about
the commission of the prohibited conduct open the door to
greater punishments.
Consequently, it is hard to see how the state court’s glib
treatment of Apprendi and Alleyne in affirming Handley’s
conviction under Section 209(a) was anything short of

64

HANDLEY V. MOORE

“objectively unreasonable.” White, 572 U.S. at 419 (citation
omitted). To be sure, state Section 209(a) presents both
penalties in a single subsection, whereas federal Section
924(c) splits the penalties across subparts (i), (ii), and (iii),
but these differences in formatting are hardly of
constitutional magnitude.
The Court of Appeal relied mainly on the 1936 decision
of the California Supreme Court in Britton. The date bears
emphasis because Britton was decided before the Sixth
Amendment right to notice was held to be incorporated
against the states by the Fourteenth Amendment, see Cole v.
Arkansas, 333 U.S. 196 (1948), and obviously decades
before Apprendi, Alleyne, and related precedent. The Court
of Appeal cited Britton for the proposition that the facts of
bodily harm or likelihood of death in Section 209(a) were
“special factors pertaining to the issue of punishment” that
“do not affect the singular nature of the underlying offense.”
Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *5 (citing Britton, 6 Cal.
2d at 4-5). The Court of Appeal offered no explanation of
how that proposition might be squared with the Sixth
Amendment precedent from the Supreme Court of the
United States. Apprendi expressly cautioned against exactly
this error. It emphasized that state law could not circumvent
the Constitution’s procedural guarantees by “redefin[ing]
the elements that constitute different crimes, characterizing
them as factors that bear solely on the extent of punishment.”
Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 485-86 (alteration in original) (citing
Mullaney, 421 U.S. at 698); see also Alleyne, 570 U.S. at 105
(Apprendi “identified a concrete limit on the types of facts
that legislatures may designate as sentencing factors”).
Consequently, “beyond any possibility for fairminded
disagreement,” Harrington v. Richter, 562 U.S. 86, 103
(2011), the Court of Appeal’s decision was outside the

HANDLEY V. MOORE

65

“range of reasonable judgment,” Yarborough v. Alvarado,
541 U.S. 652, 664 (2004). An aggravating fact that produces
a higher range of sentence “conclusively indicates that the
fact is an element of a distinct and aggravated crime.”
Alleyne, 570 U.S. at 116 (emphasis added). The essential
premise of Britton, that Section 209 sets forth only one
offense, is not consonant with the principles clearly
established by Apprendi and Alleyne. Rather than address
this issue head on, the state court said only that “Apprendi
was not a notice case” and that “[i]t is highly doubtful that
Apprendi has any effect whatever on pleading
requirements.” Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *8-9
(alteration and emphasis in original) (citation omitted). This
rather cavalier dismissal was again bereft of a cogent
explanation. In effect, the state court punted on Handley’s
Sixth Amendment claim under the federal law clearly
established at the time of its decision.
The state court’s error was a “critical oversight,” Gautt
v. Lewis, 489 F.3d 993, 1008 (9th Cir. 2007), going to the
heart of Handley’s constitutional claim and “the essential
Sixth Amendment inquiry,” Alleyne, 570 U.S. at 114.
Because the state court’s “adjudication of [Handley’s Sixth
Amendment] claim [was] dependent on an antecedent
unreasonable application of federal law” with respect to the
elements of the offenses set forth in Section 209(a), I would
conclude “the requirement set forth in § 2254(d)(1) is
satisfied.” Panetti v. Quarterman, 551 U.S. 930, 953 (2007).
C
The majority responds to all of this by drawing
distinctions that the established precedent does not support
and applying the Fifth Amendment to truncate the Sixth

66

HANDLEY V. MOORE

Amendment. These arguments do not do the work the
majority asks of them.
1
To start, the majority says there is a distinction between
facts that are elements of an offense and “punishmentenhancing facts,” which are said to be “facts serving solely
to increase the prescribed range of penalties to which a
defendant is exposed.” But Apprendi clearly establishes
there is no such difference. See Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 494
n.19 (“[W]hen the term ‘sentence enhancement’ is used to
describe an increase beyond the maximum authorized
statutory sentence, it is the functional equivalent of an
element of a greater offense . . . . Indeed, it fits squarely
within the usual definition of an ‘element’ of the offense.”).
This chart illustrates how the majority’s definitions are
actually the same as those in Apprendi and Alleyne:
Majority’s definition of
“punishment-enhancing
fact”

Apprendi and Alleyne’s
definition of “element”

• “[F]acts that serve only • “[P]ut simply, facts that
to
increase
the
expose a defendant to a
prescribed punishment
punishment greater than
to which a defendant is
that otherwise legally
exposed.”
prescribed
were
by
definition ‘elements’ of a
• “[F]acts that increase
separate legal offense.”
the prescribed range of
Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 483
penalties to which a
n.10.
defendant is exposed.”
• “When a finding of fact
alters
the
legally
prescribed punishment so

HANDLEY V. MOORE

67

as to aggravate it, the fact
necessarily
forms
a
constituent part of a new
offense.” Alleyne, 570
U.S. at 114-15.
• “The essential point is that
the
aggravating
fact
produced a higher range,
which,
in
turn,
conclusively
indicates
that the fact is an element
of
a
distinct
and
aggravated
crime.”
Alleyne, 570 U.S. at 11516.
The majority also says that Handley essentially conceded
his case. It says Handley agreed that “these decisions did
not hold that such facts must be charged in a state criminal
pleading” and that any statements in them to the contrary
was “dicta” for AEDPA purposes.
Not so. Handley filed his opening brief before the
Supreme Court decided Andrew, which clarified when legal
principles are “holdings” for purposes of AEDPA. After
Andrew was decided, Handley promptly filed a Rule 28(j)
letter with this Court in which he squarely contended that the
principles in Jones, Apprendi and Alleyne, are “a ‘holding’
of the Court for purposes of AEDPA” (quoting Andrew, 145
S. Ct. at 81). At oral argument, Handley’s lawyer repeatedly
relied on Andrew to argue that punishment-enhancing facts
are “elements” under Apprendi and Alleyne. This is not a
record of concession or agreement by Handley that plugs the
holes in the majority’s analysis.

68

HANDLEY V. MOORE

2
The majority asserts more broadly that precedent with
respect to the grand jury clause in the Fifth Amendment
forecloses the conclusion that the Sixth Amendment requires
state charging documents to allege punishment-enhancing
facts. The logic is said to go like this. Longstanding
precedent holds that the guarantee of an indictment by a
grand jury in criminal cases was not incorporated by the
Fourteenth Amendment to apply to the states. See Hurtado
v. California, 110 U.S. 516, 535 (1884); Branzberg v. Hayes,
408 U.S. 665, 688 n.25 (1972). Apprendi identified the
historical linkage of pleading, crime, and punishment with
respect to the Sixth Amendment, and did not overturn the
holding that the right of indictment by a grand jury does not
apply to the states. See Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 477 n.3. Any
doubt about this was put to rest in United States v. Cotton,
535 U.S. 625 (2002), which drew a distinction “between
federal and state prosecutions.”
Consequently, the
constitutional requirements of notice and the elements of a
criminal charge in an indictment do not apply to the states
because the Fifth Amendment right to an indictment is not
incorporated by the Fourteenth Amendment.
This reasoning is doubtful in several respects. It is true
Apprendi reserved “the indictment question” for another
day. Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 477 n.3. 4 But that is not the end
of the matter, as the majority would have it. Unlike the grand
Contrary to the majority’s suggestion, footnote 3 in Apprendi did not
say anything about reserving a Sixth Amendment question. The
“indictment question” the Court reserved was “the Fifth Amendment
right to ‘presentment or indictment of a Grand Jury’ that was implicated
in our recent decision in Almendarez-Torres v. United States, 523 U.S.
224 (1998).” Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 477 n.3.

4

HANDLEY V. MOORE

69

jury clause in the Fifth Amendment, the Sixth Amendment
has long been applied to the states by the Fourteenth
Amendment. As noted in McDonald v. City of Chicago, 561
U.S. 742, 764 n.12 (2010), the many rights that originate
under the Sixth Amendment have been incorporated in full
in state criminal proceedings, including: the right to a trial
by jury, see Duncan v. Louisiana, 391 U.S. 145 (1968); the
right to compulsory process, see Washington v. Texas, 388
U.S. 14 (1967); the right to a speedy trial, see Klopfer v.
North Carolina, 386 U.S. 213 (1967); the right to confront
adverse witnesses, see Pointer v. Texas, 380 U.S. 400
(1965); the right to assistance of counsel, see Gideon v.
Wainwright, 372 U.S. 335 (1963); and the right to a public
trial, see In re Oliver, 333 U.S. 257 (1948). 5
Even so, the majority suggests that Cotton, a case about
waiver of a Fifth Amendment objection and plain error
review, closes the door on the Sixth Amendment here
because it stated that a fact which increases the penalty for a
crime must be charged in an indictment “in federal
prosecutions.” Cotton, 535 U.S. at 627. This is a heavy hat
to hang on Cotton, and it does not bear the weight. The fact
that the Fifth Amendment does not require states to use
grand juries to return indictments in state criminal cases does
not mean that the Sixth Amendment principles identified in
Apprendi and Alleyne do not apply to the states or state
charging documents. That would be an odd conclusion
McDonald noted one “exception” at the time of publication, namely
that “although the Sixth Amendment right to trial by jury requires a
unanimous jury verdict in federal criminal trials, it does not require a
unanimous jury verdict in state criminal trials.” McDonald, 561 U.S. at
766 n.14. But that too has changed, and a unanimous verdict is now
required in state criminal cases. See Ramos v. Louisiana, 590 U.S. 83,
100 (2020).

5

70

HANDLEY V. MOORE

given the overall incorporation of the Sixth Amendment to
the states. To be sure, Apprendi and Alleyne specifically
addressed the question of what facts must be submitted and
proved to a petit jury in state and federal criminal trials, but
that in no way indicates that the general principles of
punishment, elements, and notice they identified and relied
on in the Sixth Amendment do not apply here in full
measure. Cotton did not, and had no reason to, overrule
these general principles any more than Apprendi overruled
the Fifth Amendment cases.
The more likely reason for the mention of federal
prosecutions in Cotton is that it was simply speaking to the
facts at hand. This case is different. To obtain relief, a
habeas petitioner must identify a “controlling legal
standard.” Panetti, 551 U.S. at 953. “General legal
principles can constitute clearly established law for purposes
of AEDPA so long as they are holdings of [the Supreme]
Court.” Andrew, 145 S. Ct. at 82; see also Panetti, 551 U.S.
at 953 (“[E]ven a general standard may be applied in an
unreasonable manner.”). A controlling standard or principle
for Section 2254(d)(1) need not be neatly packaged in one
decision. “For example, the Eighth Amendment principle
that a sentence may not be grossly disproportionate to the
offense is clearly established under § 2254(d)(1), even
though it arises out of a thicket of Eighth Amendment
jurisprudence and lacks precise contours.” Andrew, 145 S.
Ct. at 82 (cleaned up) (quoting Lockyer, 538 U.S. at 72).
So too here. Apprendi, Alleyne, and allied cases
established the historical linkage of pleading, crime, and
punishment as general principles embodied in the Sixth
Amendment. These principles are “fundamental enough that
when new factual permutations arise, the necessity to apply

HANDLEY V. MOORE

71

the earlier rule will be beyond doubt.” Andrew, 145 S. Ct. at
82 (quoting White, 572 U.S. at 427).
To conclude otherwise, as the majority does,
unreasonably dilutes the Sixth Amendment. The Supreme
Court has “abandoned ‘the notion that the Fourteenth
Amendment applies to States only a watered-down,
subjective version of the individual guarantees of the Bill of
Rights.’” McDonald, 561 U.S. at 765 (quoting Malloy v.
Hogan, 378 U.S. 1, 10-11 (1964)). Rather, it has “decisively
held that incorporated Bill of Rights protections ‘are all to
be enforced against the States under the Fourteenth
Amendment according to the same standards that protect
those personal rights against federal encroachment.’” Id.
(quoting Malloy, 378 U.S. at 10); see also Timbs v. Indiana,
586 U.S. 146, 150 (2019) (“[I]f a Bill of Rights protection is
incorporated, there is no daylight between the federal and
state conduct it prohibits or requires.”). The majority
reduces the Sixth Amendment to weak tea with its cramped
reading of the general principles clearly established in
Supreme Court precedent.
D
Handley framed his challenge to the Court of Appeal’s
decision primarily as “contrary to” established precedent.
AEDPA permits habeas relief when the state decision “was
contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of,
clearly established” federal law in Supreme Court precedent.
28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(1). Given the clarification in Andrew
of what constitutes a holding for purposes of AEDPA, which
was decided after Handley filed his petition and brief, it
would be unfair to penalize him for focusing more on the
“contrary to” versus the “unreasonable application” prong,
especially in light of his Rule 28(j) letter and oral arguments.

72

HANDLEY V. MOORE

Moreover, it is not obvious there is a meaningful difference
in this case between saying the state court’s construction of
Section 209(a) was “contrary to” Apprendi and Alleyne’s
application of the principle versus saying that construction
involved an “unreasonable application” of that principle.
In any event, we should not turn away a good merits
argument on mere formalities. Rather, we must “focus on
the substance of the [litigant’s] claims, not the [litigant’s]
labels.” Sateriale v. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co., 697 F.3d
777, 788 n.4 (9th Cir. 2012); see also Smith v. Texas, 550
U.S. 297, 314 (2007) (“Smith’s labeling of the claim . . . did
not change its substance.”). An issue is properly presented
on habeas review when a party “provided [the] court with
ample opportunity to make a reasoned judgment on the
issue.” Goeke v. Branch, 514 U.S. 115, 118 (1995).
Handley has done that. It bears mention that the District
Court also understood Handley to contend that the state
court’s decision was “objectively unreasonable factually or
under the clearly established federal law.”
III
We come now to the second unreasonable application of
precedent by the Court of Appeal. The court held that, “even
if Britton were not controlling,” “[n]o due process violation
has been shown” because the charges against Handley were
informally amended to provide adequate notice of an
aggravated kidnapping charge and sentence of life without
parole. Handley II, 2021 WL 1138353, at *9, 11. This was
based on: (1) the trial judge stating at the December 21
conference that he would give the CALCRIM No. 1202
instruction, and defense counsel’s failure to object; (2) the
trial judge remarking at the January 3 conference that he
would instruct on “great bodily injury” in connection with

HANDLEY V. MOORE

73

the kidnapping-for-ransom counts; (3) the prosecution’s
statement at the January 3 conference that it would argue
substantial likelihood of death as to Mary; (4) defense
counsel’s failure to object at the January 3 conference;
(5) defense counsel’s failure to object during closing
argument or the return of the guilty verdict; and (6) defense
counsel “fully acknowledging” that Handley faced “a
potential sentence of LWOP” in his sentencing brief. Id. at
*11.
These events happened during trial at the very end of
Handley’s multi-year prosecution, but nevertheless satisfied
the state court that Handley was “apprised of the
prosecutor’s intent to prove the special allegations required
to impose a sentence of LWOP,” and that Handley
“consented to the inclusion of those allegations in the jury
instructions and verdict form.” Id. The state court
concluded Handley received all the process he was due
because the record showed an informal amendment occurred
as a matter of state law. Id. at *10-12.
This too was constitutional error. It is clearly established
under the Sixth Amendment and Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment that a state criminal defendant “has
a right . . . to be informed of any charges against him.”
Gautt, 487 U.S. at 1004 (discussing Cole, 333 U.S. 196); see
Marshall v. Rodgers, 569 U.S. 58, 64 (2013) (circuit courts
may “look to circuit precedent” to see if a “particular point
in issue is clearly established by Supreme Court precedent”).
The parties did not contend otherwise.
Gautt aptly stated that it was “troublesome” to treat jury
instructions or closing arguments as a “substitute for
sufficient notice to a defendant of the charges that have been
leveled against him,” but did not decide the issue because it

74

HANDLEY V. MOORE

concluded the state court unreasonably determined the
evidence from the late-stage trial events there so sufficed.
Gautt, 487 U.S. at 1010-11. This case presents the occasion
to apply the controlling legal standard that the Sixth
Amendment and due process require notice to be given at the
beginning of court proceedings, and not at the end of them.
Established precedent in Application of Gault, 387 U.S.
1 (1967), commands this result. In Gault, the Supreme Court
reversed a state court’s denial of habeas relief sought by a
minor challenging his confinement pursuant to a juvenile
court “delinquency” determination because the minor’s
constitutional right to notice, among others, had been
violated. Id. at 31-34. Although sensitive to the distinctions
between juvenile and adult criminal proceedings, the Court
concluded that minors were not stripped of the “substantial
rights under the Constitution” they would otherwise be
afforded if they were “over 18” and facing charges. Gault,
387 U.S. at 29. Juvenile proceedings “must measure up to
the essentials of due process and fair treatment.” Id. at 31
(quoting Kent v. United States, 383 U.S. 541, 562 (1966)).
The Court squarely stated that “[n]otice, to comply with
due process requirements, must be given sufficiently in
advance of scheduled court proceedings so that reasonable
opportunity to prepare will be afforded, and it must set forth
the alleged misconduct with particularity.” 6 Id. at 33
Gault makes plain that these rights originated in the specific guarantees
in the Bill of Rights held to apply to the states by the Fourteenth
Amendment’s Due Process Clause, such as the right to notice, to counsel,
to confrontation, to cross-examination, and against self-incrimination.
Gault, 387 U.S. at 10, 13. The concurring Justices agreed the rights
analyzed by the majority were rooted in the Bill of Rights’ textual
procedural guarantees. See id. at 59-61 (Black, J., concurring); id. at 6465 (White, J., concurring).

6

HANDLEY V. MOORE

75

(internal quotation omitted). The minor’s rights were
violated because the Constitution “requires notice of the sort
[the Court] described -- that is, notice which would be
deemed constitutionally adequate in a civil or criminal
proceeding.” Id. at 33 (citing, inter alia, Cole, 333 U.S.
196). Delaying notice of the charge until “a hearing on the
merits” is patently “not timely,” which is true “even if there
were a conceivable purpose served by the deferral proposed
by the court below.” Id. Gault thus relied upon, and so
clearly established for purposes of AEDPA, the principle
that, as part of “the essentials of due process and fair
treatment,” criminal defendants have a right to specific
notice of the charges against them “sufficiently in advance”
of a merits proceeding. Id. at 30, 33 (citation omitted).
The Court of Appeal unreasonably applied this precedent
when it determined that Handley was given constitutionally
adequate notice of the aggravated kidnapping for ransom
charge in a whirlwind of jury instruction conferences at the
tail end of his prosecution. See Handley II, 2021 WL
1138353, at *10-11. Much of the ostensible “notice” was
provided during the conference on January 3 that took place
about two hours before the close of evidence and featured a
variety of incorrect statements by the trial judge, as we have
seen. This cannot be constitutionally sufficient because
Gault made plain that notice given at the start of an initial
merits hearing was “not timely.” Gault, 387 U.S. at 33; see
also Balbuena v. Sullivan, 980 F.3d 619, 631-32 (9th Cir.
2020) (assessing reasonableness of state court ruling by
comparing to prior Supreme Court rulings). Whatever the
outer boundary of Gault might be for notice being
“sufficiently in advance” of a merits proceeding, notice at
such a late stage here, when the jury trial of Handley was

76

HANDLEY V. MOORE

effectively at an end, cannot be deemed adequate by any
stretch of reasoning.
The state court gave substantial attention to whether
Handley’s case was similar to People v. Anderson, 9 Cal. 5th
946 (2020), but did not stop to consider the salient question
of whether the ostensible notice to Handley was
constitutionally adequate. It bears mention that none of the
California state cases cited for support by the Court of
Appeal held that notice, provided after the start of trial, of a
different charge with greater penalties is constitutionally
adequate. See, e.g., Anderson, 9 Cal. 5th at 958-60; People
v. Sawyers, 15 Cal. App. 5th 713, 722-26 (2017); People v.
Sandoval, 140 Cal. App. 4th 111, 127-29, 132-34 (2006);
People v. Haskin, 4 Cal. App. 4th 1434, 1439-40 (1992); see
also People v. Mancebo, 27 Cal. 4th 735, 740-41, 751-53
(2002); People v. Robinson, 122 Cal. App. 4th 275, 282
(2004).
Respondent did not cite a decision of this Court which
concluded that events occurring after the start of trial can
provide adequate notice under the Sixth Amendment of a
different offense carrying more severe penalties than the one
formally charged. See John-Charles v. California, 646 F.3d
1243, 1250 (9th Cir. 2011) (looking to circuit precedent to
see if a “fairminded” jurist could agree with the state court
based on whether prior panels came to the same conclusion).
As Gautt stated, our precedents concern either late-stage
notice of a new theory by which the prosecution would seek
to prove the previously charged offense, or a record of
constitutionally sufficient pre-trial notice. See Gautt, 489
F.3d at 1009 (discussing cases); see also Zanini v. Garrett,
No. 23-15397, 2024 WL 2379017 (9th Cir. May 23, 2024)
(unpub.) (mid-trial amendment to add new facts to original
allegations for the same offenses with the same elements);

HANDLEY V. MOORE

77

Cain v. Chappell, 870 F.3d 1003, 1014-15 (9th Cir. 2017)
(information alleged the factual basis for “the commission of
rape” and cited the statute containing the “attempted rape
special circumstance,” which was a “lesser-included
offense” (quoting Gautt, 489 F.3d at 1007)); Cote v. Adams,
586 F. App’x. 414, 415 (9th Cir. 2014) (unpub.).
Even so, the majority rejects Handley’s argument under
Gault by saying he “points to no Supreme Court precedent
holding that notice provided through informal amendment of
the information -- with the defendant’s consent -- cannot
satisfy the Sixth Amendment’s notice requirement.”
I see it differently. The notice requirement in Gault is a
“general constitutional rule already identified in the
decisional law [that] may apply with obvious clarity to the
specific conduct in question.” Andrew, 145 S. Ct. at 82
(quoting Taylor v. Riojas, 592 U.S. 7, 9 (2020) (per curiam)).
We have stated that “a legal principle established by a
Supreme Court decision” may not provide a “controlling
legal standard” when “there is a ‘structural difference’
between the prior precedent and the case at issue, or when
the prior precedent requires ‘tailoring or modification’ to
apply to the new situation.” Moses v. Payne, 555 F.3d 742,
754-55 (9th Cir. 2009) (citations omitted).
The majority does not say that the plain holding of Gault
might entail such “tailoring or modification” to govern here,
for good reason. The material question is the same -- did the
notice come too late? -- and so the inquiry under AEDPA is
“whether the application of that standard was objectively
unreasonable, even if the facts . . . are not identical to the
Supreme Court precedent.” Id. (citation omitted). That
Handley is said to have been given notice by means of an
oral, informal amendment does not necessitate any tailoring

78

HANDLEY V. MOORE

or modification. The notices in Gault were given orally and
then on paper. See 387 U.S. at 5-6.
The majority’s mention of consent is of no moment and
does not pose a “structural difference” between Gault and
this case. Moses, 555 F.3d at 754 (citation omitted). The
petitioner and his family in Gault “appeared at the two
hearings ‘without objection.’” Gault, 387 U.S. at 5-7, 32.
The Court could not have been clearer in stating that the
“asserted failure to object does not excuse the lack of
adequate notice.” Id. at 34 n.54. 7 The fact that the petitioner
was proceeding pro se does not pose a structural difference,
as the majority suggests. Gault certainly did not limit the
right of “notice which would be deemed constitutionally
adequate in a civil or criminal proceeding” to pro se litigants.
Id. at 33, n.53 (citing, inter alia, Cole, 333 U.S. 196, in which
the defendants had counsel). It bears mention that the Court
of Appeal expressly declined to find that Handley waived or
forfeited his constitutional claim. See Handley II, 2021 WL
1138353, at *11-12, n.6.
IV
Because Handley has established grounds for relief
under Section 2254, and it is clear from the foregoing
principles that his Sixth Amendment rights were violated,
the remaining question is the proper remedy. In my view, a
violation of the Sixth Amendment right to adequate notice
One looks in vain in the trial transcript for affirmative consent by
Handley to “amendment of the information,” as the majority would have
it. At most, the record shows, and the Court of Appeal so found, that
Handley did not object to the jury instructions or verdict form after the
trial judge told Handley that language would not increase his sentence.
Those are facts to which Gault “clearly extends.” Moses, 555 F.3d at
753.
7

HANDLEY V. MOORE

79

of a criminal charge requires automatic reversal of the
conviction without a showing of prejudice, for such an error
is “structural.”
A “constitutional error is either structural or it is not.”
Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1, 14 (1999). Structural
errors “affect the framework within which the trial proceeds,
and are not simply an error in the trial process itself.” United
States v. Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. 140, 148 (2006) (cleaned
up) (quoting Arizona v. Fulminante, 499 U.S. 279, 309-10
(1991)); see McKinney v. Ryan, 813 F.3d 798, 821 (9th Cir.
2015); see also Puckett v. United States, 556 U.S. 129, 141
(2009) (constitutional error is structural when it would
“necessarily render a criminal trial fundamentally unfair”
(citation omitted)). An error may also be structural when its
effects are “too hard to measure,” Weaver v. Mass., 582 U.S.
286, 295 (2017), such that conducting a harmless-error
analysis “would be a speculative inquiry,” Gonzalez-Lopez,
548 U.S. at 150.
Although many constitutional errors can be harmless,
see Fulminante, 499 U.S. at 306-07, a deprivation of the
Sixth Amendment right to notice of a criminal charge is not.
The Supreme Court has characterized the right to notice as
“both ‘basic in our system of jurisprudence’ and as a
‘principle of procedural due process’ that is unsurpassed in
its ‘clearly established’ nature.” Gautt, 489 F.3d at 1015
(emphasis omitted) (first quoting In re Oliver, 333 U.S. at
273, then Cole, 333 U.S. at 201). Adequate notice is one of
“the essentials of due process and fair treatment.” Gault, 387
U.S. at 31 (quoting Kent, 383 U.S. at 562). Apprendi and
Alleyne detailed the pivotal role that allegations in a charging
document played in criminal prosecutions at common law.
See Apprendi, 530 U.S. at 478-79; Alleyne, 570 U.S. at 10911.

80

HANDLEY V. MOORE

The “charging instrument is ‘the framework within
which the trial proceeds,’ and forms the basis of the
Government’s proof, the accused’s defense, and the trial
court’s rulings.” United States v. Lewis, 802 F.3d 449, 462
(3d Cir. 2015) (en banc) (Smith, J., concurring, with whom
McKee, Ambro, and Jordan, J.J., join) (emphasis in original)
(citations omitted). Inadequate notice puts a defendant in the
unfair position of proceeding through investigation, plea
negotiations, and trial on an understanding of the offense and
potential sentence that is completely different from what the
prosecution ultimately demands in a verdict. This error
“infect[s] the entire trial process,” such that the process
“cannot reliably serve its function as a vehicle for
determination of guilt or innocence.” Neder, 527 U.S. at 89 (citation omitted); see Puckett, 556 U.S. at 141.
Respondent suggests that Cotton decided that notice
errors are subject to harmless error analysis. But Cotton
concerned a question not presented in this case, namely
whether an arguably waived claim of the right to an
indictment by a grand jury is reviewed for plain error.
Cotton, 353 U.S. at 631-32. It expressly did not resolve the
prejudice prong of plain error. Id. at 632; see also United
States v. Resendiz-Ponce, 549 U.S. 102, 103-04 (2007).
Overall, Cotton is not instructive here.
Respondent also says that harmless error review should
apply because failures to submit an element to a jury under
Apprendi and Alleyne are so reviewed. But harmless error
analysis is appropriate in those circumstances because such
an error does not “necessarily render a criminal trial
fundamentally unfair or an unreliable vehicle for
determining guilt or innocence.” Washington v. Recuenco,
548 U.S. 212, 219 (2006) (emphasis in original) (citations
omitted). That is not the situation here. Adequate notice of

HANDLEY V. MOORE

81

the crime being charged, and its attendant sentence,
materially affects defense strategies from start to end. See
Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. at 150; Lewis, 802 F.3d at 463
(Smith, J., concurring). Adequate and accurate knowledge
of the charged crime and punishment determines “whether
and on what terms the defendant cooperates with the
prosecution, plea bargains, or decides to go to trial.”
Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. at 150. Unlike the situation where
a judge finds a particular fact instead of the jury,
“determining ‘what might have been’” when a defendant and
her counsel were deprived of adequate notice of the ultimate
charge and penalty at stake “is an exercise in rank
speculation.” Lewis, 802 F.3d at 463 (Smith, J., concurring);
see Weaver, 582 U.S. at 295-96; Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S.
at 150.
This fits Handley’s case to perfection. Handley states,
and Respondent does not contest, that individuals sentenced
to LWP are eligible for parole in seven years in California.
See Cal. Pen. Code § 3046(a)(1) (2024). Handley received
that sentence for the mayhem and torture counts. If Handley
had been found guilty of simple kidnapping for ransom, as
alleged in the operative information, there was a possibility
he would serve between seven and twenty-eight years in
prison for all counts before being paroled. See id.
§§ 3046(a), (b). The calculus of whether to plea bargain or
go to trial is obviously quite different when life in prison
without parole is on the table. Consequently, a harmless
error approach is not reasonable here. It would necessarily
entail a “speculative inquiry into what might have occurred
in an alternate universe.” Gonzalez-Lopez, 548 U.S. at 150.

82

HANDLEY V. MOORE

V
I would reverse the denial of habeas relief in this
circumstance and remand with instructions to issue a
conditional writ of habeas corpus directing the vacatur of
Handley’s convictions and sentences on the kidnapping for
ransom charges unless he is retried within 120 days. The
Sixth Amendment demands no less than that.

