FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
AUBRY MCMAHON,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
WORLD VISION INC.,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 24-3259
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-00920JLR

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
James L. Robart, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 21, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed August 5, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould, Richard C. Tallman, and
Morgan B. Christen, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Tallman

2

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

SUMMARY *
Employment Discrimination
The panel reversed the district court’s summary
judgment for Aubry McMahon and remanded for entry of
summary judgment in favor of World Vision, Inc., in
McMahon’s lawsuit against World Vision alleging
discrimination based on sex, sexual orientation, and marital
status under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the
Washington Law Against Discrimination (WLAD).
World Vision extended a job offer to McMahon for a
remote position as a customer service representative
(CSR). After learning that McMahon was in a same-sex
marriage, World Vision revoked its job offer.
The district court initially granted summary judgment for
World Vision based on the church autonomy
doctrine. Reversing itself after McMahon moved for
reconsideration, the district court decided that the church
autonomy doctrine did not apply because World Vision had
acted under a “facially discriminatory hiring policy,” so the
court could resolve the case using “neutral principles of law”
without becoming entangled in religion. Rejecting World
Vision’s ministerial exception defense and other defenses,
the district court entered summary judgment for McMahon
after concluding that World Vision rescinded her job offer
pursuant to a policy that facially discriminated based on sex,

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

3

sexual orientation, and marital status in violation of Title VII
and the WLAD.
Renewing on appeal the arguments it made before the
district court, World Vision argued, inter alia, that CSRs fall
under the ministerial exception to employment
discrimination laws because CSRs serve a pivotal role in
World Vision’s religious mission as its public voice.
The panel held that the district court erred by rejecting
World Vision’s ministerial exception defense. The
ministerial exception bars McMahon’s employment
discrimination claims because the record shows that CSRs
perform key religious functions central to World Vision’s
mission.
CSRs are responsible for effectively
communicating World Vision’s worldwide ministries and
projects to donors and supporters. CSRs engage with donors
in prayer and give them the opportunity to join World
Vision’s
religious
mission
through
financial
contributions. Because each of these “vital religious duties,”
Our Lady of Guadalupe Sch. v. Morrissey-Berru, 591 U.S.
732, 756 (2020), lies at the core of World Vision’s religious
mission of “working with the poor and oppressed to promote
human transformation, seek justice and bear witness to the
good news of the Kingdom of God,” the ministerial
exception applies to CSRs and bars McMahon’s claims.
The panel accordingly reversed the district court’s grant
of summary judgment for McMahon and remanded for
entry of summary judgment in favor of World Vision.

4

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

COUNSEL
Michael C. Subit (argued), Frank Freed Subit & Thomas
LLP, Seattle, Washington; Casimir Wolnowski, Nisar Law
Group PC, New York, New York; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Daniel H. Blomberg (argued), Luke W. Goodrich, Jordan T.
Varberg, and Amanda G. Dixon, The Becket Fund for
Religious Liberty, Washington, D.C.; Scott J. Ward and J.
Matthew Szymanski, Gammon & Grange PC, Tysons,
Virginia; Abigail J. St. Hilaire and Nathaniel L. Taylor, Ellis
Li & McKinstry PLLC, Seattle, Washington; for DefendantAppellant.
Rebecca R. Dummermuth, First Liberty Institute,
Washington, D.C.; Randall W. Miller, Julie M. Christensen,
and Emily C. Means, Munsch Hardt Kopf & Harr PC,
Dallas, Texas; Jeffrey C. Mateer, David J. Hacker, Stephanie
N. Taub, and Jeremiah G. Dys, First Liberty Institute, Plano,
Texas; for Amici Curiae Billy Graham Evangelistic
Association and Samaritan's Purse.
Ian S. Speir I, Covenant Law PLLC, Colorado Springs,
Colorado, for Amici Curiae Colson Center for Christian
Worldview, Moody Bible Institute, Summit Ministries, and
Cedarville University.
Steven T. McFarland, Christian Legal Society, Center for
Law & Religious Freedom, Springfield, Virginia, for Amici
Curiae Christian Legal Society, Accord Network, American
Association of Christian Schools, Association of Christian
Schools International, Campus Crusade for Christ, Crista
Ministries, Christian Medical and Dental Association,
General Conference of Seventh-Day Adventists,
InterVarsity Christian Fellowship/USA, Islam and Religious
Freedom Action Team of the Religious Freedom Institute,

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

5

Jewish Coalition for Religious Liberty, The Center for
Public Justice, The Institutional Religious Freedom
Alliance, and The Navigators.
Joshua W. Carden, Carden Livesay Ltd., Mesa, Arizona;
Michael P. Farris, National Religious Broadcasters,
Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae National Religious
Broadcasters.
John T. Melcon, Taylor Huse, and Stuart Lark, Taft
Stettinius & Hollister LLP, Colorado Springs, Colorado, for
Amici Curiae Council for Christian Colleges & Universities,
Calvary Chapel Ft. Lauderdale. Cherry Hills Community
Church, International Mission Inc. dba Christar, Christian
Camp and Conference Association, Church Educational
System of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints,
Community Bible Study, Cross Catholic Outreach Inc., The
Crowell Trust, Diocese of Colorado Springs, Ethics and
Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist
Convention,
Evangelical
Council
for
Financial
Accountability, Family Stations Inc. dba Family Radio,
Focus on the Family, Grace to You, Gull Lake Ministries,
International Church of the Foursquare Gospel, The Master's
University & Seminary, O.C. International Inc., Servant
Foundation Dba The Signatry, Tyndale House Ministries,
Upward Unlimited, The Christian Community Foundation
Inc. dba Waterstone, and Young Life.
Peter M. Torstensen Jr., Deputy Solicitor General; Christian
B. Corrigan, Solicitor General; Austin Knudsen, Montana
Attorney General, Office of the Montana Attorney General,
Helena, Montana; Steve Marshall, Alabama Attorney
General, Office of the Alabama, Attorney General,
Montgomery, Alabama; Tim Griffin, Arkansas Attorney
General, Office of the Arkansas Attorney General, Little

6

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

Rock, Arkansas; Ashley Moody, Florida Attorney General,
Office of the Florida Attorney General, Tallahassee, Florida;
Raul R. Labrador, Idaho Attorney General; Idaho Office of
the Attorney General, Boise, Idaho; Brenna Bird, Iowa
Attorney General, Office of the Iowa Attorney General, Des
Moines, Iowa; Kris W. Kobach, Kansas Attorney General,
Office of the Kansas Attorney General, Topeka, Kansas; Liz
Murrill, Louisiana Attorney General, Office of the Louisiana
Attorney General, Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Lynn Fitch,
Mississippi Attorney General, Office of the Mississippi
Attorney General, Jackson, Mississippi; Andrew T. Bailey,
Missouri Attorney General, Office of the Missouri Attorney
General, Kansas City, Missouri; Michael T. Hilgers
Nebraska Attorney General, Office of the Nebraska Attorney
General, Lincoln, Nebraska; Dave Yost, Ohio Attorney
General, Office of the Ohio Attorney General, Columbus,
Ohio; Gentner F. Drummond, Oklahoma Attorney General,
Office of the Oklahoma Attorney General, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma; Alan Wilson, South Carolina Attorney General,
Office of the South Carolina Attorney General, Columbia,
South Carolina; Jonathan Skrmetti, Tennessee Attorney
General and Reporter, Office of the Tennessee Attorney
General, Nashville, Tennessee; Ken Paxton, Texas Attorney
General, Office of the Texas Attorney General, Austin,
Texas; Sean D. Reyes, Utah Attorney General, Office of the
Utah Attorney General, Salt Lake City, Utah; for Amici
Curiae State of Montana and 16 Other States.
Michael B. Buschbacher and Austin Lipari, Boyden Gray
PLLC, Washington, D.C.; Rachel N. Morrison and Eric N.
Kniffin, Ethics and Public Policy Center, Washington, D.C.;
for Amicus Curiae Ethics and Public Policy Center.
Vince R. Eisinger, Cranfill Sumner LLP, Raleigh, North
Carolina, for Amici Curiae Professors Robert F. Cochran Jr.,

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

7

David F. Forte, Richard Garnett, Douglas Laycock, Michael
W. McConnell, Michael P. Moreland, and Robert J. Pushaw.
Jenny Samuels, Alexander J. Luchenitser, and Scott Lowder,
Americans United for Separation of Church and State,
Washington, D.C., for Amici Curiae Americans United for
Separation of Church and State and The Sikh Coalition.
Georgia C. Yeomans, Attorney; Anne N. Occhialino,
Assistant General Counsel; Jennifer S. Goldstein, Associate
General Counsel; Karla Gilbride, General Counsel; Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission, Office of General
Counsel, Appellate Services, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus
Curiae Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Michelle Fraling, Aditi Fruitwala, and Daniel Mach,
American Civil Liberties Union Foundation, Washington,
D.C.; Adrien Leavitt and La Rond Baker, American Civil
Liberties Union of Washington Foundation, Seattle,
Washington; for Amici Curiae American Civil Liberties
Union and American Civil Liberties Union of Washington.
Adam M. Cambier, Assistant Attorney General; David C.
Kravitz, State Solicitor; Andrea J. Campbell,
Commonwealth of Massachusetts Attorney General; Office
of the Massachusetts Attorney General, Boston,
Massachusetts; Rob Bonta, California Attorney General,
Office of the California Attorney General, Sacramento,
California; William Tong, Connecticut Attorney General,
Office of the Connecticut Attorney General, Hartford,
Connecticut; Philip J. Weiser, Colorado Attorney General,
Office of the Colorado Attorney General, Denver Colorado;
Brian L. Schwalb, District of Columbia Attorney General,
Office of the District of Columbia Attorney General,
Washington, D.C.; Kathleen Jennings, Delaware Attorney
General, Office of the Delaware Attorney General,

8

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

Wilmington, Delaware; Anne E. Lopez, Hawai‘i Attorney
General, Office of the Hawai‘i Attorney General, Honolulu,
Hawai‘i; Kwame Raoul, Illinois Attorney General, Office of
the Illinois Attorney General, Chicago, Illinois; Aaron M.
Frey, Maine Attorney General, Office of the Maine Attorney
General, Augusta, Maine; Anthony G. Brown, Maryland
Attorney General, Office of the Maryland Attorney General,
Baltimore, Maryland; Dana Nessel, Michigan Attorney
General, Office of the Michigan Attorney General, Lansing,
Michigan; Keith Ellison, Minnesota Attorney General,
Office of the Minnesota Attorney General, St. Paul,
Minnesota; Matthew J. Platkin, New Jersey Attorney
General, Office of the New Jersey Attorney General,
Trenton, New Jersey; Raul Torrez, New Mexico Attorney
General, Office of the New Mexico Attorney General, Santa
Fe, New Mexico; Letitia James, New York Attorney
General, Office of the New York Attorney General, New
York, New York; Joshua H. Stein, North Carolina Attorney
General, Office of the North Carolina Attorney General,
Raleigh, North Carolina; Ellen F. Rosenblum, Oregon
Attorney General, Office of the Oregon Attorney General,
Salem, Oregon; Charity R. Clark, Vermont Attorney
General, Office of the Vermont Attorney General,
Montpelier, Vermont; Robert W. Ferguson, Washington
Attorney General, Office of the Washington Attorney
General, Olympia, Washington; Joshua L. Kaul, Wisconsin
Attorney General, Office of the Wisconsin Attorney
General, Madison, Wisconsin; for Amici Curiae
Massachusetts,
California,
Colorado,
Connecticut,
Delaware, the District of Columbia, Hawai‘i, Illinois,
Maine, Maryland, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New
Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Oregon, Vermont,
Washington, and Wisconsin.

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

9

OPINION
TALLMAN, Circuit Judge:
Defendant-Appellant World Vision, Inc., extended a job
offer to Plaintiff-Appellee Aubry McMahon for a remote
position as a customer service representative (“CSR”). After
learning that McMahon was in a same-sex marriage, World
Vision revoked its job offer. McMahon sued in federal
district court, alleging discrimination based on sex, sexual
orientation, and marital status under Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and the Washington Law Against
Discrimination (“WLAD”).
The district court initially granted summary judgment for
World Vision, finding that the church autonomy doctrine
“foreclose[d] judicial inquiry into World Vision’s
religiously motivated personnel decision” and thus barred
McMahon’s claims. However, the district court reversed
itself after McMahon moved for reconsideration, ultimately
deciding that the church autonomy doctrine did not apply
because World Vision had acted under a “facially
discriminatory hiring policy,” so the court could resolve the
case using “neutral principles of law” without becoming
entangled in religion. 1 The district court also rejected World
Vision’s remaining defenses under the ministerial exception,
exemptions to Title VII and the WLAD, freedom of
expressive association, and the Free Exercise Clause, and
entered summary judgment for McMahon after concluding
that World Vision rescinded her job offer pursuant to a
policy that facially discriminated based on sex, sexual
The district court used “church autonomy doctrine” and “ecclesiastical
abstention” interchangeably.

1

10

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

orientation, and marital status in violation of Title VII and
the WLAD.
On appeal, World Vision renews each of the arguments
it made before the district court. World Vision argues that
CSRs fall under the ministerial exception to employment
discrimination laws because CSRs serve a pivotal role in
World Vision’s religious mission as its public voice,
responsible for conveying the organization’s mission,
discussing World Vision’s projects, and praying with donors
and supporters over the phone. World Vision also contends
that even if the ministerial exception does not apply,
McMahon’s claims are barred by (a) another component of
what it calls the church autonomy doctrine that protects a
religious organization’s membership decisions, (b) the Free
Exercise Clause, (c) the freedom of expressive association
under the First Amendment, and (d) exemptions to Title VII
and the WLAD. We conclude that the district court erred by
rejecting World Vision’s ministerial exception defense, and
we reverse. 2
We now hold that the ministerial exception bars
McMahon’s employment discrimination claims because the
record shows that CSRs perform key religious functions
central to World Vision’s mission. CSRs are responsible for
effectively communicating World Vision’s worldwide
ministries and projects to donors and supporters. CSRs
engage with donors in prayer and give them the opportunity
to join World Vision’s religious mission through financial
contributions. Because each of these “vital religious duties,”
Our Lady of Guadalupe Sch. v. Morrissey-Berru, 591 U.S.
732, 756 (2020), lies at the core of World Vision’s religious
Because McMahon’s claims are barred under the ministerial exception,
we do not reach the remainder of World Vision’s arguments on appeal.

2

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

11

mission of “working with the poor and oppressed to promote
human transformation, seek justice and bear witness to the
good news of the Kingdom of God,” the ministerial
exception applies to CSRs and bars McMahon’s claims.
Accordingly, we reverse the district court’s grant of
summary judgment for McMahon and remand for entry of
summary judgment in favor of World Vision.
I
The parties do not dispute that World Vision is a
religious organization. See Spencer v. World Vision, Inc.,
633 F.3d 723, 724 (9th Cir. 2011) (per curiam) (holding that
World Vision qualified as a religious organization exempt
from Title VII’s general prohibition on religious
discrimination).
World Vision describes itself as a
“Christian ministry dedicated to sharing the gospel of Jesus
Christ” through “humanitarian outreach to children and
families around the world who are poor and underserved.”
World Vision primarily serves “the world’s most
vulnerable . . . those living in extreme poverty or fragile
contexts.” Its mission is to “follow our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ in working with the poor and oppressed to
promote human transformation, seek justice, and bear
witness to the good news of the Kingdom of God.” World
Vision pursues this mission through partnership with donors,
prayer supporters, and churches. It helps people of any faith
or no faith. Each year, it trains more than 100,000 pastors
and faith leaders from partner churches, working with them
to serve millions of children worldwide.
World Vision holds itself out to the public as a Christian
organization, with “its faith in Jesus . . . at the heart of all it
does.” World Vision’s Articles of Incorporation state its
religious purposes, including “perform[ing] the functions of

12

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

the Christian church” in ways that “teach and preach the
Gospel” and “spread . . . the Christian religion.” World
Vision staff are required to (a) confess that they are
committed Christians, (b) agree wholeheartedly with World
Vision’s core religious principles, (c) communicate World
Vision’s Christian faith, and (d) participate in prayer
activities, devotionals, and weekly chapel services.
Every World Vision staff member is provided an
employee guidebook titled the “Orange Book: Living Out
Our Values,” which instructs that prayer “plays a central role
in World Vision’s ministry.” Each World Vision team is
expected to spend one hour each week in team devotions,
and all employees “are invited and expected” to attend a
weekly “organization-wide chapel” service. World Vision
believes that it and its staff’s “corporate and individual
behavior witnesses, reflects, and testifies about what we
believe as a ministry and as individual believers.”
Accordingly, World Vision “seeks to honor God by
requiring all staff to ‘[f]ollow the living Christ, individually
and corporately in faith and conduct, publicly and privately,
in accord with the teaching in His Word (the Bible).’”
World Vision provides Standards of Conduct (“SOC”) to
“clarify expectations and assist candidates/employees in
deciding whether or not [World Vision] is the right place for
them to serve the Lord.” Because World Vision believes that
the Bible confines the “express[ion of] sexuality solely
within a faithful marriage between a man and a woman[,]”
its SOC prohibits, among other things, “sexual conduct
outside the Biblical covenant of marriage between a man and
a woman.” To be eligible for employment at World Vision,
an individual must, among other things, be able and willing
to affirm and comply with the SOC.

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

13

Aubry McMahon is a Christian, openly gay person in a
same-sex marriage. McMahon and her wife are “huge
advocates” for “the LGBTQ community.” They attend Pride
events, display Pride symbols publicly, and conduct their
“day-to-day lives . . . to show that [they] are supportive of
the LGBTQ community.” McMahon became pregnant
around June 2020 via a sperm donor and gave birth in March
2021.
In the late fall of 2020, McMahon saw a job posting for
World Vision’s CSR position on the website Indeed.com.
The position was “remote” and offered compensation
ranging from $13 to $15 per hour depending on location and
cost of living, as well as a “comprehensive benefits
package.” The CSR position did not require any formal
religious education or training. Rather, the job posting
sought candidates with the following qualifications:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

High school graduate/GED or equivalent.
Basic routine work experience.
Prefer a minimum of 1 year previous
customer service/sales work experience.
Must have access to a reliable, high speed
internet connection.
The ability to multi-task in a fast pace
[sic] environment.
Must be able to train and work 40 hours a
week.
Have strong technical skills with all
Microsoft Office Suite.
The ability to type 20 wpm or more.
Enjoys making a difference in the world!

14

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

•

Must be available to start training on
February 1st.

The job description explains in detail World Vision’s
expectations for CSRs:
As a Customer Service Representative, you
will participate in a training program to gain
a working knowledge and understanding of
the position and to perform the essential
functions of the job at a level of performance
that consistently meets expectations. You
will learn, understand and develop the skills
necessary to acquire and maintain donor
relationships through basic inbound and
outbound calls. Serve as a liaison between
donors and the general public as well as
provide basic levels of customer service for
all special programs. Help carry out our
Christian organization’s mission, vision, and
strategies. Personify the ministry of World
Vision by witnessing to Christ and
ministering to others through life, deed,
word, and sign. You will also…
1. Keep Christ central in our individual and
corporate lives. Attend and participate in
the leadership of devotions, weekly
Chapel services, and regular prayer.
2. Maintain reliable, regular attendance.
Report to work on time and return from
breaks and lunches on time.
3. Under supervision, learn to answer
inbound customer service calls and make
outbound calls, to current and potential

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

donors in response to all media
presentations and World Vision products
and services. Answer incoming calls
using an Automated Call Distribution
system utilizing a standard script for
guidance. Recognize and respond to upsell opportunities and actively cross-sell
other WV programs when appropriate.
4. Through training and active participation,
gain the skills necessary to assess callers’
needs and input information accurately
and efficiently using data entry and tenkey skills.
5. Achieve and maintain an acceptable level
of individual statistics to accomplish Call
Center business goals.
6. Develop skills to utilize technology for
maintaining and updating donor
information as appropriate.
7. Accepts constructive feedback and
welcomes instruction and direction.
8. Under supervision, research and
effectively respond to inquiries utilizing a
variety of resource materials and
methods.
9. Learn and effectively communicate
World Vision’s involvement in ministries
and projects around the world.
10. Work
collaboratively
with
team
members.
11. Be sensitive to Donor’s needs and pray
with them when appropriate.
12. Perform other duties as assigned.

15

16

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

13. Keep informed of organizational
announcements, activities and changes
via regular reading of the WVUS Intranet
and other corporate communication tools.
CSRs fall under World Vision’s Donor Contact Services
(“DCS”) department. DCS describes its employees as “the
Voice, Face and Heart of World Vision” because they
“interact all day with the ministry’s donors, its lifeblood.”
“This challenge requires that each of us think of ourselves as
servants; demonstrating flexibility and servicing the
donor(s) with a smile.” More specifically, unlike most of
World Vision’s employees, CSRs engage with World
Vision’s donors, supporters, and partners on a daily basis to
provide information and answer questions about World
Vision’s work, ministry, and beliefs. For this reason, CSRs
play a crucial role in fundraising, which World Vision views
as “a form of ministry in itself.” When appropriate, CSRs
are expected to “pray[] for and with the persons with whom
they talk” because spiritual “[t]ransformation of donors is
just as vital to World Vision as that of the children they
sponsor.” World Vision states that prayer is an “essential
function of the role.” However, praying with donors is not a
requirement of the CSR role, and the failure to do so does
not result in discipline or termination.
CSRs are required to attend “devotions”—religious
meetings where teams come together “for reading of
Scripture and prayer for the daily work.” All World Vision
employees, including CSRs, are expected to lead devotions
at some point. CSRs may also lead World Vision’s weekly
organization-wide chapel services, but they are not required
to do so. Upon joining World Vision, representatives
receive nine to eleven weeks of formal training, which is

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

17

more “advanced training” than that required of any other
World Vision employee. This training covers religious
topics such as “who we are in Christ,” “how to pray with
donors,” “attending chapel,” and “leading and participating
in devotions.”
Shortly after McMahon applied for the CSR position, she
conducted a phone screening interview with a World Vision
talent acquisition partner. McMahon was asked questions
about her background and interest in World Vision and her
comfort level with job “requirement[s]” like “making
inbound and outbound calls” and “upselling” World Vision
programs. World Vision asked about McMahon’s computer
experience and skills, her background in working with
technology, and her comfort level and experience using
virtual meeting rooms.
World Vision described its
“Christian commitment” and asked McMahon to describe
her personal faith. McMahon was asked if she was “willing
and able to comply with the Standards of Conduct” and
McMahon responded, “I’m aligned, yes!”
World Vision extended McMahon a verbal offer of
employment on January 4, 2021, followed by a formal
written offer the next day for the “full-time position of
Donor/Customer Service Representative Trainee (DSR
Trainee).” That same day, McMahon sent the following
email to World Vision:
Hey there, I just have a quick question! My
wife and I are expecting our first baby in
March and I wanted to see if I would qualify
for any time off since I’ll be a new employee?
I will be the one having the baby so I just
wanted to check to see if any time would be

18

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

allowed off. If not, no worries, thanks so
much!
After receiving McMahon’s email, World Vision engaged in
internal discussions about the “application of its Biblical
marriage policy . . . to Ms. McMahon’s situation.” World
Vision decided to rescind McMahon’s offer because of her
“inability” to comply with the SOC prohibiting sexual
conduct outside the Biblical covenant of marriage between a
man and a woman. World Vision rescinded McMahon’s job
offer on January 8, 2021.
II
McMahon sued World Vision in federal district court for
sex, sexual orientation, and marital status discrimination
under Title VII and the WLAD. After discovery, the parties
cross-moved for summary judgment. The district court
initially granted summary judgment to World Vision under
the church autonomy doctrine because World Vision had
rescinded McMahon’s job offer due to her inability to
comply with World Vision’s SOC. McMahon successfully
moved for reconsideration, arguing that because World
Vision had acted under a “facially discriminatory hiring
policy,” the court could resolve the case under “neutral
principles of law” without becoming entangled in religion,
and thus the church autonomy doctrine did not bar her
claims. The district court reconsidered and reversed its
initial decision, granting summary judgment for McMahon
and finding that World Vision engaged in “unlawful sex,
sexual orientation, and marital status discrimination” by
rescinding McMahon’s job offer pursuant to its “Biblical
marriage [SOC],” which the court deemed a “facially
discriminatory policy.”

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

19

The district court then rejected World Vision’s
remaining defenses under the ministerial exception,
exemptions under Title VII and the WLAD, freedom of
expressive association, and the Free Exercise Clause, and
granted summary judgment to McMahon. In lieu of a jury
trial on damages, the parties stipulated to damages of
$120,000, and the district court entered final judgment for
McMahon.
III
The district court had jurisdiction under 18 U.S.C.
§§ 1331 and 1367, and 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(f)(3). We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We review grants of
summary judgment “de novo, viewing the evidence and
drawing all reasonable inferences in the light most favorable
to the non-moving party.” Behrend v. S.F. Zen Ctr., Inc.,
108 F.4th 765, 768 (9th Cir. 2024) (citation and internal
quotation marks omitted).
IV
A
The Religion Clauses of the First Amendment protect the
“principle of church autonomy,” which guarantees religious
groups’ “independence in matters of faith and doctrine and
in closely linked matters of internal government.” Our Lady,
591 U.S. at 747. But the church autonomy doctrine is not
absolute; churches and other religious organizations must
abide by neutral and generally applicable state and federal
employment laws. See id. at 746 (explaining that religious
institutions do not enjoy a general immunity from secular
laws). However, an exception to this requirement exists for
certain employees within religious organizations who
perform “important religious functions.” Hosanna-Tabor

20

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

Evangelical Lutheran Church & Sch. v. EEOC, 565 U.S.
171, 190–92 (2012); see also Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 746
(explaining that religious organizations are afforded
“autonomy with respect to internal management decisions
that are essential to the institution’s central mission. And a
component of this autonomy is the selection of the
individuals who play certain key roles.”).
The ministerial exception “broadly ensures that religious
organizations have the freedom to choose ‘who will preach
their beliefs, teach their faith, and carry out their mission.’”
Behrend, 108 F.4th at 766 (quoting Hosanna-Tabor, 565
U.S. at 196). But we have recognized that “[a] religious
employer is not given carte blanche with respect to all
employees, ministerial and non-ministerial alike . . . First
Amendment protections serve as a sieve, not a lid.” Seattle
Pac. Univ. v. Ferguson, 104 F.4th 50, 58 (9th Cir. 2024).
“[T]he ministerial exception is just that, an exception,
applicable only to a subset of a religious entity’s
employees.” Palmer v. Liberty Univ., Inc., 72 F.4th 52, 71
(4th Cir. 2023) (Motz, J., concurring); see also Seattle Pac.
Univ., 104 F.4th at 58 (rejecting defendant’s “sweeping
interpretation [that] the ministerial exception” prohibits any
inquiry into a religious organization’s employment
practices).
Although the Supreme Court has declined “to adopt a
rigid formula for deciding when an employee qualifies as a
minister,” it has provided some guidance on circumstances
that might qualify an employee as a minister within the
meaning of the ministerial exception. Hosanna-Tabor, 565
U.S. at 190–92.
Though they are not “inflexible
requirements,” Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 753, courts should
consider: (1) the employee’s formal title; (2) the “substance
reflected in that title,” such as “a significant degree of

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

21

religious training followed by a formal process of
commissioning”; (3) the employee’s use of that title; and
(4) whether the employee performed important religious
functions. Hosanna-Tabor, 565 U.S. at 191–92.
Importantly, courts must not “treat[] the circumstances
that [the Court] found relevant in [Hosanna-Tabor] as
checklist items to be assessed and weighed against each
other in every case” because “[t]hat approach is contrary to
our admonition that [the Court was] not imposing any ‘rigid
formula.’” 3 Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 757–58 (quoting
Hosanna-Tabor, 565 U.S. at 190). Rather, to determine
whether an employee falls within the ministerial exception,
we are to “take all relevant circumstances into account and
to determine whether each particular position implicated the
fundamental purpose of the exception.” Behrend, 108 F.4th
at 769 (quoting Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 758). The Supreme
Court has emphasized that “what matters, at bottom, is what
an employee does” and whether they perform “vital religious
duties.” Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 753, 756. To determine this,
the “religious institution’s explanation of the role
of . . . employees in the life of the religion in question is
important.” Id. at 757. The employee need not be a “coreligionist,” a practicing member of the religion with which
the employer is associated, for the ministerial exception to
apply. Id. at 761. We have also rejected the argument that
the ministerial exception applies only to teachers and leaders
of the faith. Behrend, 108 F.4th at 769–70.
The ministerial exception is an “affirmative
defense . . . not a jurisdictional bar.” Hosanna-Tabor, 565
Relatedly, courts should refrain from overemphasizing the lack of a
clerical title or the amount of formal religious training required. Our
Lady, 591 U.S. at 758–59.
3

22

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

U.S. at 195 n.4. Therefore, an employer who asserts the
ministerial exception as a defense has the burden of proving
it. Fitzgerald v. Roncalli High School, Inc., 73 F.4th 529,
531 (7th Cir. 2023).
B
We begin by discussing the various contexts in which
courts have found the ministerial exception applies. The
Supreme Court has found the ministerial exception applies
to teachers at religious schools because “educating young
people in their faith, inculcating its teachings, and training
them to live their faith are responsibilities that lie at the very
core of the mission of a private religious school.” Our Lady,
591 U.S. at 753–54, 757–58 (finding that religious
schoolteachers responsible for educating students in the
Catholic faith—the core mission of their schools—were
ministers for purposes of the exception); see also HosannaTabor, 565 U.S. at 190–92 (“called” religious schoolteacher
qualified under ministerial exception). Lower courts have
followed suit. 4
But the exception is not exclusive to Catholic school
teachers. We have applied the ministerial exception outside
the religious schoolteacher context on a few occasions,
including recently to a “work practice apprentice” at the San
Francisco Zen Center (“Center”). See Behrend, 108 F.4th at
See, e.g., Billard v. Charlotte Cath. High Sch., 101 F.4th 316, 331–33
(4th Cir. 2024) (substitute English and drama teacher was a “minister”
because he was required to teach in a way “agreeable with Catholic
thought,” and to pray and attend Mass with his students); Butler v. Saint
Stanislaus Kostka Cath. Acad., 609 F. Supp. 3d 184, 193–98 (E.D.N.Y.
2022) (same); Orr v. Christian Bros. High Sch., Inc., 21-15109, 2021
WL 5493416, *1 (9th Cir. Nov. 23, 2021) (finding the ministerial
exception applied to a religious-school principal).
4

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

23

766–67, 769–71. The Center is the largest Zen Buddhist
temple in North America and was formed to “encourage the
practice of Zen Buddhism by operating one or more religious
practice facilities and educating the public about Zen
Buddhism.” Id. at 766. It offers three residential programs
designed to be sequential: a two-to-six-week in-residence
guest student program, a two-to-three-year in-residence
work practice apprenticeship, and, for those who complete
an apprenticeship, full-time staff positions. Id. at 766–67.
As a work practice apprentice, Behrend was required to
follow a “strict practice schedule of formal and work
practice” including twice daily meditations and services,
temple cleanings, dharma talks, ceremonial tasks to support
the formal practice, and menial tasks like cooking,
dishwashing, and cleaning. Id. at 767.
We found that the ministerial exception applied to
Behrend because, although he performed mostly menial
work, that work was itself “an essential component of Zen
training.” Id. at 769. We reasoned:
Behrend was tasked with performing
maintenance, kitchen, and guest services.
But he was also responsible for assisting with
rituals, participating in meditations and
services, cleaning the temple, attending talks
and classes, and performing doan ryo
ceremonial tasks like ringing bells and
cleaning altars. He lived and worked full
time at the temple as a monk. While Behrend
may not have taught and was not a part of the
hierarchical leadership structure,
he
“performed vital religious duties” as part of

24

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

the Center’s [work practice apprentice]
program.
Id. at 770 (quoting Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 756). Importantly,
we rejected Behrend’s argument that only those in key roles
in preaching and teaching the faith to others could be subject
to the exception because that would mean “‘interfering with
the freedom of religious groups to select’ who may or may
not serve as a live-in monk.” Id. (quoting Hosanna-Tabor,
565 U.S. at 184).
We have also found that the ministerial exception
applied to an Orthodox Jewish man employed by the Union
of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America (“Union”) as
a mashgiach—“an inspector appointed by a board of
Orthodox rabbis to guard against any violation of the Jewish
dietary laws” (i.e., “keeping kosher”). Markel v. Union of
Orthodox Jewish Congregations of Am., 124 F.4th 796, 801
(9th Cir. 2024) cert. denied sub nom. Markel v. Union of
Orthodox Jewish, No. 24-1204, 2025 WL 1727421 (June 23,
2025). The Union ran the largest kosher certification
program in the United States and used those revenues to
further its core religious mission of serving the Orthodox
Jewish Community. Id. Markel served on the Union’s
kosher team and was responsible for grape products, which
are unique in Jewish dietary law because, to be kosher, only
Orthodox Jews can handle them until they are sufficiently
cooked or boiled. Id. at 802. Thus, “[t]o qualify to serve as
a mashgiach, Markel needed to submit a letter from an
Orthodox rabbi certifying that he was Sabbath observant,
knowledgeable about kosher law, and compliant with the
same.” Id. We held that because (1) only observant
Orthodox Jews can serve as a mashgiach for the Union, and
(2) a mashgiach is necessary to the Union’s mission of

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

25

“ensuring the wide availability of kosher food,” a mashgiach
is “essential to the institution’s central mission” and thus
qualifies as a minister for purposes of the ministerial
exception. 5 Id. at 807 (quoting Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 746).
The common thread between these cases is that the
Catholic schoolteacher in Our Lady, the work practice
apprentice in Behrend, and the mashgiach in Markel all
performed “vital religious duties” in light of the core
missions of their respective organizations. Our Lady, 591
U.S. at 756, 758; see Behrend, 108 F.4th at 769; Markel, 124
F.4th at 807. We apply that analysis here to determine
whether World Vision’s CSR position falls under the
ministerial exception.
C
World Vision, like any employer, is generally prohibited
under Title VII and the WLAD from taking adverse
employment actions based on protected characteristics,
including sexual orientation. 6 Bostock v. Clayton County,
590 U.S. 644, 661–62 (2020). Because we agree with the
district court’s determination that World Vision’s Biblical
marriage SOC facially discriminates based on sex, sexual
orientation, and marital status, World Vision is liable under
Title VII and the WLAD unless it can establish an exemption
or a defense, including by showing that the CSR position

The district court did not have the benefit of our most recent decisions
applying the ministerial exception, Behrend and Markel, because its
order granting summary judgment to McMahon was issued before either
case was published.

5

The parties agree that World Vision rescinded McMahon’s job offer
because she is in a same-sex marriage.

6

26

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

qualifies for the ministerial exception. 7 For the reasons
below, we hold that World Vision has met its burden of
showing that the CSR position qualifies for the ministerial
exception, barring McMahon’s claims.
Whether World Vision’s CSRs qualify as “ministers” for
purposes of the exception is the central issue in this appeal
and requires a lengthy analysis. The district court concluded
that World Vision’s CSR position was not entitled to the
ministerial exception affirmative defense. The district court
found that the CSR position was secular and lacked
ministerial or religious substance given that CSRs do not
receive significant doctrinal instruction or a religious
commissioning, are not required to perform any unique,
important religious functions, and perform primarily secular
job responsibilities such as placing donor calls, describing
World Vision’s work, data entry, and maintaining statistics.
Though it “considered donor prayer and credited this job
function in World Vision’s favor,” the district court
ultimately concluded that the CSR’s job duties—answering
calls, up-selling, data entry, sales work, typing proficiency—
“demonstrate[d] that the thrust of the customer service
representative position is administrative, not ministerial.”
We respectfully disagree with the district court’s
conclusion. When viewing CSRs’ religious functions within
the context of World Vision’s mission, we hold that World
Vision’s CSRs qualify for the ministerial exception because
they perform “vital religious duties” at the heart of World
Vision’s mission. Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 753–54, 756
It follows that World Vision generally remains bound by state and
federal laws prohibiting employment discrimination based on race,
color, sex, national origin, or other protected grounds for all nonministerial positions.

7

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

27

(“What matters, at bottom, is what an employee does” and
whether those responsibilities “lie at the very core of [World
Vision’s] mission.”).
The Supreme Court has made it clear that an employee’s
job duties cannot be viewed in isolation from the religious
organization’s mission. Id. at 751–52 (“The circumstances
that informed our decision in Hosanna-Tabor were relevant
because of their relationship to Perich’s ‘role in conveying
the Church’s message and carrying out its mission.’”
(quoting Hosanna-Tabor, 565 U.S. at 192)). Thus, the
ministerial exception applies to individuals who perform
“vital religious duties” that are “essential to the institution’s
central [religious] mission.” Markel, 124 F.4th at 806
(quoting Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 746). For instance, because
the “very reason for the existence” of a religious school is
the “religious education and formation of students,” the
“selection and supervision of the teachers upon whom the
schools rely to do this work lie at the core of their mission.”8
Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 738.
On this critical step, the district court erred by viewing
the CSR’s responsibilities in the abstract, isolated from
World Vision’s central mission. See id. at 753–54
(explaining that courts should consider what an employee
does in the context of the “core of the [employer’s]
mission”). When viewed within the context of World
Similarly, the Court found the ministerial exception applied to a
religious school teacher because her “job duties reflected a role in
conveying the Church’s message and carrying out its mission”—she
taught religion four days a week, led prayer three times a day, took
students to a weekly school-wide chapel service, led the chapel service
twice per year, performed devotional exercises every morning with
fourth graders, and thereby played an “important role in transmitting the
Lutheran faith to the next generation.” Hosanna-Tabor, 565 U.S. at 192.
8

28

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

Vision’s central mission, as we must, it is evident to us that
CSRs serve “vital religious duties” at the core of World
Vision’s mission. Id. at 756.
World Vision describes its mission as to “follow our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ in working with the poor and
oppressed to promote human transformation, seek justice
and bear witness to the good news of the Kingdom of God.”
World
Vision
pursues
its
mission
through:
(1) “[t]ansformational [d]evelopment that is communitybased and sustainable, focused especially on the needs of
children”; (2) “[e]mergency [r]elief that assists people
afflicted by conflict or disaster”; (3) [p]romotion of [j]ustice
that seeks to change unjust structures affecting the poor
among whom we work”; (4) “[p]artnerships with churches
to contribute to spiritual and social transformation”;
(5) “[p]ublic awareness that leads to informed
understanding, giving, involvement and prayer”; and
(6) “[w]itness to Jesus Christ by life, deed, word and sign
that encourages people to respond to the Gospel.”
According to World Vision, CSRs play a unique and
vital role in each aspect of the organization’s mission.
World Vision describes its CSRs as the organization’s
“lifeblood” because they are the sole employees interfacing
with donors and soliciting donations, which World Vision
views as a form of ministry or religious practice. CSRs
minister to donors through prayer and routinely pray with
donors about their needs and the needs of the children they
sponsor. In this way, World Vision considers CSRs its
“voice.”
World Vision emphasizes that CSRs are at the frontline
of one of its primary goals: promoting the “child sponsorship
program,” which pairs donors with children. Some of World

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

29

Vision’s donors may wish to “learn about the Christian
faith,” and the CSRs are responsible for teaching curious
donors about World Vision’s Christian faith and mission.
Thus, World Vision views the CSR position as crucial not
only because CSRs solicit donations and complete
administrative tasks, but also because they support donors’
religious transformation by “inspiring those donors who
share World Vision’s faith and by sharing that faith with
those who don’t.”
True, the CSR job posting primarily lists secular and
administrative duties: “[r]eport to work on time”; “learn to
answer inbound customer service calls and make outbound
calls”; “[a]nswer incoming calls using an Automated Call
Distribution system utilizing a standard script for guidance”;
“[r]ecognize and respond to up-sell opportunities”; and
“[a]chieve and maintain an acceptable level of individual
statistics to accomplish Call Center business goals,” among
others. But the job posting also states that a CSR must
“[l]earn and effectively communicate World Vision’s
involvement in ministries and projects around the world,”
“[h]elp carry out our Christian organization’s mission,
vision, and strategies,” and “[p]ersonify the ministry of
World Vision by witnessing to Christ and ministering to
others through life, deed, word and sign.” In so doing, CSRs
are required to “[k]eep Christ central in [their] individual and
corporate lives,” “[a]ttend and participate in leadership of
devotions, weekly Chapel services, and regular prayer,” and
“[b]e sensitive to Donor’s needs and pray with them when
appropriate.”
But that is not all. In addition to the job posting, “[a]
religious institution’s explanation of the role of such
employees in the life of the religion in question is
important.” Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 757. According to World

30

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

Vision, “Being a part of DCS means you are the Voice, Face
and Heart of World Vision.” World Vision’s Senior
Director of Talent Management, Melanie Freiberg, testified
that “ministering to people is an essential function of the
[CSR] job” that requires “being a representative of Christ
and teaching about the witness of Jesus Christ.”
Recordings of real-world calls between CSRs and donors
also demonstrate that the CSR role is not merely an
employee at a call center cold-calling for donations. In one
call, a CSR and a current donor discuss how COVID-19 has
impacted a 15-year-old in Zimbabwe that the donor has
sponsored for the past nine years before praying together for
the donor’s family during the pandemic. In another call,
after a donor asks about how his sponsored child is doing,
the CSR thanks the donor for providing clean water to the
child and provides methods for the donor to find out how the
COVID-19 pandemic is impacting the child. The donor then
asks the CSR to pray for his brother, who is “close to meeting
God,” and the donor puts the call on speakerphone so his
wife can pray with the donor and the CSR.
In sum, we hold that the ministerial exception applies to
World Vision’s CSR position because CSRs perform “vital
religious duties” that “lie at the very core of [World
Vision’s] mission.” See Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 754, 756–57.
World Vision’s “core mission” is to bear witness to Jesus
Christ through acts of service, including support for children,
those afflicted by conflict, and the poor, by partnering with
churches, donors, and other members of the public through
prayer and ministry. The CSRs’ responsibilities “lie at the
very core of [World Vision’s] mission” because CSRs are
the organization’s “voice, face, and heart”—without the
CSRs, World Vision would be severely hindered in pursuing
its central religious mission. Although the execution of

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

31

those responsibilities requires administrative and customer
service tasks that are ubiquitous in a secular setting, CSRs
also perform “vital religious duties” crucial to World
Vision’s mission by explaining World Vision’s ministry,
programs, and by “giv[ing] people an opportunity to join
[World Vision] in the mission of God” through donations
and sponsorships. See Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 756–57.
McMahon argues that a holistic view of a CSR’s job
duties shows that the position is overwhelmingly secular,
and any religious aspects of the position were either equally
applicable to all World Vision employees or optional. We
reject these arguments. For one, that a position has primarily
administrative or secular job duties does not foreclose the
possibility that the position qualifies under the ministerial
exception. The Supreme Court has imposed no requirement
that the “thrust” of the position be ministerial, or that a
particular quantum of the position’s job duties be religious
in nature. See Hosanna-Tabor, 565 U.S. at 193 (indicating
that the Sixth Circuit erred by “plac[ing] too much emphasis
on Perich’s performance of secular duties,” which occupied
most of each school day).
We also reject McMahon’s argument and the district
court’s conclusion that religious job duties that are equally
applicable to all World Vision employees carry diminished
or no relevance in the ministerial exception analysis. True,
all World Vision employees are expected to “bear witness to
Jesus Christ” through life, deed, word, and sign. Similarly,
all employees, not just CSRs, are “invited and expected” to
attend a weekly “organization-wide chapel” service. But the
district court did not cite any authority for the proposition
that a position is less likely to be central to a religious
organization’s core mission if its religious duties are shared
with general members of that organization. In fact, in

32

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

Hosanna-Tabor, the Supreme Court explained that the Sixth
Circuit “gave too much weight to the fact that lay teachers at
the school performed the same religious duties as Perich.”
565 U.S. at 193.
At the same time, we recognize that the touchstone of the
ministerial exception analysis is “whether each particular
position implicate[s] the fundamental purpose of the
[ministerial] exception,” because the exception protects only
“certain key roles” or “certain important positions.” Our
Lady, 591 U.S. at 746, 758. But while the ministerial
exception requires at least some characteristics that
distinguish a “minister” from other general employees, we
have no reason to believe that any religious job duties shared
between the “minister” position and other employees are
irrelevant. For example, in Markel, the mashgiach was
required to be an observant Jew, keep the Sabbath, and
follow kosher laws—religious obligations that would apply
to all Orthodox Jews. 124 F.4th at 807. Beyond those shared
job requirements, the mashgiach’s “certain important” role
was ensuring the kosher integrity at the two wineries to
which he was assigned, which carried out the Union’s
mission of ensuring the wide availability of kosher food. Id.
at 803 (quoting Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 746).
Here, while the CSR’s obligation to attend chapel and to
bear witness to Jesus Christ are shared with all World Vision
employees, the “certain important” and unique role of a CSR
is to “give people an opportunity to join [World Vision] in
the mission of God” through monetary donations
underwriting the organization’s mission.
Secretaries,
accountants, and custodians at World Vision, despite having
the same religious obligations to attend chapel and bear
witness to Jesus Christ, would not qualify for the ministerial
exception because, unlike CSRs, they are not charged with

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

33

conveying the organization’s message to its donors—a role
“vital” to World Vision’s central mission. See Our Lady,
591 U.S. at 756–57.
We emphasize that although universal, generic job
requirements can be considered in the ministerial analysis,
they are alone insufficient to establish that a position
qualifies for the ministerial exception. Otherwise, every
employee of a religious organization would qualify as a
“minister.” See Palmer, 72 F.4th at 71 (Motz, J., concurring)
(“[T]he ministerial exception is just that—an exception[.]”).
An employee does not necessarily qualify for the ministerial
exception because they are required to pray or participate in
religious services with their colleagues. Likewise, a
religious employer’s universal requirement that its
employees help carry out the organization’s religious
mission or live consistently with the organization’s religious
values cannot be enough to qualify for the ministerial
exception.
Here, every World Vision employee is required to
“[p]ersonify the ministry of World Vision by witnessing to
Christ and ministering to others through life, deed, word and
sign” and to “keep Christ central in [their] individual and
corporate lives.” Though we may consider those duties in
our ministerial exception analysis, they would not be
sufficient standing on their own. A religious organization
must show more: that the position it claims is ministerial
performs “vital religious duties” at the core of the
organization’s mission. Our Lady, 591 U.S. at 756–57.
World Vision has done so on the record before us.
We hold that the ministerial exception applies to a CSR
not merely because they interface with the public, pray with
their colleagues, or abide by World Vision’s requirements to

34

MCMAHON V. WORLD VISION INC.

embody Christian values. Rather, CSRs qualify for the
exception because (1) they are World Vision’s “voice,”
responsible for “effectively communicat[ing] World
Vision’s involvement in ministries and projects around the
world”; (2) their engagement with donors is a form of
ministry itself; and (3) they “give people an opportunity to
join [World Vision] in the mission of God.” Each of these
religious responsibilities is “vital” to World Vision’s
particular religious mission. See id. at 756.
***
Considering that CSRs perform “vital religious
functions” that “lie at the very core of [World Vision’s]
mission,” we conclude that CSRs qualify for the ministerial
exception. Because World Vision has carried its burden of
showing that there is no genuine issue of material fact as to
whether a CSR qualifies for the ministerial exception, World
Vision is entitled to summary judgment.
Each party shall bear its own fees and costs.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

