FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
PATRICIA PRITCHARD, as parent
on behalf of minor C.P.; NOLLE
PRITCHARD, as parent on behalf of
minor C.P.; S.R.; R.L., as parent on
behalf of minor S.L.; EMMETT
JONES,

No. 23-4331

Plaintiffs - Appellees,

D.C. No.
3:20-cv-06145RJB

OPINION

v.
BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF
ILLINOIS,
Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
Robert J. Bryan, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted January 15, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed November 17, 2025

2

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

Before: JOHNNIE B. RAWLINSON and MILAN D.
SMITH, JR., Circuit Judges, and JED S. RAKOFF, District
Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.;
Concurrence by Judge Johnnie B. Rawlinson

SUMMARY **
Affordable Care Act / Sex-Based Discrimination
The panel vacated the district court’s summary judgment
against Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois (BCBSIL), and
remanded, in a class action alleging that BCBSIL, a thirdparty administrator for certain employer-sponsored health
insurance plans, violated Section 1557 of the Affordable
Care Act by refusing to cover treatment for gender
dysphoria, citing plan exclusions put in place at the
insistence of the employer sponsors.
The panel joined the district court in rejecting BCBSIL’s
arguments that it was not liable pursuant to Section 1557,
which bars sex-based discrimination, because (1) its plans
were not funded by the federal government, (2) it was acting
at the direction of the employers, and (3) it was shielded by
the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA). First,
The Honorable Jed S. Rakoff, United States District Judge for the
Southern District of New York, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

3

employing an entity-level analysis, rather than a plan-level
analysis, BCBSIL’s provision of health insurance was a
health program or activity, part of which was receiving
Federal financial assistance. BCBSIL waived its argument
that it had insufficient notice, as required by the Spending
Clause, that it would be subject to Section 1557 for its thirdparty administrator activities. Second, a third-party
administrator such as BCBSIL can be liable for violating
Section 1557, even when implementing plan terms drafted
by a plan sponsor. The Employee Retirement Income
Security Act does not require third-party administrators to
implement unlawful plan terms. BCBSIL forfeited its
argument regarding intent, and even absent forfeiture, its
argument failed because intentional discrimination based on
sex violates Section 1557, even if intended only to comply
with the terms selected by the plan sponsor. Third, RFRA
does not apply because BCBSIL’s religious exercise was not
burdened. And even if RFRA provides a defense to those
whose religious exercise is not burdened, it does not provide
a defense against claims brought by a private party.
The district court also rejected BCBSIL’s argument that
its exclusions did not discriminate based on sex. The panel
concluded, however, that the district court’s analysis was
undercut by intervening Supreme Court authority in United
States v. Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. 1816 (2025). The panel
therefore vacated the district court’s summary judgment
against BCBSIL and remanded for the district court to
consider the implications of Skrmetti. The panel explained
that, although the district court’s reasoning failed in light of
Skrmetti, this case is potentially different from Skrmetti in
two respects. First, some Plaintiffs allegedly had diagnoses
other than gender dysphoria that entitled them to hormones
or other treatment, but BCBSIL still would not treat

4

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

them. Second, Skrmetti left open the argument that
BCBSIL’s justifications for its actions were a pretext for
invidious discrimination. The panel expressed no view
about the appropriate outcome on remand.
Concurring in the judgment, Judge Rawlinson wrote that
she agreed in large part with the majority opinion but wrote
separately because it was improvident to opine on issues that
the panel was remanding to the district court in light of
intervening Supreme Court precedent—specifically, how
the district court could potentially distinguish Skrmetti.

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

5

COUNSEL
Omar Gonzalez-Pagan (argued), Lambda Legal Defense &
Education Fund Inc., New York, New York; Karen L.
Loewy, Lambda Legal Defense & Education Fund Inc.,
Washington, D.C.; Jennifer C. Pizer, Lambda Legal Defense
& Education Fund Inc., Los Angeles, California; Eleanor
Hamburger, Sirianni Youtz Spoonemore Hamburger PLLC,
Seattle, Washington; for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Robert N. Hochman (argued) and Sam Gorsche, Sidley
Austin LLP, Chicago, Illinois; Jeremy D. Rozansky and
Kwaku A. Akowuah, Sidley Austin LLP, Washington, D.C.;
Gwendolyn C. Payton and John R. Neeleman, Kilpatrick
Townsend & Stockton LLP, Seattle, Washington; Stephanie
Bedard, Kilpatrick Townsend & Stockton LLP, Atlanta,
Georgia; Adam H. Charnes, Kilpatrick Townsend &
Stockton LLP, Dallas, Texas; for Defendant-Appellant.
Jonathan A. Scruggs, Alliance Defending Freedom,
Scottsdale, Arizona; John J. Bursch and Andrea Dill,
Alliance Defending Freedom, Washington, D.C.; for
Amicus Curiae Christian Employers Alliance.
Andrew Nussbaum and L. Martin Nussbaum, First &
Fourteenth PLLC, Colorado Springs, Colorado, for Amicus
Curiae the Catholic Benefits Association.
Joanne Roskey and Anthony F. Shelley, Miller & Chevalier
Chartered, Washington, D.C., for Amici Curiae the ERISA
Industry Committee and America’s Health Insurance Plans
Inc..
Eric N. Kniffin and Mary R. Hasson, Ethics & Public Policy
Center, Washington, D.C., for Amicus Curiae Ethics and
Public Policy Center.

6

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

Joshua A. Block, American Civil Liberties Union
Foundation, Washington, D.C.; Susannah P. Lake,
American Civil Liberties Union of Washington Foundation,
Seattle, Washington; for Amici Curiae American Civil
Liberties Union and American Civil Liberties Union of
Washington Foundation.
Richard B. Katskee, Joshua Britt, Margaret K. Kruzner, and
Jake Sherman, Duke University School of Law, Durham,
North Carolina, for Amici Curiae Religion-Law Scholars.
Caroline E. Reynolds and David A. Reiser, Zuckerman
Spaeder LLP, Washington, D.C.; Abigail K. Coursolle and
Elizabeth Edwards, National Health Law Program, Los
Angeles, California; for Amici Curiae The National Health
Law Program, et al..
Barbara J. Chisholm, Connie K. Chan, and Robin S. Tholin,
Altshuler Berzon LLP, San Francisco, California; Alison
Tanner and Michelle Banker, National Women's Law
Center, Washington, D.C.; for Amici Curiae National
Women’s Law Center, Autistic Self Advocacy Network,
Autistic Women & Nonbinary Network, Campaign for
Southern Equality, Disability Rights Education & Defense
Fund, Equality California, GLBTQ Legal Advocates &
Defenders, National Partnership for Women & Families,
Positive Women’s Network-USA, Service Employees
International Union, and Transgender Legal Defense &
Education Fund.

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

7

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiffs, who represent a similarly situated class, sued
Defendant Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois (BCBSIL), for
its actions as a third-party administrator for certain
employer-sponsored health insurance plans. BCBSIL
refuses to cover treatment for gender dysphoria, citing plan
exclusions put in place at the insistence of the employer
sponsors. Plaintiffs sued pursuant to Section 1557 of the
Affordable Care Act, 42 U.S.C. § 18116, which bars sexbased discrimination, to compel BCBSIL to cover this
treatment. BCBSIL counters with four arguments, arguing
it is not liable pursuant to Section 1557 because: its plans are
not funded by the federal government; it was acting at the
direction of the employers; it is shielded by the Religious
Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA); and its exclusions do not
discriminate based on sex.
The district court rejected each of BCBSIL’s arguments,
awarding summary judgment to the class. We join the
district court in rejecting BCBSIL’s first three arguments.
But the district court’s analysis of the fourth argument is
undercut by intervening Supreme Court authority in United
States v. Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. 1816 (2025). We therefore
vacate the summary judgment against BCBSIL and remand
so the district court may consider the implications of that
authority.
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
I. Gender Dysphoria
Someone’s gender identity is their “inner sense of
belonging to a particular sex, like male or female.” Most

8

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

people are cisgender, and their “actual sex” matches the sex
they “are assigned . . . based solely on the appearance of
their external genitalia.” For transgender people, however,
their gender identity and sex do not match.
As the American Psychiatric Association has
recognized, this “gender incongruence, in and of itself, does
not constitute a mental disorder.” However, a transgender
person can suffer from gender dysphoria if the “marked
incongruence between [their] experienced/expressed gender
and assigned gender” causes “clinically significant distress
or impairment in social, occupational, or other important
areas of functioning.” Without treatment, gender dysphoria
can lead to anxiety, depression, suicide, and other mental
health problems.
Healthcare providers can treat gender dysphoria using
counseling, hormone therapy, surgery, and other forms of
gender-affirming care. Providers adapt the treatments used
to the medical needs of each patient; not all patients need
each treatment. When doctors provide gender-affirming
hormone therapy, they seek to decrease hormones associated
with the person’s birth sex and increase hormones associated
with their actual sex. Likewise, when transgender women
receive surgery, they undergo procedures like chest
reconstruction, hysterectomy, or phalloplasty to eliminate or
reduce the physical features reflecting their birth sex.
Transgender men, when they receive surgery, undergo
procedures like vaginoplasty, breast reduction, and
orchiectomy for the same purpose. Sometimes, doctors give
transgender adolescents medication to delay puberty and
prevent the development of characteristics associated with
the individual’s sex at birth.

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

9

II. Third-Party Administrators
Most people obtain health insurance on the group market
from their employer or a family member’s employer.
Employers sponsor plans for their workers in two ways.
First, “fully insured” employers purchase insurance on their
employees’ behalf from an insurer. Second, “self-insured”
employers assume responsibility for their employees’
healthcare costs but retain a third-party administrator to
perform tasks like assembling a provider network, billing
those providers, and processing claims. This group of plan
sponsors decides which healthcare costs they will cover for
employees.
These employer-sponsored plans can exclude services
for many reasons. Plans generally exclude services that are
not medically necessary. Plan sponsors often exclude
certain classes of treatment, like dental coverage, Lasik eye
surgery, and weight loss prescription drugs. Sometimes,
sponsors exclude treatments like contraceptives for religious
reasons.
Some plans exclude services to treat gender dysphoria.
These plans may exclude all such services, exclude only
some forms of gender-affirming care, or exclude genderaffirming care only in specific situations. Others exclude
from coverage only the reversal of gender reassignment
surgery.
III. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois
BCBSIL is a health care services company that sells
health insurance coverage and operates as a third-party
administrator for various health plans. BCBSIL is not a
religious entity.

10

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

BCBSIL receives federal funds for several products,
including Medicare supplemental coverage, Medicaid,
Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug insurance
coverage, and Medicare/Medicaid dual eligibility. It does
not receive assistance for acting as a third-party
administrator. To receive these funds, BCBSIL promised to
comply with Section 1557’s non-discrimination
obligations. 1
For fully insured plans, BCBSIL covers genderaffirming care. BCBSIL considers these treatments to be
medically necessary for treating adolescents with gender
dysphoria.
When BCBSIL is a third-party administrator, it permits
its employer-clients to “add or remove any benefits that they
wish.” Thus, it lets plan sponsors exclude gender-affirming
care. 398 of its sponsors have chosen to do so. BCBSIL
offers “standard language” to employers who want to
exclude gender-affirming care. 378 of the 398 sponsors use
that language.
BCBSIL never asks employers for a justification or
reason when they exclude gender-affirming care. It does not
require a medical, scientific, or religious reason for the
exclusions. It would administer the exclusion even if the
employer wanted the exclusion for discriminatory purposes.
The plans here have gender-affirming care exclusions,
which exclude treatment for gender dysphoria. For these
1
BCBSIL’s parent, Health Care Services Corporation (HCSC), signed
an agreement stating it would abide by Section 1557. Neither party
argues that only HCSC is bound by Section 1557. Indeed, BCBSIL says
it, not just HCSC, “receives Federal financial assistance for” various
insurance plans.

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

11

plans, BCBSIL determines whether to approve or deny
claims based on the patient’s diagnosis and the procedure at
issue.
IV. Plaintiffs and Their Treatment
C.P. is a young transgender man diagnosed with gender
dysphoria. He was enrolled in a BCBSIL-administered
health plan. That plan excluded “[b]enefits . . . for treatment,
drugs, medicines, therapy, counseling services and supplies
for, or leading to, gender reassignment surgery.” The plan
sponsor, Catholic Health Initiatives (“CHI”), requested that
exclusion for religious reasons.
C.P.’s doctor prescribed puberty-delaying medication,
distributed through a Vantas implant. BCBSIL initially
covered the implant. BCBSIL later said its coverage
decision was erroneous because of the plan exclusion. C.P.’s
family appealed, and the appeal was denied. Later, when
C.P. was prescribed a second Vantas implant, BCBSIL
denied coverage.
C.P.’s doctor also recommended gender-affirming chest
surgery. BCBSIL denied coverage based on the exclusion.
A BCBSIL representative stated that the surgery was
necessary.
S.L. is a transgender girl who has been diagnosed with
gender dysphoria and precocious puberty. 2 She is enrolled
in a self-funded health benefit plan administered by
BCBSIL. Her healthcare provider prescribed pubertydelaying hormones. BCBSIL denied coverage, citing an
exclusion in the plan. That provision excludes “[g]ender
Precocious puberty is a condition where puberty begins at an
abnormally young age.

2

12

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

reassignment surgery (also referred to as transsexual
Surgery, sex reassignment Surgery or intersex Surgery),
including related services and supplies.” S.L.’s mother
appealed, but BCBSIL denied the appeal.
Emmett Jones is a transgender man diagnosed with
gender dysphoria. He is enrolled in the same plan as
C.P. Jones’s providers recommended gender-affirming
chest surgery. Jones paid out-of-pocket and sought
reimbursement, which BCBSIL denied.
V. This Action
C.P. and his mother, Patricia Pritchard, filed this lawsuit
on November 23, 2020. They alleged that BCBSIL violated
Section 1557 by administering the exclusion in their policy.
BCBSIL moved to dismiss, but the district court denied that
motion. On September 10, 2021, C.P. and Patricia Pritchard
moved to file an amended complaint on behalf of a class.
The district court granted this motion.
After discovery, Plaintiffs moved to certify the class, and
both sides moved for summary judgment. On November 9,
2022, the district court certified the class, with later
amendments in December 2022 and December 2023. Now,
the class consists of:
[A]ll individuals who: (1) have been, are, or
will be participants or beneficiaries in an
ERISA self-funded ‘group health plan’ (as
defined in 29 U.S.C. § 1167(1)) administered
by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois during
the Class Period and that contains a
categorical exclusion of some or all GenderAffirming Health Care services; and (2) were
denied pre-authorization or coverage of

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

13

treatment solely based on an exclusion of
some or all Gender Affirming Health Care
services; and/or (3) are or will be denied preauthorization or coverage of treatment solely
based on an exclusion of some or all Gender
Affirming Health Care services.
The class period is November 23, 2016, to the present.
On December 19, 2022, the district court granted
Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment and denied
BCBSIL’s analogous motion. In doing so, the district court
made four principal rulings. First, it rejected the argument
that BCBSIL was exempt from Section 1557 because its
third-party administrator activities were “not ‘healthcare
activities’” and because it “does not receive any federal
financial assistance for [those] activities.” The district court
also held that “ERISA’s requirement that Blue Cross follow
the Exclusion’s language is no defense.” Next, the district
court rejected BCBSIL’s RFRA arguments because this is
an action between private parties. Finally, the district court
held that BCBSIL’s “denial of benefits under the Plaintiffs’
plans based on their transgender status was discrimination
on the basis of sex.”
After the summary-judgment ruling, Plaintiffs sought
class-wide relief. While that motion was pending, Plaintiffs
added S.L. and Emmett Jones. The district court prohibited
BCBSIL from administering or enforcing exclusions for
gender-affirming health care and required it to re-process
class members’ claims if denied during the class period.
BCBSIL timely appealed. The district court stayed its
injunction pending this appeal.

14

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
Because Plaintiffs raise claims pursuant to Section 1557
of the Affordable Care Act, 42 U.S.C. § 18116, the district
court had subject-matter jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 1331. In turn, we have subject-matter jurisdiction pursuant
to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1).
“The district court’s ruling on cross-motions for
summary judgment is reviewed de novo.” Hartstein v. Hyatt
Corp., 82 F.4th 825, 828 (9th Cir. 2023).
ANALYSIS
We reject BCBSIL’s first three defenses. BCBSIL is
bound by Section 1557 because its provision of health
insurance is a health program or activity, part of which is
receiving Federal financial assistance. BCBSIL can be
liable for violating Section 1557 even when implementing
plan terms drafted by a plan sponsor. BCBSIL also has no
RFRA defense here.
BCBSIL’s fourth defense, however, presents a far more
difficult question. The district court’s application of Bostock
v. Clayton Cnty., 590 U.S. 644 (2020), cannot stand in light
of United States v. Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. 1816 (2025). Even
so, there is some possibility that Skrmetti may not
necessarily foreclose Plaintiffs’ Section 1557 claim. Thus,
we vacate the summary judgment against BCBSIL and
remand for the district court to reconsider this issue in light
of Skrmetti.
I. The district court reached the correct result in
concluding that BCBSIL’s provision of health

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

15

insurance is a health program or activity, part of
which is receiving Federal financial assistance.
Pursuant to Section 1557 of the Affordable Care Act, “an
individual shall not [on certain grounds] be excluded from
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under, any health program or activity, any
part of which is receiving Federal financial assistance,
including credits, subsidies, or contracts of insurance[.]” 42
U.S.C. § 18116(a). BCBSIL does not deny that “health
program or activity” includes health insurance, 3 but it argues
Section 1557 only governs the plans receiving funding, not
its entire health insurance program.
A. The district court’s analysis of “health program
or activity” was erroneous.
The district court concluded that providing contracts of
insurance is a single “health program or activity” because
Section 1557 covers “any health program or activity, any
part of which is receiving Federal financial assistance,
including credits, subsidies, or contracts of insurance[.]” 42
U.S.C. § 18116(a). The district court, and Plaintiffs, read
providing “credits, subsidies, or contracts of insurance” as
examples of health programs or activities, while BCBSIL
reads them as forms of financial assistance.
We agree with BCBSIL. Typically, “qualifying phrases
are to be applied to the words or phrase immediately
preceding the qualifier and are not to be construed as
Even if BCBSIL had disputed this point, we have held that “Section
1557 . . . prohibits discrimination on th[e enumerated] grounds . . . in
health insurance contracts.” Schmitt v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan of
Wash., 965 F.3d 945, 951 (9th Cir. 2020). Indeed, Section 1557 was part
of the Affordable Care Act, and it would be anomalous to read it to
exclude health insurance.

3

16

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

modifying more remote phrases.” Am. Fed’n of Gov’t
Emps., AFL-CIO Loc. 2152 v. Principi, 464 F.3d 1049, 1055
(9th Cir. 2006). Thus, “credits, subsidies, and contracts of
insurance” modifies “Federal financial assistance.”
Moreover, “[w]hen a word appears in a list of similar
terms, each term should be read in light of characteristics
shared by the entire list[.]” Maner v. Dignity Health, 9 F.4th
1114, 1123 (9th Cir. 2021). “Credits” and “subsidies” are
always forms of financial assistance, but they need not have
anything to do with health. Because the statute treats
“contracts of insurance” like “credits” and “subsidies,” it
treats “contracts of insurance” as a form of financial
assistance.
Plaintiffs respond that the statute includes “contracts of
insurance” to distinguish other civil rights statutes that
exempted “contracts of insurance.”. Even in the other
context Plaintiffs cite, however, contracts of insurance are a
form of federal financial assistance, not a type of health
program or activity. See 45 C.F.R. § 84.10 (defining
“Federal financial assistance [as] any grant, cooperative
agreement, loan, contract (other than a direct Federal
procurement contract or a contract of insurance or guaranty),
subgrant, contract under a grant or any other arrangement”
meeting certain conditions).
Nor would reading “contracts of insurance” as a form of
financial assistance render this part of the statute a nullity.
Health programs and activities sometimes receive
government aid via contracts of insurance. For example,
pursuant to the National Flood Insurance Program, the
government organizes a pool of insurers to provide flood
coverage to businesses. See 42 U.S.C. §§ 4051, 4071; see
also 42 U.S.C. § 4012(a) (making insurance available to

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

17

cover business properties). Some of those businesses are
presumably engaged in health programs or activities.
The district court responds that the ACA was enacted “to
increase access to services and insurance coverage.”
However, that purpose describes the entire ACA and not
Section 1557. It does not illuminate whether “contracts of
insurance” are a form of financial assistance or whether
“health program or activity” is defined at the entity or plan
level. 4 We turn to that question now.
B. Notwithstanding the district court’s error,
BCBSIL is subject to Section 1557 because courts
must analyze “health program or activity” at the
entity level, not the plan level.
BCBSIL claims it is not subject to Section 1557 based
on a plan-level analysis: BCBSIL received no federal
funding for the plans that exclude gender-affirming care, so
those plans are not “health program[s] or activit[ies], any
part of which is receiving Federal financial assistance” and
therefore are not covered by Section 1557. Plaintiffs
disagree, employing an entity-level analysis: BCBSIL
received federal funding, so all of its operations are covered.
Section 1557’s text forecloses BCBSIL’s position that
“insurers have been subject [to] Section 1557 only as far as
‘Federal financial assistance is extended.’” Section 1557
only requires that some “part” of the health program or
In the same vein, Plaintiffs also rely on the legislative history of Section
1557. That section’s sponsors expressed a desire “that all Americans
[be] able to reap the benefits of health insurance reform equally, without
discrimination.” 156 Cong. Rec. S1821, 1842 (daily ed. Mar. 23, 2010).
Although that statement underscores Section 1557’s importance, it does
not help understand the appropriate level of analysis for “health program
or activity.”

4

18

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

activity receive funding. 42 U.S.C. § 18116(a). If “health
program or activity” was already limited to the part receiving
funding, it would not make sense to say that only part of the
“health program or activity” needed to receive funding.
Additionally, the structure of the Affordable Care Act
undercuts the view that “health program or activity” refers
to the individual insurance plan, rather than the entity
providing health insurance. The Affordable Care Act uses
“health program” again in 42 U.S.C. § 18051, where it
authorizes states to establish “basic health programs.” In one
of those “health programs,” “a State may enter into contracts
to offer 1 or more standard health plans,” which is
inconsistent with the position that each plan is its own
separate health program. See 42 U.S.C. § 18051(a)(1).
BCBSIL argues that each health plan is just a type of health
program. The statute does not treat health plans that way.
For example, 42 U.S.C. § 18051(c)(1) states that “[a] State
basic health program shall establish a competitive process
for entering into contracts with standard health plans[.]” As
before, there is only one health program, and it offers
multiple health plans. This section suggests “health program
or activity” is not defined at the plan level.
The related term “program or activity,” 5 as used in other
statutes, often requires an entity-level analysis, and it is
never limited to the specific operation receiving federal
funds. The Civil Rights Restoration Act (CRRA), for
When interpreting a term, it is appropriate to consider related terms
used in similar contexts. After all, “‘statutes addressing the same subject
matter’ generally should be interpreted consistently with each other,”
especially when “the language in an earlier act is the same as, or similar
to, the language in the later act.” Advanced Integrative Med. Sci. Inst.,
PLLC v. Garland, 24 F.4th 1249, 1256 (9th Cir. 2022) (quoting
Wachovia Bank v. Schmidt, 546 U.S. 303, 305 (2006)).

5

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

19

example, provides that “program or activity” means, among
other things, “all of the operations of . . . (A) an entire
corporation, partnership, or other private organization, or an
entire sole proprietorship—(i) if assistance is extended to
such corporation, partnership, private organization, or sole
proprietorship as a whole; or (ii) which is principally
engaged in the business of providing education, health care,
housing, social services, or parks and recreation; or (B) the
entire plant or other comparable, geographically separate
facility to which Federal financial assistance is extended, in
the case of any other corporation, partnership, private
organization, or sole proprietorship; . . . any part of which is
extended Federal financial assistance[.]”
20 U.S.C.
§ 1687(3). 6 Under this definition, “program or activity” is
either defined with respect to an entire entity or, at the
smallest, a “geographically separate facility to which Federal
financial assistance is extended.”
This definition of “program or activity” provides further
support for our conclusion that Congress generally treats that
phrase as directing an entity-level analysis. Indeed, the only
instance in which that definition reaches a unit smaller than
an “entire corporation” is in the case of a “geographically
separate facility.” Even in that instance, the entire facility
constitutes a “program or activity” without regard to the
different operations or activities provided therein.
Accordingly, both parts of the definition of “program or
activity” set forth entity-level tests, suggesting that “health
program or activity,” as used in Section 1557, directs the
same. And because the funding BCBSIL received cannot be
cabined to a single “plant or other comparable,
Other statutes use the same definition. See, e.g., 42 U.S.C. § 6107(4);
42 U.S.C. § 2000d-4a(3).
6

20

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

geographically separate facility,” even the narrower of these
two tests provides no basis for treating “health program or
activity” as referring solely to a subset of BCBSIL’s
operations, no less to a specific insurance plan.
Applying an entity-level test is also consistent with
Supreme Court precedent. The Supreme Court noted that
Section 1557 “outlaws discrimination on [various] grounds
. . . by healthcare entities receiving federal funds.”
Cummings v. Premier Rehab Keller, P.L.L.C., 596 U.S. 212,
218 (2022), reh’g denied, 142 S. Ct. 2853 (2022) (emphasis
added); see id. at 217 (Section 1557 “appl[ies] to entities that
receive federal financial assistance” (emphasis added)). To
be sure, Cummings did not consider BCBSIL’s argument.
But if BCBSIL were right, we think the Supreme Court
would have written that Section 1557 applies to healthcare
plans or healthcare options, not “healthcare entities.” Id. at
218.
To avoid this conclusion, BCBSIL relies on the 2020
Rule, a regulation that defined “health program or activity”
for the purposes of Section 1557. See Nondiscrimination in
Health and Health Education Programs or Activities, 85 Fed.
Reg. 37,160 (June 19, 2020). However, the 2020 Rule does
not control. Even if Section 1557 were ambiguous, “courts
need not and under the APA may not defer to an agency
interpretation of the law simply because a statute is
ambiguous.” Loper Bright Enters. v. Raimondo, 603 U.S.
369, 413 (2024). It is true that an agency interpretation may
have “power to persuade” “depend[ing] upon the
thoroughness evident in its consideration, the validity of its
reasoning, its consistency with earlier and later
pronouncements, and” other factors. Id. at 388 (quoting
Skidmore v. Swift & Co., 323 U.S. 134, 140 (1944)). All the

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

21

same, we find that the 2020 Rule used invalid reasoning. 7
We also note that the 2020 Rule is inconsistent with at least
one later pronouncement. 8 Accordingly, we do not decide
The 2020 Rule defined “health program or activity” to include “all the
operations of entities principally engaged in the business of providing
healthcare,” and, for any other entity, to include “such entity’s operations
only to the extent that any such operation received Federal financial
assistance.” 85 Fed. Reg. at 37, 244. The 2020 Rule further provided
that an entity “principally engaged in the business of providing
healthcare” does not include an entity “engaged in the business of
providing health insurance.” Id. at 37, 244-45. This definition is
inconsistent with the statutory text for two reasons. First, it introduces a
distinction between entities that provide “healthcare” and those
performing other health functions, even though the language of Section
1557 refers to “health” programs or activities in general. Second, to the
extent the 2020 Rule extends “health program or activity” to entities
other than “healthcare” entities, it does so only “to the extent” of the
federal financial assistance received. But, as explained above, the text
of Section 1557 expressly forecloses this interpretation as it requires only
that “any part” of the health program or activity receive funding for
Section 1557 to apply. Finally, the fact that the 2020 Rule purported to
adopt a definition “align[ed] . . . with the standard articulated in the [Civil
Rights Restoration Act]” does not save the Rule because the CRRA does
not support the definition adopted. Id. at 37,171. As discussed above,
the CRRA defined “program or activity” to require an entity-level or
geographically-separate-facility-level analysis. It provides no support
for the portion of the 2020 Rule extending Section 1557 “only to the
extent [an individual] operation receives Federal financial assistance.”
Id. at 37,244. Likewise, nothing in the CRRA, which defines “program
or activity,” not “health program or activity,” explains or requires the
2020 Rule’s further limitation to “healthcare” entities.
7

The 2020 Rule has now been superseded by the 2024 Rule. Pursuant
to the 2024 Rule, “health program or activity” includes “[a]ny project,
enterprise, venture, or undertaking to: . . . [p]rovide or administer healthrelated services, health insurance coverage, or other health-related
coverage[,]” as well as “[a]ll of the operations of any entity principally
engaged in the provision or administration of” the aforementioned
projects, enterprises, ventures, or undertakings, “including, but not
8

22

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

whether BCBSIL is “principally engaged in the business of
providing healthcare,” as the 2020 Rule would require.
Nondiscrimination in Health and Health Education
Programs or Activities, 85 Fed. Reg. 37,160, 37,244 (June
19, 2020).
We also do not decide whether Section 1557 always
requires an entity-level analysis. The related term “program
or activity” suggests that a geographically-separate-facilitylevel analysis might be appropriate in some cases. Here,
however, the assistance was not tied to a particular facility,
yielding the same result as an entity-level analysis. Because
BCBSIL receives federal financial assistance, it is subject to
Section 1557 for all of its operations.
C. BCBSIL did not preserve its Spending Clause
argument.
For the first time in its reply brief, BCBSIL argues that
it had insufficient notice, as required by the Spending
Clause, that it would be subject to Section 1557 for its thirdparty administrator activities.
BCBSIL waived this
argument by failing to raise it in its opening brief. BCBSIL
also forfeited this argument by failing to make it to the
district court.
BCBSIL could have raised this argument before.
BCBSIL knew Plaintiffs were arguing that Section 1557
covered its activities, and the regulation that allegedly
provided insufficient notice was promulgated years ago. See
Nondiscrimination in Health and Health Education
Programs or Activities, 85 Fed. Reg. 37,160, 37,172–73,
37,244–45 (June 19, 2020). Although the 2020 Rule was
limited to, a . . . health insurance issuer[.]” Nondiscrimination in Health
Programs and Activities, 89 Fed. Reg. 37,522, 37,694 (May 6, 2024).

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

23

superseded by the 2024 Rule, which was finalized after
BCBSIL filed its opening brief, a proposed rule making the
same change was promulgated two years ago. See
Nondiscrimination in Health Programs and Activities, 89
Fed. Reg. 37,522, 37,694 (May 6, 2024); Nondiscrimination
in Health Programs and Activities, 87 Fed. Reg. 47,824,
47,912 (Aug. 4, 2022). Moreover, BCBSIL’s Spending
Clause argument only relies on the 2020 Rule, not the new
one. We see nothing that precluded BCBSIL from raising
the Spending Clause before now.
II. The district court correctly held that third-party
administrators can be liable for violating Section
1557, even when implementing plan terms drafted by
a plan sponsor.
BCBSIL concedes that it is not immune from Section
1557 liability if it discriminates “without instruction from
the plan.” However, it contends that it cannot be liable for
administering and enforcing a discriminatory plan term
designed by the plan sponsor.
A. ERISA
does
not
require
third-party
administrators to implement unlawful plan
terms.
BCBSIL claims two aspects of ERISA permit it to
administer discriminatory plan terms without incurring
Section 1557 liability. First, ERISA requires third-party
administrators and other fiduciaries to “discharge [their]
duties with respect to a plan . . . in accordance with the
documents and instruments governing the plan.” 29 U.S.C.
§ 1104(a)(1)(D).
This rule means “that contractual
limitations provisions ordinarily should be enforced as
written,” which “is especially appropriate when enforcing an
ERISA plan.” Heimeshoff v. Hartford Life & Acc. Ins. Co.,

24

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

571 U.S. 99, 108 (2013) (emphasis added). Second,
“[e]mployers have large leeway to design disability and
other welfare plans as they see fit.” Id. (quoting Black &
Decker Disability Plan v. Nord, 538 U.S. 822, 833 (2003)).
They, “are generally free . . . for any reason at any time, to
adopt, modify, or terminate welfare plans.” Curtiss-Wright
Corp. v. Schoonejongen, 514 U.S. 73, 78 (1995).
However, neither of these authorities suggests that
BCBSIL must, or can, administer unlawful plan terms. First,
contractual provisions are ordinarily enforced (but not
always), and plan sponsors have large leeway to design their
plans (but not absolute discretion). Second, even Section
1104(a)(1)(D) only requires administrators to enforce the
plan “insofar as such documents and instruments are
consistent with the provisions of this subchapter and
subchapter III.” 29 U.S.C. § 1104(a)(1)(D). Thus, Section
1104(a)(1)(D) recognizes that plan terms conflicting with at
least some laws may not be enforced.
BCBSIL responds that Section 1557 is in neither of the
subchapters mentioned in Section 1104(a)(1)(D). We do not
think Section 1104(a)(1)(D) licenses third-party
administrators to violate any federal law other than those
listed, just because a plan sponsor commanded it. Fiduciary
duties, such as “the duty of prudence, under ERISA as under
the common law of trusts, do[] not require a fiduciary to
break the law.” Fifth Third Bancorp v. Dudenhoeffer, 573
U.S. 409, 428 (2014). If Congress intended a different result
for the fiduciary duty to follow the plan terms, it would be
clear about that result. Section 1104(a)(1)(D) is not.
The statutory structure confirms this intuition.
Elsewhere in the same subchapter, ERISA states that
“[n]othing in this subchapter shall be construed to alter,

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

25

amend, modify, invalidate, impair, or supersede any law of
the United States . . . or any rule or regulation issued under
any such law.” 29 U.S.C. § 1144(d). Thus, a third-party
administrator’s duties under ERISA cannot entitle it to
violate another federal law; to hold otherwise would “alter,”
“impair,” or “supersede” that other law.
BCBSIL criticizes the district court’s reading of Section
1144(d), contending it makes ERISA “a sort of second-class
federal policy, one that yields at the first sign of conflict with
any other federal statutory requirement.” Hyperbole aside,
the district court was correct that, if a plan sponsor tells a
third-party administrator to discriminate, the law prohibiting
discrimination and the law requiring administrators to obey
plan sponsors conflict. When two laws conflict, one must
yield. And Section 1144(d) shows that ERISA is the law that
yields. The district court did not err by ruling accordingly.
BCBSIL argues that ERISA cannot yield because
ERISA’s commands are express, and Plaintiffs’ Section
1557 right of action is implied. This is fallacious. The
conflict is not between ERISA and Section 1557’s implied
right of action but between ERISA and Section 1557’s
express prohibition against discrimination. And Section
1144(d)’s express command that ERISA does not supersede
other federal law provides a clear outcome in the face of this
conflict.
Nor does BCBSIL point to any cases supporting its
position. To the contrary, although no circuit has expressly
addressed a third-party administrator’s duties when ERISA
and another federal law conflict, the Third Circuit has held
that “[a]n administrator who strictly adheres to the lawful
terms of an employee benefit plan may not be found to have
acted arbitrarily and capriciously.” Vitale v. Latrobe Area

26

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

Hosp., 420 F.3d 278, 284 (3d Cir. 2005) (emphasis added)
(quoting Hlinka v. Bethlehem Steel Corp., 863 F.2d 279, 286
(3d Cir. 1988)). If administrators could violate the law at the
command of a plan sponsor, the limitation to “lawful” terms
in Vitale would make little sense.
BCBSIL does rely on regulations promulgated by the
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). But the
regulations make clear that ERISA “explicitly preserves the
independent operation of civil rights laws” and therefore
“the fact that third party administrators are governed by . . .
ERISA is not a reason to exempt them from Section 1557.”
Nondiscrimination in Health Programs and Activities, 81
Fed. Reg. 31,376, 31,432 (May 18, 2016); see also
Nondiscrimination in Health Programs and Activities, 89
Fed. Reg. 37,522, 37,549 (May 6, 2024) (similar). The final
rule did “not exclude[e]” third party administrators,” but
merely “adopt[ed] specific procedures to govern the
processing of complaints against [them].” 81 Fed. Reg. at
31,432. Specifically, HHS decided to “adjust[] the way in
which it will process claims that involve alleged
discrimination in self-insured group health plans
administered by third party administrators that are covered
entities.” Id. “Where . . . the alleged discrimination relates
to the benefit design of a self-insured plan—for example,
where a plan excludes coverage for all health services related
to gender transition . . . [HHS] will typically address the
complaint against that employer.” Id. (emphasis added).
HHS did not suggest that third-party administrators were not
liable for implementing plans with discriminatory benefit
designs. Instead, it explained how it would use its
enforcement discretion to target the party most responsible

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

27

for the discrimination. 9 The 2016 and 2024 Rules are
consistent with our holding and do not support BCBSIL’s
position. 10
As BCBSIL observes, our holding leaves it in a dilemma
when there is doubt about whether a plan exclusion is
unlawful. If it enforces an unlawful term, it faces liability to
participants whose care was denied; but if it ignores a lawful
term, it faces liability to the plan sponsor. This is a risk
BCBSIL accepted when it assumed fiduciary duties to the
plan. Every fiduciary faces the same dilemma when there is
doubt about the legality of an action it feels compelled to
take. BCBSIL could have refused to administer plans for
employers requesting potentially illegal plan exclusions, or
it could have paid for the excluded care out of its own pocket,
which would satisfy its potential duty to the participant
without risking an ERISA violation by using the plan’s
money. BCBSIL may also have been able to seek a
declaratory judgment to avoid the tension it now faces. See
28 U.S.C. § 2201(a). BCBSIL’s policy argument gives us
no reason to depart from the text and structure of ERISA,

The other cited regulation followed the same approach. HHS agreed
“that a third party administrator should not be held responsible for
discriminatory plan design features over which the third party
administrator exercised no control.” Nondiscrimination in Health
Programs and Activities, 89 Fed. Reg. 37,522, 37,626 (May 6, 2024). It
did so to explain why it “will take into account the party responsible for
the alleged discriminatory conduct” and why it did “not intend to enforce
this rule against a third party administrator for a plan design that it did
not design and over which it has no control.” Id.

9

To the extent these regulations suggest third-party administrators are
immune from Section 1557 liability when acting at the direction of a plan
sponsor, we disagree.

10

28

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

which do not allow third-party administrators to flout the law
on behalf of their employer-customers.
B. BCBSIL’s
remaining
unpersuasive.

arguments

are

According to BCBSIL, even if the plan terms violate
Section 1557, there is no conflict with its duty to follow the
plan terms because Section 1557 penalizes only intentional
discrimination, and it had no discriminatory intent in
administering those plan terms. These arguments do not
persuade.
At the outset, BCBSIL failed to preserve its position that
Plaintiffs’ claims fail because they have not shown
discriminatory intent. See In re Am. W. Airlines, Inc., 217
F.3d 1161, 1165 (9th Cir. 2000) (“Absent exceptional
circumstances, we generally will not consider arguments
raised for the first time on appeal, although we have
discretion to do so.”). In its summary-judgment briefing,
BCBSIL denied that a third-party administrator could be
liable for plan features it did not design, but it never raised
its present defense that Plaintiffs failed to show it acted with
discriminatory intent. BCBSIL cites our prior holding (in a
different context) that “it is claims that are deemed waived
or forfeited, not arguments.” United States v. PallaresGalan, 359 F.3d 1088, 1095 (9th Cir. 2004). Although
BCBSIL is right that parties have leeway to present their
appeals, “[f]ailure to argue a point in a motion for summary
judgment qualifies as failing to raise that issue below” when
“the argument was not raised sufficiently for the trial court
to rule on it.” Villanueva v. California, 986 F.3d 1158, 1164
n.4 (9th Cir. 2021) (quoting In re Mercury Interactive Corp.
Secs. Litig., 618 F.3d 988, 992 (9th Cir. 2010)). There is
considerable daylight between whether BCBSIL intended to

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

29

discriminate and whether the policy exclusions at issue
originated with BCBSIL. Accordingly, we find BCBSIL
forfeited its intent argument.
Even absent forfeiture, Plaintiffs’ claim is that BCBSIL
facially discriminated.
“[B]y its very terms, facial
discrimination is ‘intentional.’” Lovell v. Chandler, 303
F.3d 1039, 1057 (9th Cir. 2002). If Plaintiffs succeed in
proving facial discrimination, “no greater proof of mental
state [is] necessary” because “intentional discrimination” is
“synonymous with discrimination resulting in ‘disparate
treatment,’” as opposed to “disparate impact.” Id. (quoting
Pandazides v. Va. Bd. of Educ., 13 F.3d 823, 830 n.9 (4th
Cir. 1994)). The contrary authorities BCBSIL relies on
involve various types of non-facial discrimination. See, e.g.,
Comm. Concerning Cmty. Improvement v. City of Modesto,
583 F.3d 690, 703 (9th Cir. 2009); Karasek v. Regents of
Univ. of Cal., 956 F.3d 1093, 1105 (9th Cir. 2020). 11
BCBSIL’s response that its intention was to comply with
the plan terms, not discriminate, does not alter the analysis.
“[I]ntentional discrimination based on sex violates Title VII,
even if it is intended only as a means to achieving the
11
This part of our analysis is unchanged by Skrmetti. As we explain
below, on remand, the district court will consider two arguments:
whether BCBSIL adopted a policy that looked to class members’
transgender status rather than their gender-dysphoria diagnoses and
whether BCBSIL discriminated based on gender-dysphoria treatment as
a pretext/proxy for anti-transgender discrimination. See infra Section
IV. The former is arguably a facial-discrimination theory. Arguably,
the latter is also because “[p]roxy discrimination is a form of facial
discrimination.” Pac. Shores Props., LLC v. City of Newport Beach, 730
F.3d 1142, 1160 n.23 (9th Cir. 2013); see also Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. at 182
(requiring a showing of “invidious discriminatory purpose” only “where
a law’s classifications are neither covertly nor overtly based on” a
protected characteristic).

30

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

employer’s ultimate goal of discriminating against
homosexual or transgender employees.” Bostock v. Clayton
Cnty., 590 U.S. 644, 661 (2020). This is because
“[r]eframing the additional causes” for the employer’s
decision does nothing “to insulate the employers from
liability.” Id. After all, “[i]ntentionally burning down a
neighbor’s house is arson, even if the perpetrator’s ultimate
intention (or motivation) is only to improve the view.” Id.
For the same reason, intentional discrimination based on sex
violates Section 1557, even if intended only to comply with
the terms selected by the plan sponsor.
As a backup, BCBSIL argues that there is no conflict
between Section 1557 and ERISA because Plaintiffs are
seeking to use “agency principles” to hold it liable rather
than seeking to hold it liable for its own actions. BCBSIL’s
agency argument suffers from the same forfeiture problem
as its intent argument. Setting that aside, BCBSIL’s position
is unpersuasive. If Plaintiffs only sought to hold BCBSIL
liable because plan sponsors insisted on the exclusions at
issue, BCBSIL might have a point about agency.
Instead, BCBSIL’s own undisputed conduct 12 —
agreeing to apply the exclusions at issue and applying them
to deny coverage to Plaintiffs—is the kind of conduct that
could violate Section 1557. “[A]ll Title VII has ever
demanded to establish liability” is that the defendant
“necessarily and intentionally discriminates against [the
12
BCBSIL is correct that the district court found there was a genuine
dispute of material fact as to whether BCBSIL designed the exclusions
at issue, which Plaintiffs have not challenged. Thus, we do not affirm
on the basis that BCBSIL is liable for designing the exclusions. If
Plaintiffs do not succeed on their present theory, the district court may
need to revisit this issue. It will have the opportunity to do so on remand.

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

31

plaintiff] in part because of sex.” Bostock, 590 U.S. at 665. 13
In turn, someone “intentionally discriminate[s] based on
sex” who “necessarily and intentionally applies sex-based
rules.” Id. at 667 (emphasis omitted). The key word is
“applies.”
Here, BCBSIL applied the allegedly sex-based rules.
BCBSIL’s corporate representative testified that BCBSIL is
responsible for “determin[ing] whether [the care] falls under
that particular exclusion.” BCBSIL had a “standard
practice” for these claims: “look at the diagnosis and service
code to determine if it’s gender reassignment, and if it is then
it is denied[.]” It is BCBSIL that “looks at the diagnostic
code and the service code to figure out if [the claim is] for
gender reassignment” and “then looks at the service code in
particular to figure out if it is related to surgery.” The
excluded claims are “denied within [BCBSIL’s] system and
the member receives an Explanation of Benefits with that
denial.” This was no mechanical task: BCBSIL had to
review the claims, including the diagnosis and procedure
codes, and assess whether the claim fell within the exclusion.
Although plan sponsors chose the rules, BCBSIL applied
them. 14

We interpret Title VII and Title IX consistently, Doe v. Snyder, 28
F.4th 103, 114 (9th Cir. 2022), and the “grounds” of discrimination
prohibited by Title IX are incorporated into Section 1557. Thus, the legal
standard for Title VII and Section 1557 claims is the same.

13

14
The parties argue about whether Tovar v. Essentia Health, 857 F.3d
771, 778–79 (8th Cir. 2017), suggests that third party administrators can
be liable under Section 1557 for administering discriminatory plan
terms. However, Tovar is not binding, and Tovar merely decided the
plaintiff had Article III standing. It expressly declined to decide Section
1557’s scope.

32

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

III. The district court correctly concluded that BCBSIL
could not invoke a RFRA defense.
The Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA)
requires that “[g]overnment shall not substantially burden a
person’s exercise of religion even if the burden results from
a rule of general applicability[.]” 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(a).
However, the “[g]overnment may substantially burden a
person’s exercise of religion only if it demonstrates that
application of the burden to the person—(1) is in furtherance
of a compelling governmental interest; and (2) is the least
restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest.” Id. § 2000bb-1(b). “A person
whose religious exercise has been burdened in violation of
this section may assert that violation as a claim or defense in
a judicial proceeding and obtain appropriate relief against a
government.” Id. § 2000bb-1(c).
BCBSIL contends that enforcing Section 1557 here
would infringe the religious exercise of its employercustomers. However, the district court rejected this
argument, primarily because “RFRA provides relief against
the government and does not apply to disputes between
private parties” and also because BCBSIL “is not an entity
with a ‘sincerely-held religious belief.’” The district court
was correct on both counts.
A. RFRA does not provide a defense to those whose
religious exercise is not burdened.
RFRA has a judicial-relief provision stating that it
provides a claim or defense to “[a] person whose religious
exercise has been burdened in violation” of that statute. 42
U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(c). That provision would be superfluous
if RFRA’s other provisions implicitly created a defense for
everyone, whether their religious exercise has been burdened

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

33

or not. Thus, only people whose religious exercise has been
burdened can raise a defense under RFRA.
BCBSIL responds that it is not seeking to raise a defense.
It argues that “RFRA informs the interpretation and
application of existing laws even when no party invokes the
RFRA” in support of a claim or defense. Yet this view
would render RFRA’s judicial-relief provision equally
superfluous. If RFRA already “requires an exception” to
laws like Section 1557 as a matter of statutory construction,
no person whose religious exercise has been burdened would
ever need to go further and assert a RFRA defense.
BCBSIL has not argued that its religious exercise, or that
of its employees, officers, or shareholders, was affected by
providing the care at issue. Although RFRA sometimes
protects “a for-profit closely held corporation,” BCBSIL
does not meet that criterion, nor does this case implicate “the
religious liberty of the humans who own and control”
BCBSIL. Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, Inc., 573 U.S.
682, 707, 719 (2014). Indeed, BCBSIL is a secular
company. Moreover, BCBSIL does provide genderaffirming care for non-self-funded plans.
B. Even if RFRA provides a defense to those whose
religious exercise is not burdened, it does not
provide a defense against claims brought by a
private party.
Our sister circuits are divided over whether RFRA
applies in actions where the government is not a party. The
Second Circuit has held that “RFRA applies to an action by
a private party seeking relief under a federal statute against
another private party who claims that the federal statute
substantially burdens his or her exercise of religion,” at least
with respect to federal laws also enforceable by the

34

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

government. Hankins v. Lyght, 441 F.3d 96, 103 (2d Cir.
2006). On the other hand, the Sixth and Seventh Circuits
have held that “RFRA is not applicable in cases where the
government is not a party.” Listecki v. Off. Comm. of
Unsecured Creditors, 780 F.3d 731, 736 (7th Cir. 2015);
accord Gen. Conf. Corp. of Seventh-Day Adventists v.
McGill, 617 F.3d 402, 410–12 (6th Cir. 2010). 15
We have not squarely addressed the question. First, in
dicta, we found it “seems unlikely that the government
action Congress envisioned in adopting RFRA included”
private suits for copyright infringement. Worldwide Church
of God v. Phil. Church of God, Inc., 227 F.3d 1110, 1121
(9th Cir. 2000). Second, we held that RFRA claims
generally require a government defendant because the
statute on its face applies only to government actors, and
“governmental compulsion in the form of a general statute,
without more, is [in]sufficient to transform every private
entity that follows the statute into a governmental actor.”
Sutton v. Providence St. Joseph Med. Ctr., 192 F.3d 826, 839
(9th Cir. 1999). When RFRA claims against a private
defendant were permitted, “there was some additional nexus
that made it fair to deem the private entity a governmental
The parties have cited several other cases allegedly bearing on this
issue. However, none of them considered whether RFRA affects actions
between private parties, and many involved a governmental party. See
United States v. Bauer, 84 F.3d 1549, 1558–59 (9th Cir. 1996) (criminal
prosecution); EEOC v. Cath. Univ. of Am., 83 F.3d 455, 470 (D.C. Cir.
1996) (EEOC); In re Young, 141 F.3d 854, 861 (8th Cir. 1998)
(bankruptcy trustee); In re Grand Jury Empaneling of Special Grand
Jury, 171 F.3d 826, 835 (3d Cir. 1999) (grand jury subpoena); cf. Whole
Woman’s Health v. Smith, 896 F.3d 362, 371 (5th Cir. 2018), as revised
(July 17, 2018) (addressing court-ordered discovery in a private dispute,
but without addressing RFRA’s “government” burden requirement).
15

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

35

actor in the circumstances.” Id. However, Sutton addressed
RFRA claims, not RFRA defenses.
We now extend Sutton to RFRA defenses because no
part of Sutton’s reasoning is affected by the distinction
between claims and defenses. Whenever RFRA discusses
“claims,” it discusses “defenses” in the same breath. See 42
U.S.C. § 2000bb(b)(2); 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(c). Next,
Sutton decided RFRA claims could not target private
defendants because, “[w]hen Congress has intended to
regulate private employers . . . it has done so explicitly,” but
“Congress chose not to include similar wording in RFRA.”
Sutton, 192 F.3d at 834. This logic applies to both claims
and defenses: if Congress intended to shield private parties
from federal law, it would do so explicitly, and it has not
done so here. Finally, Sutton noted that RFRA applies when
the “government” acts, and RFRA defines the “government”
to “include[] parts of government and agents acting on
behalf of government, not purely private entities.” Id. This
definition applies to both RFRA claims and RFRA defenses
because the statute draws no distinction between the two.
In addition, the arguments considered by some of our
sister circuits persuade us that RFRA does not apply to suits
between private parties.
First, RFRA’s main provisions describe a process of
burden shifting between a government and a person whose
religious exercise is substantially burdened. Even assuming
a substantial burden, the government “may substantially
burden [that] person’s exercise of religion . . . if it
demonstrates that application of the burden” is justified by
strict scrutiny. 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(b). RFRA defines
“demonstrates” to mean “meets the burdens of going
forward with the evidence and of persuasion.” 42 U.S.C.

36

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

§ 2000bb-2(3). Because the statute requires the government
to present evidence and meet a burden of proof, it suggests
the government must be a party. If the government was not
part of the case, it would not be able to present evidence, and
it would make little sense to speak of the government’s
burden of proof. Likewise, even if a private party presented
evidence about the government’s interest, it would not be the
government that demonstrated that interest. 16
Second, RFRA’s judicial-relief provision states that “[a]
person whose religious exercise has been burdened in
violation of this section may assert that violation as a claim
or defense in a judicial proceeding and obtain appropriate
relief against a government.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-1(c).
Thus, the only form of relief provided by RFRA is “against
a government.” Conversely, absent a governmental party,
RFRA provides no relief.
The drafting history of the judicial-relief provision
supports this view. Earlier drafts authorized relief from both
governments and private parties, stating that “[a] party
aggrieved by a violation of this section may obtain
appropriate relief (including relief against a government) in
a civil action.” Religious Freedom Restoration Act, H.R.
5377, 101st Cong. § 2(c) (1990). Ultimately, Congress

BCBSIL responds to this argument by framing it as an argument that
courts sometimes lack sufficient information to identify the state interest
that may justify the law. This misunderstands Plaintiffs’ argument.
Plaintiffs are pointing out not only the practical difficulties of obtaining
information about the relevant state interest without the government’s
participation but also the statute’s requirement that the government
demonstrate the state interest, not a private party.
16

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

37

chose to enact a narrower provision, providing relief only
against a government. 17
The legislative history suggests RFRA requires a
governmental party. As then-Judge Sotomayor noted, “[a]ll
of the examples cited in the Senate and House Reports on
RFRA involve actual or hypothetical lawsuits in which the
government is a party.” Hankins, 441 F.3d at 115 n.9
(Sotomayor, J., dissenting) (citing S. Rep. No. 103-111
(1993); H.R. Rep. 103-88 (1993)). 18
BCBSIL points to RFRA’s purposes section, which
explains RFRA was intended “to restore the compelling
interest test . . . and to guarantee its application in all cases
where free exercise of religion is substantially burdened.”
At least one author contends that the clause authorizing relief against
a government was introduced to abrogate sovereign immunity and
signifies “an additional right upon which a litigant may rely,” rather than
“limit[ing] the set of cases in which a ‘claim or defense’ may be raised
in a judicial proceeding[.]” Shruti Chaganti, Why the Religious Freedom
Restoration Act Provides a Defense in Suits by Private Plaintiffs, 99 Va.
L. Rev. 343, 344, 348–55 (2013). This author contends that the
“ambiguity” leading courts to believe RFRA requires the government to
be a party “arose incidentally as a result of the restructuring of the
section.” Id. at 353. Perhaps that is a plausible reading of the drafting
history, but in cases of doubt, courts are bound to implement the text
Congress enacted, not the one it might have enacted.
17

A footnote in each committee report cited the testimony of
Prof. Douglas Laycock, part of which mentioned lawsuits between
private parties. However, the cited portion of the testimony covered
only lawsuits to which the government was a party. Compare H.R.
Rep. No. 103-88 at 2 n.2, and S. Rep. No. 103-111 at 4 n.3, with
Douglas
Laycock,
Statement
to
House
Civil
and
Constitutional Rights Subcommittee 2–5 (May 14, 1992),
https://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/jmd/legacy/2014/07/13/hear99-1992.pdf at 331–34.
18

38

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

42 U.S.C. § 2000bb(b)(1). BCBSIL argues that the free
exercise of religion may be substantially burdened in cases
where the government is not a party. But though purpose
may help us interpret text, we cannot adopt atextual
interpretations simply because they advance a statute’s
purpose. We do not think BCBSIL’s argument outweighs
the textual considerations we have discussed.
BCBSIL also observes that some statutes can be
enforced by the government or a private party. If RFRA only
applies when the government is involved, it creates an
inconsistency, limiting claims by the government but not by
private parties. This is a reasonable policy concern, but
ultimately, we must follow the text Congress enacted, even
if there is some reason to believe that text is inconsistent or
unwise.
Next, BCBSIL notes that RFRA applies to “all Federal
law, and the implementation of that law, whether statutory
or otherwise[.]” 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb-3(a). Although RFRA
certainly applies to all laws, that does not mean it applies in
all cases. The provision cited by BCBSIL only addresses the
former. 42 U.S.C. § 2000bb(a)(5), which finds that “the
compelling interest test as set forth in prior Federal court
rulings is a workable test for striking sensible balances,” is
irrelevant because it defines the test courts use when RFRA
applies, not when RFRA applies.
BCBSIL argues that, even if RFRA cannot provide a
claim or defense in a suit between private parties, it governs
Section 1557’s interpretation to provide BCBSIL with an
exception to liability. This is simply a defense by another
name. Also, the authorities BCBSIL relies on do not stretch
that far. The Supreme Court has held that “RFRA operates
as a kind of super statute, displacing the normal operation of

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

39

other federal laws, [and] might supersede Title VII’s
commands in appropriate cases.” Bostock v. Clayton Cnty.,
590 U.S. 644, 682 (2020); accord Apache Stronghold v.
United States, 101 F.4th 1036, 1058 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting
Bostock and calling RFRA a “framework statute”). That is
certainly true. But Bostock explained the effect RFRA has
when it applies—namely, it precludes liability for a
defendant who would otherwise be in violation of federal
law—and not the circumstances when it applies. Indeed,
Bostock expressly declined to decide when, or even whether,
RFRA would permit a business to violate the statute at issue.
590 U.S. at 682 (noting that RFRA “might” supersede Title
VII “in appropriate cases” and that “how these doctrines
protecting religious liberty interact with Title VII are
questions for future cases”). Even if RFRA might supersede
Section 1557 in appropriate cases, this is not one of them:
the plaintiff is not a governmental party, and the defendant’s
religious exercise was not burdened.
IV. When the district court found that BCBSIL’s
gender-dysphoria exclusion discriminated based on
sex, it ran afoul of Skrmetti.
Pursuant to Section 1557, “an individual shall not, on the
ground prohibited under . . . title IX of the Education
Amendments of 1972 (20 U.S.C. 1681 et seq.) . . . be
excluded from participation in, be denied the benefits of, or
be subjected to discrimination under, any health program or
activity[.]” 42 U.S.C. § 18116(a). The “ground” prohibited
by Title IX is “sex.” 20 U.S.C. § 1681(a).
Certainly, “discrimination based on . . . transgender
status necessarily entails discrimination based on sex.”
Bostock, 590 U.S. at 669. For example, “[a]n employer who
fires an individual for being . . . transgender fires that person

40

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

for traits or actions it would not have questioned in members
of a different sex.” Id. at 651–52. That is still true. See
United States v. Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. 1816, 1834 (2025).
Here, BCBSIL acknowledges that it excludes treatment
for “gender dysphoria” and “transgender services.”
However, BCBSIL denies violating Section 1557 because
the exclusions it administers only cover health care
“administered or prescribed for the treatment of gender
dysphoria,” and discrimination against treatment for gender
dysphoria is not discrimination based on transgender status
or discrimination based on sex. The district court rejected
this defense, holding “[g]ender dysphoria cannot be
understood without referencing sex or a synonym.”
The district court’s reasoning fails, but there are arguably
two potential avenues for relief that remain open to
Plaintiffs. We remand for the district court to consider those
issues.
A. The district court’s reasoning fails in light of
Skrmetti.
First, Skrmetti rejected the district court’s reasoning.
The statute in Skrmetti “remove[d] one set of diagnoses,”
including “gender dysphoria,” “from the range of treatable
conditions.” 145 S. Ct. at 1833. Even so, “sex is simply not
a but-for cause of [the] operation” of that statute. Id. at 1835.
Thus, Bostock did not apply. Id. at 1834. Likewise, by
excluding treatment for gender dysphoria, BCBSIL removed
that diagnosis from the range of conditions its insurance
plans cover. Without more, sex is not a but-for cause of the
exclusions’ operation, and Bostock does not apply.
Second, the district court erred in focusing on whether
the plans referenced sex or a synonym. The Supreme Court

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

41

“has never suggested that [a statute’s] mere reference to sex
is sufficient to trigger heightened scrutiny” by showing that
the statute discriminates based on sex. Id. at 1829.
Particularly “[i]n the medical context, the mere use of sexbased language does not sweep a statute within the reach of
heightened scrutiny.” Id. at 1830. Here, we are in the
medical context. Though BCBSIL’s exclusions reference
sex, and though that reference may be relevant, it is not
sufficient to trigger Bostock’s application.
Third, the district court relied on the district court’s
vacated decision in Kadel v. Folwell. No. 1:19CV272, 2022
WL 11166311, at *4 (M.D.N.C. Oct. 19, 2022). Similarly,
Plaintiffs rely repeatedly on the Fourth Circuit’s affirmance
in Kadel. 100 F.4th 122 (4th Cir. 2024). But when the
Supreme Court handed down Skrmetti, it held Kadel was no
longer good law. See Folwell v. Kadel, No. 24-99, 2025 WL
1787687 (U.S. June 30, 2025).
Plaintiffs try to distinguish Skrmetti, cabining it to the
constitutional context. Though Skrmetti was a constitutional
case, its logic reaches more broadly. Skrmetti applied the
Bostock test, which arose in “the Title VII context,” not the
constitutional context. 145 S. Ct. at 1834. Skrmetti did not
decide “whether Bostock’s reasoning reaches” constitutional
claims. Id. Even “[u]nder the reasoning of Bostock,”
however, the statute did not discriminate based on sex. Id.
Thus, Plaintiffs may be right that sex discrimination works
differently in constitutional and statutory cases. But because
Skrmetti assumed without deciding that the standards were
identical, Skrmetti’s gloss on Bostock applies to statutory
cases like this one.
In the same vein, Plaintiffs argue that Skrmetti does not
apply to Section 1557 cases because Skrmetti relied on

42

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

Geduldig v. Aiello, 417 U.S. 484 (1974). Skrmetti did rely
on Geduldig, but that does not make Skrmetti
distinguishable. In Geduldig, the Supreme Court interpreted
the Constitution not to bar discrimination based on
pregnancy. 417 U.S. at 492, 494, 496 n.20. The Supreme
Court later expanded that rule into Title VII. Gen. Elec. Co.
v. Gilbert, 429 U.S. 125, 136 (1976). Congress amended
Title VII to “unambiguously” reject “the holding and the
reasoning” of Gilbert. Newport News Shipbuilding & Dry
Dock Co. v. EEOC, 462 U.S. 669, 678 (1983). Because this
court “construe[s] Title IX’s protections consistently with
those of Title VII,” Doe v. Snyder, 28 F.4th 103, 114 (9th
Cir. 2022), that rule flows into Title IX and thus into Section
1557. But when Congress amended Title VII, it created a
rule that does not help Plaintiffs. Congress defined “because
of sex” to incorporate “pregnancy, childbirth, or related
medical conditions,” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(k), but it changed
nothing about gender dysphoria or gender reassignment.
Thus, Section 1557 bars discrimination against treatment for
pregnancy and childbirth but not treatment for gender
dysphoria.
Plaintiffs also argue that Skrmetti is different because the
exclusions here make “direct references to transgender
status.” But as noted, Skrmetti does not focus on whether
anyone refers to transgender status or, equivalently, sex. 145
S. Ct. at 1829–30. Indeed, the statute in Skrmetti bristled
with references to sex. See, e.g., Tenn. Code Ann. §§ 68-33101(b), (c), (m), (n), 68-33-102(1), (9), 68-33-103(a)(1),
(b)(4), (c)(2).
Next, Plaintiffs argue that BCBSIL does not just
discriminate against “a particular medical condition but
rather whether the care leads to ‘gender reassignment’
which, of course, equates with transgender status.” But the

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

43

statute in Skrmetti also targets care leading to gender
reassignment.
It bars “a medical procedure if the
performance or administration of the procedure is for the
purpose of,” among other things, “[e]nabling a minor to
identify with, or live as, a purported identity inconsistent
with the minor’s sex.” Tenn. Code Ann. § 68-33-103(a)(1).
We cannot distinguish Skrmetti this way.
B. This case is potentially different from Skrmetti in
two respects.
First, some of these Plaintiffs allegedly had diagnoses
(other than gender dysphoria) that entitled them to hormones
or other treatment—but BCBSIL still would not treat them.
In Skrmetti, “changing a minor’s sex or transgender status
d[id] not alter the application of” the statute. 145 S. Ct. at
1834. As an example, the Supreme Court envisioned “a
transgender boy seek[ing] testosterone to treat his gender
dysphoria.” Id. “The transgender boy could receive
testosterone only if he had” “a qualifying diagnosis for the
testosterone” like “a congenital defect, precocious puberty,
disease, or physical injury.” Id. “And, if he had such a
diagnosis, he could obtain the testosterone regardless of his
sex or transgender status.” Id. It was for this reason that the
Supreme Court distinguished Bostock. See id.
Here, one of the Plaintiffs has a different story to tell.
S.L. was diagnosed with both gender dysphoria and
precocious puberty. She sought puberty blockers to block
her precocious puberty. BCBSIL denied coverage. During
the appeal process, her mother “was told by BCBSIL
membership services that, had S.L. been diagnosed only with
early-onset puberty (i.e., not gender dysphoria AND earlyonset puberty), BCBSIL would have likely covered the
puberty blocker.” Unlike the example patient from Skrmetti,

44

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

S.L. has a qualifying diagnosis other than gender dysphoria,
but she still cannot get the puberty blocker. If S.L. had been
born a girl instead of a boy, she would not be transgender
and would not have gender dysphoria—because only
transgender people can have gender dysphoria. But she
would still have precocious puberty, and she could have
gotten puberty blockers. Because changing her sex, and thus
her transgender status, does “alter the application of”
BCBSIL’s exclusion, sex is a but-for cause of the
exclusion’s operation. For S.L. and those like her, Skrmetti
is arguably distinguishable.
Second, Skrmetti left Plaintiffs another potential
opportunity. It noted that no party had “argued that [the
statute’s] prohibitions are mere pretexts designed to effect
an
invidious
discrimination
against
transgender
individuals.” 145 S. Ct. at 1833. It “decline[d] to find” that
the statute discriminated against transgender individuals for
that reason. Id. at 1833–34. Here, however, Plaintiffs argue
that BCBSIL’s justifications for its actions “are a pretext for
‘invidious discrimination.’” Their argument is based on a
proxy-discrimination theory. Cf. Coal. for TJ v. Fairfax
Cnty. Sch. Bd., 68 F.4th 864, 886 (4th Cir. 2023) (identifying
“proxies” as a way to prove “an invidious discriminatory
intent”), cert. denied, No. 23-170, 2024 WL 674659 (U.S.
Feb. 20, 2024); Hearne v. Bd. of Educ., 185 F.3d 770, 776
(7th Cir. 1999) (distinguishing a case where an “ostensibly
neutral classification” was “such a good proxy for [the
protected characteristic] that [it] is ‘an obvious pretext for
. . . discrimination.’” (quoting Pers. Adm’r of Mass. v.
Feeney, 442 U.S. 256, 272 (1979))).
BCBSIL responds that Skrmetti forecloses Plaintiffs’
proxy theory because it held “there is a ‘lack of identity’
between transgender status and the excluded medical

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

45

diagnoses.” 145 S. Ct. at 1833. But while a “lack of
identity” weakens a proxy-discrimination theory, it is not
fatal. “Notably, proxy discrimination does not require an
exact match between the proxy category and the racial
classification for which it is a proxy.” Davis v. Guam, 932
F.3d 822, 838 (9th Cir. 2019). Instead, “the crucial question
is whether the proxy’s ‘fit’ is ‘sufficiently close’ to make a
discriminatory inference plausible.” Schmitt v. Kaiser
Found. Health Plan of Wash., 965 F.3d 945, 959 (9th Cir.
2020) (quoting Davis, 932 F.3d at 838).
BCBSIL counters that no such inference is plausible. At
this stage, we do not necessarily agree. The fit between
transgender people and people suffering from gender
dysphoria is strong. Only transgender people can suffer
from gender dysphoria: gender dysphoria comes from
“marked
incongruence
between
[the
patient’s]
experienced/expressed gender and assigned gender.” Also,
BCBSIL made a key concession that strengthens Plaintiffs’
pretext/proxy argument. BCBSIL’s policy admits that the
treatments Plaintiffs seek can be medically necessary for
treating adolescents with gender dysphoria. Even so, in
many of the health plans at issue, BCBSIL categorically
excludes those treatments. Because BCBSIL admits those
treatments are sometimes necessary, it cannot justify its
categorical exclusion by citing medical necessity.
Something else may be afoot, and that something may be
invidious discrimination against transgender people.
Make no mistake: we are not holding that Skrmetti favors
Plaintiffs. We are explaining which questions Skrmetti
potentially left open and, thus, why remand would not be
futile. We express no view about the appropriate outcome
on remand.

46

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

C. The appropriate course is to remand.
For several reasons, we remand for the district court to
reconsider its ruling in light of Skrmetti.
First, we are “a court of review, not of first view.” Cutter
v. Wilkinson, 544 U.S. 709, 718 n.7 (2005). The district
court did not rely on the discrimination allegedly suffered by
S.L. or Plaintiffs’ pretext/proxy argument. It should have
the first opportunity to assess those arguments. Also, the
parties did not have the opportunity to fully brief those
arguments.
The case would benefit from further
development before the district court.
Second, the district court is familiar with the full record.
It may be necessary to decide whether Plaintiffs or BCBSIL
forfeited any of their arguments (or whether any forfeiture
should be excused by Skrmetti). It may also be necessary to
decide whether either party should be allowed to take
additional discovery and, if so, what additional discovery is
appropriate. And it may be necessary to decide whether the
pretext/proxy issue can be addressed class-wide. All of these
issues are best resolved by a district court, not an appellate
court.
Third, it may not be possible to decide whether S.L. and
others suffered anti-transgender discrimination, or whether
BCBSIL’s exclusions are a pretext or proxy for invidious
discrimination, at summary judgment. If so, the district
court will need to hold a trial.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the district court’s summaryjudgment decision cannot stand. Although we agree that
BCBSIL is bound by Section 1557 and cannot use the
employers’ instructions or RFRA as defenses, we cannot

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

47

square the summary-judgment ruling against BCBSIL with
Skrmetti. We therefore vacate that ruling. On remand, the
district court will have the opportunity to consider the issues
potentially left open by Skrmetti and to conduct further
proceedings consistent with our opinion.
VACATED AND REMANDED.
Each side to bear its own costs on appeal.
Rawlinson, Circuit Judge, concurring in the judgment:
I agree in large part with the majority opinion. I write
separately only because of my perspective that it is
improvident to opine on issues that we have remanded to the
district court to consider in light of intervening Supreme
Court precedent. As the majority acknowledges in the
portion of the opinion stating that “[t]he appropriate course
is to remand,” we are not a court of “first view.” Majority
Opinion, p. 46. Rather, “we are a court of review.” Id.
(quoting Cutter v. Wilkinson, 544 U.S. 709, 718 n.7 (2005)).
Nevertheless, the majority goes on to articulate its “first
view,” id., of how the district could potentially distinguish
the intervening Supreme Court case of United States v.
Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. 1816 (2025). See Majority Opinion, pp.
43-45.
In discussing one of the plaintiffs, the majority theorizes
that Skrmetti is “arguably distinguishable” because
“changing [the plaintiff’s] sex, and thus her transgender
status does alter the application of [Blue Cross/Blue
Shield’s] exclusion, [and] sex is a but-for cause of the
exclusion’s operation.” Majority Opinion, p. 44 (internal
quotation marks omitted). But in Skrmetti, the Supreme

48

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

Court discussed its prior decision in Bostock v. Clayton
County, 590 U.S. 644 (2020), and concluded that its analysis
in Skrmetti of the statute prohibiting gender-affirming
medical treatment was not altered by its prior decision in
Bostock. See Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. at 1834.
In Bostock, the Supreme Court “held that an employer
who fires an employee for being gay or transgender violates
Title VII’s prohibition on discharging an individual because
of their sex.” Id. (citing Bostock, 590 U.S. at 650-52, 65459) (internal quotation marks omitted). However, the logic
underpinning Bostock was not followed by the Supreme
Court in Skrmetti. Rather, the Supreme Court explained that
the application of the statute in Skrmetti prohibiting genderaffirming care was not altered by changing the sex or
transgender status of the minor seeking gender-affirming
treatment. See id.
The Supreme Court provided the following example:
If a transgender boy seeks testosterone to
treat his gender dysphoria, [the statute]
prevents a healthcare provider from
administering it to him. If you change his
biological sex from female to male, [the
statute] would still not permit him the
hormones he seeks because he would lack a
qualifying diagnosis for the testosterone —
such as a congenital defect, precocious
puberty, disease, or physical injury. The
transgender boy could receive testosterone
only if he had one of those permissible
diagnoses. And if he had such a diagnosis, he
could obtain the testosterone regardless of his
sex or transgender status.
Under the

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

49

reasoning of Bostock, neither his sex nor his
transgender status is the but-for cause of his
inability to obtain testosterone.
Id. (emphasis added).
The same reasoning could be applied to this case. Some
Blue Cross/Blue Shield plan exclusions preclude coverage
for “Gender [R]eassignment Surgery,” “treatment of gender
identity disorders,” and “Gender Identity Disorder
Treatment.” Using the example provided by the Supreme
Court, if a transgender boy or man seeks coverage for gender
reassignment surgery, treatment of a gender identity disorder
or gender identity disorder treatment, the exclusion
precludes coverage for that treatment. If “you change his
biological sex from female to male, [the exclusion] would
still not permit” coverage for the treatment. Skrmetti, 145 S.
Ct. at 1834. According to the Supreme Court’s apparent
reading of Bostock, “neither [the] sex nor [the] transgender
status” of the individual “is the but-for cause of [the]
inability” to obtain coverage for the treatment. Id.
In my view, the majority’s conclusion that “[b]ecause
changing [the plaintiff’s] sex, and thus her transgender status
does alter the application of [Blue Cross/Blue Shield’s]
exclusion, sex is a but-for cause of the exclusion’s
operation,” Majority Opinion, p. 44, is in direct conflict with
the Supreme Court’s discussion of its holding in Bostock,
which included an example that almost mirrors the facts of
this case. See Skrmetti, 145 S. Ct. at 1834. It would be
unfortunate if the district court adopted an erroneous
interpretation of Skrmetti as suggested by the majority when
we could easily leave the district court to reach its own
conclusions regarding how Skrmetti affects its prior ruling.

50

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

The same can be said of the majority’s foray into what
conduct by Blue Cross/Blue Shield “is the kind of conduct
that could violate Section 1557.” Majority Opinion, p. 30.
The majority recounts that Blue Cross/Blue Shield is
“responsible for determining whether the care falls under
[one of the gender affirming treatment exclusions].” Id., p.
31 (alterations and internal quotation marks omitted).
According to the majority, Blue Cross/Blue Shield has
developed a “standard practice for these claims: look at the
diagnosis and service code to determine if it’s gender
reassignment, and if it is then it is denied.” Id. (alteration
and internal quotation marks omitted). The majority
observes that Blue Cross/Blue Shield “looks at the
diagnostic code and the service code to figure out if the claim
is for gender reassignment and then looks at the service code
in particular to figure out if it is related to surgery.” Id.
(alteration and internal quotation marks omitted). The
majority notes that “[t]he excluded claims are denied within
[Blue Cross/Blue Shield’s] system and the member receives
an Explanation of Benefits with that denial.” Id. (internal
quotation marks omitted). The majority characterizes this
processing by Blue Cross/Blue Shield as “no mechanical
task [because Blue Cross/Blue Shield] had to review the
claims, including the diagnosis and procedure codes, and
assess whether the claim fell within the [gender-affirming
care] exclusion. Although plan sponsors chose the rules
[Blue Cross/Blue Shield] applied them.” Id. The majority
acknowledges that the district court relied on these described
procedures to conclude that Blue Cross/Blue Shield applied
“sex-based rules” in violation of Section 1557 of the
Affordable Care Act, see id., see also id. pp. 40-41. The
majority also recognizes, as it must, that the district court’s
“sex-based rules” analysis “ran afoul of Skrmetti.” Id. pp.

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

51

30-31, 39. Curiously, in the majority’s suggestion to the
district court that the district court distinguish “Skrmetti in
two respects,” id. p. 43, the majority does not explain how
the district court will pivot from its analysis that Blue
Cross/Blue Shield violated § 1557 through its application of
“sex-based rules” to a different theory of liability that was
not developed during the prior proceedings in the district
court.
At a minimum, surely the majority should not continue
to insist that Blue Cross/Blue Shield failed to “preserve its
Spending Clause argument.” Id. p. 22. In its Reply Brief,
Blue Cross/Blue Shield made the argument that it “lacked
the requisite notice” of the “scope and nature of the
obligations” incurred by accepting the federal funds for other
activities engaged in by Blue Cross/Blue Shield. Blue
Cross/Blue Shield relied on several Supreme Court cases in
support of its argument that it “lacked the requisite notice”
of the “scope and nature of the obligations” incurred by
accepting federal funds for activities other than its actions in
the role of a third-party administrator of health insurance
plans.
In Cummings v. Premier Rehab Keller, P.L.L.C., 596
U.S. 212, 216 (2022), the United States Supreme Court
discussed Congress’s “broad power under the Spending
Clause of the Constitution to set the terms on which it
disburses federal funds.”
Legislation enacted under
Congress’s Spending Clause authority “is much in the nature
of a contract: in return for federal funds, the recipients agree
to comply with federally imposed conditions. Id. (alteration
omitted) (quoting Pennhurst State School and Hospital v.
Halderman, 451 U.S. 1, 17 (1981)). There is no dispute that
Section 1157 was enacted pursuant to Congress’s Spending

52

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

Clause authority. See Majority Opinion, p. 20 (discussing
Blue Cross/Blue Shield’s Spending Clause argument).
In Pennhurst, the Supreme Court addressed Congress’s
“power under the Spending Clause to place conditions on the
grant of federal funds.” 451 U.S. at 15. Noting, as it did in
Cummings, that “legislation enacted pursuant to the
spending power is much in the nature of a contract,” id. at
17, the Court reasoned that due to the contractual nature of
legislation enacted under the Spending Clause, “[t]he
legitimacy of Congress’s power to legislate under the
spending power . . . rests on whether [the recipient of the
federal funds] voluntarily and knowingly accepts the terms
of the ‘contract.’” Id. (citations omitted). The Court
explained that “[t]here can, of course, be no knowing
acceptance if a [recipient of federal funds] is unaware of the
conditions or is unable to ascertain what is expected of it.”
Id. Therefore, “if Congress intends to impose a condition on
the grant of federal moneys, it must do so unambiguously.”
Id. (citations and footnote reference omitted) (emphasis
added).
This same reasoning is articulated in Arlington Central
School District Board of Education v. Murphy, 548 U.S. 291
(2006). That case involved the Individuals with Disabilities
Education Act (IDEA). The parents of a disabled student
brought an action to require the school district to pay for their
son’s private school tuition. See id. at 294. After prevailing,
the parents sought “fees for the services of an educational
consultant . . . who assisted [them] throughout the IDEA
proceedings.” Id. The Supreme Court “granted certiorari to
resolve the conflict among the Circuits with respect to
whether Congress authorized the compensation of expert
fees to prevailing parents in IDEA actions.” Id. at 295
(citations omitted).

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

53

The Supreme Court began its analysis with the
observation that its “resolution of the question presented . . .
is guided by the fact that Congress enacted the IDEA
pursuant to the Spending Clause.” Id. (citations omitted).
Importantly, “the IDEA provides federal funds to assist state
and local agencies in educating children with disabilities,”
but “conditions such funding upon a State’s compliance with
extensive goals and procedures.” Id. (citations omitted).
The Court determined that when deciding whether a
recipient of federal funds had adequate notice of the
conditions attached to the federal funding, a court must view
the legislative enactment “from the perspective of” the
recipient of federal funding. Id. at 296. The question a court
must ask itself is whether the recipient of the federal funds
“would clearly understand . . . the obligations of” the funding
legislation. The Supreme Court stated, “[i]n other words, [a
court] must ask whether the [legislative enactment] furnishes
clear notice regarding the liability at issue.” Id.
Applied to the facts of this case, Blue Cross/Blue Shield
asserts that as the “recipient[] of federal funding,” Section
1557 did not “furnish[] clear notice” to it that, as a thirdparty administrator it would be liable for discrimination
based on its application of exclusion decisions made by
insurers whose policies Blue Cross/Blue Shield
administered. Id. It is undisputed that the text of Section
1557 does not address third-party administrators. See id.
(confirming that when deciding whether a statute “provides
clear notice, we begin with the text”). Indeed, a considerable
portion of the majority opinion is devoted to the question of
whether Blue Cross/Blue Shield as a third-party
administrator is covered under Section 1557. See Majority
Opinion, pp. 14-22.

54

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

In the absence of express language in the statute applying
the discrimination provisions to it, Blue Cross/Blue Shield
contends that it lacked “clear notice regarding the liability”
for discrimination in administering health insurance
contracts. Arlington Cent. Sch. Dist., 548 U.S. at 296.
Notably, Blue Cross/Blue Shield points to the varying
regulations promulgated by the federal government
addressing this issue. Compare Nondiscrimination in
Health and Health Education Programs or Activities,
Delegation of Authority, 85 Fed. Reg. 37,160, 37,244 (June
19, 2020) (“[T]his part applies to (1) Any health program or
activity . . . principally engaged in the business of providing
healthcare that receive Federal financial assistance . . .); with
Nondiscrimination in Health Programs and Activities, 81
Fed. Reg. 31,376, 31,432 (May 18, 2016) (“[I]f an issuer that
receives Federal financial assistance is principally engaged
in providing health insurance and also provides third party
administrator services, there is no principled basis on which
to exclude the law’s application to the third party
administrator services . . .”); and Nondiscrimination in
Health Programs and Activities, 89 Fed. Reg. 37,522,
37,627 (May 6, 2024) (“[The Office for Civil Rights] does
not intend to enforce this rule against a third party
administrator for a plan design that it did not design and over
which it has no control. . . .”).
Blue Cross/Blue Shield contends that the vagaries in the
various
regulations
promulgated
over
different
administrations resulted in a lack of the “unambiguous[]”
notice of a “condition on the grant of federal moneys”
required by the Supreme Court. Pennhurst, 451 U.S. at 17,
see also Arlington, 548 U.S. at 296 (noting that, considering
the perspective of the recipient of federal funding, a court
must inquire whether the recipient of the federal funds

PRITCHARD V. BLUE CROSS BLUE SHIELD OF IL

55

“would clearly understand . . . the obligations” set forth in
the conditions of the legislation).
I am not prepared to say that Blue Cross/Blue Shield’s
argument is a winning one. I am prepared to say that Blue
Cross/Blue Shield should have the opportunity to present
this argument to the district court in light of the majority’s
suggested arguments to the plaintiff on remand that were not
previously made to the district court. See Majority Opinion,
pp. 43-48. Allowing Blue Cross/Blue Shield to also make
its arguments that were not previously made to the district
court would level the playing field, a fundamental tenet of
our justice system. See Yamada v. Nobel Biocare Hldg. AG,
825 F.3d 536, 544 (9th Cir. 2016), as amended, (stating that
[o]ur adversarial system of justice is premised on the welltested principle that truth—as well as fairness—is best
discovered by powerful statements on both sides of the
question) (citation and internal quotation marks omitted).
To summarize, I concur only in the judgment because I
part company with the majority’s analysis that goes beyond
a discussion of the Supreme Court’s holding in Skrmetti and
a remand for the district court to apply Skrmetti in the first
instance. I see the majority’s analysis as exceeding a remand
and conducting a “first view” rather than a “review.” Cutter,
544 U.S. at 718 n.7. But, as the majority has ventured to
suggest its “first view” of the case for the plaintiffs to pursue
on remand, it certainly should not preclude Blue Cross/Blue
Shield from pursuing any available defenses on remand. See
Majority Opinion, p. 22 (concluding that Blue Cross/Blue
Shield “did not preserve its Spending Clause argument.”).
See Yamada, 825 F.3d at 544.

