FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CHRISTINA ST. CLAIR, an
individual,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 24-4195
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00280TOR

COUNTY OF OKANOGAN, a
municipal corporation; ISAIAH
HOLLOWAY, an individual and
employee of Okanogan County,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Washington
Thomas O. Rice, District Judge, Presiding
Submitted September 23, 2025*
Seattle, Washington
Filed September 23, 2025
Before: M. Margaret McKeown, Richard A. Paez, and
Gabriel P. Sanchez, Circuit Judges.
*

The panel unanimously concludes this case is suitable for decision
without oral argument. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a)(2).

2

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

Opinion by Judge McKeown
SUMMARY**
Statute of Limitations
The panel reversed the district court’s dismissal, as
barred by the statute of limitations, of Christina St. Clair’s
claims against Okanogan County Sheriff Deputy Isaiah
Holloway and his employer, Okanogan County.
St. Clair alleges she was coerced into sexual encounters
by Holloway, who had knowledge of her drug addiction and
criminal involvement, in exchange for his turning a blind eye
to her illegal activity. While St. Clair alleges the deputy’s
misconduct towards her began in 2014, she also alleges his
inappropriate contact continued into 2020 and 2021.
The panel reversed the district court’s dismissal of St.
Clair’s claims against Holliday as barred by Washington’s
governing three-year statute of limitations. The panel held
that regardless of whether the inflicted harm is part of a
pattern of ongoing conduct, each sexual assault or act of
abuse constitutes an “independently wrongful, discrete act”
for statute of limitations purposes. Accordingly, St. Clair
adequately pled intentional sexual misconduct for the
alleged actions that Holloway committed within the threeyear limitation period lasting from September 26, 2020, until

**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

3

September 26, 2023. The district court erred by applying the
continuing violation doctrine to these claims.
For the alleged actions that occurred prior to September
26, 2020, St. Clair sufficiently alleged a delayed accrual
theory of injury. Acknowledging that the power imbalance
between a law enforcement officer and a vulnerable victim
of sexual assault may result in a delayed realization of the
underlying harm, the panel held that St. Clair alleged facts
that plausibly established she neither knew nor reasonably
should have known of her injuries until after September
2020.
With respect to St. Clair’s Monell claims against
Okanogan County, the panel applied the long-standing
principle that courts should liberally permit plaintiffs to
amend their complaints. Various facts in St. Clair’s first and
proposed second amended complaints alleged a cognizable
pattern or custom of deliberate indifference to ongoing
sexual misconduct at the Okanogan County Sheriff’s Office.
It was therefore an abuse of discretion to dismiss this claim
without leave to amend, and St. Clair should be given an
opportunity to amend her complaint.
Because the panel reversed the district court’s dismissal
of St. Clair’s federal claims, the panel also reversed the
district court’s dismissal of the state law claims against
Okanogan County based on a lack of supplemental
jurisdiction.

4

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

COUNSEL
Tyler Hotchkiss, Foreman Hotchkiss Bauscher &
Zimmerman, Wenatchee, Washington, for PlaintiffAppellant.
Patrick G. McMahon, Carlson & McMahon PLLC,
Wenatchee, Washington; Amanda B. Kuehn, Law Lyman
Daniel Kamerrer & Bogdanovich PS, Olympia, Washington;
for Defendants-Appellees.

OPINION
McKEOWN, Circuit Judge:
This appeal highlights the importance of careful
application of the statute of limitations in sexual assault
cases. Christina St. Clair alleges she was coerced into sexual
encounters by an Okanogan County Sheriff’s Deputy, who
had knowledge of her drug addiction and criminal
involvement, in exchange for his turning a blind eye to her
illegal activity. While St. Clair alleges the deputy’s
misconduct towards her began in 2014, she also alleges his
inappropriate contact continued into 2020 and 2021.
We draw from the Supreme Court’s decision in National
Railroad Passenger Corp. v. Morgan, 536 U.S. 101 (2002),
and reaffirm our view that, regardless of whether the
inflicted harm is part of a pattern of ongoing conduct, an
“independently wrongful, discrete act” restarts the clock for
filing a claim based on that act. Pouncil v. Tilton, 704 F.3d
568, 581 (9th Cir. 2012). We conclude that each sexual
assault or act of abuse constitutes an “independently

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

5

wrongful, discrete act” for statute of limitations purposes.
Id. We also conclude that because individuals who suffer
such harm may not become aware of or understand the
causes of their injuries until years later, St. Clair has alleged
a plausible theory of delayed accrual of her injuries. With
respect to St. Clair’s claims against Okanogan County, we
apply our long-standing principle that courts should liberally
permit plaintiffs to amend their complaints. Thus, we
reverse the dismissal of St. Clair’s claims, direct the district
court to reinstate her claims against Holloway, and remand
to permit her an opportunity to amend her complaint.
Background
Christina St. Clair brings claims against Okanogan
County Sheriff Deputy Isaiah Holloway and his employer,
Okanogan County, based on Holloway’s sexual misconduct.
St. Clair alleges constitutional claims under 42 U.S.C.
§ 1983, a violation of the Washington Law Against
Discrimination, and a civil conspiracy claim against both
Holloway and Okanogan County. Her claims against
Okanogan County are based on municipal liability under
Monell v. New York City Dep’t of Soc. Servs., 436 U.S. 658
(1978). St. Clair also alleges negligent supervision and
retention against Okanogan County for its employment of
Holloway.
St. Clair alleges that, when Holloway was a sheriff’s
deputy and detective, he took advantage of her known
addiction to methamphetamines and involvement in criminal
activity to coerce her into a quid pro quo: In exchange for
unwanted sexual contact with him, she would not face

6

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

criminal investigation. 1 According to the complaint, the
conduct began in 2014, when St. Clair was addicted to
narcotics and engaging in criminal activity. Holloway
encountered St. Clair in his role as a deputy sheriff and began
to pressure her into sexual acts. In December 2014, St.
Clair’s uncle called the Sheriff’s Office and reported to both
dispatch and a sergeant within the department that he had
discovered Holloway engaged in sexual activity with St.
Clair. St. Clair’s uncle also informed the Sheriff’s Office
that his niece was involved with the criminal justice system
and using drugs. He expressed concerns that Holloway was
providing St. Clair favorable treatment in exchange for sex.
The Sheriff’s Office opened an investigation but did not
discipline Holloway; instead, superiors instructed Holloway
to stay away from St. Clair and changed his geographic area
of assignment. St. Clair alleges that the Sheriff’s Office
failed to follow up and ensure that Holloway was no longer
pursuing St. Clair, either by monitoring his Automatic
Vehicle Location logs, directly contacting St. Clair, or other
appropriate means.
Holloway’s sexual contacts with St. Clair continued.
From 2014 through 2021, they engaged in sexual activity at
least twenty times, including communicating over text
message and video conferencing platforms. According to St.
Clair, she “did not feel free to refuse or curb the sexual
activity with Holloway[,] who had previously arrested her,
knew her to be a drug addict, and knew her to have been
involved in other crimes, as well as involved with other
criminals and drug addicts.” In short, St. Clair alleges she

1

We accept “as true all facts alleged in the complaint.” DaVinci
Aircraft, Inc. v. United States, 926 F.3d 1117, 1122 (9th Cir. 2019).

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

7

could not consent to sex with Holloway or his sexual
advances because she was coerced.
St. Clair alleges that the sexual activity “occurred many
times” when Holloway was on duty as a deputy sheriff.
During most of their sexual encounters, Holloway wore his
Sheriff’s Office uniform and arrived in his department
vehicle. Some of the sexual encounters occurred in his
patrol car. He would “grab her breasts aggressively, to the
point her breasts would physically hurt” and “leave hickeys
on her breasts.” Holloway predominately communicated
with St. Clair via the mobile phone he was issued by the
Sheriff’s Office. Holloway also contacted St. Clair through
a fake Facebook profile that he accessed both on and off
duty.
Additionally, St. Clair alleges that Holloway used his
prior investigation of her involvement in a burglary, for
which she had not been charged, to maintain the sexual
relationship. Holloway would remind St. Clair about her
involvement in the burglary and warn her that no one would
believe her regarding their sexual encounters due to her
involvement in criminal activity. In fall 2021, Holloway
asked St. Clair to meet him for lunch. When they met, he
attempted to hug her, blamed his mental health struggles on
her, and guilted her for not having more frequent sexual
contact with him. This encounter was their last meet-up.
St. Clair states she only came to understand that she had
been harmed when she read a news article in November 2021
detailing Holloway’s inappropriate sexual conduct with
other similarly situated women. She alleges that Holloway,
while employed at the Sheriff’s Office, engaged in sexual
activities with at least six other women who were using
drugs and involved with the criminal justice system. The

8

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

complaint also alleges that three other employees in the
Sheriff’s Office engaged in sexual relations with women
who used drugs and were involved in criminal activity
during the same time period. After learning about
Holloway’s pattern of behavior, St. Clair realized that he had
used “his position of authority to manipulate her and control
her for years.” She “start[ed] experiencing pain, anxiety and
other negative effects from her relationship with Holloway,”
including “trauma, fear and distrust of authority, anxiety and
depression as well as damage to her familial relationships.”
On September 26, 2023, St. Clair filed her initial
complaint against Holloway and Okanogan County. After
Okanogan County filed a motion to dismiss under Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure Rule 12(b)(6), St. Clair filed her first
amended complaint as of right under Rule 15(A)(1). The
County then filed a motion to dismiss the first amended
complaint.
Okanogan County and Holloway argued
dismissal was warranted because St. Clair’s claims were
barred by Washington’s governing three-year statute of
limitations. See Wash. Rev. Code Ann. § 4.16.080(2).
Okanogan County additionally argued St. Clair’s alleged
facts were too “sporadic” and “threadbare” to support a
Monell claim. St. Clair opposed the motion to dismiss and
argued her claims were adequately pled while, in the
alternative, requesting leave to amend.
The district court granted the Rule 12(b)(6) motion and
dismissed the claims against Holloway and Okanogan
County with prejudice. St. Clair filed a motion under Rule
59(e) to alter and amend the judgment, arguing errors of law
and fact, as well as new evidence, and included as an exhibit
a proposed second amended complaint with changes and
additions highlighted. The district court denied the motion.
We reverse and remand.

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

9

Analysis
I.

Claims Against Holloway

We review de novo the district court’s Rule 12(b)(6)
dismissal of claims as time-barred by the three-year statute
of limitations. Mills v. City of Covina, 921 F.3d 1161, 1166
(9th Cir. 2019) (citation omitted). We also review de novo
when the statute of limitations begins to run and whether it
bars a claim. Pouncil, 704 F.3d at 574.
We conclude that because each sexual encounter
qualifies as a discrete act, St. Clair has adequately pled
intentional sexual misconduct for the alleged actions that
Holloway committed within the three-year limitation period
lasting from September 26, 2020 until September 26, 2023.
For the alleged actions that occurred prior to September 26,
2020, St. Clair also sufficiently alleges a delayed accrual
theory of injury.
A. Discrete Acts
St. Clair’s claims of misconduct after September 25,
2020 survive because they fall within three years of her
September 26, 2023 filing date. Violations restart the clock
when they constitute discrete acts rather than an “inevitable
consequence” of an earlier act. Pouncil, 704 F.3d at 576
(analyzing statute of limitations in a Section 1983 action).
Our starting point is the Supreme Court’s employment
discrimination decision in Morgan, which held that “[e]ach
discrete discriminatory act starts a new clock for filing
charges alleging that act.” 536 U.S. at 113. The result is that
“[t]he existence of past acts and the [injured party’s] prior
knowledge of their occurrence . . . does not bar [the injured
party] from filing charges about related discrete acts so long
as the acts are independently discriminatory.” Id.; see also

10

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

Cherosky v. Henderson, 330 F.3d 1243, 1246 n.3 (9th Cir.
2003) (noting that Morgan’s “continuing violations
doctrine” applies to civil rights claims). The Supreme Court
subsequently clarified that “[a] new violation does not
occur” from mere “adverse effects resulting from the past
discrimination. But of course, if [a defendant] engages in a
series of acts each of which is intentionally discriminatory,
then a fresh violation takes place when each act is
committed.” Ledbetter v. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co.,
Inc., 550 U.S. 618, 628 (2007), superseded by statute, Lilly
Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009, Pub. L. No. 111–2, 123 Stat.
5. Building on Morgan, in Pouncil we held that “the
existence of past acts and the claimant’s prior knowledge of
their occurrence does not bar a claimant from filing claims
about related discrete acts, so long as the subsequent acts are
independently wrongful and claims alleging those acts are
themselves timely filed.” 704 F.3d at 583 (citing Morgan,
536 U.S. at 113).
The Supreme Court’s guidance applies with equal force
here. Unwanted, nonconsensual sexual conduct is not an
inevitable consequence that necessarily flows from the first
such violation by Holloway. Sexual misconduct is not akin
to a wage misclassification that is repeatedly enforced.
Sexual misconduct need not beget sexual misconduct.
Rather, each act is “intentionally discriminatory,” rendering
each instance of sexual misconduct “a fresh violation.”
Ledbetter, 550 U.S. at 628. Even though St. Clair’s
complaint emphasizes the compounded coercion, or
“grooming,” by Holloway over time, it does not follow that
Holloway’s earlier misconduct shields him via the statute of
limitations for his later sexual misconduct. Had Holloway
made no sexual overtures to St. Clair from 2014 to 2019 and
only contacted her in 2020 and 2021—allegedly exposing

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

11

his penis to her in a video call and going to her home
uninvited to request sex and grope her, all while on duty—
those 2020 and 2021 actions would surely be independent
violations.2 The later acts are neither dependent on the prior
violations nor merely “adverse effects resulting from the past
discrimination.” Ledbetter, 550 U.S. at 628. Holloway’s
acts, as alleged, are independently wrongful.
Statutes of limitation are meant to provide repose rather
than insulate parties from liability for subsequent
independent, wrongful acts. To hold that a later intentional
act of sexual misconduct that falls within the statute of
limitations is merely an “inevitable consequence” of earlier
abuse would create perverse incentives at odds with the civil
rights laws at issue. Pouncil, 704 F.3d at 576. Victims of
sexual abuse would be deprived of protection from ongoing
harassment under the false belief that perpetrators cannot
and will not stop their wrongdoing. Precedent from the
Supreme Court and our circuit make clear that that is not the
case. Accordingly, we reverse the dismissal of St. Clair’s
claims arising from actions by Holloway after September 25,
2020 because the district court erred in applying the
continuing violation doctrine to these claims.
B. Claim Accrual
As for her claims of misconduct prior to September 26,
2020, St. Clair alleges that accrual of her Section 1983 claim
was delayed because, due to her age, addiction, and the
2

That St. Clair’s criminal involvement was seemingly confined to 2014
through 2016 does not render untimely a claim based on these facts. As
the district court noted, the “crimes that presumptively took place
between 2014–2016, which Defendant Holloway could have pursued at
any point during his employment,” did not end until 2021, bolstering St.
Clair’s quid pro quo theory.

12

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

coercion, she did not understand the nature of the harm until
long after the sexual encounters. Her account evokes the
sentiment of the Supreme Court’s opinion in Urie v.
Thompson: trauma is like silica dust in the lungs, lurking
“unknown and inherently unknowable” until symptoms
manifest and their cause is realized. 337 U.S. 163, 169
(1949). This theory rests on the principle that a Section 1983
claim accrues “not just when the plaintiff experiences the
injury, but ‘when the plaintiff knew or in the exercise of
reasonable diligence should have known of the injury and
the cause of that injury.’” Bonneau v. Centennial Sch. Dist.
No. 28J, 666 F.3d 577, 581 (9th Cir. 2012) (quoting
Lukovsky v. City & Cnty. of San Francisco, 535 F.3d 1044,
1050 (9th Cir. 2008)). 3 This discovery rule incorporates
“some flexibility.” Id.
The district court held that at the time of the first
encounter in 2014, St. Clair “was made aware that her
relationship with Defendant Holloway was in exchange for
her criminal activity remaining uncharged and unpursued.”
This reasoning gives rise to the erroneous conclusion that the
statute of limitations ran out by 2017, before St. Clair first
filed her complaint in 2023. We hold, to the contrary, that
St. Clair plausibly alleges sufficient facts that the accrual of
her claims was delayed.
Struggling with addiction, fearful of criminal liability,
and coerced by Holloway into sexual acts, St. Clair
sufficiently alleges evidence at the motion to dismiss stage
that the delayed realization of her injuries justifies the
delayed filing. Our decision acknowledges that the power
3

Like the district court, we conclude that the same analysis applies to St.
Clair’s Section 1983, Washington Law Against Discrimination, and
conspiracy claims.

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

13

imbalance between a law enforcement officer and a
vulnerable victim of sexual assault may result in a delayed
realization of the underlying harm. As we have previously
highlighted, “[m]any victims of sexual assault feel so upset,
embarrassed, humiliated, and ashamed about the assault that
they do not tell anyone that it occurred.” Mousa v. Mukasey,
530 F.3d 1025, 1027 (9th Cir. 2008). This observation is
consistent with the literature and other cases involving
sexual assault. See, e.g., Gregg v. Hawaii, Dep’t of Pub.
Safety, 870 F.3d 883, 889 (9th Cir. 2017) (“Psychiatric
injury and its cause . . . are ‘subtler and more complicated’
than other injuries.” (quoting Simmons v. United States, 805
F.2d 1363, 1368 (9th Cir. 1986))); United States v. Johnson,
860 F.3d 1133, 1140 (8th Cir. 2017) (noting sexual abuse
victims behaviors generally include “not reporting the abuse
and not attempting to escape from the abuser”); Michelle
Wieberneit et al., Silenced Survivors: A Systematic Review
of the Barriers to Reporting, Investigating, Prosecuting, and
Sentencing of Adult Female Rape and Sexual Assault, 25
TRAUMA, VIOLENCE, & ABUSE 3742, 3747 (2024) (finding
that self-blame, shame, and guilt rank among most frequent
barriers to reporting sexual violence).
In Simmons, we recognized that a mental health
counselor’s coaxing of a patient into sexual relations can
give rise to delayed accrual of a claim because the patient’s
dependence on her counselor and her shame prevented her
from realizing the extent to which he was at fault for her
injuries. 805 F.2d at 1367–68. The same holds true here.
St. Clair suffered from drug addiction and previously
committed crimes. She believed she depended on Holloway,
who, as a law enforcement officer, held the power and
official authority to impose criminal consequences on St.
Clair. Even if, as the district court noted, St. Clair was aware

14

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

of the power imbalance from the start of Holloway’s
conduct, there is ample daylight between that awareness and
awareness that such authority is being wielded
inappropriately.
Indeed, precisely “what [the plaintiff] knew and when
she knew it are questions of fact,” better left for a jury.
Simmons, 805 F.2d at 1368. St. Clair alleges facts that
plausibly establish she neither knew nor reasonably should
have known of her injuries until after September 2020.
II.

Claims Against Okanogan County

A. Monell Claim
St. Clair’s Monell claim is premised on a policy
established by a longstanding practice or custom or,
alternatively, deliberate indifference to constitutional rights
through a failure to train employees. See City of Canton,
Ohio v. Harris, 489 U.S. 378, 388 (1989); Thomas v. County
of Riverside, 763 F.3d 1167, 1170 (9th Cir. 2014). Though
the district court held that the Monell claim was timely, it
also found that St. Clair’s complaint “supports only a
sporadic collection of the illicit relationships taking place at
[the Sheriff’s Office], rather than a detailed description of a
pattern that would allow the Court to draw the inference of
an internal sanctioned practice,” or deliberate indifference
through failure to train. The district court’s analysis
improperly found amendment to be futile when, in fact, St.
Clair alleges ample facts supporting multiple theories of
Monell liability and was prepared to remedy the first
amended complaint’s shortcomings.
Because a “court should freely give leave [to amend]
when justice so requires,” Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(2), “[w]e
review the denial of leave to amend for an abuse of

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

15

discretion[] but [] review the futility of amendment de
novo.” Cohen v. ConAgra Brands, Inc., 16 F.4th 1283, 1287
(9th Cir. 2021); see also Moss v. U.S. Secret Service, 572
F.3d 962, 972 (9th Cir. 2009) (“[R]equests for leave [to
amend] should be granted with extreme liberality.”) (citation
and internal quotation marks omitted). This is not a situation
where “it is clear, upon de novo review, that the complaint
could not be saved by any amendment.” Polich v.
Burlington N., Inc., 942 F.2d 1467, 1472 (9th Cir. 1991)
(citation omitted).
Various facts in St. Clair’s first and proposed second
amended complaints allege a cognizable pattern or custom
of deliberate indifference to ongoing sexual misconduct at
the Okanogan County Sheriff’s Office. She alleges the
Sheriff’s Office leadership knew or had reason to know both
of Holloway’s repeated, long-standing sexual misconduct
with numerous victims and of contemporaneous
inappropriate sexual conduct by three other deputies. She
also alleges that other deputies’ sexual conduct was, like
Holloway’s, of a quid pro quo nature with women seeking to
avoid criminal investigation. Finally, St. Clair alleges that a
2019 audit by the Washington Association of Sheriffs and
Police Chiefs identified deficient policies, practices, and
complaint tracking within the Sherrif’s Office, but the
audit’s findings were downplayed and its recommendations
not acted upon. These additional facts provide a basis for a
plausible Monell claim. It was therefore an abuse of
discretion to dismiss this claim without leave to amend, and
St. Clair should be given an opportunity to amend her
complaint.

16

ST. CLAIR V. COUNTY OF OKANOGAN

B. State Law Claims
The district court dismissed the state law claims against
Okanogan County based on a lack of supplemental
jurisdiction after dismissing all other claims. Because we
reverse the dismissal of St. Clair’s federal claims, the district
court can appropriately exercise supplemental jurisdiction
over these claims, and the dismissal of those claims should
likewise be reversed. 28 U.S.C. § 1367(a).
REVERSED and REMANDED.

