FOR PUBLICATION
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
AUSTIN MILLIKEN,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.,

No. 24-4498
D.C. No.
3:23-cv-03709AMO
OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Araceli Martinez-Olguin, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted August 19, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed December 29, 2025
Before: Morgan B. Christen, Daniel A. Bress, and
Lawrence VanDyke, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bress

2

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

SUMMARY*
Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and
Disclosure Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment
dismissing under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) Austin Milliken’s
lawsuit alleging that Bank of America’s formula for
calculating the interest rate for variable-rate credit cards
violates the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and
Disclosure Act of 2009 (CARD Act).
Under the CARD Act, credit card issuers are generally
not permitted to “increase any annual percentage rate, fee, or
finance charge applicable to any outstanding balance” on a
consumer’s credit card account. 15 U.S.C. § 1666i1(a). However, the prohibition does not apply to “an
increase in a variable annual percentage rate in accordance
with a credit card agreement that provides for changes in the
rate according to operation of an index that is not under the
control of the creditor and is available to the general
public.” Id. § 1666i-1(b)(2).
The panel held that Milliken’s credit card agreement
with Bank of America changes rates “according to operation
of an index that is not under the control of the creditor,”
§ 1666i-1(b)(2), and thus does not violate the CARD
Act. Bank of America calculates percentage rates for its
variable-rate credit cards during each billing cycle by adding
the value of the U.S. Prime Rate on the last day of each
month to a constant margin set by the bank. Only two values
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

3

affect Bank of America’s variable rate calculation: (1) the
constant margin and (2) the value of the Prime Rate at the
end of the month. By the terms of Milliken’s agreement, any
increase or decrease in the Prime Rate results in an identical
increase or decrease in the variable rate. The Prime Rate is
publicly available and not under Bank of America’s
control. Accordingly, Milliken’s credit card agreement with
Bank of America does not violate the CARD Act.

COUNSEL
Claire E. Tonry (argued), Knoll D. Lowney, and Alyssa L.
Koepfgen, Smith & Lowney PLLC, Seattle, Washington;
Breanna Van Engelen and Shayne C. Stevenson, Hagens
Berman Sobol Shapiro LLP, Seattle, Washington; for
Plaintiff-Appellant.
Danielle O. Morris (argued), O'Melveny & Myers LLP,
Newport Beach, California, for Defendant-Appellee.

4

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

OPINION
BRESS, Circuit Judge:
We consider whether a variable-rate credit card
agreement complies with federal law.
I
In the wake of the 2008 financial crisis, Congress passed
the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and
Disclosure Act of 2009 (CARD Act). Pub. L. No. 111-24,
123 Stat. 1734 (2009). Under the CARD Act, credit card
issuers are generally not permitted to “increase any annual
percentage rate, fee, or finance charge applicable to any
outstanding balance” on a consumer’s credit card account.
15 U.S.C. § 1666i-1(a). But there are exceptions. See id.
(specifying that the prohibition applies “except as permitted
under subsection (b)”). Relevant here, the prohibition does
not apply to “an increase in a variable annual percentage rate
in accordance with a credit card agreement that provides for
changes in the rate according to operation of an index that is
not under the control of the creditor and is available to the
general public.” Id. § 1666i-1(b)(2).
Like many credit card issuers, Bank of America
calculates percentage rates for its variable-rate credit cards
during each billing cycle by adding the value of the U.S.
Prime Rate on the last day of each month to a constant
margin set by the bank. The Prime Rate is “the base rate on
corporate loans posted by at least 70% of the 10 largest U.S.
banks,” which is, in turn, keyed to the Federal Funds Rate
set by the Federal Reserve. Bank of America has no control
over the Prime Rate, and if the Prime Rate increases or
decreases between the beginning of the billing cycle and the

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

5

last day of a month, the cardholder’s total interest rate will
increase or decrease by the same amount.
Seeking to take advantage of the statutory exception in
§ 1666i-1(b)(2), Bank of America offers its customers
variable-rate credit cards with rates calculated based on the
following formula contained in their credit card agreements:
Variable Rates are calculated by adding
together an index and a margin. This index is
the highest U.S. Prime Rate as published in
the “Money Rates” section of The Wall Street
Journal on the last publication day of each
month. . . . An increase or decrease in the
index will cause a corresponding increase or
decrease in your variable rates on the first day
of your billing cycle that begins in the same
month in which the index is published.
If the billing cycle begins on a day before the last day of the
month, then the new U.S. Prime Rate applies to the interest
rate on the outstanding balance for the days in the billing
cycle preceding the last day of the month. That is, if the
Prime Rate changes after the start of the billing cycle, the
rate published on the last day of the month is applied to
outstanding balances for the entire billing cycle. And the
amount of that change will be determined by the change in
the Prime Rate.
As the parties explain it, imagine that a customer’s
billing cycle renews on the fifteenth day of each month. In
that case, the applicable Prime Rate for the rate charged to
the customer’s outstanding balance between April 15 and
May 15 is the Prime Rate published on April 30 (or the last
publication day of the month). This Prime Rate, applicable

6

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

to the customer’s May 15 statement, applies for purchases
made between April 15 and 30, even if the Prime Rate
increased on a day after April 15. It’s not all downside for
the cardholder, however, as this policy also applies to
decreases in the Prime Rate. So if the Prime Rate had instead
decreased between April 15 and April 30, the cardholder’s
rate would have been lowered correspondingly. And that
lower rate would be applied to the entire outstanding balance
for the billing cycle.
In this case, plaintiff Austin Milliken was caught on the
wrong side of a rate change. During the relevant time period,
from March 2022 through July 2023, the Federal Reserve
raised the Federal Funds Rate ten times to curb inflation,
causing the Prime Rate to more than double from a low of
3.25% to a high of 8.25%. In response to this increase, rates
on Bank of America’s variable-rate credit cards changed
accordingly, and those higher rates were applied to the
outstanding balances incurred before the rate increases.
Unhappy with this outcome, Milliken filed this class action
lawsuit. He alleged that Bank of America violated the
CARD Act and advanced a collateral claim under
California’s Unfair Competition Law. Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 17200, et seq.
The district court dismissed the lawsuit under Rule
12(b)(6), concluding that Bank of America’s formula for
calculating the interest rate for variable-rate credit cards did
not violate the CARD Act because it fell within the § 1666i1(b)(2) exception. Milliken appeals. Our review is de novo.
Chang v. United States, 139 F.4th 1087, 1092 (9th Cir. 2025).
II
Interpreting § 1666i-1(b)(2) in context and based on its
plain and natural meaning, see, e.g., N.L. v. Credit One Bank,

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

7

N.A., 960 F.3d 1164, 1167 (9th Cir. 2020), Milliken’s credit
card agreement with Bank of America fits within the CARD
Act’s variable rate exception. Although rate increases may
generally not be applied to outstanding balances, 15 U.S.C.
§ 1666i-1(a), the exception in § 1666i-1(b)(2) provides that
issuers may increase a variable rate “in accordance with a
credit card agreement that provides for changes in the rate
according to operation of an index that is not under the
control of the creditor and is available to the general public.”
In the agreement before us, the only variable that affects the
interest rate (setting aside the constant margin) is the value
of the Prime Rate, which is publicly available and not under
Bank of America’s control. So any increase or decrease in
the Prime Rate results in an identical increase or decrease in
the variable rate. In other words, any change in the
cardholder’s interest rate is made “according to” a change in
the Prime Rate. 15 U.S.C. § 1666i-1(b)(2).
Milliken sees matters differently. He first argues that
since the effective value of the Prime Rate can change dayto-day, retroactively setting the variable rate for the entire
billing cycle based solely on the rate’s effective value at the
end of the month is not doing so “according to operation” of
the Prime Rate. But it is § 1666i-1(a) that prohibits applying
increased rates to outstanding balances; § 1666i1(b)(2) carves out an exception to this. And § 1666i-1(b)(2)
requires only that the interest rate change “according to
operation of an index,” not the operation of an index on a
particular date. Nor does it prohibit applying this rate to
outstanding balances. Instead, as we explained, it is an
exception to a prohibition against doing just that.
Here, only two values affect Bank of America’s variable
rate calculation: (1) the constant margin and (2) the value of
the Prime Rate at the end of the month. Again, by the terms

8

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

of Milliken’s agreement, any increase or decrease in the
Prime Rate results in an identical increase or decrease in the
variable rate, and Bank of America has no control over either
the Prime Rate or the underlying Federal Funds Rate.
Therefore, any change in the interest rate under Bank of
America’s credit card agreement is made “according to” the
corresponding change in the effective value of the Prime
Rate between the beginning of the billing cycle and the end
of the month. Milliken’s argument effectively reads an
additional, stricter conformity requirement into the statute—
a requirement the statute does not impose.
Milliken responds by arguing that “one cannot
effectively use [the Prime Rate] without also specifying a
date or period,” as the Prime Rate “only ‘operates’ as an
index when both the percentage rate and the ‘Effective Date’
are taken together.” True enough. But it’s hard to see how
this changes things, as Bank of America’s credit card
agreement does specify an effective date—namely, the
Prime Rate “on the last publication day of each month.” The
mere fact that a date is needed does not mean that § 1666i1(b)(2) requires Bank of America to calculate rates using any
particular date or to update its rates every day.
Milliken cites our decision in McCoy v. Chase
Manhattan Bank, 559 F.3d 963 (9th Cir. 2009), rev’d and
remanded on other grounds sub nom. Chase Bank USA, N.A.
v. McCoy, 562 U.S. 195 (2011), to argue that the term
“according to” in § 1666i-1(b)(2) requires stricter adherence
to the referenced index. But McCoy is inapposite. In
McCoy, we interpreted a portion of the Delaware Banking
Act that “authorizes rates of interest that ‘vary in accordance
with a schedule or formula.’” McCoy, 559 F.3d at 970
(quoting Del. Code tit. 5, § 944). We held that the Delaware
Banking Act did not “authorize rate increases that are

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

9

discretionary and vary according to criteria . . . where those
criteria are not specified in a schedule or formula contained
in the agreement.” Id.
But Bank of America’s method for calculating interest
rates is not “discretionary.” Milliken’s credit card agreement
left no discretion for the bank to determine whether a change
in the Prime Rate would affect the variable interest rate or
what effect such a change would have. And unlike in
McCoy, this arrangement is very much “specified . . . in the
agreement.” Id. There is no allegation that consumers were
not informed as to the terms of the agreement.
The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau’s (CFPB)
implementing regulation to the CARD Act, Regulation Z,
and its accompanying commentary also cut against
Milliken’s interpretation. As Regulation Z states, “[a] card
issuer may increase an annual percentage rate when . . . [t]he
increase in the annual percentage rate is due to an increase
in the index” that “is not under the card issuer’s control.” 12
C.F.R. § 1026.55(b)(2). Nothing in the regulation requires
an issuer to change the rate based on the day-to-day
movements of such an index or prohibits applying the
changed rate to the whole billing cycle. Indeed, to the
contrary, the CFPB expressly contemplated that banks can
set the effective date for rate changes and that effective dates
can be based on billing cycles, as the guidance allows credit
card agreements to specify that “the variable rate will be
calculated based on the index value on a specific day (such
as the last day of a billing cycle).” 12 C.F.R. § 1026.55(b)(2)
cmt. 2(ii). That is what Bank of America’s credit card
agreement does.
In response, Milliken argues that the CFPB’s
commentary also states that “[o]nce an increased rate has

10

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

gone into effect, the card issuer cannot calculate interest
charges based on that increased rate for days prior to the
effective date.” Id. § 1026.55(b) cmt. 2(ii). But this
commentary is not applicable here, because it specifically
relates to “the requirements in § 1026.9(c) and (g) that
creditors provide written notice at least 45 days prior to the
effective date of certain increases.” Id. Section 1026.9(c)
only applies when there is a “significant change in account
terms,” id. § 1026.9(c)(2)(i)–(ii), such as a change in Bank
of America’s formula for calculating rates. Indeed, the
section specifically notes that it does not apply to the
“according to operation of an index” exception at issue in
this case. Id. § 1026.9(c)(2)(v)(C). And § 1026.9(g) relates
to an “[i]ncrease in rates due to delinquency or default or as
a penalty,” which is not at issue here. Id. § 1026.9(g).
Milliken suggests that under the bank’s interpretation,
card issuers will be able to “unlawfully charge its customers
millions more in retroactive interest,” and that cardholders
will be unable to make informed decisions if they do not
know the applicable interest rate beforehand. But setting
aside that Bank of America’s agreement complies with the
CARD Act’s express terms, this argument fails to consider
that Bank of America’s agreement will benefit cardholders if
interest rates decrease. Indeed, Milliken himself benefited
from such rate decreases in the past, and unsurprisingly, he
does not challenge those decreases here. A consumer
protection statute, the CARD Act puts specified limits
around variable rate increases while ensuring that
cardholders like Milliken are adequately informed about the
terms and conditions of their credit card agreement. The
statute does not insulate customers from the consequences of
otherwise lawful risks that they knowingly bear.

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

11

Milliken also contends that Bank of America’s
calculation method does not rely on an index “not under the
control of the creditor” because the bank raises rates on the
“first day of [each] billing cycle.” Milliken suggests that
since Bank of America has discretion to set and adjust billing
cycles for each cardholder, it could potentially increase the
length of a billing cycle after an interest rate increase to
retroactively lock in those higher interest rates.
This argument is unpersuasive. As an initial matter,
Milliken does not allege that Bank of America has
manipulated its billing cycles for some improper purpose.
But even if we assume that this type of manipulation is
possible, the event that triggers an interest rate increase or
decrease under Bank of America’s credit card agreement is a
change in the Prime Rate—not the billing cycle. Regardless
of the billing cycle, the cardholder’s total rate will not
increase or decrease unless the Prime Rate does so.
Therefore, the rate more properly changes “according to” the
Prime Rate. And neither party here disputes that the Prime
Rate itself is “an index that is not under the control of the
creditor.”
Milliken’s argument about billing cycles is also
undermined by the fact that issuers are limited in their ability
to adjust those cycles. Regulation Z states that billing cycles
may not exceed a “quarter of a year.” 12 C.F.R.
§ 1026.2(a)(4). They must also be equal in length. Id. And
while banks may “occasionally” change a customer’s billing
cycle, id. § 1026.2(a)(4) cmt. 3, the regulations do not
contemplate routine billing cycle changes. Indeed, a change
in billing cycle would generally require the card issuer to
give notice to the cardholder beforehand. Id. § 1026.9(c)(2).
And Bank of America expressly represents in its briefing that
“a card-issuer may not give itself the right, in its credit card

12

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

agreement, to choose from cycle-to-cycle the date on which
it measures the index rate.” For these reasons, the effect of
any potential billing cycle manipulation—which, again,
Milliken does not allege here—would be limited, and it does
not detract from Bank of America’s express compliance with
§ 1666i-1(b)(2).
The CFPB’s commentary to Regulation Z further refutes
Milliken’s point. The commentary lists three examples of
when “an index is under the card issuer’s control”: (1) the
“index is the card issuer’s own prime rate or cost of funds,”
(2) the “variable rate is subject to a fixed minimum rate or
similar requirement that does not permit the variable rate to
decrease consistent with reduction in the index,” and (3) the
“variable rate can be calculated based on any index value
during a period of time.” 12 C.F.R. § 1026.55(b)(2) cmt. 2.
The common thread tying these three examples in the
commentary together is that they allow the card issuer to
exercise its discretion to reap the upsides of changes in the
index, while preventing the cardholder from doing the same.
Bank of America’s use of the Prime Rate is different.
The Prime Rate is not Bank of America’s own rate. The
agreement permits the variable rate to decrease with the
Prime Rate. The effective value can only be calculated based
on one date—the last publication day of the month. And
unlike the CFPB’s examples, Bank of America’s calculation
method neither leaves any discretion to the bank nor
prevents cardholders from obtaining the benefits of
decreased interest rates.
Because Milliken’s credit card agreement with Bank of
America changes rates “according to operation of an index
that is not under the control of the creditor,” 15 U.S.C.

MILLIKEN V. BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.

13

§ 1666i-1(b)(2), we hold that it does not violate the CARD
Act.
AFFIRMED.

