FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
WILLIE WILLIAMS; LADON
CLINE; PAUL CONTRERAS, on
behalf of themselves and all others
similarly situated,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.

Nos. 24-933
24-2970
D.C. No.
8:20-cv-01701PSG-JDE
OPINION

J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC., an
Arkansas corporation,
Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Philip S. Gutierrez, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 31, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed August 12, 2025
Before: MILAN D. SMITH, JR. and LAWRENCE
VANDYKE, Circuit Judges, and JANE MAGNUSSTINSON, District Judge.*
*

The Honorable Jane Magnus-Stinson, United States District Judge for
the Southern District of Indiana, sitting by designation.

2

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.
SUMMARY**
California Labor Code
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment in favor
of J.B. Hunt Transport, Inc., in a wage and hour putative
class action brought by former employees alleging that J.B.
Hunt’s compensation scheme—the Driver Pay Plan—
violated the California Labor Code.
Plaintiffs, who are California-based truck drivers,
alleged that J.B. Hunt violated Cal. Labor Code § 226.2 by
improperly paying them on a piece-rate basis without
additional compensation for nonproductive time. They also
alleged J.B. Hunt committed other Labor Code violations,
such as failing to reimburse them for the necessary use of
their personal cell phones.
Section 226.2 implemented new rules for employees
compensated on a piece-rate basis, meaning that the
employee is compensated based on activities completed as
opposed to total hours worked. Section 226.2 carves out an
exception—known as the “safe harbor” provision—for
hybrid compensation plans.
The panel held that the Driver Pay Plan qualified for the
safe harbor of § 226.2(a)(7), which requires that an employer
“pays an hourly rate of at least the applicable minimum wage
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

3

for all hours worked” in addition to paying any piece-rate
compensation. That is what happened here. J.B. Hunt paid
its employees an hourly wage for “all hours,” and
supplemented that pay with a piece-rate-based
bonus. Accordingly, the panel held that the district court did
not err by granting summary judgment to J.B. Hunt as to
plaintiffs’ first cause of action for unpaid wages to the extent
that this cause of action was based on the purported
unlawfulness of the Driver Pay Plan.
The panel held that plaintiffs had not otherwise shown a
genuine dispute of material fact as to whether J.B. Hunt was
otherwise liable for failing to pay plaintiffs for off-the-clock
work.
The panel also held that the district court did not err by
granting summary judgment in favor of J.B. Hunt on
plaintiffs’ Private Attorneys General Act and non-Private
Attorneys General Act itemized wage statement claims.
Turning to the claims decided at trial, the panel held that
the district court did not err by entering judgment in favor of
J.B. Hunt on plaintiffs’ claims for failure to reimburse
necessary business expenses under Cal. Labor Code § 2802
and the derivative reimbursement claims under California’s
Unfair Competition Law and PAGA. The district court did
not abuse its discretion by improperly limiting evidence,
testimony, and argument as to plaintiffs’ individual claims;
by excluding evidence that J.B. Hunt changed its
reimbursement policy; or by failing to provide adequate jury
instructions.
Finally, the panel held that the district court did not abuse
its discretion by awarding costs to J.B Hunt following the
district court’s denial of the parties’ cross-motions to retax.

4

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

COUNSEL
Glenn A. Danas (argued), Ashley M. Boulton, and Katelyn
M. Leeviraphan, Clarkson Law Firm PC, Malibu, California;
Aashish Y. Desai and Adrianne De Castro, Desai Law Firm
PC, Costa Mesa, California; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
James H. Hanson (argued) and R. Jay Taylor Jr., Scopelitis
Garvin, Light Hanson & Feary PC, Indianapolis, Indiana;
Jared S. Kramer, Scopelitis Garvin Light Hanson & Feary
LLP, Chicago, Illinois; Christopher C. McNatt Jr., Scopelitis
Garvin Light Hanson & Feary LLP, Pasadena, California;
Karen B. Reisinger, J.B. Hunt Transport Inc., Lowell,
Arkansas; for Defendant-Appellee.

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

5

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
In this wage and hour case, Plaintiffs Willie Williams,
LaDon Cline, and Paul Contreras, three truck drivers based
in California, challenge the legality of the allegedly
“convoluted” compensation scheme of their former
employer, the Arkansas-based transportation and logistics
company, Defendant J.B. Hunt Transport, Inc. (J.B. Hunt).
Plaintiffs assert that J.B. Hunt’s compensation scheme
violates California Labor Code § 226.2 by improperly
paying them on a piece-rate basis without additional
compensation for nonproductive time. They also allege that
J.B. Hunt has committed several other Labor Code
violations, such as failing to reimburse them for the
necessary use of their personal cell phones. In the
proceedings below, the district court granted summary
judgment to J.B. Hunt on most claims but allowed the claims
based on necessary business expenditures to go to trial. The
jury subsequently found in favor of J.B. Hunt.
Plaintiffs now appeal the district court’s partial grant of
summary judgment to J.B. Hunt, the final judgment at trial,
and the denial of its separate motion to retax costs. We
conclude that the district court did not err in granting partial
summary judgment to J.B. Hunt. Nor did it abuse its
discretion as to its evidentiary rulings and its formulation of
the jury instructions. Finally, it did not abuse its discretion
in awarding costs to J.B. Hunt. We therefore affirm.

6

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

FACTUAL BACKGROUND
In 2015, the California Legislature enacted California
Labor Code § 226.2, 1 which implemented new rules for
employees compensated on a “piece-rate basis,” meaning the
employee is compensated based on activities completed as
opposed to total hours worked. See 2015 Cal. Legis. Serv.
Ch. 754, § 4 (West). Section 226.2 clarified that employees
paid on a “piece-rate basis” must be “compensated for rest
and recovery periods and other nonproductive time separate
from any piece-rate compensation,” and that this other time
must be compensated “at an hourly rate that is no less than
the applicable minimum wage.”
Cal. Lab. Code
§ 226.2(a)(1), (4). “Nonproductive time” refers to time in
which employees are at work but not performing the
activities for which they receive piece-rate compensation.
See Fowler Packing Co., Inc. v. Lanier, 844 F.3d 809, 812
(9th Cir. 2016). Section § 226.2 also clarified that
employers who compensate on a piece-rate basis must
provide employees with an itemized wage statement
containing details about total hours of nonproductive time,
the rate of compensation, and the gross wages paid for that
time during the pay period. Id. § 226.2(a)(2)(B).
Notably, § 226.2 also carved out an exception—what the
parties call the “‘safe harbor’ provision”—for hybrid
compensation plans. Under § 226.2(a)(7), “[a]n employer
who, in addition to paying any piece-rate compensation,
pays an hourly rate of at least the applicable minimum wage
for all hours worked, shall be deemed in compliance” with
the statute’s requirement that employers who pay only on a
piece-rate basis must separately compensate for
1

Unless otherwise specified, all statutory references herein are
references to the California Labor Code.

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

7

nonproductive time. Id. § 226.2(a)(7). Employers whose
compensation plans qualify for this safe harbor are also
exempt from the statute’s requirement that itemized wage
statements include additional information on nonproductive
time, rate of compensation, and gross wages.
Id.
§ 226.2(a)(2)(B).
In response to § 226.2, J.B. Hunt implemented new pay
plans for most of its California-based drivers, including
Plaintiffs, in December 2018. Under this new plan,
employees were paid on neither a pure hourly basis nor a
pure piece-rate basis. Rather, employees received hourly
pay for all hours worked from the start of the day to the end
of the day, including time spent on pre-route and post-route
paperwork, pre-trip and post-trip inspections, fueling, and
training activities. Then, on top of hourly pay, employees
were paid an “activity-based bonus amount.” Eligible
activities that would be calculated into bonus pay included
miles, stops, detention, and loading and unloading.
Activities such as fueling and completing paperwork were
not eligible activities. This compensation scheme—which
we will call the Driver Pay Plan—can be expressed by the
following formula:
Hourly Pay + Activity-Based Bonus
Amount = Total Compensation
Notably, J.B. Hunt’s “activity-based bonus amount” was
not simply the sum of all eligible activity pay. Rather, J.B.
Hunt calculated its “activity-based bonus amount” by
subtracting hourly pay from total eligible activity pay (the
raw sum of all eligible activity pay). As J.B. Hunt explained

8

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

in its driver guidelines, the activity-based bonus amount was
calculated as follows:
Total Eligible Activities – Hourly Pay =
Activity-Based Bonus Amount
If the difference between total eligible activity pay and
hourly pay was negative—meaning hourly pay was higher
than total eligible activity pay—then J.B. Hunt simply paid
the employee their hourly pay and no additional bonus for
that pay period. In such circumstances, the formula would
simply become the standard Hourly Pay = Total
Compensation.
It is the application of this compensation scheme to
Plaintiffs—and J.B. Hunt’s alleged violation of § 226.2 in
doing so—that forms the heart of Plaintiffs’ case and the
bulk of the dispute between the parties. However, as detailed
below, Plaintiffs also challenge a variety of J.B. Hunt’s other
practices, such as failing to pay for off-the-clock work and
failing to reimburse for personal cell phone use, which are
also before us on appeal.
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiffs are three California-based truck drivers who
were employed by J.B. Hunt beginning in 2019. In July
2020, they filed a putative class action against J.B. Hunt in
the Superior Court of California, alleging failure to pay all
wages for non-driving time in violation of §§ 1194, 1196,
and 226.2; failure to provide meal breaks in violation of
§§ 226.7, 512, and 558; failure to provide rest breaks in
violation of § 226.7; failure to indemnify for all necessary
expenditures in violation of § 2802; failure to issue accurate
itemized wage statements in violation of §§ 226(a), 226(b),

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

9

and 226(e); late pay and waiting time penalties in violation
of §§ 200–03; and unlawful and/or unfair business practices
in violation of California’s Unfair Competition Law (UCL).
J.B. Hunt later removed the case to federal court.
In October 2020, Plaintiffs filed an amended complaint,
adding an eighth cause of action for violation of the Private
Attorneys General Act (§§ 2698–2699.8) (PAGA), which
allows aggrieved employees to file lawsuits to recover civil
penalties on behalf of California for Labor Code violations.
The parties then stipulated to the dismissal of the causes of
action for failure to pay for rest breaks and meal breaks.
Plaintiffs moved for class certification, and both parties filed
cross-motions for summary judgment as to the remaining
causes of action. In December 2021, the district court denied
class certification. The district court then denied Plaintiffs’
motion for summary judgment in its entirety and granted
summary judgment to J.B. Hunt on all causes of action
except the cause of action for reimbursement under § 2802
and the UCL and PAGA claims predicated on that cause of
action.
In short, the district court found that, contrary to
Plaintiffs’ assertions, the Driver Pay Plan was lawful and
qualified for the safe harbor of § 226.2(a)(7) because it
always paid Plaintiffs at least the minimum wage for all
hours worked in addition to compensating them on a piecerate basis for certain eligible activities. Therefore, because
J.B. Hunt did not pay Plaintiffs only on a piece-rate basis, it
did not need to compensate Plaintiffs separately for
nonproductive time under § 226.2(a)(4). The district court
also found that the Driver Pay Plan did not violate
contractual promises to provide particular amounts of
compensation for particular tasks because J.B. Hunt made
clear that the activity-based bonus amount was calculated by

10

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

subtracting hourly pay from total eligible activity pay and
was not itself the sum of all eligible piece-rate pay.
The district court also rejected the argument that,
regardless of the validity of the Driver Pay Plan, J.B. Hunt
was liable for failure to pay all wages for non-driving time
because Plaintiffs performed work off-the-clock that was not
covered by hourly pay or activity-based pay. The court
found that even if such work was occurring, Plaintiffs had
not demonstrated that J.B. Hunt knew or should have known
that it was occurring, and such knowledge is required to
establish liability under California law. The district court
thus granted summary judgment to J.B. Hunt as to Plaintiffs’
first cause of action.
The district court also granted summary judgment to J.B.
Hunt on Plaintiffs’ cause of action for failure to issue
accurate wage statements in part for similar reasons. The
court found that even if Plaintiffs had shown that parts of
their wage statements were incomplete (and the court largely
found that the wage statements were adequate), Plaintiffs
had not shown that those violations were knowing and
intentional. The district court then granted summary
judgment to J.B. Hunt on Plaintiffs’ cause of action for
waiting time penalties because that claim was derivative of
the first cause of action, and the court had already granted
summary judgment to J.B. Hunt as to that cause of action.
The district court allowed Plaintiffs’ claim for failure to
reimburse necessary business expenditures under § 2802 and
the derivative UCL and PAGA claims based on the alleged
§ 2802 violation to proceed to trial, however, finding that a
genuine dispute of material fact existed as to whether
Plaintiffs’ decisions to use their cell phones for work were
reasonable under the circumstances. The district court found

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

11

that a jury could reasonably rely on Plaintiffs’ testimony as
to the issues with J.B. Hunt’s provided PeopleNet system
and their testimony that J.B. Hunt supervisors were aware of
and encouraged the use of their cell phones to conclude that
Plaintiffs’ cell-phone-related expenses were “necessary” and
therefore entitled to reimbursement under § 2802.
Prior to trial, the parties filed twelve motions in limine.
Among other requests, J.B. Hunt sought to bar Plaintiffs
from introducing evidence of cell phone use from nonPlaintiff drivers, while Plaintiffs sought to rely on such
evidence. The district court then bifurcated the trial, with
the first phrase to be focused on the § 2802 claim and held
in front of a jury and the second phase, if necessary, to be
focused on the UCL and PAGA claims and to be held in front
of the court. The district court subsequently granted J.B.
Hunt’s motions in limine and denied Plaintiffs’ motion
regarding whether Plaintiffs could present evidence and
argument to the jury that J.B. Hunt was liable for actions or
failures related to other drivers, concluding that such
arguments should be excluded under both Federal Rule of
Evidence 401 and Federal Rule of Evidence 403.
In January 2024, the district court conducted the jury trial
on the § 2802 claims. During the trial, the district court did
not allow Plaintiffs to present evidence that J.B. Hunt
changed its reimbursement policy after Plaintiffs filed their
lawsuit. The district court also refused to include several
jury instructions proposed by Plaintiffs, include ones
purportedly based on Anderson v. Mount Clemens Pottery
Co., 328 U.S. 680 (1946), superseded by statute on other
grounds, Portal-to-Portal Act of 1947, 29 U.S.C. §§ 251–
262, and Cochran v. Schwan’s Home Service, Inc., 228 Cal.
App. 4th 1137 (2014). After three days of trial, the jury
returned a verdict in favor of J.B. Hunt. And as a result, the

12

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

district court also found in favor of J.B. Hunt as to the UCL
and PAGA reimbursement claims. On January 25, 2024, the
district court entered a final judgment on all of Plaintiffs’
claims, dismissed the action with prejudice, and stated that
J.B. Hunt shall recover costs. On February 20, 2024,
Plaintiffs appealed the final judgment.
Meanwhile, on February 9, 2024, J.B. Hunt submitted its
application to the Clerk to tax costs. Plaintiffs objected,
primarily arguing that the costs for the depositions were not
taxable because the depositions were not used at trial. The
Clerk declined to award roughly half of the deposition costs
on the grounds that those costs did not fall within the scope
of the local rules. Both parties filed motions to retax costs,
and the district court denied both motions. On May 6, 2024,
Plaintiffs appealed this post-judgment ruling. Our court later
consolidated both appeals.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
The district court had jurisdiction over this case pursuant
to 28 U.S.C. § 1332. Although this case was originally filed
in state court, J.B. Hunt removed the matter to federal court
under 28 U.S.C. § 1441(a), alleging that the district court had
jurisdiction over the action under the Class Action Fairness
Act because (1) Plaintiffs are citizens of California, (2) J.B.
Hunt is a citizen of Arkansas and Georgia, (3) over five
million dollars was at stake based on the allegations in the
complaint, and (4) all the other requirements for a class
action were met. While the district court ultimately did not
certify the proposed class, that decision did not divest the
district court of jurisdiction. See United Steel, Paper &
Forestry, Rubber, Mfg., Energy, Allied Indus. & Serv.
Workers Int’l Union, AFL-CIO, CLC v. Shell Oil Co., 602
F.3d 1087, 1092 (9th Cir. 2010). This court has appellate

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

13

jurisdiction over the district court’s final judgment and
post-judgment ruling under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
“We review a grant of summary judgment de novo.”
Pavoni v. Chrysler Grp., LLC, 789 F.3d 1095, 1098 (9th Cir.
2015). “We must determine, viewing the evidence in the
light most favorable to the non-moving party, whether there
are any genuine issues of material fact and whether the
district court correctly applied the relevant law.” Gonzales
v. CarMax Auto Superstores, LLC, 840 F.3d 644, 648 (9th
Cir. 2016) (quoting Ventura Packers, Inc. v. F/V JEANINE
KETHLEEN, 305 F.3d 913, 916 (9th Cir. 2002)).
We review a district court’s evidentiary rulings and its
formulation of civil jury instructions for abuse of discretion.
See Wilkerson v. Wheeler, 772 F.3d 834, 838 (9th Cir. 2014).
We likewise review a district court’s award of costs for
abuse of discretion. Draper v. Rosario, 836 F.3d 1072, 1087
(9th Cir. 2016). An abuse of discretion occurs “when the
district court fails to employ the appropriate legal standards,
misapprehends the law, or rests its decision on a clearly
erroneous finding of fact.” Smith v. Helzer, 95 F.4th 1207,
1213–14 (9th Cir. 2024) (cleaned up) (quoting Zepeda v.
INS, 753 F.2d 719, 724–25 (9th Cir. 1983)).
ANALYSIS
I. The Driver Pay Plan qualifies for the safe harbor of
§ 226.2(a)(7).
Plaintiffs first allege that the district court erred by
concluding as a matter of law that J.B. Hunt was protected
by § 226.2(a)(7)’s safe harbor provision. Plaintiffs make
two arguments to that end. First, they argue that, as applied,
the Driver Pay Plan is really a piece-rate scheme that is
ineligible for the safe harbor of § 226.2(a)(7) because when

14

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

total eligible pay is higher than hourly pay, the formula just
pays total eligible activity pay. Second, they argue that
because the Driver Pay Plan only pays hourly pay when
hourly pay is higher than total eligible activity pay, it
constitutes a “minimum wage floor” akin to what was held
unlawful in Gonzalez v. Downtown LA Motors, LP, 215 Cal.
App. 4th 36, 40 (2013). We reject both arguments.
We begin by breaking down Plaintiffs’ first argument.
As explained above, the Driver Pay Plan consists of two
parts: hourly pay at a rate at or above the applicable
minimum wage plus—where applicable—an activity-based
bonus. In turn, the activity-based bonus is calculated by
subtracting hourly pay from total eligible activity pay. As
such, the Driver Pay Plan can be represented by the
simplified formula stated above:
Hourly Pay + Activity-Based Bonus
Amount = Total Compensation
However, as Plaintiffs point out, this formula can also be
broken down further into its component pieces, which yields
the following formula:
Hourly Pay + (Total Eligible Activity Pay –
Hourly Pay) = Total Compensation
Therefore, Plaintiffs point out, the Hourly Pay inputs cancel
each other out, and in circumstances where hourly pay is less
than total eligible activity pay, the formula simply becomes
Total Eligible Activity Pay = Total Compensation.
Plaintiffs use the example of one of Williams’s pay
checks to emphasize that, under the Driver Pay Plan, a driver
could be paid the same amount for different hours of work.

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

15

In this pay period, Williams worked 31.78 hours, and his pay
was calculated as follows:
•
•
•
•

Hourly pay: 31.78333 hours x $14.25 =
$452.92
Total eligible bonus activity: $1,033.04
Activity-based bonus: $1,033.04 –
$452.92 = $580.12
Total pay: $452.92 + $580.12 =
$1,033.04 (plus $25.34 for rest breaks)

J.B. Hunt’s corporate witness confirmed that, outside of a
difference in rest-break pay, Williams would have been paid
the same if he had worked forty hours instead of 31.78 hours.
The calculations based on forty hours of work, with the same
amount of eligible bonus activity, would be as follows:
•
•
•
•

Hourly pay: 40 hours x $14.25 = $570
Total eligible bonus activity: $1,033.04
Activity-based bonus: $1,033.04 – $570
= $463.04
Total pay: $570 + $463.04 = $1033.04
(plus slightly different rest break pay)

Therefore, according to Plaintiffs, “unlike true hourly pay
plus a bonus, it is not the case that the more hours J.B. Hunt’s
drivers work, the more they get paid.” As such, they
contend, the Driver Pay Plan is really a piece-rate scheme
improperly masquerading as a hybrid scheme, and J.B. Hunt
is ineligible for the safe harbor of § 226.2(a)(7). And if J.B.
Hunt is ineligible for this safe harbor, then Plaintiffs have
shown a genuine issue of material fact as to whether J.B.

16

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

Hunt failed to separately compensate them for “other
nonproductive time” as required by § 226.2(a)(4).
While we agree with Plaintiffs that J.B. Hunt’s
compensation scheme can fairly be described as
“convoluted,” we ultimately disagree with them that this
scheme does not qualify for the safe harbor of § 226.2(a)(7).2
Although Plaintiffs frame the Driver Pay Plan as “simply a
piece-rate compensation scheme that fails to separately pay
for all hours worked,” that framing mischaracterizes the
actual functioning of the Driver Pay Plan. Rather, the
scheme initially pays for all hours worked and then adds any
applicable bonus compensation on top of that hourly pay.
Nothing in § 226.2 prohibits an employer from paying an
hourly wage of at least the minimum wage and then adding
bonus pay based on a formula that considers hours worked.
Indeed, all that § 226.2(a)(7) requires is that an employer
“pays an hourly rate of at least the applicable minimum wage
for all hours worked” in addition to paying any piece-rate
compensation. Cal. Lab. Code § 226.2(a)(7).
That is exactly what happened here. J.B. Hunt paid its
employees an hourly wage for “all hours worked,” whether
or not those hours were “productive” or “nonproductive.” It
then supplemented that pay—when employees were
eligible—with a piece-rate-based bonus. And J.B. Hunt did
not promise that its additional compensation would be pure
piece-rate pay. Rather, it explained to drivers that the bonus
pay would be calculated by subtracting hourly pay from
eligible bonus activities, and that only this difference would
be added onto the base hourly pay. Therefore, J.B. Hunt has
satisfied its obligation to “pay no less than the minimum
2

It is undisputed that the J.B. Hunt’s hourly rate was always at or above
the applicable minimum wage during the relevant time period.

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

17

wage for all hours worked” while “still keeping any
promises it has made to provide particular amounts of
compensation for particular tasks or periods of work.”
Oman v. Delta Air Lines, Inc., 9 Cal. 5th 762, 782 (2020).
That this scheme is “relatively unusual” does not mean that
it is inherently unlawful. Id. at 789.
Indeed, although this scheme may be odd, J.B. Hunt’s
driver guidelines stated that the goal of the scheme was to
reward efficiency and productivity. We can see good reason
why J.B. Hunt would consider this formula a means to that
end: because an employee could either earn the same pay for
fewer hours worked or earn more money by completing
more tasks in the same number of hours, the employee would
be incentivized to work more efficiently. Similarly, an
employee would be disincentivized from dawdling because
taking too long to complete tasks might mean no activity
bonus added to hourly pay. Ultimately, “[t]he minimum
wage laws exist to ensure that workers receive adequate and
fair pay, not to dictate to employers and employees what pay
formulas they may, or may not, agree to adopt as a means to
that end.” Id. Forbidding J.B. Hunt from offering greater
pay based on employee efficiency would “do nothing to
ensure workers are paid fair or adequate wages for all hours
worked.” Id. at 787.
We also reject Plaintiffs’ argument that, by just paying
drivers their hourly pay when the Driver Pay Plan formula
results in a negative number, J.B. Hunt has impermissibly
created a “minimum wage floor” akin to what the California
Court of Appeal held unlawful in Gonzalez, 215 Cal. App.
4th at 40–41. In Gonzalez, a car dealership paid its
technicians on a piece-rate basis for repair work. Id. at 40.
When their piece-rate pay averaged over hours worked fell
below the minimum wage, the dealership supplemented their

18

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

income so that the technicians were always paid at least a
minimum wage (the so-called “minimum wage floor”). Id.
The California Court of Appeal struck down this system,
holding that the technicians were entitled to hourly
compensation for non-productive time separate from any
piece-rate pay. Id. at 40–41. The California Supreme Court
later confirmed that Gonzalez’s “no borrowing” rule (that is,
an employer cannot “borrow” compensation from one set of
hours or tasks to rectify compensation below the minimum
wage for a different set of tasks) was codified by § 226.2.
See Oman, 9 Cal. 5th at 788 n.8; see id. at 789 (Liu, J.,
concurring).
We find Gonzalez inapplicable here. What Gonzalez and
its progeny hold is that employers cannot “tak[e]
compensation contractually due for one set of hours and
spread[] it over other, otherwise un- or undercompensated,
hours to satisfy the minimum wage.” Oman, 9 Cal. 5th at
779. The concern with wage borrowing is that such a
practice “reduc[es] compensation, for the hours from which
wages were borrowed, below the contractually agreed-upon
level.” Id. at 780; see also Gonzalez, 215 Cal. App. 4th at
48–50. Indeed, the issue in Gonzalez was that the dealership
had promised to pay a certain rate for tasks completed, and
the minimum wage floor “did not alter the nature of that
promise,” meaning the dealership was reneging on its
contractual commitment when it “borrowed” from piece-rate
pay to meet minimum wage requirements. Oman, 9 Cal. 5th
at 788.
No such borrowing occurred here. J.B. Hunt never took
from piece-rate pay to supplement hourly pay the way the
car dealership did in Gonzalez. Rather, as detailed above,
J.B. Hunt always paid hourly wages, and then paid any
piece-rate-based bonus pay on top of that pay. The hourly

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

19

pay never changed: only the bonus pay did. In other words,
there was no “minimum wage floor” because J.B. Hunt was
not borrowing from piece-rate pay to meet minimum wage
obligations, but rather—as it clearly explained to drivers in
its guidelines—calculating bonus pay based in part on hours
worked. See Oman, 9 Cal. 5th at 791 (Liu, J., concurring)
(“Correctly identifying an employer’s contractual
commitment is critical to ensuring that employers do not
circumvent the no-borrowing rule simply by inserting into
employment agreements a minimum wage floor—i.e., an
agreement to make up the difference if an employee’s
promised pay, averaged over all hours worked, falls below
the applicable minimum wage.”). Nothing in California’s
caselaw or our own prevents an employer from creating a
contract that alters bonus pay based on hours worked, so
long as the hourly pay does not borrow from promised piecerate pay to create a minimum wage floor.
To that end, as the district court recognized, J.B. Hunt’s
scheme complies with the general guidelines for
complicated compensation schemes articulated in Oman.
Because we find that J.B. Hunt did not improperly insert a
“minimum wage floor . . . into a contract that otherwise
promised to pay by the piece,” Oman, 9 Cal. 5th at 788,
Plaintiffs’ reliance on footnote 8 of Oman is inapposite.
Instead, as Oman articulates, to determine whether a
compensation scheme is proper, we ask (1) whether, for each
task or period covered by the contract, the employee is paid
at or above the minimum wage, and (2) whether there are
other tasks or periods not covered by the contract for which
at least the minimum wage should have been paid. Id. at
782. As the district court recognized, the answer to the first
question is yes, because J.B. Hunt always paid Plaintiffs at
least a minimum wage for all hours worked, and the answer

20

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

to the second question is no, because there are no tasks or
periods not covered by the contract for which J.B. Hunt
should have owed compensation. Additionally, J.B. Hunt
never promised to pay exact amounts as piece-rate
compensation, but articulated that total eligible activity pay
would be just one factor that went into a potential activity
bonus. As such, J.B. Hunt’s pay scheme “satisfies state
minimum wage law without ever needing to compromise its
contractual commitments.” Id. at 788. It therefore complies
with Oman’s general principles for evaluating compensation
schemes.
Accordingly, because J.B. Hunt is entitled to
§ 226.2(a)(7)’s safe harbor, its compensation scheme does
not violate the no-borrowing principles articulated by
Gonzalez, and it otherwise complies with Oman’s general
guidelines, the district court did not err by granting summary
judgment to J.B. Hunt as to Plaintiffs’ first cause of action
for unpaid wages to the extent that this cause of action was
based on the purported unlawfulness of the Driver Pay Plan.
II. Plaintiffs have not shown a genuine dispute of
material fact as to whether J.B. Hunt is otherwise
liable for failing to pay Plaintiffs for off-the-clock
work.
Plaintiffs also argue that, regardless, genuine issues of
material fact remain as to whether J.B. Hunt is nonetheless
liable for failing to pay Plaintiffs for off-the-clock work that
occurred pre- or post-shift and that was not captured by the
PeopleNet units that track driver time throughout the day.
That is, Plaintiffs argue that even if the Driver Pay Plan were
lawful, the district court erred by granting summary
judgment to J.B. Hunt as to their first cause of action because
they demonstrated genuine issues of material fact as to

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

21

whether J.B. Hunt still failed to pay them for all the work
they completed.
Under California law, “[a] plaintiff may establish
liability for an off-the-clock claim by proving that (1) he
performed work for which he did not receive compensation;
(2) that defendants knew or should have known that plaintiff
did so; but that (3) the defendants stood idly by.” Jimenez v.
Allstate Ins. Co., 765 F.3d 1161, 1165 (9th Cir. 2014)
(quoting Adoma v. Univ. of Phoenix, Inc., 270 F.R.D. 543,
548 (E.D. Cal. 2010)). When employees are clocked out,
there is a presumption that they are not working. See Brinker
Rest. Corp. v. Superior Ct., 53 Cal. 4th 1004, 1051 (2012).
The plaintiff bears the burden of rebutting that presumption.
Id.
In the proceedings below, the district court found that a
genuine dispute of material fact existed as to the first element
because Plaintiffs testified that they performed pre- and posttrip duties before logging in (or out) of the PeopleNet units
in their trucks. The district court determined that based on
this testimony, a jury could reasonably conclude that
Plaintiffs each performed some work off the clock, despite
J.B. Hunt’s policies instructing drivers to log all their hours.
Because such pre-trip duties did not qualify for activitybased pay, Plaintiffs would not have been compensated
either via hourly pay or bonus pay for this work.
The district court nonetheless granted summary
judgment in favor of J.B. Hunt on this claim because
Plaintiffs failed to raise a genuine dispute of material fact as
to the second element: whether J.B. Hunt knew or should
have known that Plaintiffs were performing such off-theclock work. The district court found that Plaintiffs had
conceded this issue by failing to address it in their motion

22

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

for summary judgment and then failing to respond to J.B.
Hunt’s arguments as to this element in its opposition brief.
The district court then found that, in any event, the record
did not support a finding that J.B. Hunt knew or should have
known that Plaintiffs performed off-the-clock work.
Even if Plaintiffs had not conceded this issue, we agree
with the district court that Plaintiffs’ claims fail on the
merits. On appeal, Plaintiffs merely point out that Williams
testified that J.B. Hunt wanted its drivers to arrive forty-five
minutes before their shift and that Williams and Cline used
to wait at the office with “other guys” for paperwork before
their shifts. Plaintiffs also point out that the PeopleNet unit
necessarily would not capture pre-shift or post-shift work
that occurred before the drivers got into their trucks and that
J.B. Hunt’s driver manual emphasized that it was “critical”
that employees log in and out of PeopleNet at the beginning
and end of their shifts. In Plaintiffs’ view, this evidence is
more than sufficient to create a genuine dispute of material
fact as to whether J.B. Hunt knew or should have known that
off-the-clock work was occurring.
We disagree. As J.B. Hunt notes, Williams did not
testify that J.B. Hunt wanted him to arrive forty-five minutes
before his shift, but rather forty-five minutes before
departure. Had Williams logged in at the beginning of the
shift, he would have been paid for those hours. And while
Cline testified that after she picked up her paperwork, she
would wait in the office with “other guys” including
Williams, there is nothing in her testimony demonstrating
that a supervisor knew or should have known that she had
not clocked in during that time. As Plaintiffs even
acknowledge, J.B. Hunt required Plaintiffs to log on to their
PeopleNet units at the beginning and end of their shifts to
ensure accurate hours. Plaintiffs’ bare-bones testimony and

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

23

speculative assertions do not demonstrate a genuine issue of
material fact as to whether J.B. Hunt knew or should have
known that Plaintiffs were not following its clear
instructions. See Angle v. Miller, 673 F.3d 1122, 1134 n.6
(9th Cir. 2012).
Moreover, Plaintiffs have provided no evidence that
supervisors at J.B. Hunt monitored their hours. We agree
with authority suggesting that, had Plaintiffs shown that J.B.
Hunt closely tracked their hours, they might have
demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact as to whether
J.B. Hunt knew or should have known that such off-theclock work was occurring. See, e.g., Reloj v. Gov’t Emps.
Ins. Co., No. 21-CV-1751-L, 2023 WL 6370901, at *3 (S.D.
Cal. Sept. 11, 2023); Castillo v. Bank of Am. Nat’l Ass’n, No.
17-CV-0580-DOC, 2019 WL 7166055, at *5 (C.D. Cal. Oct.
29, 2019). However, Plaintiffs have identified no similar
kind of evidence demonstrating that J.B. Hunt was paying
close attention to employee compliance with their
timekeeping policies. Plaintiffs’ speculation that J.B. Hunt
could have compared PeopleNet log-in/log-out times with
Plaintiffs’ overall time spent working is insufficient to
demonstrate that J.B. Hunt should have known that such offthe-clock work was occurring. See Jong v. Kaiser Found.
Health Plan, Inc., 226 Cal. App. 4th 391, 398–99 (2014).
Ultimately, while the summary judgment standard
requires us to view the evidence in the light most favorable
to the moving party, it does not require us to ignore
deficiencies in the record. The standard under California law
is whether the defendant knew or should have known that a
plaintiff performed off-the-clock work, not whether a
defendant could have known that such work was occurring.
Jimenez, 765 F.3d at 1165. Plaintiffs have potentially raised
a genuine issue of material fact as to the latter but not the

24

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

former. Therefore, the district court did not err by granting
summary judgment to J.B. Hunt on Plaintiffs’ first cause of
action to the extent it was based on their claim that they
performed off-the-clock work.
III. The district court did not err by granting
summary judgment in favor of J.B. Hunt on
Plaintiffs’ itemized wage statement claims.
Plaintiffs next argue that the district court erred by
granting summary to J.B. Hunt as to their non-PAGA and
PAGA wage statement claims. Under § 226(a), an employer
must include information such as gross wages earned, total
hours worked, and (if applicable) the number of piece-rate
units and the relevant piece-rate in an “accurate itemized
statement” of wages. Cal. Lab. Code § 226(a). An
employee who has been injured by a violation of § 226(a)
can recover damages under § 226(e). Id. § 226(e). The
district court granted summary judgment to J.B. Hunt as to
both the § 226(e) claim (the non-PAGA claim) as well as the
PAGA claim based on the purported violation of § 226(a).3
As Plaintiffs belatedly realize on appeal, § 226(e) and
PAGA have different requirements. To prevail on an
individual § 226(e) claim, a plaintiff must show (1) a
violation of § 226(a), (2) that was “knowing and
3

Plaintiffs also contend that the wage statements violated
§ 226.2(a)(2)(B) by failing to separately list productive and
nonproductive time. The district court rejected this argument on the
grounds that, because J.B. Hunt qualified for the safe harbor of
§ 226.2(a)(7), it did not need to comply with the requirements articulated
in § 226.2(a)(2)(B). Because we agree that J.B. Hunt qualifies for the
safe harbor of § 226.2(a)(7), we likewise reject Plaintiffs’ arguments on
appeal that J.B. Hunt committed derivative violations of
§ 226.2(a)(2)(B).
We therefore do not address Plaintiffs’
§ 226.2(a)(2)(B) arguments any further.

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

25

intentional,” and (3) that caused a resulting injury. Id.
Meanwhile, to prevail on a PAGA claim based on § 226(a),
a plaintiff need only show a violation of § 226(a) without
having to satisfy the additional knowledge and injury
requirements for a claim made under § 226(e). See Lopez v.
Friant & Assocs., 15 Cal. App. 5th 773, 788 (2017). Before
the district court, however, Plaintiffs consistently argued that
their PAGA claims relied on the “same reasons” for
establishing liability as their non-PAGA claims. Therefore,
we reject at the outset Plaintiffs’ argument that the district
court erred by applying the “knowing and intentional”
requirement to both their PAGA and non-PAGA claims. See
Hunter v. U.S. Dep’t of Educ., 115 F.4th 955, 963–64 (9th
Cir. 2024). Plaintiffs invited this error, so they cannot
complain on appeal that the district court should not have
followed their own framing. See id. (“[A] party may not
complain on review of errors below for which he is
responsible.” (quoting Sovak v. Chugai Pharm. Co., 280
F.3d 1266, 1270 (9th Cir. 2002))).
Moving on to the alleged § 226(a) violations, we agree
with the district court that Plaintiffs have raised a genuine
dispute of material fact as to whether their wage statements
were inaccurate to the extent that these statements did not
accurately state Plaintiffs’ total hours worked. As detailed
above, Plaintiffs each testified that they performed
uncompensated work that was not reflected in either hourly
pay or activity-based pay. However, for the same reasons
detailed above, Plaintiffs’ claims on this ground fall at the
second hurdle: they cannot show that any wage statement
violations as to total hours worked were “knowing and
intentional.” Accordingly, the district court did not err by
granting summary judgment to J.B. Hunt as to the part of this

26

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

cause of action premised on inaccurate recording of total
hours worked.
Additionally, we reject Plaintiffs’ argument that the
district court erred by failing to recognize that § 226 requires
that an employer must provide details as to piece-rate units
earned and applicable piece-rates in the wage statement itself
as opposed to a separate document. On appeal, Plaintiffs
argue that while J.B. Hunt provided this information in
another document, it did not do so in the one-page paystub
that Plaintiffs actually received, which violated the statute.
In turn, J.B. Hunt argues that this information was included
as part of Plaintiffs’ multi-page wage statements, and that
Plaintiffs’ inclusion of just one page of these statements in
their brief is misleading. On appeal, Plaintiffs fault the
district court for taking “too narrow a view of what is
required under the statute” when it failed to address this issue
and instead merely concluded that J.B. Hunt’s wage
statements were not incomplete simply because they did not
include the specific date on which each piece-rate unit was
earned.
However, the district court only took this narrower view
of the issue because Plaintiffs failed to properly raise the
broader arguments they now make on appeal. Before the
district court, Plaintiffs did not clearly argue that J.B. Hunt
erred by including information as to piece-rate units and
piece-rate only in an (allegedly) separate document, but
rather that this other document “d[id] not indicate which day
the stops and miles were made,” which would “make it
nearly impossible to determine if [Plaintiffs] are being paid
properly for any given workday.” See In re Mercury
Interactive Corp. Sec. Litig., 618 F.3d 988, 992 (9th Cir.
2010) (“[A]n issue will generally be deemed waived on
appeal if the argument was not ‘raised sufficiently for the

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

27

trial court to rule on it.’” (quoting Whittaker Corp. v.
Execuair Corp., 953 F.2d 510, 515 (9th Cir. 1992))). To the
extent that the parties now dispute whether the wage
statements Plaintiffs received were a one-page document
that did not include this information or a multi-page
document that did, that ambiguity is a function of the
insufficient arguments that Plaintiffs made before the district
court. Therefore, we do not reach the merits, and do not
wade into the parties’ disagreement as to whether any good
faith defense applies.
IV. The district court did not err by entering
judgment in favor of J.B. Hunt on Plaintiffs’
reimbursement claims following trial.
We now turn to the trial portion of the case. As detailed
above, the district court granted summary judgment to J.B.
Hunt on all of Plaintiffs’ claims except the claim for failure
to reimburse necessary business expenses under § 2802 and
the derivative UCL and PAGA reimbursement claims.
Under § 2802, “[a]n employer shall indemnify his or her
employee for all necessary expenditures or losses incurred
by the employee in direct consequence of the discharge of
his or her duties[.]” Cal. Lab. Code § 2802(a). “Necessary
expenditures” includes “all reasonable costs,” including
attorney’s fees. Id. § 2802(c).
The district court bifurcated the trial into two
proceedings, dividing it into a jury trial for the § 2802 claim
followed by (if necessary) a bench trial on the UCL and
PAGA claims. Because the jury found in favor of J.B. Hunt
as to the § 2802 claims, the district court found in favor of
J.B. Hunt on the related UCL and PAGA claims without
holding a trial as to that portion. On appeal, Plaintiffs argue
that the district court made a variety of errors, each of which

28

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

warrants reversal. We disagree. We take each argument in
turn.
A. The district court did not abuse its discretion by
improperly limiting evidence, testimony, and
argument to Plaintiffs’ individual claims.
Plaintiffs first argue that the district court abused its
discretion by barring any evidence, testimony, or argument
related to their representative PAGA and UCL claims during
the jury trial portion of the proceedings. Prior to trial, the
district court had excluded evidence about other drivers’ use
of their cell phones both on the grounds that such evidence
was irrelevant and that it would create a significant danger
of unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, and misleading the
jury. On appeal, Plaintiffs contend that the evidence was
relevant because whether their cell phone use was reasonable
is informed by what other drivers were doing pursuant to J.B.
Hunt’s policies and that the district court should not have
alternatively excluded the evidence under Rule 403.
We need not decide whether this evidence was relevant
because Plaintiffs have not carried their burden of showing
that the district court abused its discretion by excluding the
evidence under Rule 403. See Sidibe v. Sutter Health, 103
F.4th 675, 691–92 (9th Cir. 2024). First, contrary to
Plaintiffs’ assertions, the district court did not inherently
abuse its discretion by failing to extensively explain its
decision to exclude evidence under Rule 403.4 Second, it
4

Rather, our standard is that “[w]e must affirm if the record, as a whole,
indicates that the court properly balanced the evidence.” United States
v. Daly, 974 F.2d 1215, 1217 (9th Cir. 1992); see also Sidibe v. Sutter
Health, 103 F.4th 675, 703 (9th Cir. 2024) (concluding that “[v]iewing
the evidence as a whole, it is apparent that the district court abused its
discretion” in its blanket exclusion of certain evidence). Here, the

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

29

was not otherwise “illogical,” “implausible,” or “without
support in inferences that may be drawn from the facts in the
record” for the district court to have concluded that the
probative value of the evidence was substantially
outweighed by unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, and
misleading the jury. See United States v. Espinoza, 880 F.3d
506, 511 (9th Cir. 2018). The only issue before the jury was
whether J.B. Hunt failed to pay each individual Plaintiff for
personal cell phone use. It was not illogical for the district
court to determine that allowing evidence of J.B. Hunt’s
potential liability as to other drivers would have confused
the jury as to the precise issue it needed to decide.
Ultimately, “Rule 403 determinations are ‘subject to great
deference,’” United States v. Cabrera, 83 F.4th 729, 736 (9th
Cir. 2023) (quoting United States v. Hinkson, 585 F.3d 1247,
1267 (9th Cir. 2009) (en banc)), and Plaintiffs’ passing
assertion that the district court abused its discretion has not
shown that this is one of the “rare” cases requiring reversal,
United States v. Johnson, 89 F.4th 997, 1003 n.1 (7th Cir.
2024).
B. The district court did not abuse its discretion by
excluding evidence that J.B. Hunt changed its
reimbursement policy.
Next, we conclude that the district court did not abuse its
discretion by refusing to allow evidence that, after this
lawsuit was filed, J.B. Hunt changed its reimbursement
policy to provide a stipend to drivers for their cell phones.
Under Rule 407, evidence of subsequent remedial measures
is not admissible to prove culpable conduct. Fed. R. Evid.
district court’s order shows that it reviewed the relevant motions in
limine and then briefly, but explicitly, balanced the Rule 403 factors.
Nothing more was required.

30

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

407. Plaintiffs argue, however, that evidence of this change
in policy should have been admitted under Rule 407’s
exception for demonstrating “the feasibility of precautionary
measures.” Id.
Critically, although Plaintiffs claim they are making a
feasibility argument, they do not actually challenge whether
it was “feasible” for J.B. Hunt to allow drivers to use their
personal cellphones or to reimburse them for such use.
Rather, in their own words, they seek to introduce this
evidence to prove that they were required to use their cell
phones at work. That is, Plaintiffs want to use the evidence
of J.B. Hunt’s change in policy to prove the allegedly
culpable conduct at the heart of their § 2802 claim. Rule 407
squarely bars this proposed use, and there was no need—as
Plaintiffs now allege—for the district court to have instead
admitted this evidence but coupled it with a limiting
instruction.
C. The district court did not abuse its discretion by
failing to provide adequate jury instructions.
Plaintiffs also argue that the district court abused its
discretion by failing to provide adequate jury instructions
during trial. Plaintiffs make two arguments: first, that the
district court should have instructed the jury on the burdenshifting approach set forth in Mount Clemens, and second,
that the district court should have instructed the jury on the
de minimis exception under Cochran. We reject both
arguments.
As to the Mount Clemens argument, Plaintiffs are upset
that J.B. Hunt pointed out at trial that Plaintiffs’ cell phone
records showed many personal calls but few work-related
calls and that J.B. Hunt argued to the jury that it could
assume that Plaintiffs’ failure to produce certain cell phone

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

31

records meant that those records would not have supported
their claims. Plaintiffs claim that, under Mount Clemens,
they were entitled to an instruction that would have “allowed
the jury to understand that any lack of records could not
properly be held against Plaintiffs.”
Even setting aside the disputed issue of waiver, this
argument fails on the merits. Under Mount Clemens, if an
employee alleges improper compensation, he must show that
he has performed work for which he was improperly
compensated and produce evidence to show the extent of
that work as a matter of reasonable inference. Mount
Clemens, 328 U.S. at 687. If he does so, the burden shifts to
the employer to produce “evidence of the precise amount of
work performed or . . . evidence to negative the
reasonableness of the inference to be drawn from the
employee’s evidence.” Id at 687–688. If the employer fails
to produce such evidence, “the court may then award
damages to the employee, even though the result be only
approximate.” Id. at 688. Mount Clemens does not
generally hold that when an employee alleges that they have
incurred expenses that were not explicitly mandatory, an
employer cannot point out deficiencies in the employee’s
records when challenging whether those expenses were
necessary. Accordingly, even if Plaintiffs had properly
proposed the instruction below that they now argue for on
appeal,5 it should not have been included. See Chuman v.
Wright, 76 F.3d 292, 294 (9th Cir. 1996) (“Jury instructions
must be formulated so that they fairly and adequately cover
the issues presented, correctly state the law, and are not
misleading.”).
5

Neither Mount Clemens-based jury instruction that Plaintiffs proposed
below reflects the instruction that they now request on appeal.

32

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

Meanwhile, as to their Cochran argument, Plaintiffs
assert that the district court abused its discretion by failing
to instruct the jury that “they should recover a reasonable
percentage of their entire personal cell phone expenses
regardless of whether the actual expense they incurred was
de minimis.” Cochran holds that where cell phone use is
mandatory, the employer “must pay some reasonable
percentage of the employee’s cell phone bill” even if the
employee would not have incurred an extra expense absent
the job—for example, where the employee already has a plan
with unlimited minutes. 228 Cal. App. 4th at 1140, 1144.
However, again setting aside the issue of waiver,6 the district
court did not abuse its discretion because Plaintiffs again
misstate the legal standard. As formulated in their opening
brief, Plaintiffs appear to ask for an instruction that would
require J.B. Hunt to pay for a reasonable percentage of
Plaintiffs’ cell phone expenses regardless of whether those
expenses were mandatory. We agree with J.B. Hunt that the
district court did not abuse its discretion by failing to include
this incomplete and inaccurate instruction, especially where
the district court correctly instructed the jury as to the
elements required for Plaintiffs to establish a claim under
§ 2802.7
6

Before the district court, Plaintiffs proposed two Cochran-based
instructions. On appeal, they do not identify which of the two proposed
instructions is at issue, and neither proposed instruction cleanly maps
onto the instruction Plaintiffs now argue for on appeal.
7

The district court instructed the jury that to establish a § 2802 claim,
Plaintiffs must prove (1) that they incurred expenditures in direct
consequence of the discharge of their job duties for J.B. Hunt; (2) that
the expenditures were reasonable and necessary; (3) that J.B. Hunt failed
to reimburse Plaintiffs the full amount of the expenditures; and (4) the
amount of the expenditures that J.B. Hunt failed to reimburse Plaintiffs.

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

33

V. The district court did not abuse its discretion by
awarding costs to J.B. Hunt.
Plaintiffs also appeal the district court’s separate postjudgment order awarding J.B. Hunt costs of $14,381.08
following the district court’s denial of the parties’
cross-motions to retax. Plaintiffs argue that the district court
abused its discretion when it taxed over $7,300 in deposition
costs not “necessarily obtained for use in the case” and when
it awarded “travel costs” of $525.66 for corporate witness
Sherry Moncrief (Moncrief) to fly from Arkansas to Los
Angeles to testify at trial. Once again, we reject both
arguments.
Rule 54 provides that, in general, costs should be
awarded to the prevailing party in a civil action. Fed. R. Civ.
P. 54(d)(1). In turn, costs are defined in 28 U.S.C. § 1920,
which provides that “[f]ees for printed or electronically
recorded transcripts necessarily obtained for use in the case”
as well as copies of any materials “necessarily obtained for
use in the case” are taxable. 28 U.S.C. § 1920(2), (4). Both
the Central District of California’s Local Rules and this court
consider reasonable deposition costs to fall within the scope
of 28 U.S.C. § 1920. See C.D. Cal. R. 54-3.5; Alflex Corp.
v. Underwriters Lab’ys, Inc., 914 F.2d 175, 177, 176 n. 3
(9th Cir. 1990) (per curiam); see also Evanow v. M/V
Neptune, 163 F.3d 1108, 1118 (9th Cir. 1998).
Plaintiffs primarily argue that the district court should
have excluded the costs of all the depositions taken in the
case because none of the depositions were used at trial.
However, we have held that documents do not need to be
See Cal. Lab. Code § 2802; see also Jud. Council of Cal. Civ. Jury Instr.
2750.

34

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

offered as evidence for them to be “necessarily obtained for
use in the case” within the meaning of § 1920. See HaagenDazs Co., Inc. v. Double Rainbow Gourmet Ice Creams, Inc.,
920 F.2d 587, 588 (9th Cir. 1990) (per curiam) (holding that
the district court did not abuse its discretion by awarding
copying costs for documents necessarily obtained for use in
the case but not offered as evidence). Rather, while a district
court maintains discretion to deny costs for that reason, it
does not need to do so. See EEOC v. Pape Lift, Inc., 115
F.3d 676, 683 (9th Cir. 1997); see also C.D. Cal. R. 543.5(a).
Here, the district court explained that all the depositions
were reasonably necessary for trial preparation, given that
all the people deposed testified at trial and several were
cross-examined about their testimony for impeachment
purposes. Additionally, the district court pointed out the
deposition testimony was repeatedly used in the parties’
filings on class certification and summary judgment. Under
those circumstances, the district court found that the
depositions were not “unnecessary” just because they were
not introduced at trial. These are all valid reasons for
determining that the depositions were “necessarily obtained
for use in the case” within the meaning of § 1920. As such,
given the trial court’s “intimate familiarity” with the
proceedings and its justifiable reasons for finding the
depositions necessary, we conclude that the district court did
not abuse its discretion by taxing the deposition costs. Pape
Lift, Inc., 115 F.3d at 683 (quoting Smith v. Hughes Aircraft
Co., 22 F.3d 1432, 1439 (9th Cir. 1993)).8

8

Plaintiffs also argue in passing that it would be “unjust” to award these
costs. However, Plaintiffs waived this argument both by failing to

WILLIAMS V. J.B. HUNT TRANSPORT, INC.

35

Plaintiffs also argue—for the first time on appeal—that
the district court abused its discretion by awarding full travel
costs for Moncrief to travel from Arkansas to Los Angeles.
In their view, because Moncrief resided outside the district,
her mileage allowance should have only covered up to 100
miles at most. See Kemart Corp. v. Printing Arts Rsch.
Lab’ys, Inc., 232 F.2d 897, 904 (9th Cir. 1956). However,
once again setting aside the issue of waiver, this argument is
meritless. Both the current version of 28 U.S.C. § 1821 and
the relevant Local Rules plainly allow a district court to tax
full mileage and other associated travel expenses. See 28
U.S.C. § 1821(c)(1); C.D. Cal. R. 54-3.6. As such, the
district court did not abuse its discretion by awarding full
costs for Moncrief’s travel.
AFFIRMED.

properly present it to the district court and by failing to properly develop
it before this court.

