FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ION LAPADAT; GIOVANI
BECALI LAPADAT; LAURA
LAPADAT; MIRABELA
LAPADAT; SIMONA LAPADAT,
v.

Petitioners,

PAMELA BONDI, Attorney
General,
Respondent.

No. 23-1745
Agency Nos.
A208-585-239
A209-171-053
A208-585-240
A209-171-054
A209-171-052
ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

On Petition for Review of an Order of the
Board of Immigration Appeals
Argued and Submitted May 14, 2024
Pasadena, California
Filed February 12, 2025
Amended July 31, 2025
Before: Ronald Lee Gilman, * N. Randy Smith, and
Salvador Mendoza, Jr., Circuit Judges.

The Honorable Ronald Lee Gilman, United States Circuit Judge for the
Court of Appeals, 6th Circuit, sitting by designation.

*

2

LAPADAT V. BONDI

Order;
Opinion by Judge Mendoza;
Dissent by Judge N. Randy Smith
SUMMARY **
Immigration
The panel filed (1) an order amending its opinion filed
February 12, 2025, and denying Respondent’s petition for
panel rehearing; and (2) an amended opinion granting Ion
Lapadat’s petition for review of the Board of Immigration
Appeals’ decision affirming the denial of asylum and
withholding of removal, and remanding for further
proceedings.
In the amended opinion, the panel held that the record
compelled the conclusion that Ion’s past experiences rose to
the level of persecution, and that the BIA erred when it
determined that the Roma are not a disfavored group in
Romania.
The panel concluded that the BIA erred by ignoring Ion’s
credible, highly probative, and potentially dispositive
testimony when it determined that his mistreatment was
insufficiently severe to constitute persecution. Ion’s
testimony that he was shot in the back, together with his
family’s credible testimony and the remaining record
evidence, collectively compelled a finding of serious harm
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

LAPADAT V. BONDI

3

that rose to the level of past persecution. The panel wrote
that this was especially so given the severe assaults,
attempted kidnappings, threats, violence, and mistreatment
that Ion and his family faced in Romania.
The panel noted that it was deciding only whether the
Lapadats had established the first prong of the pastpersecution claim—serious harm rising to the level of
persecution. The panel left it to the agency to determine in
the first instance the other two prongs—whether the
persecution was motivated on account of a protected ground
and was committed by the government, or by forces that the
government was unable or unwilling to control.
The panel concluded that the BIA also erred when it held
that the Roma are not a disfavored group in
Romania. Eliding centuries of anti-Roma abuse in Romania,
the BIA mistakenly swapped the European Union’s
proposed reforms, designed to aid Europe’s Roma
population, with the Romanian government’s own
documented and persecutory conduct toward the
Roma. Moreover, the record unmistakably established that
the Roma are a disfavored group in Romania.
Given the errors in its past-persecution and disfavoredgroup analyses, the panel wrote that the BIA likely erred
when it determined that Ion lacked a sufficient
individualized risk of future persecution to make his fear of
return to Romania objectively reasonable. The panel left it
to the agency to determine whether Ion established a
sufficiently individualized risk of persecution considering
the egregious evidence of group persecution.
Dissenting, Judge N.R. Smith wrote that the majority
incorrectly limited its review to the BIA’s decision,
improperly substituted its own view for that of the IJ and the

4

LAPADAT V. BONDI

BIA in determining past persecution, and assessed the harms
the Lapadats suffered out of context by failing to tie them to
persecution on account of a protected ground. Additionally,
in remanding for a disfavored group analysis, the majority
ignored the BIA’s alternative determination that even if the
Roma constitute a disfavored group there was insufficient
evidence that any of the individuals who targeted Lapadat
were likely to do so in the future.

COUNSEL
Colyn B. Desatnik (argued), Colyn B. Desatnik APLC,
Irvine, California, for Petitioners.
Jonathan Needle (argued) and Roberta O. Roberts; Zoe J.
Heller and Walter M. Evans, Senior Litigation Counsel;
Office of Immigration Litigation, Civil Division; Bernard A.
Joseph, Senior Litigation Counsel; Brian M. Boynton,
Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General; United States
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for Respondent.

ORDER
The opinion filed February 12, 2025, is hereby amended.
The amended opinion will be filed concurrently with this
order.
Judges Gilman and Mendoza vote to deny
Respondent’s petition for panel rehearing, and Judge N.R.
Smith votes to grant the petition for rehearing. The petition
for panel rehearing (Dkt. No. 40) is DENIED. No further
petitions for rehearing will be considered.

LAPADAT V. BONDI

5

OPINION
MENDOZA, Circuit Judge:
As appellate judges, we generally defer to the reasoned
and expert judgment of our colleagues in the Board of
Immigration Appeals (“BIA”), whom we trust to carefully
review the record and apply the law. But judges are human,
and like all humans, they sometimes make mistakes. Such
is the case today. Ion Lapadat, a native of Romania, seeks
asylum for himself and his family because he fears
persecution on account of their Roma ethnicity. The BIA
was unpersuaded by his petition, and it affirmed the
Immigration Judge’s (“IJ”) denial of Ion’s application and
his family’s derivative applications for asylum, withholding
of removal, and protection under the Convention Against
Torture (“CAT”). Relevant here, the BIA concluded that Ion
had established neither past persecution nor a well-founded
fear of future persecution in Romania.
Our ruling today does not decide whether the Lapadats
have met all the elements required to attain asylum or the
withholding of removal. Rather, we write to address only
the two errors on which the BIA’s decision rests. First, the
BIA ignored Ion’s credible, highly probative, and potentially
dispositive testimony when it determined that Ion’s
mistreatment was insufficiently severe to constitute
persecution. Ion’s testimony that he was shot in the back,
together with his family’s credible testimony and the
remaining record evidence, collectively compels a finding of
serious harm that rises to the level of past persecution. This
is especially so given the severe assaults, attempted
kidnappings, threats, violence, and mistreatment that the
Lapadats faced in Romania. Second, the BIA erred when it

6

LAPADAT V. BONDI

held that the Roma are not a disfavored group in Romania.
Eliding centuries of anti-Roma abuse in Romania, it
swapped the European Union’s proposed reforms, designed
to aid Europe’s Roma population, with the Romanian
government’s own documented and persecutory conduct
toward the Roma. In our view, the record unmistakably
establishes that the Roma are a disfavored group in Romania.
At base, our opinion today does little more than
accomplish Congress’s goal when it passed the Refugee Act
of 1980. We give proper deference to the BIA’s analysis and
correct its clear missteps, thus preserving our nation’s
systematic procedures for admitting refugees who have been
persecuted in their countries of origin. Accordingly, we
grant Ion’s petition and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
I.
Ion, his wife Simona, and their children—Giovani,
Laura, and Mirabela—are Roma and natives and citizens of
Romania. 1 The Roma—commonly and derogatively known
as “gypsies”—are Europe’s largest ethnic minority,
identifiable by their darker complexions, historically
nomadic lifestyle, and characteristic mode of dress. See
Mihalev v. Ashcroft, 388 F.3d 722, 726 (9th Cir. 2004)
(“There is no question that Gypsies are an identifiable ethnic
group and that being a Gypsy is a protected ground under
§ 208 of the INA.”). The Lapadats lived in Romania until
2013, moved to France for two years, returned to Romania
in 2015, and fled to the United States in 2016. After the
The record also contains an application for Mariana Lapadat—Ion’s
and Simona’s fourth child. The record reflects that Mariana failed to
appear for the merits hearing and was ordered removed in absentia. That
decision was not appealed.
1

LAPADAT V. BONDI

7

Department of Homeland Security served the Lapadats with
notices to appear, they timely sought asylum, withholding of
removal, and protection under CAT, citing the “racial hate”
that they faced living in Romania. Ion submitted the
application, and his wife and four children are named as
derivative asylum applicants.
A.
At the Lapadats’ removal hearing, the IJ found each
testifying family member—Ion, Simona, and Laura—
broadly credible. Over the course of multiple days, they
each testified that they endured years of significant hardship
while living in Romania on account of their Roma ethnicity.
Ion described a particularly harrowing incident from
2007, when he attempted to collect firewood on land that he
said belonged to the city hall. While Ion was collecting
wood, a man appeared and accused him of trespassing. The
man grabbed a rifle from his car and, as Ion apologized and
tried to flee in his horse-drawn cart, the man began cursing
him for being a “gypsy.” The man then opened fire: Ion
heard at least one shot, and bullets struck his back and skull.
Bleeding profusely, Ion rushed to the hospital, only for the
police to take him in for questioning before he could receive
treatment. Once he told the police who shot him, they
refused to take his story, threatened to imprison him if he
tried to press charges, and left him to find his own way home.
As it turns out, the police knew the shooter. Ion luckily made
it back to his family, changed his blood-soaked shirt, and
returned to the hospital, where a doctor discharged him,
casually remarking that he was “not going to die [from]
this.” Ion testified that shards of the bullets remain in his
body to this day.

8

LAPADAT V. BONDI

Simona and Laura credibly shared their own horrifying
story. Laura and her sister, Mariana, were each younger than
fourteen years old when a group of young Romanian men
attempted to abduct them outside of their school, dragging
them into a car while threatening to rape them. Men
frequently harassed and assaulted the girls at school for
being “gypsies,” but had never attempted actual kidnap
before. When Simona tried to stop the men from abducting
her daughters, the men slashed her back with a knife,
threatening to kill her and rape her and her daughters if she
called for help. 2 Thankfully, she thwarted the attack. But a
few days later, before dawn, the men came to the Lapadats’
home and tried to break in, again threatening to rape Simona
and her children if Simona tried to file a complaint with the
police. As with Ion’s shooting, Romanian officials were also
uninterested in prosecuting this crime—the police just
“didn’t believe them” and indicated that they had “no
problem with that.”
That testimony was just the tip of the iceberg. For one,
Ion credibly testified that he was frequently and arbitrarily
detained by police, who often beat him. He described one
such event in detail. In 2011, an officer detained and
handcuffed Ion after he discovered Ion on the streets without
identification after 7:00 p.m. He carted Ion to the police
station and cursed him for being a “gypsy.” While at the
station, the officer did not charge Ion with a crime. Instead,
he slapped Ion across the face twice, kicked him in the
abdomen, and sent him on his way. Apparently, walking
while Roma will get you arrested and beaten, but not
formally charged.
The BIA mistakenly found that the men cut Simona’s hand, but that
factual finding is directly contradicted by the record.
2

LAPADAT V. BONDI

9

Ion also testified that he and his family frequently
struggled to obtain consistent and prompt government or
public services, and that they suffered from pervasive
discrimination.
He described, for example, seeking
treatment at a Romanian hospital for acute appendicitis.
Despite the hospital stating that he needed “urgent” care,
doctors let him languish in pain for two days before
removing his appendix.
It is not just hospitals that refused to accommodate Ion.
Before he left for France, Ion recalls being denied entrance
to a store by a security officer, who pointed to a sign on a
window that said “gypsies and dogs” were not allowed
inside. In a separate incident, a waitress refused to take his
order, explaining the restaurant’s policy of denying services
to Roma people. These types of events also occurred after
he returned to Romania from France. Ion recalls being
denied the simple pleasure of going to a public swimming
pool because the man selling tickets refused him entry and
punched Ion in the chest when he inquired why. Ion’s family
has also experienced discrimination of a similar ilk. Ion’s
brother, for instance, tried to purchase a house in a nonRoma neighborhood. The Romanian residents of that
neighborhood threatened to set his house on fire rather than
let him live there.
As for employment, Ion testified that he had to rely on
the kindness of friends, and like others in his community, he
could not obtain official employment because he is Roma
and has “no right to work in Romania.” No company would
hire him, no office would consider his application, and he
lacked the right documents to secure formal employment.
He testified that hiring personnel turned him away because
he is a “gypsy.” Accordingly, Ion worked odd jobs for other
Romani people—building their fences and houses. When

10

LAPADAT V. BONDI

the Lapadats moved to France, Ion tried to find stable work
but, just as in Romania, he lacked the necessary paperwork
to get a job. So his wife resorted to begging to support them.
Ion also testified at length about his fear of a local police
officer, whom he knows by name and who, like the officer
from the 2011 incident, has repeatedly harassed and beaten
him. This officer made a habit of kicking, slapping, and
threatening Ion with physical harm and false imprisonment,
all because Ion is a “gypsy” and “[y]ou gypsies are idiots.”
That harassment continued when the Lapadats briefly
returned to Romania from France, before making their way
to the United States. One day before the Lapadats left for
the United States, that same officer recognized Ion on the
street. As before, the officer physically assaulted Ion,
slapping him over the head, kicking him, and demanding to
know why he had “crawl[ed]” back to Romania. It seems
that this incident cemented in Ion’s mind that he and his
family were not and would never be safe in their homeland.
The beatings, the shootings, the threatened rape, the
harassment, the discrimination, the unemployment, the
poverty, and the lack of medical attention had taken their toll
on the Lapadats.
B.
The Lapadats’ testimony reflects the experiences of
many Romani people living in Europe and Romania. The
Roma have been marginalized and vilified throughout
Europe for centuries, and are frequently derided as
swindlers, petty criminals, and scum. According to the
European Union (“EU”), anti-Roma “discrimination
continues to be widespread across the EU and is present in
all societies, and in all key areas.” Romania is no exception.
The EU classifies Romania as a “Cluster 1” country, which

LAPADAT V. BONDI

11

means it has one of the largest Roma communities in Europe
and faces the “most acute challenges” relating to
“antigypsyism.” Defined as “the specific racism towards
Roma who are stigmatized as ‘gypsies’ in the public
imagination,” antigypsyism animates severe mistreatment of
the Roma in Romania.
The EU has recently taken measures to combat
antigypsyism in Europe. Starting in 2011, the EU developed
and implemented a “Framework” for national Roma
integration strategies across the continent. Seeking to “close
the gap between Roma and non-Roma in four key areas:
education, employment, healthcare and housing,” the EU’s
Framework “invited Member States to design national Roma
integration strategies.” The record is silent as to whether
Romania has designed or otherwise proposed such a
strategy.
As of 2020, the EU’s Framework had not accomplished
its goals. Relying on survey data, the EU reports that “[a]n
overwhelming majority of [stakeholders] think that the
situation of Roma is worse than that of non-Roma” in all
target areas. And the EU concedes that its Framework has
failed to meaningfully counteract antigypsyism. Since its
inception, EU stakeholders report that while there have been
modest improvements in Roma access to education and
health outcomes, discrimination against Romani populations
in housing and employment has worsened since 2011, and
Roma are generally discriminated against more than they
were before in Europe. Accordingly, the EU projects that
“real impact may not be seen for at least a generation.”
C.
After considering this documentary evidence and Ion’s,
Simona’s, and Laura’s credible testimony, the IJ denied

12

LAPADAT V. BONDI

Ion’s application and his family’s derivative applications for
relief. The BIA affirmed the IJ’s decision. First, although
the BIA concurred with the IJ that Ion had faced
discrimination, it found that the mistreatment that he
suffered in the past “did not rise to the level of persecution.”
Second, the BIA affirmed that the Lapadats could not
establish a well-founded fear of future persecution. It held
that the Roma are not a disfavored group in Romania, given
the EU’s steps to combat anti-Roma sentiment in Europe
through its Framework. And it agreed with the IJ that Ion’s
evidence of past harm was insufficient to show that he would
be “single[d] out and target[ed] for persecution in the
future.” 3 This appeal timely followed.
II.
We have jurisdiction under 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a). When,
as here, “the BIA conducts its own review of the evidence
and law, rather than adopting the IJ’s decision, our review is
limited to the BIA’s decision, except to the extent the IJ’s
opinion is expressly adopted.” 4 Rodriguez v. Holder, 683
The BIA also determined that Ion waived his challenge to the IJ’s denial
of CAT protection. In his briefing before this court and at oral argument,
Ion failed to raise any issues or advance any arguments in favor of relief
under CAT. Accordingly, “petitioners waived review of their CAT
claim.” Tampubolon v. Holder, 610 F.3d 1056, 1058 n.3 (9th Cir. 2010).

3

The dissent suggests that we have ignored the record. Dissent at
37. Not so. We review the IJ’s decision only to the extent that the
agency has expressly adopted the IJ’s reasoning. See Rodriguez, 683
F.3d at 1169; Hosseini v. Gonzales, 471 F.3d 953, 957 (9th Cir. 2006);
Cordon-Garcia v. I.N.S., 204 F.3d 985, 990 (9th Cir. 2000); Ghaly v.
I.N.S., 58 F.3d 1425, 1430 (9th Cir. 1995). Here, although it might be a
close call because the BIA agreed with the IJ’s conclusion that the harm
did not rise to the level of persecution, the BIA conducted its own review

4

LAPADAT V. BONDI

13

F.3d 1164, 1169 (9th Cir. 2012) (citation and quotation
marks omitted). “We review factual findings for substantial
evidence and legal questions de novo.” Guerra v. Barr, 974
F.3d 909, 911 (9th Cir. 2020). We consider factual findings
“conclusive unless any reasonable adjudicator would be
compelled to conclude to the contrary.”
8 U.S.C.
§ 1252(b)(4)(B). “While this standard is deferential,
‘deference does not mean blindness.’” Parada v. Sessions,
902 F.3d 901, 909 (9th Cir. 2018) (quoting Nguyen v.
Holder, 763 F.3d 1022, 1029 (9th Cir. 2014)).
III.
To qualify for asylum, Ion must demonstrate that he “is
unable or unwilling” to return to Romania “because of
persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on account
of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular
social group, or political opinion.” Melkonian v. Ashcroft,
320 F.3d 1061, 1064 (9th Cir. 2003) (quoting 8 U.S.C.
§ 1101(a)(42)(A)). To be well-founded, Ion’s “fear of
persecution must be both subjectively genuine and
objectively reasonable.” Sael v. Ashcroft, 386 F.3d 922, 924
(9th Cir. 2004). As is the case here, “[a]n applicant ‘satisfies
the subjective component by credibly testifying that [he]
genuinely fears persecution.’” Id. (quoting Mgoian v. I.N.S.,
184 F.3d 1029, 1035 (9th Cir. 1999)). The objective
component can be established in two different ways: either
of the evidence and relied on the IJ’s reasoning regarding only four out
of the five harms discussed. The shooting—the most severe harm—was
absent from the BIA’s consideration. Thus, we review only the BIA’s
decision and disregard the IJ’s discussion of the shooting, as the BIA did
not expressly adopt—or even mention—that discussion.
Regardless, even if we look to the IJ’s reasoning, it is clear that the IJ
also erred. See infra Section III.A.i.2.

14

LAPADAT V. BONDI

by demonstrating (1) past persecution or (2) a well-founded
fear of future persecution. See Ratnam v. I.N.S., 154 F.3d
990, 994 (9th Cir. 1998). If an applicant demonstrates past
persecution, “then fear of future persecution is presumed.”
Deloso v. Ashcroft, 393 F.3d 858, 863 (9th Cir. 2005).
Here, the BIA affirmed the IJ’s holding that Ion failed to
establish either past persecution or a well-founded fear of
future persecution. Ion raises challenges to both objectivecomponent determinations, and we consider each in turn.
See Flores Molina v. Garland, 37 F.4th 626, 630, 637 (9th
Cir. 2022).
A.
We acknowledge that our standard of review for pastpersecution determinations appears to be in flux. In Kaur v.
Wilkinson, we held that “[w]hether particular acts constitute
persecution for asylum purposes is a legal question reviewed
de novo.” 986 F.3d 1216, 1221 (9th Cir. 2021) (alterations
omitted) (quoting Boer-Sedano v. Gonzales, 418 F.3d 1082,
1088 (9th Cir. 2005)). But we have also held that we “review
for substantial evidence the BIA’s particular determination
that a petitioner’s past harm ‘does not amount to past
persecution.’” Sharma v. Garland, 9 F.4th 1052, 1060 (9th
Cir. 2021) (alteration omitted) (quoting Villegas Sanchez v.
Garland, 990 F.3d 1173, 1179 (9th Cir. 2021)). Other
circuits’ decisions reflect this intra-circuit inconsistency.
See Xue v. Lynch, 846 F.3d 1099, 1105 n.11 (10th Cir. 2017)
(explaining that “[t]he circuits are split as to the standard of
review applicable to the question [of] whether an undisputed
set of facts constitute persecution” and collecting cases).
Since 2021, our colleagues have thoughtfully explained why
we ought to consider reviewing past-persecution
determinations de novo, seeing as our review generally

LAPADAT V. BONDI

15

requires the “application of a legal standard to settled facts.”
Flores Molina, 37 F.4th at 640 (Korman, J., concurring). 5
Like many panels before us, 6 we need not resolve this
question today. Here, the record compels our conclusion
that Ion experienced persecutory treatment under either
standard of review.
i.
To establish past persecution, Ion must demonstrate
(1) serious harm “ris[ing] to the level of persecution”;
(2) that “the persecution was committed by the government,
or by forces that the government was unable or unwilling to
In their concurring opinions in Fon v. Garland, Judge Graber and Judge
Collins present competing concerns about resolving this standard-ofreview issue. 34 F.4th 810 (9th Cir. 2022). Judge Graber recommends
“a middle way” for this mixed question of law and fact, in which we
adapt our review of a past-persecution determination depending on
whether the question “entails primarily legal or factual work.” Id. at
816–17 (Graber, J., concurring). Judge Collins rejoins that “the question
is actually quite a bit more complicated” than Judge Graber suggests, and
he reasons that her path is foreclosed by our and the Supreme Court’s
precedent. Id. at 819–20 (Collins, J., concurring).

5

6
See, e.g., Singh v. Garland, 97 F.4th 597, 603 (9th Cir. 2024) (“We
need not address which standard should apply because the harm suffered
by Singh rose to the level of persecution even under the substantial
evidence standard, which affords greater deference to the BIA’s
determinations.”); Flores Molina, 37 F.4th at 633 n.2 (applying the
“more deferential ‘substantial evidence’ standard” to avoid “discuss[ing]
the nuances” of the competing standards); Singh v. Garland, 57 F.4th
643, 652 (9th Cir. 2023) (declining to address the competing standards
because “the harm [Singh] suffered rose to the level of persecution under
the more deferential ‘substantial evidence’” standard (alteration in
original) (quoting Flores Molina, 37 F.4th at 633 n.2)); Fon, 34 F.4th at
823 (Collins, J., concurring) (“[G]iven that the Petitioner here prevails
even if we apply a more deferential standard of review to the agency’s
decision, this is not [the] case [to clarify the standard of review].”).

16

LAPADAT V. BONDI

control”; and (3) that “the persecution was on account of one
or more protected grounds.” Kaur, 986 F.3d at 1221. Like
in Flores Molina, here the BIA reached only the first
element, finding that the Lapadats failed to establish a pastpersecution claim because the harms they suffered did not
rise to the level of persecution. See 37 F.4th at 633. The
BIA erred in concluding so and in dismissing the pastpersecution claim. Accordingly, we address only the first
element of the past-persecution claim.
We assess a past-persecution finding by “looking at the
cumulative effect of all the incidents [that the] [p]etitioner
has suffered.” Singh v. I.N.S., 134 F.3d 962, 967 (9th Cir.
1998). In Sharma v. Garland, we identified seven factors to
guide a past-persecution analysis: physical injury or
violence; “isolated” or “ongoing pattern[s] of serious
maltreatment”; length and quality of detention; evidence of
“threats” that “are repeated, specific[,] and combined with
confrontation or other mistreatment”; harm to family and
friends; “substantial economic deprivation that constitutes a
threat to life or freedom”; or “political and social turmoil.”
9 F.4th at 1060–63 (citations and quotation marks omitted).
No single factor is necessarily dispositive, and the list is nonexhaustive; but Sharma’s factors provide a helpful set of
relevant indicia to assess whether mistreatment rises to the
level of persecution, which is “an extreme concept” that
eclipses mere harassment or discrimination. Ghaly v. I.N.S.,
58 F.3d 1425, 1431 (9th Cir. 1995).
1.
The record makes clear that Ion demonstrated harm
rising to the level of persecution when he credibly testified
that he was shot in the back for collecting firewood. This is
not a close case. As we noted in Sharma, “physical

LAPADAT V. BONDI

17

violence” is “often a significant consideration” to a pastpersecution analysis, and “when we have granted petitions
for review because the record compelled a finding of past
persecution,” we have frequently done so because the
petitioner “experienced serious physical violence.” 9 F.4th
at 1061. “There is no question” that “assaults on one’s life,
family and business”—like, say, shooting someone—is
serious physical violence, “ris[ing] to the level of
persecution.” Singh v. I.N.S., 94 F.3d 1353, 1360 (9th Cir.
1996); see also Kaur, 986 F.3d at 1223 (“[W]e have held that
attempted murder constitutes persecution.” (citing Lopez v.
Ashcroft, 366 F.3d 799, 803 (9th Cir. 2004))); Madrigal v.
Holder, 716 F.3d 499, 504 n.2 (9th Cir. 2013).
2.
The BIA affirmed the IJ’s denial of Ion’s petition on
past-persecution grounds, determining that the abuse he
suffered did not reach the level of persecution. It committed
legal and factual errors in the process.
First, the BIA declined to consider or mention the
shooting in its past-persecution analysis, despite Ion’s clear
testimony that he was shot in the back. For its part, the IJ
not only minimized the shooting, but mischaracterized it by
noting that “[Ion] was physically harmed in the sense that he
was shot at by an individual for trespassing onto property,”
and that the shooting was “isolated.” The statement “in the
sense that he was shot at,” is vague and makes unclear the
extent of the harm Ion suffered. Moreover, saying that he
was merely “shot at” is incorrect. Ion was struck with a
bullet in the back and the head, where bullet fragments
remain today.
He was clearly physically harmed.
Considering that the IJ had found Ion’s testimony credible,

18

LAPADAT V. BONDI

the IJ knew this. And pretending otherwise, or minimizing
it, is not supported by substantial evidence.
The BIA did not mention, much less explicitly adopt, this
aspect of the IJ’s decision when it affirmed the IJ’s pastpersecution finding. Accordingly, we are bound to consider
the BIA’s decision on this point, see Rodriguez, 683 F.3d at
1169, and its oversight was legal error, see Flores Molina,
37 F.4th at 632 (“Where the BIA does not consider all the
evidence before it, either by ‘misstating the record [or]
failing to mention highly probative or potentially dispositive
evidence,’ its decision is legal error and ‘cannot stand.’”
(alteration in original) (quoting Cole v. Holder, 659 F.3d
762, 772 (9th Cir. 2011))).
Second, the IJ held, and the BIA agreed, that the
Lapadats’ other evidence of maltreatment “did not rise to the
level of persecution.” After considering and rejecting the
“isolated” shooting, the IJ characterized the attempted
kidnapping of the Lapadats’ daughters as an abhorrent-butnot-persecutory crime under our precedent. The IJ then
rejected as insufficiently persecutory a laundry list of abuse
(like being denied healthcare, work, and access to public
pools and restaurants), as well as criminal acts, police
beatings, and threats—each stretching across years. This too
was error.
3.
The shooting, the attempted kidnapping and the rape and
death threats—accompanied by the Lapadats’ credible
testimony regarding an ongoing pattern of serious
maltreatment—collectively compel a finding of harm rising

LAPADAT V. BONDI

19

to the level of persecution. 7 See Gu v. Gonzales, 454 F.3d
1014, 1020 (9th Cir. 2006). We have held as much in similar
cases. In Korablina v. I.N.S., for example, we considered a
petition by a Jewish woman who suffered a physical attack
on her life, watched other Jewish individuals suffer physical
attacks, struggled to secure employment, and received
threatening phone calls. 158 F.3d 1038, 1044–45 (9th Cir.
1998). In reversing the BIA’s past-persecution finding, we
held that “[w]here evidence of a specific threat on [a
petitioner]’s life . . . is presented in conjunction with
evidence of political and social turmoil, the [petitioner] has
succeeded in establishing a prima facie eligibility for
The dissent disagrees that the attempted kidnapping, and the rape and
death threats rise to the level of persecution, but in doing so, the dissent
conflates prong one with prong three. Dissent at 40–48. To meet prong
one and establish a qualifying harm, a petitioner does not need to also
prove prong three—whether the persecution was motivated on account
of a protected ground. In Gormley v. Ashcroft, for example, we did not
consider whether the perpetrators “victimized [the petitioner] on account
of his race” or whether they were “groups that the government is
unwilling or unable to control” until the analysis of the second and third
prongs. 364 F.3d 1172, 1177 (9th Cir. 2004); see also Navas v. I.N.S.,
217 F.3d 646, 658–61 (9th Cir. 2000) (identifying two distinct issues—
whether the petitioner had demonstrated persecution and “whether the
persecution was on account of [his] political opinion”—and proceeding
to analyze them separately).
7

We decide today only that the Lapadats have established the first prong
of the past-persecution claim—serious harm “ris[ing] to the level of
persecution.” See Kaur, 986 F.3d at 1221. We leave the other two
prongs—including whether the persecution was motivated on account of
a “protected ground”—to the agency to determine in the first instance.
See id.
We do not dispute that the Lapadats must satisfy all three prongs in order
to prevail on their asylum claim, but we rebut the assertion that prong
three subsumes the first prong.

20

LAPADAT V. BONDI

asylum.” Id. at 1045. Likewise, in Guo v. Sessions, we
considered a Christian Chinese citizen’s petition for asylum.
897 F.3d 1208, 1213 (9th Cir. 2018). Drawing on our
decision in Korablina, we reversed the BIA, and we held that
the record “compel[led] a finding of past persecution”
because police beat the petitioner, even though the beating
resulted in “no permanent injuries”; the beating required a
hospital stay; and the petitioner received a short detention,
was forced to disavow his faith, and was impeded from
practicing it. Id. at 1215. Or take our decision in Baballah
v. Ashcroft, where we considered an Israeli citizen’s petition
for asylum based on mistreatment that he received for his
parents’ “mixed marriage.” 367 F.3d 1067, 1071 (9th Cir.
2004). The Baballah petitioner presented evidence that
Israeli citizens and officials “shot bullets in the air over” his
fishing boat; sprayed him, his brother, and his boat with
“pressurized water in freezing weather” in an apparent effort
to sink it; called him religious and ethnic slurs; “made it
impossible” for the petitioner “to earn a living”; and
“refused” to employ his family members. Id. at 1071–72.
We reversed the BIA because, “[w]hen analyzed in the
aggregate, the physical assaults and economic harassment
endured by [the petitioner] compel a finding of persecution.”
Id. at 1076.
Our recent decision in Kaur is also instructive. 986 F.3d
at 1219. There, we addressed a petition by an Indian
petitioner largely based on an attempted rape connected to
her political beliefs, and we determined that the BIA’s
rejection of her petition was “marred by legal error.” Id. at
1219, 1222. First, we held that “[s]imilar to attempted
murder and attempted kidnapping, attempted rape almost
always constitutes persecution.” Id. at 1224. After all, “in
evaluating whether past treatment rises to the level of

LAPADAT V. BONDI

21

persecution, we do not look to the level of harm experienced
by the petitioner.” Id. at 1226. It is the “treatment” that
counts. Id. (quoting Mihalev, 388 F.3d at 729). Second, we
held that it was “plain on the record” that petitioner “suffered
past persecution.” Id. at 1227. In addition to the attempted
rape, petitioner “endured death threats,” and her parents
“were attacked on multiple occasions.” Id. We found such
evidence sufficient to compel a finding of mistreatment
rising to the level of persecution. 8 Id.
Trying to compare harms between past and present
petitioners is often a perverse task. But we conclude that the
Lapadats’ persecution is plain on the record and falls
squarely within the bounds established by our precedent. “It
is, of course, ‘well established that physical violence is
persecution under 8 U.S.C. § 1001(a)(42)(A).’” Parada,
902 F.3d at 909 (quoting Li v. Holder, 559 F.3d 1096, 1107
(9th Cir. 2009)). Like the Korablina and Baballah
The dissent invokes Beskovic v. Gonzales, 467 F.3d 223, 226 (2d Cir.
2006), for the proposition that the degree of harm suffered “must be
assessed with regard to the context in which the mistreatment occurs.”
Dissent at 43. In other words, if the harm suffered is not connected to a
protected ground, it necessarily cannot amount to harm rising to the level
of persecution. But that is not what Beskovic stands for. Beskovic
elaborated that “even mistreatment that, in other contexts, could fairly be
characterized as the mere annoyance and distress of harassment can take
on an entirely different character when officially inflicted on an
individual while detained on account of [a] protected ground[].” Id. at
226 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). First, being shot and
receiving death and rape threats can hardly be considered a “mere
annoyance and distress.” Second, Beskovic explains a one-way ratchet—
harassment and mistreatment that would typically not be considered a
harm rising to the level of persecution might be considered such a harm
when it is motivated by a protected ground. Beskovic does not provide
a general rule allowing courts to downgrade or disregard severe harms
(like being shot) simply because prong three is not satisfied.
8

22

LAPADAT V. BONDI

petitioners, each of whom recounted assaults that could have
turned deadly, Ion too experienced a violent physical attack
on his life. 9 His account of being cursed and shot—and then
dragged by the police from the hospital, blood soaking his
clothes, only to have those same police threaten to imprison
him for reporting the crime—is chilling. Indeed, he must
relive this experience every time he contemplates the
shrapnel still embedded in his body. In our opinion, this
shooting eclipses the harm we deemed sufficient in Guo,
where petitioner testified to “repeated baton blows” to parts
of his body by police, which required a hospital examination
but left no lasting injuries. 897 F.3d at 1215.
Likewise, the attempted kidnapping of Laura and
Mariana, and the threatened rape and threatened murder of
the girls and their mother, echo the events described in Kaur.
As we explained there, “some forms of physical violence,”
like “attempted murder and attempted kidnapping,” “are so
extreme that even attempts to commit them constitute
persecution.” 10 See Kaur, 986 F.3d at 1223–24; see also
The dissent criticizes our reliance on Korablina, Baballah, and Kaur
because, in those cases, the persecutory conduct was connected to a
protected ground. Dissent at 53. The dissent’s concern is unwarranted.
Of course, when you discuss all three prongs of a past-persecution claim,
like in Korablina and Baballah, prongs one and three may bleed
together. And in Kaur, it is unsurprising that the court repeatedly
mentioned that the persecutory conduct was motivated on a protected
ground because it was “uncontested that Kaur had suffered past physical
abuse and death threats on account of her political opinion.” 986 F.3d at
1222. Thus, we do not read those cases as precluding us from analyzing
only prong one—persecutory conduct—particularly when that is the
only prong addressed by the BIA here.

9

The dissent’s quibbling with the Lapadats’ characterization of the
shooting as “attempted murder,” dissent at 46, misses the mark. What is

10

LAPADAT V. BONDI

23

Sangha v. I.N.S., 103 F.3d 1482, 1487 (9th Cir. 1997)
(attempting to forcibly conscript a petitioner, which was
tantamount to attempted kidnapping, constituted
persecution). Indeed, those moments appear seared in
Laura’s mind: she still cries each time she recalls this
incident, making tangible the Kaur court’s thoughtful
explanation that loss of “bodily autonomy” causes severe
psychological damage. 986 F.3d at 1224–25 (explaining that
attempted rape and sexual assault impose “severe
psychological effects,” like shame, clouded memory, selfblame, and a “pervasive feeling of loss of control”). And the
Lapadats’ fear of further violence from this incident is
justified—the men, after all, returned to the Lapadats’ home,
threatening to kill and rape them if Simona or the girls tried
to go to the police.
These events, when considered in the context of the
ongoing mistreatment that the Lapadats experienced, compel
a finding of maltreatment rising to the level of persecution.
As we noted in Sharma, “serious maltreatment that is
sustained and recurring is more likely to compel the
conclusion of past persecution” when it is “[i]n combination
with other indicia of persecution.” 9 F.4th at 1061; see also
Korablina, 158 F.3d at 1045 (holding that the conjunction of
social unrest and a credible threat on a petitioner’s life
satisfied the past-persecution standard). Ion’s shooting and
his daughters’ attempted kidnapping did not occur in
relevant is that Ion was shot in the back and the head. Whether the
shooting can be characterized as an attempted murder is not dispositive
because, regardless of the verbiage used, as we outline above, “serious
physical violence,” such as being shot, is sufficient to establish
persecution. See Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1061; see also Guo, 897 F.3d at
1215 (noting that “it would be a strange rule if the absence or presence
of a broken arm were the dispositive fact”).

24

LAPADAT V. BONDI

isolation, contrary to what the IJ held. 11 Far from it. That
“contention disregards the reality that . . . persecution was
ongoing”: the Lapadats, like many Romani people, had been
mistreated by the police and Romanian public for years
because of their ethnicity. Guo, 897 F.3d at 1216. Ion
testified to repeated harassment and beatings by Romanian
police and his inability to secure meaningful or formal
employment, basic healthcare, or public services. And both
he and his family recounted the death, rape, and arson threats
that they have endured. Such pernicious maltreatment
clearly satisfies the past-persecution criteria established in
our caselaw. See Ahmed v. Keisler, 504 F.3d 1183, 1194
(9th Cir. 2007) (“Where an asylum applicant suffers
[physical harm and threats] on more than one occasion . . . ,
the cumulative effect of the harms is severe enough that no
reasonable fact-finder could conclude that it did not rise to
the level of persecution.”).
For its part, the government asks us to discount the
persecution that the Lapadats suffered because it produced
no “lasting injuries.” Our law has never imposed such a
requirement. See Guo, 897 F.3d at 1215 (“[A] beating ‘may
constitute persecution, even when there are no long-term
effects and the [petitioner] does not seek medical attention.’”
(second alteration in original and citation omitted)). Indeed,
we’ve routinely held the opposite. In Kaur, for example, we
considered and rejected the BIA’s attempts to require a
And even if the shooting and attempted kidnappings were the only
persecutory acts in the record, those standing alone would be sufficient.
It is clear beyond peradventure that a single, “isolated,” persecutory act
can—and often does—amount to harm reaching the level of persecution
if that act is sufficiently severe. See, e.g., Kaur, 986 F.3d at 1224 (noting
that “attempted murder[,] attempted kidnapping, [and] attempted rape
almost always constitutes persecution”).
11

LAPADAT V. BONDI

25

petitioner to produce “evidence of ongoing trauma or
psychological treatment to establish a claim to past
persecution on account of attempted rape.” 986 F.3d at
1225–26. Holding that such a view is legal error, we
determined that, when evaluating “whether past treatment
rises to the level of persecution, we do not look to the level
of harm experienced by the petitioner.” Id. at 1226
(emphasis added). Rather, we look at the “conduct of the
persecutor.” Id. Or, as we put it more colloquially in
Mihalev, “it would be a strange rule if the absence or
presence of a broken arm were the dispositive fact” for a
past-persecution finding. 388 F.3d at 730 (overturning
agency’s past-persecution finding, despite petitioner’s lack
of “serious bodily injury”). Here, the “treatment” Ion
suffered was extreme: he was shot for being a “gypsy.” The
“treatment” his wife and children suffered was also extreme:
Simona was slashed for attempting to protect her daughters
from an attempted kidnapping and threatened rape. We
would “miss[] the forest for the trees,” Guo, 897 F.3d at
1215, if we required the Lapadats to prove that they suffered
lasting injuries from these assaults in order to demonstrate
persecution.
Additionally, the underlying conduct described in the
three decisions cited by the BIA to support its findings bears
no resemblance to the violence, threats, and mistreatment
that the Lapadats have experienced. In Fisher v. I.N.S., for
example, we denied an Iranian petitioner’s appeal based in
part on inadequately persecutory police conduct. 79 F.3d
955, 959 (9th Cir. 1996). In that case, Iranian police
questioned and detained the petitioner for attending a party
at a male friend’s home where that friend wore a bathing suit;
ordered her, albeit at gunpoint, to cover her hair beneath her
chador; and visited her family home seeking information

26

LAPADAT V. BONDI

about potential political dissidents. Id. That conduct left the
Fisher petitioner “ill,” id. at 960, but it hardly resembles (and
pales in comparison to) the persecution suffered by the
Lapadats. The BIA and the dissent also invoked Gormley v.
Ashcroft, but that case is inapposite. 364 F.3d 1172, 1177–
78 (9th Cir. 2004). The Gormley petitioner experienced a
few robberies committed by “anonymous thieves” who the
government would willingly punish if they could. Id. at
1177–81. He also stated that white men like himself
struggled to find jobs in post-apartheid South Africa. Id. at
1175; see also Hussain v. Rosen, 985 F.3d 634, 646–47 (9th
Cir. 2021) (dismissing civil unrest and violence that harmed
petitioner because it was “the result of a general attack on
the town” and did not involve “any individualized physical
attacks or threats”). None of “these factual scenarios are
close to the sustained, repeated, specific” threats and
violence to which Ion was subjected. Flores Molina, 37
F.4th at 637. There is no evidence in the record that targeted
shootings and attempted kidnappings are “all too common”
“general conditions” in Romania. Cf. Gormley, 364 F.3d at
1177 (concluding that robberies “are an all too common
byproduct of civil unrest and economic turmoil” in South
Africa).
The dissent also relies on Gormley (and a host of other
cases) for the proposition that “not all incidents qualify as
persecution,” such as discrimination or harassment or other
general conditions like criminal activity. Dissent at 41–42.
We agree, but those are far from the circumstances presented
here. Additionally, none of those cases hold that whether an
incident is a “general condition” hinges on whether the
harmful conduct is motivated by the petitioner’s status. See
id. (finding that two robberies did not rise to the level of

LAPADAT V. BONDI

27

persecution because “robberies of this sort are an all too
common byproduct of civil unrest and economic turmoil”).
In sum, by properly applying our caselaw to the entirety
of the record, any reasonable factfinder would be compelled
to find that Ion’s past experiences “rose to the level of
persecution.” Baghdasaryan v. Holder, 592 F.3d 1018, 1023
(9th Cir. 2010). On remand, the BIA must address the
remaining elements of Ion’s claim for asylum based on past
persecution. 12 Assuming that Ion satisfies those elements, a
“rebuttable presumption of a well-founded fear arises,” and
the government has the burden to prove “that there has been
a fundamental change in circumstances such that the
applicant no longer has a well-founded fear.” Tawadrus v.
Ashcroft, 364 F.3d 1099, 1103 (9th Cir. 2004) (citation and
quotation marks omitted).
B.
Because the BIA must still address whether Ion’s
persecutory treatment was on account of his Roma ethnicity
and whether Romanian officials were unable or unwilling to
protect him, we also consider Ion’s challenge to the BIA’s
determination that he failed to demonstrate a well-founded
fear of future persecution. See Flores Molina, 37 F.4th at
637. “An asylum applicant demonstrates a well-founded
Specifically, the BIA must determine whether Ion’s persecution was
on account of one or more of the five protected grounds, and that the
persecution was committed either by the government or by forces that
the government was unable or unwilling to control. See Chand v. I.N.S.,
222 F.3d 1066, 1073 (9th Cir. 2000). As discussed, the “record evidence
strongly suggests that” Ion was persecuted on account of his Roma
ethnicity, often by government officials and police, and that those police
were unwilling to do anything to protect him or his family. Flores
Molina, 37 F.4th at 637 n.5. But “that is a determination the agency must
make in the first instance.” Id.
12

28

LAPADAT V. BONDI

fear of future persecution in either of two ways”: (1) by
showing a “pattern or practice of persecution” for similarly
situated people or (2) by demonstrating that he “is a member
of a ‘disfavored group’” and is “likely to be targeted as a
member of that group.” Sael, 386 F.3d at 925 (internal
quotations and citations omitted). Ion chose the latter route.
Under our disfavored-group precedent, we have held that the
relationship between disfavored-group status and individual
risk is “correlational”: “the more serious and widespread the
threat of persecution to the group, the less individualized the
threat of persecution needs to be.” Mgoian, 184 F.3d at 1035
n.4. And we require the BIA to “evaluate all relevant
evidence in the record to determine whether [a petitioner]
carried her burden” of proving a fear of future persecution.
Davila v. Barr, 968 F.3d 1136, 1143 (9th Cir. 2020).
i.
This record compels a finding that the Roma are a
disfavored group in Romania. 13 A “disfavored group” is “a
group of individuals in a certain country or part of a country,
all of whom share a common, protected characteristic, many
of whom are mistreated, and a substantial number of whom
are persecuted.” Wakkary v. Holder, 558 F.3d 1049, 1052
(9th Cir. 2009). In Sael, we held that Indonesia’s Chinese
minority were a “disfavored group” because of Indonesia’s
centuries-long history of anti-Chinese persecution, which
included near genocidal pogroms, bloody riots, and burned
homes. 386 F.3d at 925–26, 929. In reversing the BIA’s
well-founded fear analysis, we determined that Indonesia’s
anti-Chinese history outweighed the economic success that
some ethnic Chinese had recently enjoyed in the country, as
well as the Indonesian government’s official policies
13

The dissent does not dispute this finding.

LAPADAT V. BONDI

29

promoting ethnic tolerance. Id. at 929. So too in
Tampubolon v. Holder, where we held that “Christian
Indonesians” are a disfavored group. 610 F.3d 1056, 1062
(9th Cir. 2010). Like the Sael court, the Tampubolon court
considered the Indonesian government’s failure to
adequately protect the rights of its religious minorities, the
country’s history of violently persecuting Christian
residents, and its official and private acts of discrimination.
Id. at 1060–62. By contrast, in Halim v. Holder, we held that
the petitioner had not carried his burden of demonstrating
that ethnic Chinese were still a disfavored group in
Indonesia.
590 F.3d 971, 979 (9th Cir. 2009).
Distinguishing Sael, the Halim court renewed its focus on
“the government’s perspective,” noting that “the materials
before the court indicate that the Indonesian government
does not condone discrimination against ethnic Chinese.”
Id. After all, “the Indonesian ‘government has taken
concrete steps to suppress ethnic and religious violence and
to encourage reconciliation between opposing groups.’” Id.
(quoting Lolong v. Gonzales, 484 F.3d 1173, 1181 (9th Cir.
2007)).
Here, any reasonable factfinder would be compelled to
conclude that the Roma are a disfavored group in Romania.
As in Sael and Tampubolon, the record evidence documents
centuries of anti-Roma persecution and violence throughout
Romania and Europe. Often derided as swindlers, thieves,
beggars, and scum, European Roma have been viciously
persecuted for centuries. In the 1930s and 1940s, Nazi racial
ideology put Romani, Jewish, and Black people at the
bottom of the racial scale, and the Nazi extermination of the
Romani was so thorough that it led to the extinction of the
Bohemian Romani language in 1970. Those pernicious
sentiments have not abated with time.
Thomas

30

LAPADAT V. BONDI

Hammarberg, Council of Europe Commissioner for Human
Rights, notes that “today’s rhetoric against the Roma is very
similar to the one used by Nazis and fascists before the mass
killings started in the thirties and forties.” Put simply, the
Roma have endured centuries of exclusion and deprivation
at the hands of their European compatriots.
Romania’s persecution and mistreatment of its Roma
population is particularly severe. Although Romania has
one of the largest Roma populations in Europe, antigypsyism
pervades private and public life throughout the country.
According to the Romania 2018 Human Rights Report (the
“2018 Report”), “endemic official corruption and police
violence against the Roma” is a major problem, and Romani
groups complain that police harassment, brutality, and
beatings are routine. As was the case for Ion, officers assault
Romani people who use public spaces for improper
purposes. One example included officers using “excessive
force against two Romani teenagers caught fishing in a
public park.” Indeed, the 2018 Report and the record abound
with examples of police and constables mistreating and
abusing Romani people. This type of mistreatment is welltolerated by Romania’s government. As discussed in the
2018 Report, the European Court of Human Rights ruled that
the Romanian justice system has failed to deliver just
outcomes in cases of police brutality against Romani
individuals. Likewise, the Romani Center for Social
Intervention and Studies found that, in forty-three cases of
police brutality against Roma people over the previous
twelve years, there were no convictions at the national level.
The reason? Prosecutors refused to take the cases to court.
Unlike in Halim, the record here also reflects that
Romania’s local and national government takes a permissive
view of antigypsyism. In 2010, for example, a member of

LAPADAT V. BONDI

31

Romania’s ruling Liberal Democratic Party sponsored
legislation that would rename the Roma “Tigan,” which
derives from the Greek word “untouchable” and is analogous
to “n****r” in the United States. He claimed that “those
Gypsy fellows in Transylvania who wear big hats” supported
the move. Critics pushed back, describing Roma outrage
towards the legislation and noting that such a name-change
likely violates international law, given that it deprives the
Roma of their right to self-determination. The legislation
was quickly withdrawn, but the damage was done.
Likewise, right-wing political representatives have proposed
that Roma women be sterilized, endorsing plans to offer
money to any Romani woman willing to take them up on the
offer. Additionally, and despite prohibitions on educational
and physical segregation, several non-governmental
organizations and news outlets report that Roma are still
physically separated from their non-Roma peers. This
includes government-sponsored walls sealing off
“Romanian gypsy ghetto[s]”—a modern simulacrum of the
Josefov in Prague or the Judengasse in Frankfurt. Romanian
authorities also frequently and arbitrarily deny governmentsponsored pensions to Romani Holocaust survivors,
misclassifying them as “resettled” and “not deported” to
concentration camps during the war.
As in Tampubolon, Romania’s Roma “have also suffered
private discrimination and marginalization by the general
populace.” 610 F.3d at 1061. The 2018 Report describes
broad “societal discrimination against Roma.” Roma are
consistently denied access to, or refused service in, many
public spaces. They lack employment opportunities, and
they are frequently denied adequate health care and
educational opportunities.
News outlets report that
Romanian Roma also face mass evictions. Indeed, one

32

LAPADAT V. BONDI

article details an incident in which a municipal government
gave 400 Roma two days’ notice of eviction before
removing them from their homes and placing them in a
“garbage-dump” encampment on the outskirts of the city.
Likewise, Romani people’s “lack of identity documents”
leaves many of them unable to participate in elections,
receive social benefits, access health insurance, or
participate in the labor market. Other mistreatment is quieter
but no less pervasive, and it is just as pernicious. The terms
“gypsy and cheater have been so interchangeable historically
that the word has entered the English language as a verb: he
gypped me.” Prominent Romanian and European thinkers
have written articles stating that “‘Gypsies’ are culturally
inclined towards theft[,] and [they] use their minority status
to ‘blackmail’ the majority.” Romanian academics have
even claimed that Romani music increases aggressiveness
and limits self-control, suggesting a “correlation” between
preference for Romani music and “low cognitive skills.”
Taken together, it is unsurprising that Romani people have a
higher unemployment rate and a lower life expectancy than
their non-Roma peers in Romania.
Given this robust record of Roma mistreatment, the BIA
conceded that “Roma individuals continue to experience
discrimination and harassment” in Romania. But the BIA
summarily discounted those concerns because the European
Union’s Framework “attempt[s] to address issues
experienced by Roma individuals” in Europe. By doing so,
the BIA appears to adopt the view that we analyze whether
a group is disfavored from the perspective of supranational
organizations and not national governments. That approach
distorts our precedent. “One factor critical to both a showing
of ‘disfavor’ as well as individual targeting is the
government’s perspective.” Halim, 590 F.3d at 979. The

LAPADAT V. BONDI

33

European Union is not a “government” under Halim. Id.
And its policies are irrelevant, absent evidence that the
country to which a petitioner faces removal has adopted and
implemented them. After all, a “refugee” is one “who is
outside any country of such person’s nationality” or country
of habitual residence and is “unable or unwilling to return to
. . . that country because of persecution or a well-founded
fear of persecution.” 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42) (emphasis
added).
Moreover, under the removal statute, we remove
noncitizens to “countries,” not to regional collectives of
states. See 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(1) et seq.; 8 U.S.C.
§ 1158(c)(1)(A) (providing that a noncitizen granted asylum
shall not be removed or returned to his “country of
nationality” or, absent a nationality, his country of “last
habitual residence”); 8 C.F.R. § 241.15(a) (granting
“discretion” to remove a noncitizen to “any country
described in section 241(b)” of 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)). Indeed,
our entire focus for a fear-of-future-persecution analysis
centers on a petitioner’s fear of being removed to his country
of origin or habitual residence. That is why we focus on
“government” policies and practices. See, e.g., Tampubolon,
610 F.3d at 1061 (considering whether the “Indonesian
government discriminates against Christians”); Sael, 386
F.3d at 929 (weighing whether “the Indonesian
government[’s]” official policy of “ethnic tolerance”
outweighs evidence of “[o]fficial discrimination” by the
government); Castro-Martinez v. Holder, 674 F.3d 1073,
1078 (9th Cir. 2011) (considering “the Mexican
government’s efforts to prevent violence and discrimination
against homosexuals”); Kotasz v. I.N.S., 31 F.3d 847, 854
n.12 (9th Cir. 1994) (“[T]he Hungarian government ha[s]
instituted a variety of programs specifically designed to

34

LAPADAT V. BONDI

improve the gypsies’ economic situation.”). It would be
peculiar if we permitted the policy goals of a supranational
coalition of states to obviate or otherwise negate the conduct
of a single state. Absent evidence to the contrary, the former
has no bearing on the latter.
Regardless, even if the BIA were permitted to impute the
EU’s efforts to combat antigypsyism onto the Romanian
government, the record still compels a finding that the Roma
are a disfavored group in Romania. Although official
attempts to counteract discrimination are relevant, “[w]hen
a minority group’s ‘disfavored’ status is rooted in centuries
of persecution, year-to-year fluctuations cannot reasonably
be viewed as disposing of an applicant’s claim.” Sael, 386
F.3d at 929. Here, the EU does not report on the success of
its Framework in individual countries or member states. Nor
does it report on how extensively any member state has
adopted its proposed measures to combat antigypsyism. At
best, it provides a table summarizing thirty-nine measures
that member states can “report,” each of which promote
Roma integration. Of those thirty-nine measures, Romania
“reported” ten of them: six of which related to “education”
(including one measure labeled “Other”); one related to
“employment” (the measure labeled “Other”); one related to
“healthcare;” and two related to housing (again, reporting
the measure labeled “Other”).
There is little that we can glean from Romania’s
“reporting” of these measures. Instead, we are left with the
EU’s assessment of the situation in Europe overall: (1) “no
real improvements can be seen on the ground” in combatting
discrimination; (2) there has been some attention given to
changing educational segregation; (3) “Roma participation
in the labour market remains very weak”; and (4) “[t]ackling
the health inequalities endured by Roma remains an ongoing

LAPADAT V. BONDI

35

challenge.” Or, as the EU puts it: “Roma exclusion and
discrimination has existed for centuries,” “[s]tructural
changes need time,” and “real impact may not be seen for at
least a generation.” This evidence compels the finding that
the Roma are a disfavored group in Romania—a reality that
the Roma have certainly grappled with for centuries.
ii.
Given the errors in its past-persecution and disfavoredgroup analyses, it comes as no surprise that the BIA likely
erred when it determined that Ion lacked a “sufficient
individualized risk of future persecution to make his fear of
return to Romania objectively reasonable.” “Evidence of
both individual and group targeting are relevant to
demonstrate the likelihood that a particular individual will
be persecuted.” Tampubolon, 610 F.3d at 1062 (citing
Wakkary, 558 F.3d at 1062–63). When, as here, a petitioner
presents “egregious” evidence of “group persecution,” he
can provide “less evidence of individualized persecution” to
meet the objective prong of a well-founded fear showing.
Kotasz, 31 F.3d at 853; see also Wakkary, 558 F.3d at 1063.
We leave it to the agency, however, to determine whether
Ion meets this requirement. 14
The BIA denied Ion’s claim for withholding of removal because it
determined that he had not met the requirements for asylum. Because
the BIA erred in its denial of asylum, we remand Ion’s withholding of
removal claim for further consideration. As we noted in Flores Molina,
“if the BIA determines that [Ion] experienced past persecution on
account of a protected ground,” then it “must credit [Ion] with a
rebuttable presumption of eligibility for withholding of removal.” 37
F.4th at 638 (citing 8 C.F.R. § 1208.16(b)(1)(i); Ahmed, 504 F.3d at
1199). If the BIA determines that Ion is not entitled to a presumption of
eligibility for withholding of removal, it must consider “all probative
evidence related to [Ion’s] fear of future persecution.” Id. at 638–39.
14

36

LAPADAT V. BONDI

IV.
The record compels our conclusion that Ion Lapadat’s
past experiences rise to the level of persecution, and that the
BIA erred when it determined that Ion failed to demonstrate
his membership in a disfavored group. Accordingly, we
grant Ion’s petition and remand for further proceedings,
consistent with this opinion.
GRANTED and REMANDED.
Smith, N. Randy, Circuit Judge, dissenting.
My colleagues begin their opinion by giving lip service
“to the reasoned and expert judgment of our colleagues in
the [BIA], who we trust to carefully review the record and
apply the law.” Maj. Op. at 5. Then, in order to reach the
result they seek, they make no effort to apply the correct
standard of review to the judgment of these experts they
profess to trust. Instead, they substitute their judgment for
that of the IJ and the BIA in order to reach their desired
result, overturning the holdings of these “trusted” decision
makers.
The record demonstrates that the BIA and the IJ did not
make any reversible mistakes. Instead, my colleagues make
the following mistakes in determining whether Lapadat
suffered past persecution. 1

I agree with the majority that Lapadat failed to challenge his CAT claim
both before the BIA and here. Thus, the claim is forfeited.

1

LAPADAT V. BONDI

37

1. The majority first incorrectly limits its review to
the BIA’s decision.
In determining which underlying decision to review, my
colleagues state that the “the BIA conduct[ed] its own
review of the evidence and law, rather than adopting the IJ’s
decision.” Maj. Op. at 12. Thus, they limited their review to
the BIA’s decision. See id. at 12–13. In so doing, they
allowed themselves to ignore the record and the reasoning
behind the BIA’s decision.
This narrow review was error. When one reads and
reviews this decision, the BIA explicitly stated that it
reviewed the IJ’s decision under the “clearly erroneous”
standard of review. Although the BIA did not “adopt” the
IJ’s decision, it expressly agreed with the IJ and cited to her
opinion. In these situations, we “look to the IJ’s oral decision
as a guide to what lay behind the BIA’s conclusion.” Tekle
v. Mukasey, 533 F.3d 1044, 1051 (9th Cir. 2008). “In so
doing, we review here the reasons explicitly identified by the
BIA, and then examine the reasoning articulated in the IJ’s
oral decision in support of those reasons.” Id.; see also
Garcia-Martinez v. Sessions, 886 F.3d 1291, 1293 (9th Cir.
2018) (noting that when “the BIA agrees with the IJ’s
reasoning, we review both decisions”); see also Bhattari v.
Lynch, 835 F.3d 1037, 1042 (9th Cir. 2016) (reviewing both
opinions when the BIA “agrees with and incorporates
specific findings of the IJ while adding its own reasoning”).
Moreover, even if “the BIA announced it was conducting de
novo review,” our review is not limited to the BIA decision
“when the BIA incorporates parts of the IJ’s reasoning,”
including “by giving examples from it.” Szonyi v. Barr, 942
F.3d 874, 897 (9th Cir. 2019); see also Fon v. Garland, 34
F.4th 810, 815 (9th Cir. 2022) (explaining that we may look
to the IJ’s decision because “[t]he BIA’s lack of analysis,

38

LAPADAT V. BONDI

along with the citation to the IJ’s opinion, suggests that the
BIA gave significant weight to the IJ’s findings” (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted)).
To justify their mistake regarding this review, my
colleagues assert that they do not need to review the IJ’s
decision, because the BIA did not “expressly adopt” the
decision. Maj. Op. 12 n.4. However, this justification does
“not hold water.” As the reviewing court, we look to whether
the BIA adopted or incorporated an IJ’s decision in order to
determine what portions of the IJ’s decision we may review.
To suggest that we cannot look at the IJ’s “decision as a
guide to what lay behind the BIA’s conclusion,” Tekle, 533
F.3d at 1051, would ignore the Supreme Court’s directive
that “a reviewing court must ‘uphold’ even ‘a decision of
less than ideal clarity if the agency’s path may reasonably be
discerned,’” Garland v. Ming Dai, 593 U.S. 357, 369 (2021)
(citation omitted). Notably, “reviewing courts remain bound
by traditional administrative law principles, including the
rule that judges generally must assess the lawfulness of an
agency’s action in light of the explanations the agency
offered for it rather than any ex post rationales a court can
devise.” Id.
2. The majority next improperly substitutes its view
for that of the IJ and the BIA in determining past
persecution.
While my colleagues cite to the proper standard of
review for reviewing factual findings, Maj. Op. at 12–13,
they fail to apply the standard they cite. To reiterate the
proper standard of review: an appellate court reviews the IJ’s
factual findings for substantial evidence. Kalulu v. Garland,
94 F.4th 1095, 1099 (9th Cir. 2024). “Substantial evidence
is more than a mere scintilla and is such relevant evidence as

LAPADAT V. BONDI

39

a reasonable mind might accept as adequate to support a
conclusion.” Rivera v. Mukasey, 508 F.3d 1271, 1274 (9th
Cir. 2007). The substantial evidence standard of review is
“deferential,” Parada v. Sessions, 902 F.3d 901, 909 (9th
Cir. 2018), and a “stricter” standard of review than “clearly
erroneous,” see Dickinson v. Zurko, 527 U.S. 150, 156
(1999). “The BIA’s determination that [Lapadat] was not
eligible for asylum must be upheld if ‘supported by
reasonable, substantial, and probative evidence on the record
considered as a whole’ . . . and [that determination] can be
reversed only if the evidence presented by [Lapadat] was
such that a reasonable factfinder would have to conclude that
the requisite fear of persecution existed.” INS v. EliasZacarias, 502 U.S. 478, 481 (1992). In other words, “the
evidence [must] compel[] a contrary conclusion from that
adopted by the BIA.” Parada, 902 F.3d at 909.
Instead of applying this proper standard of review, my
colleagues substitute their own judgment for that of the IJ
and the BIA and make new determinations based on facts
that were never argued by the Lapadats. Because these
findings are dispositive to their decision, these mistakes are
paramount.
3. The majority improperly reviews Lapadat’s
claims.
My colleagues make several errors in reviewing the
BIA’s denial of Lapadat’s claim based on his failure to
establish that the incidents he suffered rose to the level of
persecution. First, my colleagues assess the harms suffered
out of context by failing to tie them to persecution. Second,
my colleagues conclude that the kidnapping incident rises to
the level of persecution individually. Third, my colleagues
conclude that the shooting incident rises to the level of

40

LAPADAT V. BONDI

persecution individually. Finally, my colleagues conclude
that cumulatively the incidents suffered rise to the level of
persecution.
A. Incidents must be tied to persecution.
An applicant for asylum must have been subjected to
past “persecution” or have “a well-founded fear of [future]
persecution.” 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42). In order to establish
eligibility for asylum, an applicant “who seeks to
demonstrate that []he was persecuted in the past must prove
(1) that []he was the victim of ‘an incident, or incidents, that
rise to the level of persecution’; (2) that the persecution was
‘on account of’ one of the protected grounds; and (3) that
such persecution was ‘committed by the government or
forces the government is either unable or unwilling to
control.’” Parussimova v. Mukasey, 555 F.3d 734, 738 (9th
Cir. 2009) (quoting Navas v. INS, 217 F.3d 646, 655–56 (9th
Cir. 2000)).
In this case, the BIA and the IJ concluded that Lapadat
was not eligible for asylum, because he failed to meet his
burden of showing the incidents rose to the level of
persecution. My colleagues do not assess the validity of
these findings under the substantial evidence standard of
review but instead merely assert that the harms suffered, by
themselves, compel a different conclusion. In so concluding,
my colleagues apply too broad of a reading to the first prong.
We do not consider every harm that has been subjected upon
an applicant regardless of context. Instead, we only consider
the “incidents” that could constitute “persecution.” See
Navas, 217 F.3d at 655.
We have “defined persecution as the infliction of
suffering or harm upon those who differ (in race, religion or
political opinion) in a way regarded as offensive.” Korablina

LAPADAT V. BONDI

41

v. INS, 158 F.3d 1038, 1043 (9th Cir. 1998) (emphasis
added) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). We
have also recognized that persecution “is an extreme concept
that means something considerably more than
discrimination or harassment.” Sharma v. Garland, 9 F.4th
1052, 1060 (9th Cir. 2021). Thus, not all incidents “qualify
as persecution, despite the fact that such conditions have
caused the petitioners some harm.” Mihalev v. Ashcroft, 388
F.3d 722, 729 (9th Cir. 2004). Accordingly, before an IJ
determines whether the “incident” can rise to the level of
persecution, he or she must necessarily first determine
whether “the infliction of suffering or harm” arose because
the applicant differed from the persecutor. In other words,
for an incident to rise to the level of persecution, some
evidence must exist that shows the incident was not the result
of civil unrest or criminal activity.2 See Gormley v. Ashcroft,
364 F.3d 1172, 1177 (9th Cir. 2004) (holding that the two
My colleagues agree that not all incidents qualify as persecution. Maj.
Op. at 26. Yet, they assert that context does not matter, disregarding
Gormley’s clear holding. They attempt to distinguish Gormley by
asserting that “targeted shootings and attempted kidnappings” are not
“all too-common general conditions.” Maj. Op. at 26. First, there is no
evidence in this record that Lapadat’s shooting was targeted. Lapadat
was admittedly trespassing on private property when he was shot.
Moreover, this court has rejected social groups of persons who “are
subject to kidnappings and extortion,” because asylum cannot be based
on “fear of harm resulting from general conditions of violence and civil
unrest affecting the home country’s populace as a whole.” Alanniz v.
Barr, 924 F.3d 1061, 1064–65 (9th Cir. 2019). In this case, country
condition evidence noted that “[i]n 2016 the Directorate for Investigating
Organized Crime and Terrorism (DIICOT) uncovered a human
trafficking ring that had forced its kidnapped victims, including children,
into beggary, slavery, and other forms of forced labor.” Thus, substantial
evidence would support the agency’s conclusion that the attempted
kidnapping was a criminal act, not persecution.
2

42

LAPADAT V. BONDI

criminal attacks petitioner suffered did not rise to level of
persecution because “robberies of this sort are an all too
common byproduct of civil unrest and economic turmoil”);
see also Matter of M-E-V-G-, 26 I. & N. Dec. 227, 235 (BIA
2014) (explaining that “asylum and refugee laws do not
protect people from general conditions of strife, such as
crime and other societal afflictions”); Ming Ming Wijono v.
Gonzales, 439 F.3d 868, 872 (8th Cir. 2006) (“Low-level
intimidation and harassment alone do not rise to the level of
persecution, nor does harm arising from general conditions
such as anarchy, civil war, or mob violence ordinarily
support a claim of persecution.” (citation omitted)); Lie v.
Ashcroft, 396 F.3d 530, 532 (3d Cir. 2005) (superseded in
unrelated part by 8 U.S.C. § 1158(b)(1)(B)(I)) (holding that
“substantial evidence supports the BIA’s conclusion that
these robberies were not motivated by religion or ethnicity,
and that, at all events, such robberies were not sufficiently
severe so as to rise to the level of persecution”). To be sure,
a criminal act by its very nature cannot constitute
persecution, because it bears no nexus to a protected
ground. 3 See Zetino v. Holder, 622 F.3d 1007, 1016 (9th Cir.
My colleagues claim that assessing harm under the lens of persecution
conflates the two prongs of the past persecution analysis. Maj. Op. at 19
n.7. Not so. Our precedent is clear: each prong is tied to persecution. See
Parussimova, 555 F.3d at 738. “[W]e do not look to the level of harm
experienced by the petitioner,” but rather we look at “whether the
treatment the victim received rises to the level of persecution.” Kaur v.
Wilkinson, 986 F.3d 1216, 1226 (9th Cir. 2021) (cleaned up). “In other
words, it is the conduct of the persecutor . . . that matters for purposes of
determining what constitutes persecution.” Id. Here, my colleagues do
not consider the conduct of the persecutor, because they do not care who
caused the harm. Under their theory, it is merely the level of harm that is
assessed in the first prong without any context. Assessing harm in the
3

LAPADAT V. BONDI

43

2010) (“An [applicant’s] desire to be free from harassment
by criminals motivated by theft or random violence by gang
members bears no nexus to a protected ground.”).
Thus, in order for an IJ to properly assess whether an
applicant suffered from past persecution, the IJ cannot
ignore the cause of or reason for the harm when determining
whether the incidents rose to the level of persecution. See
Beskovic v. Gonzales, 467 F.3d 223, 226 (2d Cir. 2006). In
assessing whether physical mistreatment amounts to
persecution, the Second Circuit explained that “persecution
is the infliction of suffering or harm upon those who differ
on the basis of a protected statutory ground, while
harassment is words, conduct, or action usually repeated or
persistent that, being directed at a specific person, annoys,
alarms, or causes substantial emotional distress in that
person and serves no legitimate purpose.” Id. at 225–26
(cleaned up). The court further explained that “the difference
between harassment and persecution is necessarily one of
degree, [and] the degree must be assessed with regard to the
context in which the mistreatment occurs.” Id. at 226
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The Second
Circuit cautioned the BIA to “be keenly sensitive to the fact
that a ‘minor beating’ or, for that matter, any physical
degradation designed to cause pain, humiliation, or other
suffering, may rise to the level of persecution if it occurred
in the context of an arrest or detention on the basis of a

context of persecution does not merge the two prongs; a separate analysis
is still required to determine whether the “protected ground represent[s]
‘one central reason’ for an asylum applicant’s persecution.” See
Parussimova, 555 F.3d at 740.

44

LAPADAT V. BONDI

protected ground.” 4 Id. Notably, asylum is limited to persons
subjected to persecution; thus, allowing any incident of
random violence to be included in an analysis would
unnecessarily burden the agency in assessing claims for
asylum. Moreover, it creates an unworkable standard.
B. Attempting kidnapping incident was unrelated
to a claim of persecution.
Lapadat challenged the BIA’s exclusion of the attempted
kidnapping incident, 5 claiming that the incident was not a
criminal act but that his daughters were targeted on account
of their Roma ethnicity. The BIA upheld the IJ’s findings
noting that the incident did not rise to the level of
persecution. The BIA recognized the IJ’s finding that the
incident was caused by unknown individuals. As the IJ
explained, the evidence showed “that the [attempted]
kidnapping [was] . . . essentially a crime, and though [it was]
abhorrent in nature, . . . [it did not] rise to the level of
persecution under 9th Circuit case law.”

My colleagues attempt to minimize the language in Beskovic, arguing
that the court does not “provide a general rule allowing courts to
downgrade or disregard severe harm” because there is no connection to
a protected ground. Maj. Op. at 21 n.8. Beskovic is clear: “the context in
which the mistreatment occurs” is a necessary factor to consider in
assessing whether physical mistreatment amounts to persecution. 467
F.3d at 226. Based on my colleagues interpretation, context does not
matter. Thus, any person who credibly testifies that he or she was shot
(accidentally or for some other reason) or subject to an attempted
kidnapping (even if a purely criminal act) automatically meets prong
one.
4

During the attempting kidnapping incident, Lapadat’s wife was
threatened with death if she continued to yell and was cut with a knife
on her back. Lapadat’s daughters were also threatened with rape.
5

LAPADAT V. BONDI

45

Although the facts surrounding a particular incident
maybe appalling, persecution may not be found unless there
is sufficient evidence in the record that would compel the
conclusion that the incident was anything but a criminal act.
See Bromfield v. Mukasey, 543 F.3d 1071, 1076–77 (9th Cir.
2008) (“If the perpetrator is motivated by his victim’s
protected status . . . he is engaging in persecution, not
random violence.”). Here, Lapadat’s wife and daughter
testified that they did not know who the assailants were. In
fact, Lapadat’s wife did not discount the possibility that the
assailants themselves could have been “gypsies.” During the
attack and subsequent threats, the assailants did not use
ethnic slurs or make any indication that they were targeting
the Lapadats based upon their Roma ethnicity or any other
protected ground. Thus, this purely criminal act cannot be
considered in Lapadat’s persecution claim. See Gormley,
364 F.3d at 1177.
My colleagues ignore this record evidence and only
consider the criminal acts out of context to conclude that the
incident rose to the level of persecution. 6 But the record is
clear there was no testimony that established the incident
Despite my colleagues’ claims that context does not matter, they
nevertheless include it in their analysis. They claim that Lapadat was
shot because he was a gypsy (ignoring the IJ’s findings that Lapadat was
shot because he was admittedly trespassing). Maj. Op. at 25. They also
attempt to sidestep the IJ’s other findings that the shooting was an
isolated incident and the attempted kidnapping was a criminal act by
arguing that the shooting and attempted kidnapping “did not occur in
isolation” but were ongoing acts of persecution, because “the Lapadats,
like many Romani people, had been mistreated by the police and
Romanian public for years because of their ethnicity.” See Maj. Op. at
24. These conclusions improperly disregard the IJ’s findings of fact, and
undermine my colleagues assertion that the harm suffered should be
assessed without context.

6

46

LAPADAT V. BONDI

was related to a claim of persecution. Accordingly, this
incident cannot rise to the level of persecution.
C. Shooting/trespassing incident was an isolated
incident.
Lapadat argues that the BIA erred because it did not
consider the shooting incident. 7 Although the BIA did not
specifically address this incident in its opinion, it did cite to
the IJ’s decision, Lapadat’s testimony before the IJ, and
Lapadat’s asylum application, all which included this
shooting incident. Thus, we are required to presume the BIA
considered this evidence. Cf. Larita-Martinez v. INS, 220
F.3d 1092, 1095 (9th Cir. 2000) (“We embrace the view of
our sister circuits and hold that an alien attempting to
establish that the [BIA] violated his right to due process by
failing to consider relevant evidence must overcome the
presumption that it did review the evidence.”). Moreover, in
circumstances such as these, we look to the IJ’s decision to
see what lies behind the BIA’s conclusion. See Tekle, 533
F.3d at 1051.
Here, the IJ found that the shooting incident was isolated.
Lapadat admits he was shot while he was trespassing.
Although the individual (who shot Lapadat) also shouted a
racial epithet, substantial evidence supports the IJ’s
conclusion that the incident was isolated. Notably, the
incident occurred over eight years before Lapadat fled to the
For the first time on appeal to us, Lapadat characterized the shooting
incident as an “attempted murder.” Before the IJ and the BIA, Lapadat
testified that the man “shot toward” or “shot at” him. Lapadat’s new
characterization has a much different connotation from that to which he
testified and which we are now reviewing. Thus, we should not consider
these newly raised assertions on appeal, which he uses merely to enhance
his claim here.
7

LAPADAT V. BONDI

47

United States, and there were no other incidents with this
individual. See Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1061 (explaining that
“sporadic incidents, unaccompanied by an ongoing pattern
of harm” are less likely to rise to the level of persecution).
Although my colleagues and Lapadat attempt to enhance
this claim on appeal, Lapadat’s actual argument about the
incident is revealing. Lapadat asserts that the
trespassing/shooting incident “cannot be excluded from the
realm of possibility that the Romanian aggressor shot the
Lead Petitioner knowing there would not likely be any
consequences; and, the police would not care because his
victim was a gypsy.” This characterization does not contest
the fact that he was trespassing; moreover, it does not
suggest an “attempted murder,” because Lapadat was Roma.
Instead, this argument merely provides a different
interpretation of the facts than those found by the IJ, for
which we cannot substitute our judgment. Cf. Lianhua Jiang
v. Holder, 754 F.3d 733, 740 (9th Cir. 2014), overruled on
other grounds by Alam v. Garland, 11 F.4th 1133 (9th Cir.
2021) (“Taking the position suggested by [petitioner] would
require that we supplant the IJ’s . . . determination with our
own, as if we were conducting a de novo review.”).
Although “significant physical violence” may compel a
finding of past persecution, past persecution is only found
when coupled with “other indicators of persecution.”
Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1061. Thus, we must consider “whether
the petitioner’s harm was an isolated incident or, conversely,
part of an ongoing pattern of serious maltreatment.” Id. In
this case, the IJ found that the incident was exactly that: an
isolated event caused by Lapadat’s trespassing. Notably, this
shooting was the first and only incident when Lapadat was
physically harmed and required medical attention.
Accordingly, the record supports the IJ’s finding that the

48

LAPADAT V. BONDI

shooting was caused by Lapadat’s trespass and was isolated
event. Thus, we have no basis for reversal. Dong v. Garland,
50 F.4th 1291, 1300 (9th Cir. 2022); see also Sharma, 9
F.4th at 1061 (noting that “serious maltreatment that is
sustained and recurring is more likely to compel the
conclusion of past persecution”).
Yet, ignoring this standard of review, my colleagues
instead substitute their judgment for that of the agency. 8 My
colleagues do not explain why the IJ’s depiction of this
incident compels a different conclusion. Maj. Op. at 17.
Instead, they presume that, just because Lapadat was
physically harmed, the incident rises to the level of
persecution. However, this presumption ignores our
standard of review. Although, as an IJ, one may have
concluded that an isolated shooting incident rises to the level
of persecution, Maj. Op. at 24 n.11, that is not our decision
to make on appeal, and the record does not compel it, see
Aden v. Wilkinson, 989 F.3d 1073, 1082 (9th Cir. 2021)
(holding that even if “a reasonable factfinder could
conclude” the harm rose to the level of persecution, the
record “did not compel” it).
As the IJ concluded, the act of shooting Lapadat for
trespassing was “offensive”; however, Lapadat did not
present sufficient evidence that would compel a conclusion
that the shooting was more than an isolated act of violence.
My colleagues argue that the BIA committed “legal error” because it
did not mention the shooting incident. Maj. Op. at 17. However, the BIA
did not commit legal error. Before the BIA (like here), Lapadat argued
that cumulatively the harm suffered amounted to past persecution. With
regard to this incident, Lapadat challenged the IJ’s finding that Lapadat
was shot because he was trespassing. Moreover, as addressed above, the
BIA cited to the IJ’s decision regarding why the incidents did not rise to
the level of persecution, thus we may look at the IJ’s reasoning.
8

LAPADAT V. BONDI

49

Accordingly, this incident individually does not rise to the
level of persecution.
D. Cumulatively, the record does not compel a
conclusion of harm rising to the level of
persecution.
Lapadat argues that the incidents of harm cumulatively
rise to the level of past persecution. 9 Lapadat and his family
testified that they experienced the following incidents of
persecution:
1. The Lapadats lived in segregated areas
where Roma live.
2. Romas were unwelcome and unable to
live outside major Roma population
centers
because
of
entrenched
segregation
enforced
by
social
convention. Lapadat claimed he has been
denied entry into restaurants and stores.
3. Lapadat was excluded from formal
employment market.
4. In 2005, Lapadat was unable to obtain
prompt healthcare for an appendicitis.

Lapadat did not argue that the kidnapping or shooting incident would
individually rise to the level of persecution. Rather, he only argued that
the BIA erred in not finding the harms cumulatively rose to the level of
persecution. Nevertheless, my colleagues ignore Lapadat’s argument
and assess the shooting and attempted kidnapping incidents individually.
See Maj. Op. at 16–18. This determination only emphasizes the error
made by my colleagues. See Greenwood v. FAA, 28 F.3d 971, 977 (9th
Cir. 1994) (holding that “[w]e will not manufacture arguments for an
appellant”).

9

50

LAPADAT V. BONDI

5. In 2007, Lapadat was shot and called
“gypsy” after he trespassed on private
property.
6. In 2011, Lapadat was stopped by a
policeman who temporarily detained,
kicked, and slapped him.
7. In 2012, Lapadat’s daughters were
victims of attempted kidnapping by
unknown assailants.10 Lapadat’s wife
was injured when she thwarted the
attempted
kidnapping.
Thereafter,
Lapadat’s daughters were threatened with
rape if the Lapadats reported the
attempting kidnapping incident to the
police.
8. In 2015, Lapadat was hit in the chest
when he attempted to access a pool.
9. In 2015, Lapadat had an incident with
policeman, Chocolo, wherein he lightly
slapped him and kicked him.
My colleagues characterize the IJ as having rejected “a
laundry list of abuse (like being denied healthcare, work, and
access to public pools and restaurants), as well as criminal
acts, police beatings, and threats.” Maj. Op. at 18. But, even
considered cumulatively, the events do not compel a
conclusion of past persecution. “Cumulative-effect review is
essential where a single isolated incident may not rise to the
level of persecution, but the cumulative effect of several
incidents may constitute persecution.” Salguero Sosa v.
Lapadat’s wife testified that she did not know if the unknown
assailants were “Romanian or gypsies,” because “[y]ou can’t tell bad
guys now.”
10

LAPADAT V. BONDI

51

Garland, 55 F.4th 1213, 1218 (9th Cir. 2022) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). The BIA properly
considered the cumulative effect of all relevant harm when
assessing Lapadat’s persecution claim. See id. at 1218–19.
The BIA “agree[d] with the [IJ] that [Lapadat] did not
demonstrate that he experienced past persecution as his past
experiences do not together rise to the level of
persecution.”11
As explained above, the attempted kidnapping incident
was a criminal act that does not establish persecution in the
cumulative harm analysis.12 See Gormley, 364 F.3d at 1177
(“Random, isolated criminal acts perpetrated by anonymous
[persons] do not establish persecution.”). The remainder of
the incidents claimed by Lapadat were isolated or amount
As my colleagues recognized, our case law has tension with regard to
whether de novo or a substantial evidence standard of review applies to
whether past harm rises to the level of persecution. Maj. Op. at 14–15.
That said, I agree with my colleagues that we need not resolve that
tension here, because the result is the same. Under either de novo review
or substantial evidence review, we are not allowed “to substitute our
view of the matter for that of the [BIA].” Gu v. Gonzales, 454 F.3d 1014,
1020 (9th Cir. 2006) (citation omitted). Thus, because the IJ found that
the shooting incident was an isolated event caused by Lapadat’s
trespassing, and the kidnapping incident was a criminal act, neither
incident would not compel a conclusion that Lapadat suffered from
persecution under either standard of review. Moreover, the cumulative
harm also would not compel a different conclusion under either standard
of review.
11

My colleagues also improperly reference the subjective harm the
Lapadats continue to suffer. See Maj. Op. at 21–22. However, we have
made it clear that “‘it is the conduct of the persecutor’ that is relevant to
evaluating whether past treatment rises to the level of persecution—not
‘the level of harm’ or ‘subjective suffering’ the petitioner experienced.”
Flores Molina v. Garland, 37 F.4th 626, 636 (9th Cir. 2022) (quoting
Kaur, 986 F.3d at 1226).

12

52

LAPADAT V. BONDI

only to discrimination or harassment. See Ghaly v. INS, 58
F.3d 1425, 1431 (9th Cir. 1995) (“Discrimination . . . as
morally reprehensible as it may be, does not ordinarily
amount to ‘persecution’ within the meaning of the Act.”).
Although “[s]evere and sustained discrimination, or
discrimination in combination with other harms . . . may
compel a finding of past persecution,” Wakkary v. Holder,
558 F.3d 1049, 1059 (9th Cir. 2009), the IJ and the BIA
determined that the harm suffered here is not sufficient to
rise to the level of persecution.
Lapadat’s exclusion from formal employment does not
support a claim of persecution. Although “substantial
economic deprivation that constitutes a threat to life or
freedom can constitute persecution[,] . . . mere economic
disadvantage alone, does not rise to the level of persecution.”
Zehatye v. Gonzales, 453 F.3d 1182, 1186 (9th Cir. 2006)
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Here, even
though Lapadat could not enter the formal workforce in
Romania, Lapadat testified that he earned a living working
for other Roma citizens. Hence, he was not prevented from
earning a living. Lapadat’s employment restrictions, while
discriminatory, are not significant in comparison to our cases
that have concluded that there was substantial economic
deprivation. See, e.g., Chand v. INS, 222 F.3d 1066, 1074
(9th Cir. 2000) (citing cases). Moreover, Lapadat lived in
France for two of these years; thus, Lapadat’s employment
status during this time is not relevant to his persecution
claim.
The record does not show that Lapadat experienced
escalating harm over the last several years, Flores Molina,
37 F.4th at 634, nor does it show that there was an “ongoing
pattern of serious maltreatment,” Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1061.
Since the isolated trespassing/shooting incident in 2007,

LAPADAT V. BONDI

53

Lapadat did not experience any incidents that were anything
beyond mere discrimination and harassment.
My colleagues know that, absent the inclusion of the
shooting and kidnapping incidents, Lapadat only
experienced discrimination or harassment, which is
insufficient to establish persecution. Sharma, 9 F.4th at
1060. However, my colleagues avoid the standard of review
and our precedent, instead looking at the incidents in a
vacuum, ignoring the purpose of asylum claims.
My colleagues’ reliance on Korablina, 158 F.3d 1038
(death threats because of her religion), Baballah v. Ashcroft,
367 F.3d 1067 (9th Cir. 2004) (threats, physical violence,
and economic hardship based on ethnicity and religion), and
Kaur, 986 F.3d 1216 (attempted rape based on political
activities), to conclude these events compel a conclusion of
past persecution is misplaced. In all these cases, the harms
were not isolated and were linked to a protected ground.
My colleagues’ reliance on these cases highlight why
their broad focus on harm is unworkable. They suggested
that the prongs “may bleed together,” but that they can still
rely on these cases to assess prong one only. I agree the
prongs “bleed together,” because they must: whether an
incident rises to the level of persecution, cannot exist without
some evidence of “persecution.” Nevertheless, the fact that
the harm suffered in Korablina, Baballah, and Kaur was not
isolated and was linked to a protected ground established
that the incidents rose to the level of persecution.
In sum, a proper review of the agency’s decision requires
us to determine whether substantial evidence in record
supported its findings. My colleagues do not review the
agency’s findings in this deferential framework. If they had,

54

LAPADAT V. BONDI

they would have held that substantial evidence in the record
supports these factual findings.
4. Even assuming a disfavored group, the majority
improperly relies on its previous fact finding to
support a claim of future persecution.
Absent past persecution, the BIA must nevertheless
consider whether Lapadat has a well-founded fear of
persecution. Lapadat may establish a well-founded fear of
future persecution by “prov[ing] that []he is a member of a
‘disfavored group’ coupled with a showing that []he, in
particular, is likely to be targeted as a member of that group.”
Sael v. Ashcroft, 386 F.3d 922, 925 (9th Cir. 2004) (citation
omitted). My colleagues conclude that Lapadat has such a
fear, because he is a member of a disfavored group of Roma
citizens and, based on his past harm, he established an
individualized risk of future harm. Maj. Op. at 28–35.
However, even assuming that Roma people are a disfavored
group in Romania, the record does not compel the
conclusion that Lapadat has “an individualized threat” of
future persecution. Najmabadi v. Holder, 597 F.3d 983, 992
(9th Cir. 2010) (emphasis in original).
The BIA concluded that Lapadat did not have an
objectively reasonable fear of future harm, because his past
harm was based on “isolated incidents caused by different
individuals.” The BIA further concluded that there was
insufficient evidence that any of those individuals were
likely to target Lapadat in the future. These conclusions are
supported by substantial evidence.
My colleagues ignore these conclusions and instead
claim that they will now “leave it to the agency to determine”
whether Lapadat can meet the objective prong of a well-

LAPADAT V. BONDI

55

founded fear showing under a disfavored group analysis.13
Maj. Op. at 35. However, the agency has already made such
an alternative finding; my colleagues just fail to address the
agency’s conclusions in this regard.14 The BIA was clear that
Lapadat did not meet this lower standard:
We also agree with the Immigration Judge
that, even if Roma constituted a disfavored
group, the lead respondent has not
established that he has a sufficient
individualized risk of future persecution to
make his fear of return to Romania
objectively reasonable (IJ at 8; Respondent’s
Br. at 12-13). Most of the harm experienced
by the lead respondent occurred before he
moved to France in 2013 (IJ at 8). After
returning to Romania in 2015, the lead
respondent
experienced
an
isolated
altercation at a swimming pool and another
My colleagues nevertheless attempt to bolster its opinion and Lapadats
claim, arguing that Lapadat is able to show a well-founded fear of future
persecution by dramatically reciting facts not established by the IJ. See
Maj. Op. at 6–10, 27 n.12. Notably, my colleagues mischaracterize the
evidence in the record by (1) asserting that Lapadat was shot because he
was a “gypsy,” id. at 25, (2) implying that the attempted kidnapping was
because of the Lapadats’ daughters ethnicity, id. at 7, and severely
overstate Lapadat’s encounter with a policeman, id. at 9–10. Further, my
colleagues ignore the fact that the Lapadats left and returned to Romania
freely and without incident. Despite my colleague’s desire for the facts
to be different, “[w]e are required to accept administrative findings of
fact unless any reasonable adjudicator would be compelled to conclude
to the contrary.” Dong, 50 F.4th at 1299–1300.

13

My colleagues avoid this issue, because the BIA must first determine
past persecution before it can properly assess a well-founded fear of
future persecution. See Maj. Op. at 35 n.14.
14

56

LAPADAT V. BONDI

brief encounter with a police officer who
lightly slapped his head kicked his buttocks
(IJ at 8). Although evidence of past harm is
relevant to whether an individual’s fear of
future persecution is objectively reasonable,
all of the harm described by the lead
respondent were isolated incidents caused by
different individuals. See Sael, 386 F.3d at
928–29. There is insufficient evidence in the
record that any of these individuals are
looking for the lead respondent or would be
inclined to single out and target him for
persecution in the future. In light of the
foregoing, the lead respondent has not shown
a sufficient individualized risk to establish a
well-founded fear of persecution under a
disfavored group analysis (IJ at 8). As a
result, the lead respondent and his derivative
beneficiaries are ineligible for asylum.
Even though Lapadat need only “demonstrate a
‘comparatively low’ level of individualized risk in order to
prove that []he has a well-founded fear of future
persecution,” Sael, 386 F.3d at 927, he did not present any
evidence that any individual (whom he encountered) was
still looking for him or would target him for future
persecution. Thus, there is insufficient evidence to compel
the conclusion that he will be persecuted upon his return to
Romania.

