FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
MI FAMILIA VOTA; et al.,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
ADRIAN FONTES, in his official
capacity as Arizona Secretary of
State; et al.,
Defendants - Appellees,

No. 24-3188
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-00509SRB
District of
Arizona,
Phoenix
ORDER

WARREN PETERSEN, President of
the Arizona Senate; et al.,
Intervenor-Defendants Appellants.
MI FAMILIA VOTA; et al.,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
KRIS MAYES and STATE OF
ARIZONA,
Defendants - Appellants.

No. 24-3559
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-00509SRB
District of
Arizona,
Phoenix

2

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

PROMISE ARIZONA and
SOUTHWEST VOTER
REGISTRATION EDUCATION
PROJECT,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
and
MI FAMILIA VOTA; et al.,
Plaintiffs,
v.
ADRIAN FONTES; et al.,
Defendants,
and
KRIS MAYES and STATE OF
ARIZONA,
Defendants - Appellees,
WARREN PETERSEN and
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE,
Intervenor-Defendants Appellees,
and
STEVE MONTENEGRO, Speaker of
the Arizona House of
Representatives,
Intervenor-Defendant Appellant.

No. 24-4029
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-00509SRB
District of
Arizona,
Phoenix

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

3

Filed September 22, 2025
Before: Kim M. Wardlaw, Ronald M. Gould, and Patrick J.
Bumatay, Circuit Judges.
Order;
Dissent by Ryan D. Nelson, joined by Consuelo M.
Callahan, Mark J. Bennett, Kenneth K. Lee, Patrick J.
Bumatay, and Lawrence VanDyke, Circuit Judges, and
with whom Sandra S. Ikuta, Circuit Judge, concurs as to
Part II;
Dissent by Daniel P. Collins, Circuit Judge;
Dissent by Daniel A. Bress, Circuit Judge, joined by
Bridget S. Bade, Danielle J. Forrest, Circuit Judges

SUMMARY*
Voting Rights
The panel denied petitions for panel rehearing and for
rehearing en banc in a case in which the panel affirmed in
part and vacated in part the district court’s rulings pertaining
to two Arizona laws regulating voter registration that
require, among other things, heightened proof of citizenship.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
R. Nelson, joined by Judges Callahan, Bennett, Lee,
Bumatay, and VanDyke, and with whom Judge Ikuta
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

4

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

concurs as to Part II, wrote that the panel majority opinion
will prevent states from deterring voter fraud. In Part II,
Judge R. Nelson stated that the panel ignored both Supreme
Court and Ninth Circuit precedent when it upheld the district
court’s injunction enjoining Arizona’s documentary proof of
citizenship (DPOC) requirement for voters registering using
Arizona’s state form, despite the Supreme Court’s indication
that Arizona’s requirement was lawful in this case. In Part
III of his dissent, Judge R. Nelson wrote that the panel
majority erred by holding that the National Voter
Registration Act preempted Arizona’s DPOC requirement to
vote by mail and to vote for presidential elections. In Part
IV of his dissent, Judge R. Nelson stated that the panel
majority created a circuit split with the Sixth Circuit.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Collins stated that, as to the issues on which rehearing en
banc had been sought in the petitions, his views are in
general accord with those expressed in Judge Bumatay’s
panel dissent.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Bress, joined by Judges Bade and Forrest, wrote that, at a
minimum, the court should have reevaluated the panel
majority’s incorrect and consequential decision upholding
the injunction of Arizona’s documentary proof of citizenship
requirement for state-form applicants, the portion of the
injunction that the Supreme Court already stayed.

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

5

COUNSEL
Jonathan L. Backer (argued), Bonnie Robin-Vergeer,
Matthew N. Drecun, Andrew G. Braniff, Christopher C.
Wang, Jason Lee, and Margaret Turner, Attorneys, Civil
Rights Division, Appellate Section; Michael E. Gates and
Jesus A. Osete, Deputy Assistant Attorneys General; Kristin
Clarke and Harmeet K. Dhillon, Assistant Attorneys
General; United States Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; Danielle M. Lang (argued), R. Brent Ferguson,
Kathryn L. Huddleston, and Jonathan Diaz, Campaign Legal
Center, Washington, D.C.; James E. Barton II, Barton
Mendez Soto PLLC, Tempe, Arizona; Alexander B. Ritchie,
Attorney; Chase A. Velasquez, Assistant Attorney General;
Department of Justice San Carlos Apache Tribe, Office of
the Attorney General, San Carlos, Arizona; Courtney
Hostetler, Free Speech For People, Sharon, Massachusetts;
John C. Bonifaz, Free Speech For People, Amherst,
Massachusetts; Lee H. Rubin, Mayer Brown LLP, Palo Alto,
California; Rachel J. Lamorte, Mayer Brown LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Gary A. Isaac, Daniel T. Fenske,
Anastasiya K. Lobacheva, and William J. McElhaney III,
Mayer Brown LLP, Chicago, Illinois; Ernest I. Herrera
(argued), Denise Hulett, and Erika Cervantes, Mexican
American Legal Defense and Educational Fund, Los
Angeles, California; Daniel R. Ortega Jr., Ortega Law Firm
PC, Phoenix, Arizona; Daniel A. Arellano, Roy Herrara, and
Jillian L. Andrews, Herrera Arellano LLP, Phoenix,
Arizona; Marc E. Elias, Elisabeth C. Frost, Christopher D.
Dodge, Daniela Lorenzo, and Qizhou Ge, Elias Law Group
LLP, Washington,D.C.; Daniel J. Adelman, Arizona Center
For Law In The Public Interest, Phoenix, Arizona; John A.
Freedman, Jeremy Karpatkin, Erica McCabe, and Leah
Motzkin, Arnold & Porter Kaye Scholer LLP, Washington,

6

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

D.C.; Leah R. Novak and Andrew Hirschel, Arnold & Porter
Kaye Scholer LLP New York, New York; Nina G. Beck,
Emily Davis, Jonathan Sherman, Beauregard Patterson, and
Michelle K. Cohen, Fair Elections Center, Washington,
D.C.; Christopher E. Babbitt, Daniel S. Volchok, Seth P.
Waxman, Britany Riley-Swanbeck, and Joseph M. Meyer,
Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP, Washington,
D.C.; Bruce Samuels, Jennifer Lee-Cota, Papetti Samuels
Weiss McKirgan LLP, Scottsdale, Arizona; Sadik H.
Huseny, Amit Makker, Evan Omi, and Catherine A. Rizzoni,
Latham & Watkins LLP, San Francisco, California; Niyati
Shah, Terry A. Minnis, and Noah Baron, Asian Americans
Advancing Justice, Washington, D.C.; Andrew M. Federhar,
Spencer Fane LLP, Phoenix, Arizona; David B. Rosenbaum,
Joshua J. Messer, Osborn Maledon PA, Phoenix, Arizona;
Ezra D. Rosenberg, American Civil Liberties Union of New
Jersey, Newark, New Jersey; Matthew L. Campbell, Michael
S. Carter, Allison A. Neswood, and Jacqueline D. DeLeon,
Native American Rights Fund, Boulder, Colorado;
Samantha B. Kelty, Native American Rights Fund,
Washington D.C.; Marissa L. Sites, Assistant Attorney
General; Howard M. Shanker, Attorney General, Tohono
O'Odham Nation, Office of the Attorney General, Sells,
Arizona; Javier G. Ramos, Senior Counsel, Gila River
Indian Community, Prima Maricopa Tribe Law Office,
Sacaton, Arizona; for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Kory A. Langhofer (argued) and Thomas J. Basile, Statecraft
PLLC, Phoenix, Arizona; Tyler R. Green, Gilbert C. Dickey,
and Conor D. Woodfin, Consovoy McCarthy PLLC,
Arlington, Virginia; for Intervenor-Defendants-Appellants.
Joshua M. Whitaker (argued) Joshua D. Bendor, Hayleigh S.
Crawford, Attorneys; Kathryn E. Boughton and Timothy E.
Durkin Horley, Assistant Attorneys General; Kristin K.

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

7

Mayes, Arizona Attorney General; Office of the Arizona
Attorney General, Phoenix, Arizona; Craig Morgan, Taft
Stettinius & Hollister LLP, Phoenix, Arizona; Celeste
Robertson, Attorney, Apache County Attorney's Office, St.
Johns, Arizona; Christine J. Roberts, Deputy Chief Counsel,
Pinal County Attorney's Office, Florence, Arizona; Rose M.
Winkeler, Deputy County Attorney, Flagstaff Law Group
PLLC, Flagstaff, Arizona; Jefferson R. Dalton, Counsel,
Gila County Attorney's Office, Globe, Arizona; Gary
Griffith, County Attorney, Greenlee County Attorney’s
Office, Clifton, Arizona; Jason W. Mitchell, Trial Attorney,
La Paz County Attorney’s Office, Parker, Arizona; Ryan N.
Dooley, Attorney, City of St. George, St. George, Utah; Sean
M. Moore, Joseph E. La Rue, Jack L. O'Connor III, and
Anna Griffin Critz, Deputy County Attorneys; Maricopa
County Attorney's Office, Civil Services Division, Phoenix,
Arizona; Ryan H. Esplin, Attorney; William B. Davis,
Deputy County Attorney; Mohave County Attorney's Office,
Kingman, Arizona; Jason S. Moore, Deputy Assistant
Attorney General, Navajo County Attorney's Office,
Holbrook, Arizona; Daniel S. Jurkowitz, Pima County
Attorney's Office, Tucson, Arizona; William J. Kerekes and
Jessica L. Holzer, Deputy County Attorney’s, Office of the
Yuma County Attorney, Yuma, Arizona; Craig Cameron,
Deputy County Attorney, Pinal County Attorney's Office,
Florence, Arizona; Jean A. Roof, Graham County Attorney's
Office, Safford, Arizona; Thomas M. Stoxen, Attorney,
Yavapai County Attorney's Office, Prescott, Arizona;
Christina E. Werther and Justin S. Pierce, Pierce Coleman
PLLC, Scottsdale, Arizona; for Defendants-Appellees.
Dominic E. Draye, Greenberg Traurig LLP, Phoenix,
Arizona; Nick Peterson, Greenberg Traurig LLP, Salt Lake
City, Utah; for Amicus Curiae Arizona Free Enterprise Club.

8

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

Christopher J. Hajec, Immigration Reform Law Institute,
Washington, D.C.; Lawrence J. Joseph, Law Office of
Lawrence J. Joseph, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae
Immigration Reform Law Institute.
Jonathon P. Hauenschild, Center for Election Confidence,
Arlington, Virginia, for Amicus Curiae Center for Election
Confidence.
Michael A. Columbo, Mark P. Meuser, and Harmeet
Dhillon, Dhillon Law Group Inc., San Francisco, California;
Andrew Gould, Holtzman Vogel Baran Torchinsky &
Josefiak PLLC, Phoenix Arizona; for Amicus Curiae
Republican Party of Arizona.
Elizabeth B. Wydra, Brianne J. Gorod, David H. Gans, and
Anna K. Jessurun, Constitutional Accountability Center,
Washington, D.C, for Amicus Curiae Constitutional
Accountability Center.
Justin Levitt, LMU Loyola Law School, Los Angeles,
California, for Amicus Curiae Professor Justin Levitt.
Patricia J. Yan and Sarah E. Brannon, American Civil
Liberties Union Foundation, Washington, D.C.; Sophia L.
Lakin, American Civil Liberties Union Foundation, New
York, New York; R. Adam Lauridsen, Ian Kanig, Imara
McMillan, Sara R. Fitzpatrick, and Courtney J. Liss, Keker
Van Nest & Peters LLP, San Francisco, California; Jasleen
Singh and Sara Carter, Brennan Center for Justice at NYU
School of Law, New York, New York; Phi Nguyen and Roni
Druks, Demos, New York, New York; for Amici Curiae
League of Women Voters, League of Women Voters of
Arizona, Secure Families Initiative, and Modern Military
Association of America..

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

9

ORDER
Judge Wardlaw and Judge Gould voted to deny both
the petitions for rehearing en banc. Judge Bumatay voted to
grant both the petitions for rehearing en banc. A judge of
the court requested a vote on whether to rehear the matter en
banc. The matter failed to receive a majority of the votes of
the active judges in favor of en banc consideration. Fed. R.
App. P. 35. Judge Desai did not participate in the
deliberations or vote in this case. The petitions for rehearing
en banc, Dkt. Nos. 261 and 262, are DENIED.

R. NELSON, Circuit Judge, with whom CALLAHAN,
BENNETT, LEE, BUMATAY, VANDYKE, Circuit
Judges, join, and with whom IKUTA, Circuit Judge, concurs
as to Part II, dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc
Republican government serves as the keystone of the
Constitution. See U.S. Const. art. IV, § 4. In such a
government a majority of citizens who lawfully vote
determines who represents us in the White House, Congress,
and state legislatures. Courts must therefore defend the
franchise—both by protecting the right of all citizens to vote,
and by ensuring non-citizens do not vote. Arizona passed
laws to protect the franchise. The panel majority upheld an
injunction on those laws. Sadly, the panel majority opinion
undermines republican government, shreds federalism and
the separation of powers, and imperils free and fair elections.
We should have reheard this case en banc to correct these
errors.

10

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

Most egregiously, the panel majority ignored both
Supreme Court and Ninth Circuit precedent when it upheld
the district court’s injunction enjoining Arizona’s
documentary proof of citizenship (DPOC) requirement for
voters registering through Arizona’s state form. It reversed
a motions panel before it even heard the merits of the case.
And it upheld the district court’s injunction despite the
Supreme Court’s indication that Arizona’s requirement was
lawful in this very case. See Republican Nat’l Comm. v. Mi
Familia Vota, 145 S. Ct. 108 (2024) (“RNC”). And the
Supreme Court has cited Arizona’s prior citizenship
documentation requirement in dicta as the example of a
permissible state form requirement. See Arizona v. Inter
Tribal Council of Az., Inc., 570 U.S. 1, 12 (2013) (“ITCA”).
These are bold judicial moves by the majority and warrant a
high burden to justify such departures. The majority failed
this test and got fundamental legal principles wrong.
The majority opinion mangles our circuit’s analysis of
National Voter Registration Act (NVRA) preemption issues.
In enacting the NVRA, “Congress only sought to regulate
the times, places, and manner of electing Representatives
and Senators” in a limited capacity. Voting Rts. Coal. v.
Wilson, 60 F.3d 1411, 1415 (9th Cir. 1995). Congress could
not completely abrogate the “considerable freedom” states
have “to design their own election laws.” Bennett v.
Yoshina, 140 F.3d 1218, 1225 (9th Cir. 1998) (citing Burdick
v. Takushi, 504 U.S. 428, 433 (1992)). The majority
misinterprets the NVRA to preempt state law when it either
could not do so (i.e., in Presidential elections), see U.S.
Const. art. II, § 1, cl. 2, 4, or does not do so (i.e., in
Congressional elections), see U.S. Const. art. I, § 4, cl. 1.
Finally, the majority opinion creates a circuit split with
the Sixth Circuit, which correctly held that the NVRA does

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

11

not “bar the removal of names from the official [state voter
rolls] of persons who were ineligible and improperly
registered to vote in the first place.” Bell v. Marinko, 367
F.3d 588, 591–92 (6th Cir. 2004). The majority interprets
52 U.S.C. § 20507 to protect such individuals, placing us on
the wrong side of a circuit split. See Mi Familia Vota v.
Fontes, 129 F.4th 691, 714–17 (9th Cir. 2025).
The majority opinion will prevent states from deterring
voter fraud. In doing so, it undermines the fundamental right
of citizen voters to cast our ballots to elect a “government of
the people, by the people, for the people.” President
Abraham Lincoln, The Gettysburg Address (Nov. 19, 1863).
I dissent.
I
A
This case arises from pre-enforcement challenges to two
Arizona laws enacted in 2022—House Bills 2492 and 2243
(Voting Laws). The Arizona legislature implemented
modest changes to Arizona’s voting rules. H.B. 2492 made
these changes: (1) if an Arizonan registering using the
federal registration form1 did so without DPOC (such as a
passport), that voter could still be registered but could not
vote in the Presidential election, or vote by mail; (2) state
form applications without DPOC were to be rejected; and
(3) state form applicants were to disclose their birthplace and
provide documentary proof of residence in Arizona. See

1

Arizona uses a dual-track voter registration system. A voter can
register either through the federal form created by the Election
Assistance Commission, 52 U.S.C. § 20508(a)(2), or the state form
prescribed by Arizona law.

12

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann. §§ 16-121.01(D)–(E), 16-127(A), 16121.01(C), 16-121.01(A), 16-123.
H.B. 2243 made these changes: (1) Arizona county
recorders, each month, would conduct routine checks to
ensure registered voters were in fact citizens; (2) those
recorders would provide notice to flagged individuals by
mail asking them to confirm their eligibility to vote in the
county, and (3) those recorders would only cancel
registrations for persons who do not respond after thirty-five
days. See id. § 16-165(A)(10), (G)–(K).
The district court consolidated eight pre-enforcement
challenges against the Voting Laws and held a bench trial.
See Mi Familia Vota v. Fontes, 719 F. Supp. 3d 929, 947 (D.
Ariz. 2024) (“Fontes”). The district court enjoined several
elements of H.B. 2492, holding that the NVRA preempted
restrictions on registration in presidential elections. See id.
at 951 n. 12; 52 U.S.C. § 20505. It enjoined H.B. 2492’s
mandate to reject state forms without accompanying DPOC,
citing a preexisting consent decree in League of United Latin
Am. Citizens of Ariz. v. Reagan, No. 2:17-cv-4102 (D. Ariz.
2018), Dkt. No. 37 (the LULAC consent decree). See
Fontes, 719 F. Supp. 3d at 1015. It held that H.B. 2492’s
checkbox provision, and its requirement that individuals
who register to vote using the Arizona state form disclose
their birthplace violated the Materiality Provision of the
Civil Rights Act, 52 U.S.C. § 10101(a)(2)(B). See id.
at 1018. The district court also enjoined H.B. 2492’s proofof-location-of-residence requirement as violating the
NVRA. See id. at 996–97.
The district court also enjoined one element of H.B.
2243. It held that providing for the investigation and
removal of noncitizen voters from Arizona’s registration

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

13

system violated the NVRA, 52 U.S.C. § 20507(b). See id. at
999.
A motions panel partially stayed the district court’s
injunction. Mi Familia Vota v. Fontes, No. 24-3188, 2024
WL 3629418, at *1 (9th Cir. July 18, 2024) (Motions Panel
Order). The Motions Panel Order stayed the district court’s
injunction barring enforcement of Arizona Revised Statues
§ 16-121.01(C), which required voters using the Arizona
state form to provide DPOC. Id. Two weeks later, a merits
panel reversed the motions panel over a dissent by Judge
Bumatay. Mi Familia Vota v. Fontes, 111 F.4th 976, 980
(9th Cir. 2024).
The Supreme Court reversed the merits panel and stayed
the district court’s injunction barring enforcement of § 16121.01(C). RNC, 145 S. Ct. at 108–09. Three Justices—
Thomas, Alito, and Gorsuch—would have stayed the district
court’s injunction in full. Id.
B
On the merits, the majority affirmed vast swaths of the
district court’s injunction. First, the majority upheld the
district court’s ruling on the LULAC consent decree—
despite the Supreme Court staying that portion of the district
court’s injunction. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 717–20.
Second, the majority upheld the district court’s analysis
of the NVRA claims. The majority focused on Sections 6,
7, 8, and 9 of the NVRA. See Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at
710–17. Section 6 states that each “State shall accept and
use the mail voter registration application form prescribed
by the Federal Election Commission.”
52 U.S.C.
§ 20505(a)(1). Section 9 permits states to also use their own
state forms to register voters for federal elections, but such

14

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

forms
“may
require
only
such
identifying
information . . . and other information . . . as is necessary to
enable the appropriate State election official to assess the
eligibility of the applicant and to administer voter
registration and other parts of the election process.” Id.
§ 20508(b)(1). Section 7 explains that any voter registration
agency “that provides service or assistance” in “conducting
voter registration” shall distribute the federal voter
registration form or its “equivalent” state form. Id.
§ 20506(a)(6)(A)(i)–(ii).
The majority held that Arizona’s requirement to provide
DPOC to vote by mail conflicted with Section 6 because
doing so meant Arizona was not “accept[ing] and us[ing]”
the federal form as sufficient. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at
710; see 52 U.S.C. § 20508(a)(1). The majority also held
that Section 6 preempted Arizona’s requirement for DPOC
in presidential elections. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 711–
12.
Finally, the majority held Arizona’s periodic removals of
ineligible individuals from the voter rolls unlawful. It
construed 52 U.S.C. § 20507(c)(2)(A) to protect applicants
who were never eligible to register in the first place. Mi
Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 714–17; see Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§ 16–165(A)(10), (G)–(K).2

2

Several other holdings by the panel majority are troubling, including its
conclusions on the Materiality Provisions of the Civil Rights Act, its
holding on the proof of residency requirement under H.B. 2492, its
analysis of the Voting Laws’ list maintenance provisions, its analysis of
organizational and associational standing for certain non-profit
Appellees, and its decision to vacate the district court’s factual finding
that the Voting Laws were not motivated by discriminatory intent. See
Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 732–770 (Bumatay, J., dissenting).

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

15

Judge Bumatay dissented. He noted that the majority
erred because: (1) Arizona’s state form requirement could
not be limited by the LULAC consent decree; (2) the DPOC
requirement to vote by mail was a restriction on voting rather
than on registering to vote; (3) the NVRA does not cover
Presidential elections; and (4) the periodic removal
provisions were lawful as 52 U.S.C. § 20507(c)(2)(A) only
protects applicants who were initially eligible to vote. See
Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 745–50, 741–45, 733–41,
752–57 (Bumatay, J., dissenting).
II
Despite the Supreme Court’s stay, the majority upheld
the injunction on Arizona’s requirement for DPOC with its
state form. The majority erred by holding: (1) the LULAC
consent decree independently invalidated the requirement;
and (2) the requirement was preempted by the NVRA.
A
Our government is “strictly republican,” for it “is evident
that no other form would be reconcilable with the genius of
the people of America.” The Federalist No. 39 (James
Madison). Consent decrees subvert republican government.
The majority wrongly held that Arizona could not enact
Arizona Revised Statutes § 16-121.01(C) because it violated
the LULAC consent decree. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at
717–20. Section 16-121.01(C) mandates that individuals
registering with the state form provide DPOC. The majority
invalidated that requirement because the LULAC consent
decree was a “binding final judgment[] that remain[s] in
force permanently.” Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 718.
The majority opinion misses the point. True, the
LULAC consent decree remains in force as resolving that

16

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

specific litigation. But the decree cannot bind future
legislative action that contradicts the decree. And a consent
decree cannot forcefully prevent Arizona’s executive branch
officials from executing duly passed laws subsequently
enacted by the Arizona legislature.
While many consent decrees pose no problems under
Ninth Circuit caselaw, “a narrow but important class of
consent decrees, if judicially enforced, would violate the
structural provisions of the Constitution by denying future
executive [and legislative] officials the policymaking
authority vested in them by the Constitution and laws.”
Michael W. McConnell, Why Hold Elections? Using
Consent Decrees to Insulate Policies from Political Change,
1987 U. CHI. LEGAL F. 295, 298. Consent decrees that “bind
state and local officials to the policy preferences of their
predecessors” may “‘improperly deprive future officials of
their designated legislative and executive powers.’” Horne
v. Flores, 557 U.S. 433, 449 (2009) (quoting Frew v.
Hawkins, 540 U.S. 431, 441 (2004)).
Applying consent decrees to future legislative action
poses serious constitutional concerns. Consent decrees draw
their force from “the agreement of the parties, rather than the
force of the law upon which [a] complaint was originally
based.” Local No. 93, Int’l Ass’n of Firefighters v. City of
Cleveland, 478 U.S. 501, 522 (1986). Courts do not
determine whether “the plaintiff established his factual
claims and legal theories in litigation.” United States v.
Armour & Co., 402 U.S. 673, 682 (1971). “Thus, a court
may enter a consent decree against a government defendant
without finding that a statutory or constitutional violation
has occurred, inquiring into the precise legal rights of the
parties, or reaching and resolving the merits of the claims or
controversy.” Michael T. Morley, Consent of the Governed

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

17

or Consent of the Government? The Problems with Consent
Decrees in Government-Defendant Cases, 16 U. Pa. J.
Const. L. 637, 647–48 (2014) (quotation omitted) (citing
Rufo v. Inmates of Suffolk Cnty. Jail, 502 U.S. 367, 389
(1992); Armour & Co., 402 U.S. at 682–83) (cleaned up).
Given these concerns, we have created a common-sense
rule to determine when consent decrees that limit
government defendants can bind subsequent state
legislatures and executives. Neither the district court nor the
panel majority can “supersede [Arizona’s] law,” by citing a
consent decree “unless [Arizona’s law] conflicts with any
federal law.” Keith v. Volpe, 118 F.3d 1386, 1393 (9th Cir.
1997). The majority erred in concluding that the consent
decree alone could nullify any portion of the subsequently
enacted Voting Laws. That holding conflicts with Volpe,
which correctly holds that a violation of a consent decree is
not an independent basis to bar subsequent state law.
Volpe’s holding is based on fundamental principles.
Applying government defendant consent decrees beyond the
case in which they are entered violates the strictures of
Article III and raises grave separation of powers concerns.
The judicial power only extends to “Cases” and
“Controversies.” U.S. Const. art III, § 2, cl. 1. While “[i]t
is emphatically the province and duty of the judicial
department to say what the law is,” we do so only “to
particular cases.” Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch)
137, 177 (1803). Without a case or controversy, we are
powerless to decide questions of law under the Constitution.
Id.
This principle has stood firm since the inception of our
Republic. In 1793, in the wake of hostilities between
England and France, President Washington issued a

18

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

Proclamation of Neutrality between the warring powers. See
President George Washington, Neutrality Proclamation
(Apr. 22, 1793), in Founders Online, https://founders.archiv
es.gov/documents/Washington/05-12-02-0371.
Months
later, Secretary of State Jefferson sent a letter to the Supreme
Court, requesting the Justices to provide legal advice on
twenty-nine questions relating to the United States’ legal
obligations about the ongoing conflict. See RICHARD H.
FALLON, JR. ET AL., HART AND WECHSLER’S THE FEDERAL
COURTS AND THE FEDERAL SYSTEM 50–52 (7TH ED. 2015)
(reproducing the letter).
Breaking from pre-constitutional practice, the Supreme
Court declined to entertain Secretary Jefferson’s questions.
Id. Chief Justice John Jay wrote to President Washington:
The lines of separation drawn by the
Constitution between the three departments
of the government—their being in certain
respects checks upon each other—and our
being judges of a court in the last resort—are
considerations
which
afford
strong
arguments against the propriety of our
extrajudicially deciding the questions alluded
to; especially as the power given by the
Constitution to the President of calling on the
heads of departments for opinions, seems to
have been purposely as well as expressly
limited to the executive departments.
Id. (reproducing the letter). So when federal courts declare
law outside a particular case, they act “extrajudicially” (i.e.,
outside the judicial power) and erode “[t]he lines of

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

19

separation drawn by the Constitution between the three
departments of the government.” Id.
The Supreme Court has thus constructed modern
justiciability doctrines to ensure the judiciary acts within its
constitutional authority. See, e.g., Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife,
504 U.S. 555, 559–61 (1992). In applying those doctrines,
judges must also consider whether they are properly
exercising the judicial power as originally understood,
expounding on the law only through defined cases or
controversies. Marbury, 5 U.S. (1 Cranch) at 177.
Applying consent decrees to future cases falls outside the
judicial power. When entering consent decrees, federal
courts do “not inquire into the precise legal rights of the
parties nor reach and resolve the merits of the claims or
controversy.” Citizens for a Better Env’t v. Gorsuch, 718
F.2d 1117, 1126 (D.C. Cir. 1983) (citation omitted). When
a government defendant and a litigant form a consent decree,
they are not adverse. And the “judicial power, as we have
seen, is the right to determine actual controversies arising
between adverse litigants.” Muskrat v. United States, 219
U.S. 346, 361 (1911) (emphasis added). When “both
litigants desire precisely the same result,” as with consent
decrees, there is “no case or controversy within the meaning
of Art. III of the Constitution.” Moore v. CharlotteMecklenburg Bd. of Educ., 402 U.S. 47, 48 (1971). Such
decrees encourage the government to collude with friendly
actors and achieve legal results they would be unable to
reach normally. See, e.g., Utah v. U.S. Dep’t of Interior, 535
F.3d 1184, 1189–91 (10th Cir. 2008).
And unlike settlement agreements which are private
contracts courts can lawfully enforce, see, e.g., U.S. Bancorp
Mortg. Co. v. Bonner Mall P’ship, 513 U.S. 18, 21–22, 28–

20

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

29 (1994), the enforcement mechanism of consent decrees
demonstrates their constitutional limits. While violation of
a settlement agreement is remedied through a separate
breach-of-contract suit, “noncompliance with a consent
decree is enforceable by citation for contempt of court.”
Local No. 93, 478 U.S. at 518. We treat the violation of a
consent decree as if the violator has broken the law, even
though that “law” was not decided in the context of a case or
controversy as the judicial power requires. See id.; Marbury,
5 U.S. (1 Cranch) at 177.
By giving consent decrees the force of law, we act
extrajudicially, doing greater damage to the separation of
powers than by rendering advisory opinions. At least when
Secretary Jefferson requested an advisory opinion, he
expected the Supreme Court to say “what the law is.”
Compare Fallon, Jr. et al., supra, at 50–52 with Marbury, 5
U.S. (1 Cranch) at 177. When entering consent decrees, the
parties tell a court what they want the law to be, and the court
rubber stamps their fancies with the imprimatur of law.
Armour & Co., 402 U.S. at 682.
By independently relying on the LULAC Consent
Decree, the majority exceeds the judicial power assigned to
it by the Constitution, defacing the carefully constructed
separation of powers designed by our eminent forebears.
B
The majority separately held that the NVRA preempts
Arizona’s DPOC requirement for state form applicants in
federal elections. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 719. But
the NVRA does not conflict with Arizona’s requirement.
And by extension, no federal law nor the LULAC consent
decree prevents Arizona from enforcing the requirement.

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

21

Under the NVRA each “State shall accept and use the
mail voter registration application form prescribed by the
Federal Election Commission pursuant to section
20508(a)(2) of this title for the registration of voters in
elections for Federal office.” 52 U.S.C. § 20505(a)(1). The
Act also states, however, that “[i]n addition to accepting and
using the form described in paragraph (1), a State may
develop and use a mail voter registration form that meets all
of the criteria stated in section 20508(b) of this title for the
registration of voters in elections for Federal office.” Id.
§ 20505(a)(2).
Under § 20508(b) a registration form “may require only
such identifying information . . .and other information . . . as
is necessary to enable the appropriate State election official
to assess the eligibility of the applicant and to administer
voter registration and other parts of the election process.” Id.
§ 20508(b)(1) (emphasis added). Further, such forms “shall
include a statement that—(A) specifies each eligibility
requirement (including citizenship); (B) contains an
attestation that the applicant meets each such requirement;
and (C) requires the signature of the applicant, under penalty
of perjury.” Id. § 20508(b)(2).
The key question then is whether Arizona’s DPOC
requirement is “necessary” to allow state officials to assess
the eligibility of applicants and administer voter registration.
The majority concluded that the requirement was not
“necessary” because “necessary” in § 20508(b)(1) means
“essential.” Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 719. And any
DPOC requirement cannot be essential because the state
form’s checkbox requirement supplies proof of citizenship
by attestation. Id. The majority gets it wrong.

22

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

While “necessary” can mean “essential,” the majority
ignores that “necessary” also has another more common
meaning. In many statutory and constitutional contexts,
“necessary” means “needful.” See Necessary, MerriamWebster Unabridged Dictionary, https://unabridged.merria
m-webster.com/unabridged/necessary; Needful, MerriamWebster Unabridged Dictionary, https://unabridged.merria
m-webster.com/unabridged/needful; see also MerriamWebster’s Collegiate Dictionary, 829 (11th ed. 2005)
(defining “needful” as “necessary”). In interpreting the
Necessary and Proper Clause, for example, the Supreme
Court has rejected reading “necessary” to mean essential.
McCulloch v. Maryland, 17 U.S. (4 Wheat.) 316, 414–20
(1819).
And between these two meanings, the NVRA is better
read as authorizing states to create state forms that collect
information needful “to enable the appropriate State election
official to assess the eligibility of the applicant and to
administer voter registration and other parts of the election
process.” 52 U.S.C. § 20508(b)(1). In “ordinary speech, the
term [necessary] is often used more loosely to refer to
something that is merely important or strongly desired”
rather than “[i]n the strictest sense of the term” where
“something is ‘necessary’ only if it is essential.” Ayestas v.
Davis, 584 U.S. 28, 44 (2018). Between the two readings,
courts are better off leaning towards “necessary” meaning
“needful” rather than “essential,” especially when analyzing
statutes granting powers to the states or the federal
government (unless the statutory text demands the stricter
meaning).
The NVRA’s statutory scheme strongly suggests that
“necessary” in § 20508(b)(1) carries the more lenient
meaning. The relevant text allows states to require

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

23

identifying information “necessary to enable” a state
election official to assess the eligibility of an application. 52
U.S.C. § 20508(b)(1) (emphasis added). Under the principle
of noscitur a sociis, “a word is known by the company it
keeps.” Yates v. United States, 574 U.S. 528, 543 (2015).
And “necessary” appears just before “to enable” in the text.
This provision of the NVRA actively empowers states to
create forms that enable state election officials to determine
voter registration eligibility by giving them information
necessary to that endeavor. Under the majority’s reading of
“necessary” (i.e., “essential”), the statute would not “enable”
state election officials. Rather than read the provision as a
statutory grant, the majority’s reading of “necessary”
actively disables states and state election officials. If states
must keep second guessing if any information they collect is
truly essential, then the statute turns from a provision
enabling them to collect useful information, into a manacle
that subjects state forms to onerous litigation second
guessing information unequivocally useful in determining
voter registration eligibility.
Taken to its logical extreme, states could never collect
any information under (b)(1) because (b)(2) mandates that
state forms include provisions in which applicants attest that
they are eligible. An attestation under (b)(2) theoretically
covers all eligibility information, rendering any information
collected under (b)(1) inessential.
By giving “necessary” in the NVRA this meaning, the
majority reads out § 20508(b)(1). But “[t]hese words cannot
be meaningless, else they would not have been used.”
United States v. Butler, 297 U.S. 1, 65 (1936). The only
reading of “necessary” in § 20508(b)(1) that does not
mangle § 20508 is to conclude that “necessary” means

24

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

“needful.” And no one can dispute that DPOC is needful “to
enable” a “State election official to assess the eligibility of
[an] applicant” to register to vote. 52 U.S.C. § 20508(b)(1).
The majority then posits that Section 7 of the NVRA also
prevents a state from requiring DPOC with its state form. Mi
Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 720. But this argument also lacks
merit.
The majority points to § 20506(a)(6)(A)(ii), providing
that a state form can register voters only “if it is equivalent
to the form described in section 20508(a)(2) of this title.”
That provision states that the “Election Assistance
Commission—in consultation with the chief election
officers of the States, shall develop a mail voter registration
application form for elections for Federal office.” 52 U.S.C.
§ 20508(a)(2).
The majority misconstrued these two provisions. Under
§ 20506(a)(6)(A)(ii), the state form had to be “equivalent”
to the federal form. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 720. The
majority concluded that “the state form is not equivalent to
the federal form because the state form has unnecessary
additional requirements of DPOC, [documentary proof of
residence], and birthplace.” Id. But “equivalent” in
§ 20506(a)(6)(A)(ii) is better read to mean similar in
function or effect rather than identical. Mi Familia Vota, 129
F.4th at 750–51 (Bumatay, J., dissenting). Under that
reading, Arizona’s state form passes muster.
The majority’s reading, which implies that state forms
need to match federal forms or be rendered not “equivalent”
under § 20506(a)(6)(A)(ii), does not track Supreme Court
precedent. In ITCA, the Supreme Court explained what the
NVRA permits and proscribes. 570 U.S. at 12, 20. The
Supreme Court explained that states could not mandate

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

25

DPOC above what the federal form required to register
federal form applicants. Id. at 20. But “state–developed
forms may require information the Federal Form does not.”
Id. at 12. And the example the Court gave of such additional
information was that “Arizona’s registration form
includes . . . proof-of-citizenship”
documentation
as
information it collects. Id.
ITCA thus shows that states can require DPOC with state
registration forms without breaching the NVRA. Id. Such a
requirement does not render a state form nonequivalent to
the federal form. Id. Although ITCA dealt with whether
DPOC was allowed with federal form registration, the
colloquy about the state form issue was “considered dicta of
the Supreme Court,” entitled to “greater weight and
deference” than the majority gave it. Valladolid v. Pac.
Operations Offshore, LLP, 604 F.3d 1126, 1131 (9th Cir.
2010).
Our caselaw also confirms that states may require DPOC
with state forms. The NVRA does not have “a proscription
against states requiring documentary proof of citizenship.”
Gonzalez v. Arizona, 485 F.3d 1041, 1050 (9th Cir. 2007).
But the majority shrugged off Gonzalez. Mi Familia Vota,
129 F.4th at 719. Because Gonzalez was decided at the
preliminary injunction stage, the majority felt it was not
bound by the case. Id.
But this conclusion misstates the law. A published
opinion, even at the preliminary injunction stage, does bind
future panels if its conclusions are on pure issues of law. See
E. Bay Sanctuary Covenant v. Biden, 993 F.3d 640, 682–83
(9th Cir. 2021) (Fernandez, J., concurring); Ranchers
Cattlemen Action Legal Fund United Stockgrowers of Am. v.
U.S. Dep’t of Agric., 499 F.3d 1108, 1114 (9th Cir. 2007).

26

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

So the majority not only ignored Supreme Court precedent,
but binding circuit precedent as well. See RNC, 145 S. Ct.
108.
III
The majority held that the NVRA preempted the Voting
Laws in two critical ways. It held that Arizona’s DPOC
requirement to vote by mail was preempted. Mi Familia
Vota, 129 F.4th at 710–11. It also held that Arizona’s DPOC
requirement for presidential elections was preempted. Id. at
711–12. Both holdings are wrong.
A
The majority upheld the district court’s injunction on the
portion of H.B. 2492 that required citizenship
documentation to vote by mail. Citing conflict preemption,
it concluded that the requirement flouted 52 U.S.C.
§ 20505(a)(1)’s requirement that states “accept and use” the
federal form. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 710. But this
conclusion runs headlong into Supreme Court precedent.
In ITCA the Supreme Court held that the requirement
that states “accept and use” the federal form meant that
requiring DPOC to register a federal form voter was
impermissible.
570 U.S. at 19–20; see 52 U.S.C.
§ 20508(b)(1). But registering to vote and casting a vote by
mail differ. Once Arizona registers people to vote, it can
require them to present identification before they do vote.
For example, the Supreme Court has upheld a state law
that requires a citizen voting on election day to present photo
identification before casting a ballot. See Crawford v.
Marion Cnty. Election Bd., 553 U.S. 181, 185–86, 203–04
(2008). In Crawford, the Court recognized that states had to
“reexamine their election procedures” to comport with the

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

27

NVRA and still upheld a state law requiring photo
identification to vote. Id. at 192, 203–04. Instead, the
Supreme Court explained that such regulations must simply
withstand scrutiny under the Anderson-Burdick balancing
test. See id. at 190; see also Anderson v. Celebrezze, 460
U.S. 780 (1983); Burdick, 504 U.S. 428. Under that test, the
same state interest in “deterring and detecting voter fraud,”
that led the Supreme Court to uphold DPOC requirements
for in-person voting, also counsels upholding Arizona’s
DPOC requirement for mail-in voters using the federal form.
Crawford, 553 U.S. at 191, 203–04. Since determining voter
eligibility aims to deter voter fraud, Arizona can lawfully
require DPOC for mail-in ballots as with voting in person.
Id. at 185–86, 191, 203–04.3
B
Next, the majority held that requiring DPOC in
presidential elections is preempted by the NVRA. Mi
Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 711. According to the majority,
52 U.S.C. § 20505(a)(1)’s “accept and use” language
preempts Arizona Revised Statutes § 16-127(A)(1)’s proof
of citizenship requirement. But regulating who may vote in
presidential elections falls solely to the states.
The Elections Clause of Article I empowers Congress to
legislate on federal elections by regulating the “Times,
Places, and Manner of holding Elections for Senators and
Representatives.” U.S. Const. art. I, § 4, cl. 1. The Clause
applies only to the election of Senators and Representatives.
For presidential elections, the Electors Clause explains that
3

The logic underlying Crawford also demonstrates why the majority’s
analysis of obstacle preemption fails since Voter ID laws deterring voter
fraud do not impede the NVRA’s underlying purposes. See Mi Familia
Vota, 129 F.4th at 711.

28

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

“[e]ach State shall appoint, in such Manner as the
Legislature thereof may direct, a Number of Electors.” U.S.
Const. art. II, § 1, cl. 2. Congress’s only role in the process
comes from the Chusing Clause which does not govern voter
eligibility requirements. See U.S. Const. art. II, § 1, cl. 4.
The majority concludes that the Supreme Court has
given Congress broad authority to regulate presidential
elections. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 712. But the
majority overreads Burroughs v. United States, 290 U.S.
534, 544 (1934). Burroughs involved an indictment where
the petitioners argued that the Federal Corrupt Practices Act
(FCPA) contravened “section 1, art. 2, of the Federal
Constitution, providing for the appointment by each state of
electors.” 290 U.S. at 541–42. The Court upheld the FCPA,
but did so narrowly since it “in no sense invades any
exclusive state power.” Id. at 545. The Court explained that
“[w]hile presidential electors are not officers or agents of the
federal government, they exercise federal functions under,
and discharge duties in virtue of authority conferred by, the
Constitution of the United States.” Id. (cleaned up). Thus,
Congress had the “power to pass appropriate legislation to
safeguard [a presidential election] from the improper use of
money to influence the result.” Id.
Burroughs can be read to mean that Congress can
legislate in some cases to ensure presidential elections aren’t
improperly corrupted through bribes or violence. Id. at 544–
48. It does not suggest, as the majority concludes, that
Congress, rather than the states, can regulate who gets to
vote to choose electors. Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at 712.
Under both the text of the Electors Clause and Burroughs, it
is the “power of a state to appoint electors [and to determine]
the manner in which their appointment shall be made.” 290
U.S. at 544. Requiring proof of citizenship to vote falls

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

29

squarely within that power. Unlike in Burroughs, the
majority’s application of the NVRA to invalidate H.B.
2492’s requirement of DPOC “invades” Arizona’s
“exclusive state power” to regulate the manner of choosing
electors. Id. at 545.
Supreme Court precedent confirms this conclusion.
“[I]n choosing Presidential electors, the Clause leaves it to
the legislature exclusively to define the method of effecting
the object.” Moore v. Harper, 600 U.S. 1, 27 (2023)
(cleaned up). Both “the appointment and mode of
appointment of electors belong exclusively to the states
under the constitution of the United States.” McPherson v.
Blacker, 146 U.S. 1, 35 (1892). Arizona can both choose to
select its electors through popular elections and determine
who is eligible to vote in them. Id.
IV
Finally, the majority created a circuit split with the Sixth
Circuit in Bell, 367 F.3d at 591–92 by upholding the district
court’s injunction on Arizona Revised Statutes § 16–
165(A)(10), (G)–(K), the provisions of H.B. 2243 that task
county recorders with periodically conducting citizenship
checks and removing ineligible applicants from the rolls.
The majority found that the periodic removal provisions
conflicted with 52 U.S.C. § 20507(c)(2)(A). Mi Familia
Vota, 129 F.4th at 714–17. That portion of the NVRA states
that a “State shall complete, not later than 90 days prior to
the date of a primary or general election for Federal office,
any program the purpose of which is to systematically
remove the names of ineligible voters from the official lists
of eligible voters.” 52 U.S.C § 20507(c)(2)(A). And since,
in the majority’s view, Arizona’s periodic cancellation does
not rely on “individualized information or investigation, but

30

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

rather comparisons to databases,” “[i]t is a systematic
removal program [that] violates the 90-day Provision
because it permits systematic cancellation of registrations
within 90 days preceding a federal election.” Mi Familia
Vota, 129 F.4th at 716 (cleaned up).
But § 20507(c)(2)(A) covers “ineligible voters,” not
ineligible applicants. See Mi Familia Vota, 129 F.4th at
752–57 (Bumatay, J., dissenting). Section 20507(c)(2)(A)
refers to three sets of people. In the pre-registration process
it refers to applicants, then once eligible applicants are
registered, they are known as registrants, and finally the
statute calls on states to remove ineligible voters (i.e., a
subset of registrants) from the rolls. See 52 U.S.C.
§§ 20507(a)(1)(A)–(D),
20507(a)(3),
20507(a)(4).
“Ineligible voters” in § 20507(c)(2)(A) comprise individuals
eligible to vote at the time of their registration who become
ineligible to vote subsequently. Id. They are not individuals
who were never eligible at all, the target of H.B. 2243.
And the majority opinion conflicts with the Sixth
Circuit’s holding in Bell, 367 F.3d at 591–92. When
analyzing the voter removal provisions of the NVRA, the
Sixth Circuit held that “[i]n creating a list of justifications
for removal, Congress did not intend to bar the removal of
names” for “persons who were ineligible and improperly
registered to vote in the first place.” Id. If the NVRA were
read that way then “we would effectively grant, and then
protect, the franchise of persons not eligible to vote.” Id. at
592. The NVRA, enacted to help states “protect the integrity
of the electoral process,” does not mandate such a result. 52
U.S.C. § 20507(b). The Sixth Circuit got it right, and the
panel majority did not.

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

31

Moreover, given that Appellees brought a facial preenforcement challenge (and no as applied challenge), they
needed to show “no set of circumstances exists under which
the Act would be valid.” United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S.
739, 745 (1987). The removals are valid against anyone who
was ineligible at registration. And they are valid for
removals done prior to 90 days before an election. See 52
U.S.C. § 20507(c)(2)(A) (applying only to removals within
the 90-day window). Those applications alone undermine
the facial pre-enforcement challenge.
V
The majority opinion is profoundly wrong; it ignores
Supreme Court precedent and our own. Much worse, it
skirted Supreme Court direction in this case and again in a
case with nearly identical issues. And the opinion makes our
elections less safe—our country less free.
The rule of law is vital to the American experiment. It
requires us as inferior courts to respect the Court that the
Constitution hails as Supreme. U.S. Const. art. III § 1, cl. 1.
Each time this court shirks the Supreme Court with wrong
legal analysis we erode the rule of law, inviting “anarchy”
into our jurisprudence. Nat’l Inst. of Health v. Am. Pub.
Health Ass’n, No. 25A103, 2025 WL 2415669, at *3 (U.S.
Aug. 21, 2025) (Gorsuch, J., concurring in part). And if it
continues, “law in time will sign its epitaph.” Abrego Garcia
v. Noem, No. 25-1404, 2025 WL 1135112, at *3 (4th Cir.
Apr. 17, 2025). Today our court does a grave injustice to
republican government. And so, I must dissent.

32

MI FAMILIA VOTA V. PETERSEN

COLLINS, Circuit Judge, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
As to the issues on which rehearing en banc has been
sought in the pending petitions, my views are in general
accord with those expressed in Judge Bumatay’s panel
dissent, which details the panel majority’s many errors. See
Mi Familia Vota v. Fontes, 129 F.4th 691, 732 (9th Cir.
2025) (Bumatay, J. dissenting).
We should have
reconsidered en banc the panel majority’s egregiously
flawed decision in this important case, and I dissent from our
failure to do so.
BRESS, Circuit Judge, with whom BADE and FORREST,
Circuit Judges, join, dissenting from the denial of rehearing
en banc:
I respectfully dissent from the denial of rehearing en
banc. At a minimum, we should have reevaluated the panel
majority’s incorrect and consequential decision upholding
the injunction of Arizona’s documentary proof of citizenship
requirement for state-form applicants, Ariz. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§ 16-121.01(C)—the portion of the injunction that the
Supreme Court already stayed. Republican Nat’l Comm. v.
Mi Familia Vota, 145 S. Ct. 108 (2024).

