FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LEI LI, an individual; STRONG
WEALTH INVESTMENT
LIMITED, a British Virgin Islands
Company; PACIFIC SMILE
LIMITED, a British Virgin Islands
Company,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
ARCSOFT, INC., a California
Corporation; MICHAEL DENG, an
individual,
Defendants - Appellees,
and
DANIEL MACKEIGAN, an
individual, TIMOTHY LIN, an
individual,
Defendants.

No. 24-2531
D.C. No.
4:19-cv-05836JSW
ORDER
CERTIFYING
QUESTION TO
THE SUPREME
COURT OF
CALIFORNIA

2

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

LEI LI; STRONG WEALTH
INVESTMENT LIMITED; PACIFIC
SMILE LIMITED,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,

No. 24-2964
D.C. No.
4:19-cv-05836JSW

v.
ARCSOFT, INC.; MICHAEL
DENG,
Defendants - Appellants.
Filed December 3, 2025
Before: Mary H. Murguia, Chief Judge, Danielle J. Forrest,
Circuit Judge, and Raner C. Collins, District Judge. *
SUMMARY **
Certification to California Supreme Court
The panel certified to the California Supreme Court the
following question:

The Honorable Raner C. Collins, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

3

Do the appraisal requirements of California
Corporations Code § 1312(a) and the
California Supreme Court’s decision in
Steinberg v. Amplica, Inc., 729 P.2d 683 (Cal.
1986) (Mosk, J.), preclude a shareholder
from seeking buyout-related damages when
the facts leading to the shareholder’s cause of
action were not known until after the buyout
was consummated.

ORDER
In this case, we are asked to determine whether the
appraisal requirements imposed by California Corporations
Code § 1312(a) and the California Supreme Court’s decision
in Steinberg v. Amplica, Inc., 729 P.2d 683 (Cal. 1986)
(Mosk, J.), preclude a shareholder from seeking buyoutrelated damages when the facts leading to the shareholder’s
cause of action were not known until after the buyout was
consummated. This state-law question is determinative of
this case, and there is no controlling precedent from the
California Supreme Court. See Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(a). For this
reason, we respectfully certify this question of law to the
California Supreme Court under California Rule of Court
8.548.
I. Background
Defendant-Appellee ArcSoft, Inc., was founded by
Michael Deng in 1994. Though its products have varied,
today it is primarily known for creating software that enables
personal cellular devices to process images, including facialrecognition technology. Marc Chan was one of ArcSoft’s

4

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

early investors. Although Chan was deeply engaged with
ArcSoft’s operations for many years, by the mid-2000s he
had personally ceased to hold any shares in the company. He
instead transferred his shares to two shell companies—
Strong Wealth Investment Ltd. and Pacific Smile Ltd.—and
his wife, Lei Li, who are the plaintiffs-appellants in this
dispute.
Amid consistently lackluster performance by ArcSoft in
the early 2010s, Deng was approached by a major Chinese
institutional investor, Huatai Securities Co., which
expressed interest in facilitating an ArcSoft IPO in China. In
2017, based on Chinese accounting principles, Huatai valued
ArcSoft at the equivalent of $680 million U.S. dollars. This
favorable valuation was the basis for plans developed
between Deng and Huatai for reorganizing ArcSoft. A
condition of Huatai investing in ArcSoft was for Deng to
secure a buyout of ArcSoft’s existing shareholders.
In his efforts to persuade ArcSoft’s directors and
shareholders to consent to a buyout, Deng withheld
information about the ongoing negotiations with Huatai and
the state of ArcSoft’s finances, which had improved
considerably in the months leading up to voting. He also
failed to provide a fairness opinion. See Cal. Corp. Code
§ 1203(a)(2) (2016). Based on the incomplete information
they had available to them, ArcSoft’s shareholders approved
a $150 million buyout of ArcSoft on October 17, 2017—
considerably lower than Huatai’s $680 million valuation less
than a year earlier. Li and the shell companies received a
combined $14.22 million for their shares.
Through Deng’s efforts, in 2019, ArcSoft had an IPO on
China’s “STAR Market,” a new science-and-technologyfocused stock exchange. Li and the shell companies later

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

5

sued ArcSoft and Deng in the Northern District of
California, alleging that ArcSoft and Deng had damaged
them through: (1) fraud, deceit, and concealment; (2) breach
of fiduciary duty; and (3) breach of contract.
At summary judgment, ArcSoft and Deng argued that Li
and the shell companies were barred from recovery under
California Corporation Code § 1312(a). The district court
rejected ArcSoft and Deng’s argument, finding that
California courts recognize a non-statutory exemption to
§ 1312(a) where plaintiffs did not know about the alleged
fraud until after the buyout. The case proceeded to trial, and
ArcSoft and Deng sought judgment as a matter of law on
their § 1312(a) argument, which the district court reserved
ruling on. The jury ultimately found in favor of plaintiffs as
to:
(1) negligent
misrepresentation,
(2) fraudulent
concealment, and (3) breach of fiduciary duty, and awarded
Plaintiffs $9.7 million in compensatory damages. The jury
also found that Li and the other plaintiffs were unaware of
ArcSoft and Deng’s tortious conduct until after the buyout.
ArcSoft and Deng then renewed their motion for judgment
as a matter of law, which the district court denied because it
continued to reason “that California courts are likely to
permit” a non-statutory exception for cases where the facts
underlying the fraud were unknown to plaintiffs until after
the transaction. The district court entered judgment on
March 5, 2024. The parties timely cross appealed. See Fed.
R. App. Proc. 4(1)(A), 4(a)(4)(A)(i).
II. Explanation for Certification
Section 1312(a) of the California Corporations Code
provides that “[n]o shareholder shall have any right at law or
in equity to attack the validity of the reorganization or shortform merger, . . . except in an action to test whether the

6

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

number of shares required to authorize or approve the
reorganization have been legally voted in favor thereof,”
subject to two limited exceptions, neither of which is
implicated here. The question presented by this case is
whether there is an additional exception, not identified in the
text of the statute, for situations in which a shareholder does
not become aware of the basis for an “attack on the validity
of the reorganization or short-form merger” until after the
reorganization or short-form merger has been consummated.
Because existing precedent does not answer this state-law
question and the policy balancing implicit in crafting such
an exception is complex, we have elected to certify this
matter rather than answer it ourselves.
The California Supreme Court most recently addressed
the meaning of § 1312(a) in Steinberg v. Amplica, Inc., 729
P.2d 683 (Cal. 1986) (Mosk, J.). There, the court held that
§ 1312(a) limits a minority shareholder’s remedy in a merger
or reorganization to seeking an appraisal. 1 See id. at 694.
Section 1312(a), it explained, reflects a deliberate effort on
behalf of the state to balance “the need to deter misconduct
by corporate insiders against the risk that desirable corporate
changes will be hampered by minority stockholders who
seek to exercise leverage for their own aggrandizement.” Id.
(citation omitted). The court did not foreclose the possibility
that there is a non-statutory exception to § 1312(a) for a
shareholder who does not become aware of a manager’s
unlawful conduct until after the fact, but it also did not
endorse such an exception. See id. Instead, it simply
“conclude[d] that at least in a case . . . where the plaintiff
was aware of all the facts leading to his cause of action . . .
The challenged “merger” or “reorganization” here was the Deng
group’s buyout of ArcSoft’s shareholders on October 17, 2017.
1

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

7

but deliberately opted to sue for damages instead of seeking
appraisal, section 1312(a) acts as a bar.” Id.
In the aftermath of Steinberg, the California Courts of
Appeal have noted that the non-statutory exception remains
an “open” question. See Singhania v. Uttarwar, 38 Cal. Rptr.
3d 861, 869 (Cal. App. 2006) (“[I]n Steinberg, . . . the
California Supreme Court . . . left open the question whether
a nonstatutory exception to section 1312, subdivision (a),
might exist for a damages action based upon misconduct of
which a shareholder was unaware prior to consummation of
a merger.”). With only one partial exception, they have never
recognized such an exception. That partial exception comes
from a single unpublished California Court of Appeal
decision, which appears to have relied on a misreading of an
earlier California Court of Appeal decision. See Max v. 8E6
Corp., No. B307406, 2022 WL 909907, at *12–13 (Cal.
App. April 27, 2022) (citing Busse v. United PanAm Fin.
Corp., 166 Cal. Rptr. 3d 520, 533 (Cal. App. 2014)). Though
we have sometimes been willing to rely in part on
unpublished decisions as evidence supporting a particular
reading of California law in limited instances, e.g.,
Employers Ins. of Wasau v. Granite State Ins. Co., 330 F.3d
1214, 1220 n.8 (9th Cir. 2003), we are also sensitive to the
concern that unpublished decisions of the California Courts
of Appeal may not be cited as authority in state court, Cal.
R. Ct. 8.1115(a)–(b).
Further complicating matters, one decision from the
California Courts of Appeal pre-dating Steinberg, Sturgeon
Petroleums, Ltd. v. Merchants Petroleum Co., held that there
is no non-statutory exception to § 1312(a) under any
circumstances. 195 Cal. Rptr. 29, 32–33 (Cal. App. 1983).
Steinberg, moreover, cited Sturgeon as good authority and

8

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

rejected an effort by the plaintiff to have the latter case
overturned. Steinberg, 729 P.2d at 685, 692–93.
Other states have recognized non-statutory—
presumably equitable—exceptions to similar statutes. In
Cede & Co. v. Technicolor, Inc., for example, the Delaware
Supreme Court recognized that a shareholder who
challenges a merger based on later-discovered fraud is not
barred from litigating the claim by the state’s equivalent of
§ 1312(a). 542 A.2d 1182, 1188 (Del. 1988). As it explained,
“policy considerations militate against foreclosing a
shareholder electing appraisal rights from later bringing a
fraud action based on after-discovered wrongdoing in the
merger,” for “only shareholders pursuing discovery during
an appraisal proceeding are likely to acquire the relevant
information needed to pursue a fraud action if such
information exists.” Id. at 1188–89. “[T]o bar those seeking
appraisal from asserting a later-discovered fraud claim” thus
has the potential to “effectively immunize a controlling
shareholder from answering to a fraud claim.” Id. at 1189.
But at least one state, in the name of discouraging “vexatious
lawsuits by those whose goal is simply to receive more
money for their stock,” has stuck with appraisal as the
exclusive remedy in all cases where “the shareholder’s
objection is essentially a complaint regarding the price
which he received for his shares.” Stepak v. Schey, 553
N.E.2d 1072, 1075 (Ohio 1990).
Were the equities in this case clearly lopsided,
Steinberg’s evaluation of § 1312(a)’s policy objectives
would already give us pause. That states have taken
divergent approaches to precisely this issue based on a
reasonable weighing of the costs and benefits makes
certification even more necessary. At issue, after all, is not
only the equitable remit to “do justice” but also the stated

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

9

purposes of the California Legislature in adopting § 1312(a).
See L. Fin. Grp., LLC v. Key, 531 P.3d 326, 336–37 (Cal.
2023) (“Even absent an express prohibition . . . we have held
that equitable exceptions may be inconsistent with the
statutory text or the legislative policy reflected in the
statutory scheme.”). In our view, the California Supreme
Court, rather than a federal court, is better suited for
reconciling the two. See Klingebiel v. Lockheed Aircraft
Corp., 494 F.2d 345, 346 (9th Cir. 1974) (“[T]he duty of the
federal court is to ascertain and apply the existing California
law, not to predict that California may change its law and
then to apply the federal courts notion of what that change
might or ought to be.”); see also id. at 346 (“The proper fora
in which to seek to change California law are the California
legislature and the California courts, not the federal
courts.”).
There is a tension between § 1312(a)’s policy objectives
and background concerns of equity, which no controlling
state precedent has addressed. This unanswered question of
California law—whether there is a non-statutory exception
to § 1312(a) for a shareholder who does not become aware
of a defendant’s buyout-related misconduct until after the
buyout is consummated—is dispositive in the instant case.
We therefore exercise our discretion to certify this question
to the California Supreme Court. See Kremen v. Cohen, 325
F.3d 1035, 1037–38 (9th Cir. 2003).
III. Certified Question
In consideration of the foregoing, we respectfully certify
the following question:
Do the appraisal requirements of California
Corporations Code § 1312(a) and the

10

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

California Supreme Court’s decision in
Steinberg v. Amplica, Inc., 729 P.2d 683 (Cal.
1986) (Mosk, J.), preclude a shareholder
from seeking buyout-related damages when
the facts leading to the shareholder’s cause of
action were not known until after the buyout
was consummated?
We will accept the California Supreme Court’s decision.
Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(b)(2). We acknowledge that, as the
receiving court, the California Supreme Court may restate
the certified question. Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(f)(5).
IV. Counsel Information
The names and addresses of counsel or the parties, as
required by Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(b)(1) are as follows:
Howard E. King, Tor R. Braham, and
Jackson S. Trugman, King, Holmes, Paterno
& Soriano, LLP, 1900 Avenue Of The Stars,
Twenty-Fifth Floor, Los Angeles, CA 90067,
and Robin Meadow and Stefan C. Love,
Greines, Martin, Stein & Richland LLP, 6420
Wilshire Boulevard, Suite 1100, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, for Plaintiffs Lei Li,
Strong Wealth Investment Limited, and
Pacific Smile Limited.
Kathleen R. Hartnett, Cooley LLP, 3
Embarcadero Center, Twentieth Floor, San
Francisco, CA 94111, William K. Pao,
Cooley LLP, 355 South Grand Avenue, Suite
900, Los Angeles, CA 90071, and Adam M.
Katz, Cooley LLP, 500 Boylston Street,

LI V. ARCSOFT, INC.

11

Boston, MA 02116, for Defendants ArcSoft,
Inc., and Michael Deng.
If certification is accepted, then Defendants-Appellees
ArcSoft, Inc., and Michael Deng should be deemed the
petitioners for the purposes of the ensuing state court
proceedings.
V. Conclusion
The Clerk shall forward an original and ten certified
copies of this certification order, under official seal, to the
California Supreme Court. Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(d). The Clerk is
also ordered to transmit copies of all relevant briefs, as well
as any additional record materials requested by the
California Supreme Court. Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(c).
Submission of this appeal for decision is vacated and
deferred pending the California Supreme Court’s final
response to this certification order. The Clerk is directed to
administratively close this docket, pending further order.
The parties shall notify the Clerk of this court within
fourteen days of the California Supreme Court’s acceptance
or rejection of certification, and again, if certification is
accepted, within fourteen days of the California Supreme
Court’s issuance of a decision.
QUESTION
STAYED.

CERTIFIED;

PROCEEDINGS

