FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LATONIA W. LISTER,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
CITY OF LAS VEGAS,
Defendant - Appellee.

No. 24-3933
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-00589CDS-MDC

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Cristina D. Silva, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 12, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 4, 2025
Before: Carlos T. Bea and Ana de Alba, Circuit Judges, and
Jeffrey Vincent Brown, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Brown

The Honorable Jeffrey Vincent Brown, United States District Judge for
the Southern District of Texas, sitting by designation.

*

2

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

SUMMARY **
Employment Discrimination
The panel affirmed the district court’s entry of judgment
for the City of Las Vegas in Latonia Lister’s lawsuit for
employment discrimination, and affirmed the district court’s
denial of Lister’s motion for new trial, after a jury found the
City did not violate Title VII but nevertheless awarded Lister
damages.
The jury found: (1) an incident was severe or pervasive
and objectively and subjectively offensive to a reasonable
person; but that (2) the incident was not motivated by race
or gender; (3) the City did not discriminate against Lister in
violation of Title VII; and (4) the City did not retaliate
against Lister for reporting the April 7 incident in violation
of Title VII. Despite finding no liability, the jury answered
a damages question, awarding Lister $150,000. The district
court concluded that it could reconcile the verdict without
resubmitting it to the jury, and set aside the damages award.
The panel reviewed for plain error two jury instructions
that Lister argued contained prejudicial errors. The panel
held that when Jury Instruction 12 is read as a whole, the
exclusion of race and sex from the first element does not
amount to an error—let alone a prejudicial one—as the
instruction’s opening paragraph refers to the protected
characteristics of race and sex, clearly instructing the jury to
assess the elements of a hostile work environment on these
grounds. The panel held that, setting aside the lack of
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

3

prejudice, there is no conflict between Jury Instruction 12,
which directed the jury to assess whether Lister experienced
a hostile work environment on the grounds of race and
gender, and Jury Instruction 9, which set forth the standard
of proof for a gender- or race-based hostile-workenvironment claim.
The panel held that the district court did not abuse its
discretion when it did not resubmit the verdict to the still
available jury. The panel noted this court’s precedent
holding that, where the jury is still available, a district court’s
decision to resubmit an inconsistent verdict for clarification
is within its discretion. Facing the opposite question here,
the panel held that a district court has discretion not to
resubmit an inconsistent verdict for clarification when the
jury is still available. Here, the district court’s decision to
poll the jury—with both parties’ consent—clarified the
seemingly inconsistent liability findings. By confirming the
relevant findings of fact, the district court confirmed a clear
statement of no liability from the jury. At that point, the
district court had sufficient legal grounds to discharge the
jury and reconcile the verdict on its own. Given the jury’s
finding that there was no race- or sex-based discrimination
or retaliation, the jury’s answer to the damages question is
best treated as surplusage.
The panel held that because the district court correctly
concluded that the verdict could be reconciled, the district
court did not abuse its discretion in denying Lister’s motion
for a new trial.

4

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

COUNSEL
Jamon R. Hicks (argued) and Noel A. Arreola, Douglas
Hicks Law, Los Angeles, California; F. Travis Buchanan, F.
Travis Buchanan & Associates PLLC, Las Vegas, Nevada;
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Nechole M. Garcia (argued), Chief Deputy City Attorney;
Timothy J. Geswein, Deputy City Attorney; Jeffry M.
Dorocak, City Attorney; Las Vegas Office of the City
Attorney, Las Vegas, Nevada; for Defendant-Appellant.

OPINION
BROWN, District Judge:
Plaintiff-Appellant Latonia Lister sued DefendantAppellee City of Las Vegas for employment discrimination.
A jury found the City did not violate Title VII but
nevertheless awarded Lister $150,000 in damages. Lister
appeals the district court’s entry of judgment for the City and
denial of her motion for a new trial. Having jurisdiction
under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, we affirm.
I.
Las Vegas’s first African-American female firefighter,
Lister worked as a City firefighter for about 29 and a half
years. On April 7, 2019, Lister was on duty under the
supervision of Captain Michael Benneman, a white male.
When Lister walked into the room at dinnertime, Benneman,
who was feeding a dog pieces of steak, said, “Here, girl.
Here, Latonia,” while smacking his lips to make kissing
noises. Lister reported this incident (“the April 7 incident”)

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

5

to her immediate supervisor, Captain Victor Thompson.
Lister later endured additional incidents she considered
discriminatory, harassing, and retaliatory. Ultimately, Lister
requested to bid out of her station.
In 2021, Lister sued the City under federal and state law
for sex- and/or race-based discrimination and retaliation.
Only Lister’s Title VII discrimination and retaliation claims
based on the April 7 incident proceeded to trial.
At the close of Lister’s case-in-chief, the City moved for
judgment as a matter of law. After the close of evidence, the
district court heard arguments on the motion, denied it under
Fed. R. Civ. P. 50, and submitted the sex- and race-based
discrimination and retaliation claims to the jury.
After deliberating for nearly two hours, the jury returned
the following verdict:
We the Jury in the above-entitled matter
hereby find as follows:
QUESTION NO. 1: Did the plaintiff
establish, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the incident on April 7, 2019,
was severe or pervasive and objectively and
subjectively offensive to a reasonable person
when looking at the totality of the
circumstances, including the frequency of the
discriminatory conduct; its severity; whether
it was physically threatening or humiliating,
or a mere offensive utterance; and whether it
unreasonably interfered with Latonia Lister’s
work performance?
1a. Was it severe or pervasive?

6

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

Yes X

No ____ (check one)

1b. Was
it
objectively
and
subjectively offensive to a
reasonable person?
Yes X No ____ (check one)
If “yes” to both 1a and 1b, move to question
1c. If “no” to either 1a or 1b, move to
question 3.
1c. Because you found that the April
7, 2019 incident was severe or
pervasive and objectively and
subjectively offensive to a
reasonable
person,
please
determine if you find that the
incident was motivated by
gender-based and/or race-based
discrimination.
On the basis of gender:
Yes ____ No X (check one)
On
the
basis
of
race:
Yes ____ No X (check one)
If “yes” to either one of these, move to
question 2. If “no” to both, move to question
3.
QUESTION NO. 2: Do you find that the
defendant discriminated against the plaintiff
in violation of Title VII?: (answer both
subparts)
2a. On the basis of gender:
Yes ____ No
X (check one)

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

7

2b. On
the
basis
of
race:
Yes ____ No
X (check one)
Move to question 3.
QUESTION NO. 3: Do you find, by a
preponderance of the evidence, that the
plaintiff was retaliated against for reporting
the April 7, 2019 incident in violation of Title
VII?:
Yes ____

No

X

(check one)

If “yes” to either 2a or 2b, or if “yes” to
question 3, move to question 4.
PART II: DAMAGES
QUESTION NO. 4: We find by a
preponderance of the evidence that because
the defendant violated Title VII, the plaintiff
is entitled to the following amount of
damages for pain and suffering:
$ 150k
(if applicable, insert amount
of damages)
You are not required to award damages
for pain and suffering.
Dated: March 1

, 2024

______________________
Foreperson
In sum, the jury found: (1) the April 7 incident was
severe or pervasive and objectively and subjectively
offensive to a reasonable person; but that (2) the incident
was not motivated by race or gender; (3) the City did not

8

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

discriminate against Lister in violation of Title VII; 1 and
(4) the City did not retaliate against Lister for reporting the
April 7 incident in violation of Title VII. Despite finding no
liability, the jury answered the damages question, awarding
Lister $150,000 in damages.
After receiving the verdict in open court, the district
court stated: “There is an inconsistency in the verdict . . . I’m
going to need to figure out how we’re going to resolve this
inconsistency.” The district court asked the jury to return to
the jury room and took a brief recess.
After the recess, the district court called the jury back
and asked the parties if they objected to polling the jury.
Neither did. The district court read the verdict in open court
and asked each juror three questions: (1) “Is this your true
verdict?”; (2) “[D]o you find that the City did not
discriminate against Ms. Lister on the basis of gender or
race?”; and (3) “Is it your true and correct verdict that the
City did not retaliate against Ms. Lister for the April 7, 2019
incident?”. Each juror answered “yes” to all three questions.
The district court did not poll the jury on damages. After
completing the poll, the district court discharged the jury.
After the jury left, the district court told the parties that
the damages award would not be able to stand because the
jury “found no Title VII violation,” but still gave the parties
an opportunity to submit briefing on the issue.
Lister moved for a new trial in her briefing. The district
court denied Lister’s motion for a new trial. The court
Per the charge’s explicit instructions, the jury should not have answered
Question 2 in light of the jury’s finding that the incident was not
motivated by race or gender. This error, however, is not at issue on
appeal.

1

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

9

concluded that it could reconcile the verdict without
resubmitting it to the jury, set aside the jury’s damages
award, and entered judgment for the City. Lister timely
appealed.
II.
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 51 requires that “[a]
party who objects to an instruction or the failure to give an
instruction must do so on the record, stating distinctly the
matter objected to and the grounds for the objection.” Fed.
R. Civ. P. 51(c)(1). “When a party raises a contemporaneous
objection to a jury instruction, we review the jury instruction
either de novo or for abuse of discretion, depending on the
nature of the error.” Chess v. Dovey, 790 F.3d 961, 970 (9th
Cir. 2015). When a party fails to timely object to a civil jury
instruction, however, we review the instruction for plain
error. Id.
Additionally, we review for abuse of discretion a district
court’s decision to resubmit a verdict to the jury for
clarification or reconciliation. See Mateyko v. Felix, 924
F.2d 824, 827 (9th Cir. 1990). Denial of a motion for a new
trial is also reviewed for abuse of discretion. United States v.
99.66 Acres of Land, 970 F.2d 651, 658 (9th Cir. 1992).
III.
A.
Lister argues that Jury Instruction Nos. 9 and 12
contained prejudicial errors. Because Lister raises her
challenges to Jury Instruction Nos. 9 and 12 for the first time

10

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

on appeal, we review these jury instructions for plain error. 2
See Chess, 790 F.3d at 970.
Under plain error review, we consider “whether (1) there
was an error; (2) the error was obvious; and (3) the error
affected substantial rights.” C.B. v. City of Sonora, 769 F.3d
1005, 1018 (9th Cir. 2014) (en banc). We may “consider the
costs of correcting an error, and—in borderline cases—the
effect that a verdict may have on nonparties.” Id. “[T]he
decision whether to correct a plain error under [Rule]
51(d)(2) is discretionary” and used only “to prevent a
miscarriage of justice.” Id. at 1018–19 (quotations and
citations omitted). Plain errors are “rare.” Hoard v. Hartman,
904 F.3d 780, 791 (9th Cir. 2018).
First, Lister argues that Jury Instruction No. 12 was
erroneous because it failed to comport with the Manual of
Model Civil Jury Instructions for the Ninth Circuit (“Model
Instructions”) No. 10.7 by omitting “necessary qualifying
language regarding ‘[sexually][racially]’ in its articulation
of element 1.” Second, Lister argues Jury Instruction Nos. 9
and 12 present mutually incompatible predicates of proof for
Lister’s hostile-work-environment claim. Neither argument
has merit.
The district court used Model Instruction No. 10.7 as the
basis of Jury Instruction No. 12. Model Instruction No. 10.7
states in pertinent part:
The plaintiff seeks damages from the
defendant for a hostile work environment
caused by [sexual] [racial] [other Title VII
Lister asserts she objected to these jury instructions below. But the
record shows she objected only to the verdict form’s question about a
hostile work environment—not to the related jury instructions.

2

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

11

protected characteristic] harassment. The
plaintiff has the burden of proving both of the
following elements by a preponderance of the
evidence:
1. the plaintiff was subjected to a [sexually]
[racially] [other Title VII protected
characteristic] hostile work environment
by a [non-immediate supervisor] [coworker]; and
2. the defendant or a member of the
defendant’s management knew or should
have known of the harassment and failed
to take prompt, effective remedial action
reasonably calculated to end the
harassment.
MANUAL OF MODEL CIVIL JURY INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE
DISTRICT COURTS OF THE NINTH CIRCUIT, No. 10.7 (9th Cir.
2017) (updated March 2025) (“Ninth Cir. Model
Instructions”).
By comparison, Jury Instruction No. 12 states in
pertinent part:
The plaintiff seeks damages from the
defendant for a hostile work environment
caused by gender-based and/or race-based
harassment. The plaintiff has the burden of
proving both of the following elements by a
preponderance of the evidence:
1. the plaintiff was subjected to a hostile
work environment by immediate and/or
non-immediate supervisor(s); and

12

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

2. the defendant or a member of the
defendant’s management knew or should
have known of the harassment and failed
to take prompt, effective remedial action
reasonably calculated to end the
harassment.
The omission of race and gender in the first element of
Jury Instruction No. 12 does not render the instruction
erroneous. Jury Instruction No. 12’s opening paragraph
refers to the protected characteristics of race and sex, clearly
instructing the jury to assess the elements of a hostile work
environment on these grounds. When Jury Instruction No.
12 is read as a whole, the exclusion of race and sex from the
first element does not amount to an error—let alone a
prejudicial one. See Swinton v. Potomac Corp., 270 F.3d
794, 802 (9th Cir. 2001) (“In evaluating jury instructions,
prejudicial error results when, looking to the instructions as
a whole, the substance of the applicable law was not fairly
and correctly covered.”) (cleaned up) (citation omitted). see
also NINTH CIR. MODEL INSTRUCTIONS, Introduction (“The
instructions in this Manual are models. They are not
mandatory.”).
Lister also argues that the district court committed plain
error because Jury Instruction Nos. 9 and 12 contained
“conflicting recitations of [the] plaintiff’s burden of proof as
to a Title VII hostile work environment claim.” She asserts
that Jury Instruction No. 9 specified that Lister had to show
she was “subjected to slurs, insults, jokes or other verbal
comments of a racial and sexist nature” to establish liability
for a gender- or race-based hostile work environment, while
Jury Instruction No. 12 omitted the “race” and “sex”
elements from her burden of proof. Lister claims that these

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

13

instructions misled the jury into concluding that she could
prove hostile work environment independent of race or
gender and, therefore, be awarded damages.
Setting aside a lack of prejudice against Lister, her
argument fails because there is no conflict between the two
instructions. As discussed, Jury Instruction No. 12 directed
the jury to assess whether Lister experienced a hostile work
environment on the grounds of race and gender. Jury
Instruction No. 9 sets forth the plaintiff’s standard of proof
for a gender- or race-based hostile-work-environment claim.
Both are derived from the Ninth Circuit Model Instructions,
which instruct that they be used together when appropriate.
NINTH CIR. MODEL INSTRUCTIONS, No. 10.5. Accordingly,
we find no plain error as to Jury Instruction Nos. 9 and 12.
See City of Sonora, 769 F.3d at 1020–21; Swinton, 270 F.3d
at 802.
B.
Next, Lister argues that the district court abused its
discretion when it did not resubmit the verdict to the still
available jury. We disagree—the district court acted within
its discretion when it polled the jury, discharged it, and
reconciled the verdict.
When reviewing a district court’s decision to resubmit or
reconcile a jury’s verdict, we first determine how to construe
the jury’s verdict under Fed. R. Civ. P. 49. Floyd v. Laws,
929 F.2d 1390, 1394–95 (9th Cir. 1991); Zhang v. Am. Gem
Seafoods, Inc., 339 F.3d 1020, 1031 (9th Cir. 2003).
Consistent with the parties’ and district court’s
characterization of the verdict during and post-trial, we
consider it a special verdict. Floyd, 929 F.2d at 1396
(“[S]pecial verdicts often resemble general verdicts with
interrogatories. . . . [A]s a matter of law, the interrogatories

14

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

submitted to the jury in this case constituted a special
verdict, simply because that is what the trial court declared
them to be.”). We start by noting that Lister did not waive
her objections to the verdict’s inconsistencies. See Pierce v.
S. Pac. Trans. Co., 823 F.2d 1366, 1370 (9th Cir. 1987)
(explaining that objections to inconsistent special verdicts
need not be raised before jury discharge under Rule 49(a)).
When faced with an inconsistent special verdict, a
district court “has a duty under the [S]eventh [A]mendment
to harmonize” inconsistent answers in the special verdict “if
such be possible under a fair reading of them.” Floyd, 929
F.2d at 1396 (citing Gallick v. Balt. & O.R.R. Co., 372 U.S.
108, 119 (1963). This duty includes an “obligat[ion] to try to
reconcile the jury’s findings by exegesis, if necessary.” Id.
“Only in the case of a fatal inconsistency may the court
remand for a new trial.” Id.
Alternatively, the district court may resubmit the special
verdict to the jury if the jurors have not been discharged. See
id. Unlike Rule 49(b) on general verdicts, Rule 49(a) on
special verdicts does not expressly provide for resubmission.
See Fed. R. Civ. P. 49. We have held that district courts have
“discretion to resubmit the issue to the jury with a request
for clarification” if the court notices the inconsistency before
dismissing the jury. Mateyko, 924 F.2d at 827.
In Duk v. MGM Grand Hotel, Inc., we held that “where
the jury is still available, a district court’s decision to
resubmit an inconsistent verdict for clarification is within its
discretion.” 320 F.3d 1052, 1057 (9th Cir. 2003). We face
the opposite question here: Is it within the district court’s
discretion not to resubmit an inconsistent verdict for
clarification when the jury is still available? The answer is
“yes.”

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

15

The alleged inconsistency here is the jury’s finding of no
Title VII violation based on race and/or gender
discrimination or retaliation in Questions 1-3 of the verdict
alongside a damages award of $150,000 for Title VII
violations in response to Question 4. Question 4 conditioned
an award of damages on the jury’s “find[ing] by a
preponderance of the evidence that . . . the defendant
violated Title VII.” According to Lister, the jury found the
City liable for a hostile work environment by awarding her
damages, supported by the jury’s finding in Question 1 that
the April 7 incident was severe and pervasive and
objectively and subjectively offensive. Lister argues that
polling the jury failed to clarify the jury’s findings because
the jury did not have an opportunity to explain its reasoning
or confirm its damages award. In response, the City notes
that Lister asked the district court to neither poll the jury on
the damages award nor resubmit the verdict. Moreover, as
each juror—when polled—affirmed the relevant fact
findings in the verdict, the City argues that resubmission for
further deliberation would have been futile.
The district court’s decision to poll the jury—with both
parties’ consent—clarified the seemingly inconsistent
liability findings. The district court “polled the jury as to the
substantive law violations” precisely because “the phrasing
of the damages question appear[ed] inconsistent with the
remainder of the verdict.” The court recognized that the
jury’s apparent desire to compensate Lister for the severe
and offensive April 7 incident did not necessarily conflict
with the jury’s factual findings that the incident was not
racially or sexually discriminatory. By confirming the
relevant findings of fact, the district court confirmed a clear
statement of no liability from the jury. At that point, the

16

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

district court had sufficient legal grounds to discharge the
jury and reconcile the verdict on its own.
Lister emphasizes that resubmission is “the better view”
under our precedent, especially when the jury is still
available. Duk, 320 F.3d at 1058. Because the jury was still
available, Lister argues that clarifying the verdict remained
the province of the jury, not the court. But, as Duk
acknowledges, the Supreme Court has directed courts to
reconcile inconsistent special verdicts when possible. See
Duk, 320 F.3d at 1057 n.2 (citing Gallick, 372 U.S. at 119).
Duk does not stand for the proposition that resubmission is
mandatory when the jury is still available. Accordingly, the
district court’s decision to harmonize the verdict after
polling the jury was consistent with precedent and not an
abuse of discretion. Moreover, given the jury’s finding that
there was no race- or sex-based discrimination or retaliation,
the jury’s answer to Question 4 is best treated as surplusage. 3
See Floyd, 929 F.2d at 1397.
C.
Finally, we consider whether the district court abused its
discretion when it denied Lister’s motion for a new trial.
“[O]nly if all attempts at reconciliation fail, the court may
The district court, relying on an unpublished case, ruled that the
damages award could not be surplusage under Floyd because the jury did
not violate an express direction to not answer Question 4, and instead set
aside the damages award under Freeman v. Chicago Park District, 189
F.3d 613 (7th Cir. 1999). While Floyd does not hinge on an explicit “Stop
Here” instruction, we need not address the issue in depth to resolve this
case. In any event, as the City acknowledged during oral argument, there
is no material difference between the courts’ approaches in Freeman and
Floyd. See May 12, 2025, Oral Argument recording at 21:12–21:46
(available at https://www.ca9.uscourts.gov/media/video/?20250512/243933/).

3

LISTER V. CITY OF LAS VEGAS

17

order a new trial.” Floyd, 929 F.2d at 1396. Because neither
the jury instructions nor the damages award rendered the
jury’s verdict here fatally inconsistent, the trial court
correctly concluded that the verdict could be reconciled. See
supra III.A., B. Accordingly, the trial court correctly denied
Lister’s motion for a new trial. See Floyd, 929 F.2d at 1396.
IV.
Based on the foregoing, we affirm the district court’s
entry of judgment for the City of Las Vegas and affirm the
district court’s denial of Lister’s motion for new trial.
AFFIRMED.

