FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
DIONNE MARIE NADON,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 24-3506
D.C. No.
9:23-cv-00072DLC

FRANK BISIGNANO,
Commissioner of Social Security,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Montana
Dana L. Christensen, District Judge, Presiding
Submitted May 21, 2025 *
Seattle, Washington
Filed July 25, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould, Richard C. Tallman, and
Morgan B. Christen, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Christen
The panel unanimously concludes this case is suitable for decision
without oral argument. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a)(2).

*

2

NADON V. BISIGNANO

SUMMARY **
Social Security
The panel affirmed the district court’s decision affirming
the administrative law judge’s denial of claimant’s
applications for disability insurance benefits and
supplemental security income pursuant to Titles II and XVI.
The panel rejected claimant’s argument that the
administrative law judge (ALJ) erred by considering her
work as a personal care attendant when evaluating her
disability claim because that work did not constitute
substantial gainful activity. An ALJ is permitted to consider
any work done by a claimant when evaluating a disability
claim, regardless of whether the work constitutes substantial
gainful activity.
The panel also rejected claimant’s argument that the ALJ
erred because, besides relying on her work as a personal care
attendant, the ALJ did not provide any other reasons for
discounting her testimony and the opinions of several
healthcare professionals. The record reflected that the ALJ
gave several reasons for discounting this evidence, and did
not discount this evidence solely on the basis of claimant’s
work as a personal care attendant.
Finally, the panel rejected claimant’s argument that the
ALJ erred by relying on the vocational expert’s testimony to
the extent it did not incorporate the limitations from the
discounted opinions of the healthcare professionals because
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

NADON V. BISIGNANO

3

the argument relied on the rejected premise that the ALJ
erred in discounting the healthcare professionals’ opinions.

COUNSEL
John E. Seidlitz Jr., Seidlitz Law Office, Great Falls,
Montana; Great Falls, Montana, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Joseph J. Langkamer, Assistant Regional Counsel, Elizabeth
Firer, Senior Attorney; Matthew W. Pile, Associate General
Counsel; Mark Smith, Civil Chief; Jesse Laslovich, United
States Attorney; Office of the General Counsel, Social
Security Administration, Baltimore, Maryland; for
Defendant-Appellee.

4

NADON V. BISIGNANO

OPINION
CHRISTEN, Circuit Judge:
Dionne Marie Nadon appeals the denial of her
applications for disability insurance benefits and
supplemental security income pursuant to Titles II and XVI
of the Social Security Act.
She argues that the
administrative law judge (ALJ) erred by considering her
work as a personal care attendant when evaluating her
disability claim because that work did not constitute
substantial gainful activity. Nadon contends that remand is
warranted because, besides relying on her work as a personal
care attendant, the ALJ failed to provide any other reasons
to discount her testimony or the opinions of several
healthcare professionals. We have jurisdiction pursuant to
28 U.S.C. § 1291, and we affirm.
I
Dionne Nadon applied for disability insurance benefits
and supplemental security income in April 2015 and May
2016, respectively. She alleged that her disability began in
March 2015 and was due to conditions including
fibromyalgia, spinal abnormalities, depression, and anxiety,
among others.
The ALJ initially denied Nadon’s
applications in January 2017, finding that she was capable of
returning to her past work as a cashier/checker. On appeal,
however, we remanded the case because the ALJ had not
adequately addressed Nadon’s post-traumatic stress disorder
(PTSD) and may have conflated that condition with
depression. See Nadon v. Saul, 851 F. App’x 24, 26–28 (9th
Cir. 2021).

NADON V. BISIGNANO

5

On remand, the ALJ again determined that Nadon was
not disabled. The ALJ’s written decision followed the fivestep sequential analysis for determining disabilities as
established by the Social Security Administration. See 20
C.F.R. §§ 404.1520, 416.920. If a claimant is found to be
disabled or not disabled at any step in the sequence, there is
no need to consider subsequent steps of the analysis. See id.
§§ 404.1520, 416.920.
The first step involves determining whether a claimant is
working and whether the work is substantial gainful activity.
If a claimant is engaged in substantial gainful activity, they
will be found not disabled, regardless of their medical
condition, age, education, or work experience. See id.
§§ 404.1520(b), 416.920(b). At step one, the ALJ found that
Nadon had engaged in substantial gainful activity as a
personal care attendant and was therefore not disabled from
July 2021 through 2022.
Because Nadon alleged disability beginning in March
2015 and the ALJ found a continuous period of at least
twelve months during which Nadon did not engage in
substantial gainful activity, the ALJ continued the five-step
process. See 42 U.S.C. §§ 423(d)(1)(A) (defining disability
for the purposes of disability insurance benefits as the
“inability to engage in any substantial gainful activity by
reason of any medically determinable physical or mental
impairment . . . which has lasted or can be expected to last
for a continuous period of not less than 12 months”),
1382c(a)(3)(A) (providing a nearly identical standard for
supplemental security income).
At the second step, a claimant will be found not disabled
unless they have a severe impairment (or combination of
impairments) that significantly limits their physical or

6

NADON V. BISIGNANO

mental ability to do basic work activities. See 20 C.F.R.
§§ 404.1520(c), 416.920(c). The ALJ found at step two that
Nadon had the severe impairments of degenerative disc
disease of the spine, fibromyalgia, depressive disorder,
anxiety disorder, and PTSD.
The third step concerns the Listing of Impairments,
which describes the impairments that the Social Security
Administration considers to be severe enough to prevent an
individual from doing any gainful activity, regardless of
their age, education, or work experience.
See id.
§§ 404.1525(a), 416.925(a). A claimant will be found
disabled if their impairments meet or equal a listed
impairment and satisfy the twelve-month durational
requirement. See id. §§ 404.1520(d), 416.920(d). At step
three, the ALJ found that Nadon did not have an impairment
or combination of impairments that met or equaled the
severity of a listed impairment.
Between the third and fourth steps, an ALJ determines a
claimant’s residual functional capacity, i.e., the extent of
mental and physical activities a claimant can perform in a
work setting despite their limitations.
See
id. §§ 404.1520(e), 404.1545(a), 416.945(a); see also
Laborin v. Berryhill, 867 F.3d 1151, 1153 (9th Cir. 2017).
Here, the ALJ determined that Nadon’s residual functional
capacity allowed her to perform light work with certain
limitations.
At the fourth step, a claimant will be found not disabled
if, considering their limitations, they are capable of
performing their past relevant work. See 20 C.F.R.
§§ 404.1520(f), 416.920(f). The ALJ found at step four that
Nadon could perform her past relevant work as a personal
care attendant. Although this step-four finding provided a

NADON V. BISIGNANO

7

basis to conclude that Nadon was not disabled, the ALJ
continued to step five.
At the fifth step, a claimant who cannot perform past
relevant work will be found not disabled if they can adjust to
perform other work that exists in significant numbers in the
national economy. See id. §§ 404.1520(g), 416.920(g).
Here, the ALJ found that Nadon was capable of performing
other work as a housekeeper, marker, or small products
assembler.
Based on these findings, the ALJ concluded that Nadon
was not disabled for the period from March 27, 2015,
through the date of the ALJ’s ruling and denied her
applications for benefits. The district court affirmed the
ALJ’s decision.
II
We review de novo a district court’s order affirming an
ALJ’s decision to deny benefits and may set aside a denial
of benefits only if it is not supported by substantial evidence
or if it is based on legal error. See Ford v. Saul, 950 F.3d
1141, 1153–54 (9th Cir. 2020).
III
Nadon first argues that, contrary to the ALJ’s step-one
finding, her work as a personal care attendant from July 2021
through 2022 did not constitute substantial gainful activity
and the ALJ therefore erred by considering that work when
evaluating her disability claim. Nadon further contends that
remand is warranted because the ALJ failed to provide any
other reasons, let alone sufficient reasons, for discounting
her testimony and the opinions of several healthcare
professionals. Nadon’s arguments are unpersuasive.

8

NADON V. BISIGNANO

First, the ALJ did not err by considering Nadon’s work
as a personal care attendant. An ALJ is permitted to consider
any work done by a claimant when evaluating a disability
claim, regardless of whether the work constitutes substantial
gainful activity. See id. at 1156 (“An ALJ may consider any
work activity, including part-time work, in determining
whether a claimant is disabled.”); 20 C.F.R. § 404.1571
(“Even if the work you have done was not substantial gainful
activity, it may show that you are able to do more work than
you actually did.”). 1
Nadon’s second argument, that the ALJ did not provide
sufficient reasons for discounting her testimony and the
opinions of several healthcare professionals, fails because
the argument depends on Nadon’s incorrect assertion that the
ALJ discounted this evidence solely on the basis of her
ability to work as a personal care attendant. The record
instead reflects that the ALJ gave several reasons for
discounting this evidence, though Nadon does not
acknowledge them.

We do not decide whether the ALJ erred in finding that Nadon’s work
as a personal care attendant constituted substantial gainful activity
because such an error would be harmless. Although the ALJ relied on
that finding at step one to conclude that Nadon was not disabled from
July 2021 through 2022, and at step four to conclude that she was capable
of performing past relevant work as a personal care attendant, see 20
C.F.R. §§ 404.1560(b)(1) (defining “past relevant work” in part as
“work . . . that was substantial gainful activity”), 416.960(b)(1) (same),
the ALJ did not do so to conclude at step five that Nadon was capable of
adjusting to other work. Because the ALJ noted that this step-five
finding also applied to the period from July 2021 through 2022, id., the
ALJ’s ultimate denial of Nadon’s disability claim did not depend on the
determination that her work as a personal care attendant was substantial
gainful activity.

1

NADON V. BISIGNANO

9

Regarding Nadon’s testimony, the ALJ recognized that
she alleged an inability to work full time due to chronic back
and leg pain, depression, and PTSD; that she has difficulty
focusing and concentrating; and that she felt able to sit and
drive for only 20 minutes due to her fibromyalgia and back
pain. In addition to finding Nadon’s testimony inconsistent
with her ability to work as a personal care attendant, the ALJ
explained that Nadon’s testimony was inconsistent with
evidence indicating that her symptoms improved with
conservative treatment, that she had mostly normal
examinations, that she had engaged in normal daily
activities, and that she was able to work as a home health
aide from November 2019 to September 2020.
Nadon cites Brown-Hunter v. Colvin to argue that we
cannot discern the ALJ’s basis for discounting her testimony
because the ALJ made only a general credibility finding
instead of providing any specific, clear, and convincing
reasons for discounting her testimony. 806 F.3d 487, 493–
94 (9th Cir. 2015) (as amended). We read the record
differently. The ALJ summarized Nadon’s testimony about
her limitations and identified inconsistencies, including
Nadon’s own assertions about her daily and work activities
that indicated she was “not as limited as one would expect
from an individual alleging disability.” The ALJ highlighted
that in 2015 Nadon reported being able to “take her daughter
to school, handle personal care, perform household cleaning,
prepare meals, use a computer, watch TV, shop in stores for
20 to 30 minutes, and handle finances.” Id. The ALJ also
recognized that Nadon went camping in 2020 and, while
working as a home health aide from November 2019 to
September 2020 and as a personal care attendant from July
2021 through 2022, performed daily tasks for her clients
such as cooking, bathing, housekeeping, and providing

10

NADON V. BISIGNANO

transportation.
Id.
The ALJ’s explanation for her
assessment of Nadon’s testimony was thus more than “a
single general statement that the claimant’s statements . . .
are not credible” and is sufficient to allow appellate review.
Id. at 493 (citation modified).
The ALJ similarly provided several reasons for
discounting the various healthcare professionals’ opinions
that Nadon identifies in her opening brief. Danielle
Kimbrell, LCSW, opined that Nadon is not able to “engage
in any kind of work that requires sustained focus whether in
attention or physical activity,” and that she would miss work
more than three times each month due to mental disorders.
While Nadon argues that the ALJ discounted this opinion
solely based on the finding that it was inconsistent with
Nadon’s work as a personal care attendant, the ALJ also
explained that Kimbrell was not an acceptable medical
source, Kimbrell did not have expertise in physical ailments
such as fibromyalgia, and the limitations Kimbrell reported
were inconsistent with other medical evidence and with
Nadon’s work activity as a home health aide.
Michelle Smith, N.P.-C., opined in February 2016 that
Nadon would not be able to return to work within the next
12 months. Contrary to Nadon’s argument, the ALJ did not
discount Smith’s opinion because it was inconsistent with
Nadon’s work as a personal care attendant. The ALJ instead
gave this opinion minimal weight because Smith was not an
acceptable medical source, Smith noted that she was not
qualified to evaluate an individual for functional capacity or
to provide disability ratings, and Smith’s opinion was vague
and inconsistent with her treatment notes.
Dr. Todd Fife, M.D., opined that Nadon’s physical
activity was limited and that she would be absent from work

NADON V. BISIGNANO

11

more than three times per month. While Nadon argues that
the ALJ discounted this opinion solely based on the finding
that it was inconsistent with Nadon’s work as a personal care
attendant, the ALJ also explained that the record did not
contain significant treatment records from Dr. Fife; his
opinion was inconsistent with clinical observations that
Nadon had “a full range of motion of the neck and spine, a
normal gait, normal reflexes, normal sensation, full muscle
strength, and negative straight leg testing”; and his opinion
was inconsistent with Nadon’s work activity as a home
health aide, which included “cooking for clients, helping
them shower, and taking them to appointments.”
Dr. Michael Newman, M.D., also opined that Nadon
would be absent more than three times each month. Nadon
argues that the ALJ discounted this opinion solely based on
the finding that it was inconsistent with Nadon’s work as a
personal care attendant, but the ALJ also explained that the
opinion was not supported with a reasonable explanation and
was inconsistent with Nadon’s conservative treatment, her
normal mental-status examinations, her reports of improved
symptoms, her reported daily activities, and her prior work
as a home health aide during the relevant period.
Finally, Dr. Michelle Martin-Thompson, M.D., opined
that based on Nadon’s reported symptoms, “she would be
unable to work due to her low back pain and neck pain.”
Nadon argues that the ALJ provided no reasons for
discounting this opinion, but the ALJ’s decision explained
that this testimony was given minimal weight because it
merely recited Nadon’s subjective reports of her condition
and did not contain a specific medical opinion.
As the above demonstrates, the ALJ provided other
reasons for discounting the various healthcare professionals’

12

NADON V. BISIGNANO

opinions besides her consideration of Nadon’s work as a
personal care attendant.
Because Nadon failed to
acknowledge these additional reasons, and therefore also
failed to challenge the ALJ’s reliance on them, the
Commissioner was correct to assert that Nadon forfeited the
argument that the ALJ did not provide sufficient reasons for
discounting the opinions of the healthcare professionals. See
Carmickle v. Comm’r, Soc. Sec. Admin., 533 F.3d 1155,
1161 n.2 (9th Cir. 2008) (refusing to address an ALJ’s
reasons for rejecting a claimant’s assertions when the
claimant “failed to argue th[e] issue with any specificity in
his briefing”).
Last, Nadon argues that the ALJ erred by relying on the
vocational expert’s testimony to the extent it did not
incorporate the limitations from the discounted opinions of
the healthcare professionals. Because this argument relies
on the premise that the ALJ erred in discounting the
healthcare professionals’ opinions, which we have rejected,
it too fails. See Stubbs-Danielson v. Astrue, 539 F.3d 1169,
1175–76 (9th Cir. 2008).
For the foregoing reasons, we AFFIRM the district
court’s judgment.

