FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
AMERICAN ENCORE, an Arizona
non-profit corporation; KAREN
GLENNON, an Arizona individual;
AMERICA FIRST POLICY
INSTITUTE, a non-profit
corporation,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
ADRIAN FONTES, in his official
capacity as Arizona Secretary of
State; KRIS MAYES, in her official
capacity as Arizona Attorney
General,
Defendants - Appellants,
and
KATIE HOBBS, in her official
capacity as Governor of Arizona,
Defendant.

No. 24-6703
D.C. No.
2:24-cv-01673MTL

OPINION

2

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
Michael T. Liburdi, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted July 15, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 16, 2025
Before: Kim McLane Wardlaw, Salvador Mendoza, Jr., and
Anthony D. Johnstone, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Wardlaw
SUMMARY*
Election Law
In a case in which two nonprofit corporations and an
individual challenge provisions of the 2023 Arizona Election
Procedures Manual (EPM), the panel affirmed the district
court’s preliminary injunction enjoining the EPM’s Speech
Provision, reversed the district court’s determination that
plaintiffs had standing to challenge the EPM’s Canvas
Provision, vacated the injunction with respect to
enforcement of the Canvas Provision, and remanded.
The EPM sets forth rules and regulations that carry the
force of law, as well as non-binding guidance. EPM’s
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

3

Speech Provision purports to summarize Arizona’s voter
intimidation laws. The Canvass Provision summarizes the
Arizona Secretary of State’s statutory duty to canvass—or,
officially certify—the state’s election results by a certain
date. If a county fails to provide its official canvass to the
Secretary by the state’s canvassing deadline, the Secretary
must canvass the statewide results without including the
votes of individuals in the counties that missed the
deadline. Plaintiffs alleged that the Speech Provision
violates the First Amendment’s Freedom of Speech Clause
and the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause, and
that the Canvass Provision is an unconstitutional burden on
plaintiffs’ right to vote.
The panel affirmed the district court’s preliminary
injunction enjoining the Speech Provision. Plaintiffs
established standing by showing that they intend to engage
in political and election-related speech, that the Speech
Provision arguably proscribes that conduct, and that there is
a credible or substantial risk of enforcement. Plaintiffs
showed a likelihood of success on the merits given that the
Secretary did not challenge on appeal the district court’s
conclusion that the Speech Provision, as interpreted by
plaintiffs, likely violates the First and Fourteenth
Amendments, and the district court correctly found that the
constitutional avoidance canon was inapplicable. Plaintiffs
satisfied the remaining factors necessary to obtain injunctive
relief.
The panel agreed with the district court that Pullman
abstention is inappropriate in this case, given the important
First Amendment concerns implicated by the Speech
Provision.

4

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

The panel reversed the district court’s determination that
plaintiffs have standing to challenge the Canvass
Provision. Although the right to vote is a legally protected
interest, and voter disenfranchisement is a concrete and
particularized injury, plaintiffs failed to make a clear
showing that a county would fail to timely canvass its
election results, thereby triggering the Secretary’s duty to
canvass the state votes without including the votes in that
county. It was therefore highly unlikely that the Canvas
Provision would disenfranchise any Arizona voters. The
panel therefore vacated the injunction as to that provision.

COUNSEL
Jonathan Riches (argued), Andrew Gould, Drew C. Ensign
Dallin Holt, and Erica Leavitt, Holtzman Vogel Baran
Torchinsky & Josefiak PLLC, Phoenix, Arizona; Michael D.
Berry, America First Policy Institute, McKinney, Texas;
Jessica H. Steinmann and Patricia Nation, America First
Policy Institute, Washington, D.C.; for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Joshua D. Bendor (argued), Solicitor General; Kyle
Cummings and Karen J. Hartman-Tellez, Assistant
Attorneys General; Nathan T. Arrowsmith, Luci D. Davis,
Kara M. Karlson, Senior Litigation Counsel; Joshua M.
Whitaker, Special Litigation Unit Chief; Office of the
Arizona Attorney General, Phoenix, Arizona; for
Defendants-Appellants.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

5

OPINION
WARDLAW, Circuit Judge:
To ensure efficient, uniform, and impartial election
procedures, Arizona law requires the Arizona Secretary of
State to publish an Election Procedures Manual (“EPM”)
every-odd numbered year immediately preceding the
general election. A.R.S. § 16-452(B). The EPM sets forth
rules and regulations that carry the force of law, as well as
non-binding guidance on matters outside of the Secretary’s
authority to promulgate election regulations. At issue here
are two provisions in the 2023 EPM. The first provision, the
Canvass Provision, summarizes the Secretary’s statutory
duty to canvass—or, officially certify—the state’s election
results by a certain date. The provision specifies that if a
county fails to provide its official canvass to the Secretary
by the state’s canvassing deadline, the Secretary must
canvass the statewide results without including the votes of
individuals in the counties that missed the deadline. See
Ariz. Sec’y of State, 2023 Elections Procedure Manual 247–
53. The second provision, the Speech Provision, purports to
summarize Arizona’s voter intimidation laws and provides
examples of conduct which may be considered voter
intimidation. In particular, the Speech Provision provides
that “[a]ny activity by a person with the intent or effect of
threatening, harassing, intimidating, or coercing voters (or
conspiring with others to do so) inside or outside the 75-foot
limit at a voting location is prohibited.” Id. at 181 (citing
A.R.S. § 16-1013).

6

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

America First Policy Institute (“AFPI”), American
Encore, 1 and Karen Glennon (“Plaintiffs”) brought suit
against Arizona Secretary of State Adrian Fontes (the
“Secretary”), 2 challenging these provisions as violative of
the First and Fourteenth Amendments. The district court
agreed. The court preliminarily enjoined enforcement of the
Canvass and Speech Provisions, while denying the
Secretary’s motion to stay the case pursuant to Pullman
abstention. This appeal ensued.
We affirm the district court’s grant of preliminary
injunctive relief as to the Speech Provision, concluding that
Plaintiffs have made a clear showing that they are likely to
establish standing and that they have satisfied the factors
necessary to obtain preliminary injunctive relief. Winter v.
Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7 (2008). We also
agree with the district court that Pullman abstention is
inappropriate in this case given the important First
Amendment concerns implicated by the Speech Provision.
See R.R. Comm'n of Tex. v. Pullman Co., 312 U.S. 496, 501
(1941).
However, we reverse the district court’s
determination that Plaintiffs have standing to challenge the
Canvass Provision. We therefore vacate the injunction with
respect to enforcement of the Canvass Provision.

1

The district court dismissed American Encore as a plaintiff as to Count
I of the complaint, and American Encore is not a party to this appeal.
2

Plaintiffs also named as defendants Kris Mayes, the Arizona Attorney
General (the “Attorney General”), and Katie Hobbs, the Governor of
Arizona. However, the district court dismissed the Attorney General as
to Count I, and the parties agreed to dismiss the Governor as a party to
the suit.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

7

I. Factual and Legal Background
A. Legal Framework of the Election Procedures
Manual
In addition to its statutory scheme regulating state
elections, Arizona law charges its Secretary of State with
prescribing “rules to achieve and maintain the maximum
degree of correctness, impartiality, uniformity and
efficiency on the procedures for early voting and voting, and
of producing, distributing, collecting, counting, tabulating
and storing ballots.” A.R.S. § 16-452(A). These rules must
be published in “an official instructions and procedures
manual,” the “EPM,” which is to be issued every “oddnumbered year immediately preceding the general election.”
A.R.S. § 16-452(B). Before issuance, the Secretary must
consult with each county board of supervisors or other
officer in charge of elections, and the EPM must be approved
by the Governor and Attorney General. Id.
“Once adopted, the EPM has the force of law; any
violation of an EPM rule is punishable as a class two
misdemeanor.” Ariz. Pub. Integrity All. v. Fontes, 475 P.3d
303, 308 (Ariz. 2020) (citing A.R.S. § 16-452(C)). The EPM
also contains guidance on matters outside of the Secretary’s
statutory authority to promulgate election rules and
regulations as prescribed in A.R.S. § 16-452(A). Guidance,
such as candidate nomination procedures, McKenna v. Soto,
481 P.3d 695, 699 (Ariz. 2021), falls outside the mandates
of A.R.S. § 16-452(A), and therefore does not carry criminal
penalties as enforcement. Id.
At issue in this case are two provisions of the 2023 EPM:
(1) Chapter 13, section II(B)(2)—the Canvass Provision;
and (2) Chapter 9, section III(D)—the Speech Provision.

8

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

B. The Canvass Provision
Introduced in the 2023 EPM, the Canvass Provision
details the scope of the Secretary’s statutory duty to
canvass.3 The relevant portion provides:
The Secretary of State may postpone the
canvass on a day-to-day basis for up to three
days if the results from any county are
missing. A.R.S. § 16-648(C). All counties
must transmit their canvasses to the Secretary
of State, and the Secretary of State must
conduct the statewide canvass, no later than
30 days after the election. A.R.S. § 16648(C). If the official canvass of any county
has not been received by this deadline, the
Secretary of State must proceed with the state
canvass without including the votes of the
missing county (i.e., the Secretary of State is
not permitted to use an unofficial vote count
in lieu of the county’s official canvass).
The Secretary of State has a nondiscretionary duty to canvass the returns as
provided by the counties and has no authority
to change vote totals, reject the election
results, or delay certifying the results without
express statutory authority or a court order.
Ariz. Sec’y of State, 2023 Elections Procedure Manual 252
(emphasis added).
Arizona law places a statutorily

3

“Canvass” refers to the process by which a jurisdiction officially
certifies its election results.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

9

mandated duty upon county officials to canvass election
results by certain deadlines. A.R.S. §§ 16-642, 648.
C. The Speech Provision
The Speech Provision purports to summarize rules to
prevent voter intimidation. Most relevant to this suit, the
Speech Provision provides:
Any activity by a person with the intent or
effect of threatening, harassing, intimidating,
or coercing voters (or conspiring with others
to do so) inside or outside the 75-foot limit at
a voting location is prohibited.
Ariz. Sec’y of State, 2023 Elections Procedure Manual
181(citing A.R.S. § 16-1013). This section sought to
summarize A.R.S. § 16-1013, which states:
A. It is unlawful for a person knowingly:
1. Directly or indirectly, to make use of
force, violence or restraint, or to inflict or
threaten infliction, by himself or through
any other person, of any injury, damage,
harm or loss, or in any manner to practice
intimidation upon or against any person, in
order to induce or compel such person to
vote or refrain from voting for a particular
person or measure at any election provided
by law, or on account of such person having
voted or refrained from voting at an
election.
A.R.S. § 16-1013 (emphasis added).

10

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

The Speech Provision further instructs that elections
officials must utilize a marshal to preserve order and remove
disruptive persons, and that the marshal should use his or her
sound judgment to decide whether to contact law
enforcement. See Ariz. Sec’y of State, 2023 Elections
Procedure Manual 182. To assist election officials in
spotting “potentially intimidating conduct” the Speech
Provision provides the following examples:
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Aggressive behavior, such as raising
one’s voice or taunting a voter or poll
worker;
Using threatening, insulting, or offensive
language to a voter or poll worker;
Blocking the entrance to a voting
location;
Disrupting voting lines;
Following voters or poll workers coming
to or leaving a voting location, including
to or from their vehicles;
Intentionally disseminating false or
misleading information at a voting
location,
such
as
flyers
or
communications that misstate the date of
the election, hours of operation for voting
locations, addresses for voting locations,
or
similar
efforts
intended
to
disenfranchise voters;
Impersonating a law enforcement officer
or otherwise wearing clothing, uniforms
or official-looking apparel intended to
deter, intimidate, or harass voters (see
also A.R.S. § 26-170, prohibiting

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

•

11

unauthorized wearing of national guard
or U.S. armed forces uniform);
Directly
confronting,
questioning,
photographing, or videotaping voters or
poll workers in a harassing or
intimidating manner, including when the
voter or poll worker is coming to or
leaving the polling location;

Id.
This language was initially introduced in the 2019 EPM.
Relatively recently, however, on August 14, 2023, the
Speaker of the Arizona House of Representatives and the
President of the Arizona Senate submitted comments
asserting that the Speech Provision violated Arizona
statutory law, the First Amendment, and the Free Speech and
Due Process clauses of the Arizona Constitution. The
Secretary chose not to modify the 2023 EPM in response to
these comments.
II. Procedural Background
A. Events Preceding This Suit
In February 2024, nonprofit corporations sued the
Secretary in state court, challenging the Speech Provision.
See, e.g., Ariz. Free Enter. Club v. Fontes, No. CV2024002760 (Ariz. Super. Ct. Maricopa Cnty., filed Feb. 9,
2024). 4 AFPI joined one of these cases as a co-plaintiff.
4

Other cases challenging aspects of the 2023 EPM have also been filed
in the Arizona state courts. See Petersen v. Fontes, No. CV2024-001942
(Ariz. Super. Ct. Maricopa Cnty., filed Jan. 31, 2024); Republican Nat’l
Comm. v. Fontes, No. CV2024-050553 (Ariz. Super. Ct. Maricopa
Cnty., filed Feb. 9, 2024).

12

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

And in May 2024, AFPI sent a letter to the Attorney General
and the Secretary requesting that they “disavow”
enforcement of the Speech Provision to the extent it differs
from the underlying criminal laws that it purports to
summarize. Specifically, AFPI sought confirmation that “all
relevant prosecutions for alleged threatening, harassing,
intimidating, or coercing conduct as it relates to voting
would be brought under A.R.S. §§ 16-1013 and 1017 or
other applicable statutes, and not under A.R.S. § 16-452(C)
for alleged violations of the 2023 EPM’s Speech
Restriction.”
On May 31, 2024, the Attorney General responded in a
letter that “[t]he portion of the EPM that [AFPI] label[s] as
the ‘Speech Restriction,’ EPM, Chapter 9, section III.D,
does not itself restrict or criminalize anything.” Rather, it
provides examples of, but “does not amend or otherwise
expand,” A.R.S. § 16-1013. Furthermore, the Attorney
General confirmed that he “d[id] not view the EPM as
broadening the scope of conduct criminally prohibited under
A.R.S. §§ 16-1013, 1017 or relevant and applicable criminal
statutes.” In sum, the Attorney General confirmed that:
Yes, all relevant prosecutions by our office of
people who are not election officials for the
conduct you describe–alleged threatening,
harassing, intimidating, or coercing conduct
as it relates to voting–would be brought under
A.R.S. §§ 16-1013 and -1017 or other
applicable statutes, and not under A.R.S.
§ 16-452(C) for alleged violations of what

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

13

you refer to as the 2023 EPM’s “Speech
Restriction.”
However, the Attorney General noted that county
prosecutors may also enforce the provision in A.R.S. §§ 161013, -1017, and -452(C) as they relate to voting and
elections.
In a separate letter, dated the same day, the Secretary
responded that “[i]n light of the Attorney General’s letter
and because the Secretary does not enforce criminal laws,
the Secretary views the concerns raised in your May 21 letter
as having been addressed.”
B. This Case
On July 8, 2024, Plaintiffs filed their complaint,
contending that: (1) the Speech Provision violates the
Freedom of Speech Clause of the First Amendment and the
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment; and
(2) the Canvass Provision is an unconstitutional burden on
Plaintiffs’ right to vote.
Then, on July 18, 2024, American Encore, Karen
Glennon, and Arizona Free Enterprise Club wrote to the
Secretary requesting that he “unequivocally and specifically
disavow all enforcement of the [Canvass Provision of the
2023 EPM] for the 2024 general election.” On July 31,
2024, the Secretary responded that “the Secretary has a
nondiscretionary statutory duty to canvass without delay,
which the Canvass Provision reflects.” Thus, the July 18
letter “in effect asks the Secretary to disavow this
nondiscretionary statutory duty, which the Secretary cannot
and will not do.”

14

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

Shortly thereafter, Plaintiffs moved for preliminary
injunctive relief against enforcement of the Speech and
Canvass Provisions. The Secretary opposed the motion,
moved to stay Plaintiffs’ challenge to the Speech Provision
in light of parallel state court challenges to the Speech
Provision, and moved to dismiss both challenges under
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6).
The district court first held that Plaintiffs had standing to
challenge the Canvass and Speech Provisions, rejecting the
Secretary’s arguments that Plaintiffs failed to show a
substantial risk of harm and that Plaintiffs’ claims
incorrectly understood the Provisions. Second, the district
court denied the Secretary’s motion to stay the case pending
the resolution of the parallel state cases, concluding that
Pullman abstention is “rarely” appropriate in First
Amendment cases. Finally, the district court found that
Plaintiffs had satisfied the Winter factors, warranting a
preliminary injunction against enforcement of both
provisions.
III. Standard of Review
We review “a district court’s grant or denial of a
preliminary injunction for an abuse of discretion.” Pac.
Radiation Oncology, LLC v. Queen’s Med. Ctr., 810 F.3d
631, 635 (9th Cir. 2015). “This review is limited and
deferential, and it does not extend to the underlying merits
of the case.” Johnson v. Couturier, 572 F.3d 1067, 1078 (9th
Cir. 2009) (quotations omitted). “A district court necessarily
abuses its discretion when it bases its decision on an
erroneous legal standard or on clearly erroneous findings of
fact.” Id. at 1078–79 (quotations omitted). We review a
district court’s determination that a plaintiff has standing de

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

15

novo. Lopez v. Candaele, 630 F.3d 775, 784–85 (9th Cir.
2010).
When reviewing a district court’s decision on whether to
invoke Pullman abstention, we apply a modified abuse of
discretion standard. Courthouse News Serv. v. Planet, 750
F.3d 776, 782 (9th Cir. 2014). “We first review de novo
whether the requirements for Pullman abstention are
satisfied.” Id. “If they are not, the district court has ‘little or
no discretion’ to abstain; if they are, we review the decision
to abstain for an abuse of discretion.” Id. (citation omitted).
IV. Preliminary Injunction
A. Standing
“Article III of the Constitution confines the jurisdiction
of federal courts to ‘Cases’ and ‘Controversies.’” Food &
Drug Admin. v. All. for Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. 367, 378
(2024). To satisfy the “Cases” and “Controversies”
requirement, a plaintiff must have standing to sue. See Dep’t
of Com. v. New York, 588 U.S. 752, 766 (2019). “The
doctrine of standing ‘limits the category of litigants
empowered to maintain a lawsuit in federal court to seek
redress for a legal wrong’ and ‘confines the federal courts to
a properly judicial role.’” Id. (quoting Spokeo, Inc. v.
Robins, 578 U. S. 330, 338 (2016)).
In turn, “[t]o establish standing, . . . a plaintiff must
demonstrate (i) that she has suffered or likely will suffer an
injury in fact, (ii) that the injury likely was caused or will be
caused by the defendant, and (iii) that the injury likely would
be redressed by the requested judicial relief.” All. for
Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. at 380. “The party invoking
federal jurisdiction bears the burden of establishing these

16

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

elements.” Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561
(1992).
“[E]ach element must be supported in the same way as
any other matter on which the plaintiff bears the burden of
proof, i.e., with the manner and degree of evidence required
at the successive stages of the litigation.” Id. Thus, “[a]t the
preliminary injunction stage, . . . the plaintiff must make a
‘clear showing’ that she is likely to establish each element of
standing.” Murthy v. Missouri, 603 U.S. 43, 58 (2024)
(citations and quotations omitted); see also L.A. All. for
Hum. Rts. v. Cnty. of Los Angeles, 14 F.4th 947, 956–57 (9th
Cir. 2021) (“At the preliminary injunction stage, the
plaintiffs must make a clear showing of each element of
standing, . . . relying on the allegations in their complaint
and whatever other evidence they submitted in support of
their [preliminary-injunction] motion to meet their burden.”
(alteration in original) (citations and quotation marks
omitted)).
Furthermore, “plaintiffs must demonstrate standing for
each claim that they press and for each form of relief that
they seek.” TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U.S. 413, 431
(2021). Accordingly, Plaintiffs must show that they have
standing to challenge both the Canvass and Speech
Provisions.
Finally, “standing . . . is distinct from the merits of [a]
claim.” Maya v. Centex Corp., 658 F.3d 1060, 1068 (9th
Cir. 2011). The Supreme Court has long instructed that
“standing in no way depends on the merits of the plaintiff’s
contention that particular conduct is illegal.” Warth v.
Seldin, 422 U.S. 490, 500 (1975); see also Steel Co. v.
Citizens for a Better Env’t, 523 U.S. 83, 89 (1998) (“As we
stated in Bell v. Hood, 327 U.S. 678, 682 (1946),

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

17

‘[j]urisdiction . . . is not defeated . . . by the possibility that
the averments might fail to state a cause of action on which
petitioners could actually recover.’”). Thus, “[f]or standing
purposes, we accept as valid the merits of [Plaintiffs’] legal
claims.” Fed. Election Comm’n v. Ted Cruz for Senate, 596
U.S. 289, 298 (2022).
Consistent with these principles, we have been careful to
avoid adjudicating merits issues at the standing phase. See,
e.g., Idaho Conservation League v. Bonneville Power
Admin., 83 F.4th 1182, 1189 (9th Cir. 2023) (“That
petitioners’ theory may fail on the merits does not mean
petitioners lack standing to raise it.” (collecting cases)).
Thus, at the standing phase, when the parties dispute the
correct construction of a statute—e.g., one arguing that it
applies and the other asserting it does not—and that dispute
goes to the merits of the plaintiff’s claim, we accept the
plaintiff’s construction so long as it is arguable. See Arizona
v. Yellen, 34 F.4th 841, 849 (9th Cir. 2022) (“Viewing the
Offset Provision through Arizona’s eyes, we must accept—
for standing purposes—its allegations that the condition is
unconstitutionally ambiguous and coercive.”); Steel Co., 523
U.S. at 89 (“[T]he district court has jurisdiction if the right
of the petitioners to recover under their complaint will be
sustained if the Constitution and laws of the United States
are given one construction and will be defeated if they are
given another, . . . unless the claim clearly appears to be
immaterial and made solely for the purpose of obtaining
jurisdiction or where such a claim is wholly insubstantial and
frivolous.” (citation omitted)).
In sum, reviewing de novo, we ask—accepting the merits
of Plaintiffs’ claims—whether they have made a clear
showing that they are likely to satisfy the threshold

18

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

requirements of standing for their challenges against each
provision of the EPM. We review each in turn.
1. The Canvass Provision
The Secretary contends that Plaintiffs have not made the
clear showing of standing required to challenge the Canvass
Provision. We agree with the Secretary that Plaintiffs have
failed to make a clear showing that they are likely to suffer
an injury-in-fact, and we accordingly vacate the preliminary
injunction as to the Canvass Provision.
“To establish injury in fact, a plaintiff must show that he
or she suffered ‘an invasion of a legally protected interest’
that is ‘concrete and particularized’ and ‘actual or imminent,
not conjectural or hypothetical.’” Spokeo, Inc., 578 U.S. at
339 (quoting Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560).
Plaintiffs contend that the enforcement of the Canvass
Provision would have “the effect of disenfranchising every
voter in any county that does not timely certify its election
result with the Secretary.”5 There is no doubt that the right
to vote is a legally protected interest, and voter
disenfranchisement is a concrete and particularized injury. 6
See Burdick v. Takushi, 937 F.2d 415, 417–18 (9th Cir.
1991) (concluding that threats to “rights as a voter to
freedom of expression and association” demonstrated an
5

Plaintiffs also advanced a theory of standing based on the existence of
the Canvass Provision, contending that the Canvass Provision effectively
transforms the right to vote from unconditional to conditional. The
district court rejected this theory of standing, and Plaintiffs do not
advance it here.
6

The Secretary does not contest that Plaintiffs allege the invasion of a
legally protected interest; nor does he meaningfully contest that
Plaintiffs’ disenfranchisement would constitute a concrete and
particularized injury.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

19

“actual or threatened injury”). Thus, the parties primarily
dispute whether the risk of disenfranchisement here is
“actual or imminent” as opposed to “conjectural or
hypothetical.” Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560 (quotation marks
omitted). “A plaintiff threatened with future injury has
standing to sue ‘if the threatened injury is certainly
impending, or there is a ‘substantial risk that the harm will
occur.’” In re Zappos.com, Inc., 888 F.3d 1020, 1024 (9th
Cir. 2018) (citations and quotation marks omitted); see also
Murthy, 603 U.S. at 49–50 (“To establish standing, the
plaintiffs must demonstrate a substantial risk that, in the near
future, they will suffer an injury that is traceable to a
Government defendant and redressable by the injunction
they seek.”).
At the preliminary injunction stage,
“[P]laintiffs must proffer evidence that the defendants’
allegedly wrongful behavior w[ould] likely occur or
continue.” Murthy, 603 U.S. at 69 (alteration and emphasis
in original) (citation and quotation marks omitted).
The Secretary is unquestionably under a statutorily
mandated duty to “enforce” the Canvass Provision, i.e.
canvass the state’s election results by the State Canvass
Deadline.
However, Plaintiffs would suffer injury
(disenfranchisement) only if the county in which they voted
failed to certify its election results by the State’s Canvass
Deadline. Indeed, the parties agree that Plaintiffs would be
injured by enforcement of the Canvass Provision only
where: (a) a county election official fails to comply with his
duty to certify the County’s election results by the State
Canvass Deadline; and (b) the Secretary fails to intervene—
contrary to what he did with Cochise County in 2022—and
force county officials to comply with their mandatory,
statutory duty.

20

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

Thus, in considering whether Plaintiffs’ injuries are
actual or imminent, we must evaluate the likelihood that a
county would fail to canvass its election results. See Murthy,
603 U.S. at 69. On this record, Plaintiffs fail to make a clear
showing that it is more than hypothetical or conjectural that
a county would fail to timely canvass its election results,
thereby triggering the Secretary’s duty to canvass the state
votes without including the votes in that county.
As an initial matter, Plaintiffs fail to point to any specific
county or election where county officials are likely to violate
their mandatory duty to certify the county’s election results
on time. Plaintiffs rely on the 2022 general election where
the Cochise County Board of Supervisors refused to certify
the county’s election results as evidence that county officials
may violate their mandatory duty. But the isolated case of
Cochise County in 2022 cannot by itself support standing for
injunctive relief. See id. at 59 (“[P]ast injuries are relevant
only for their predictive value.” (citing O’Shea v. Littleton,
414 U.S. 488, 495 (1974) (“Past exposure to illegal conduct
does not in itself show a present case or controversy
regarding injunctive relief”))); see also City of L.A. v. Lyons,
461 U.S. 95, 105–10 (1983).
Furthermore, Plaintiffs fail to make a clear showing that
the events in Cochise County are likely to occur again.
Under Arizona law, county officials are under a duty to
canvass election results. Crosby v. Fish, 563 P.3d 143, 148
(Ariz. Ct. App. 2025). And the failure to comply with this
duty may form the basis for criminal sanctions. Id. 148–50.
Indeed, the Cochise County Board members who failed to
certify the 2022 election are currently under criminal
prosecution for their failure to timely certify the county’s
election results. See id. at 146–47;

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

21

To support their view that the events of Cochise County
are not “an isolated incident,” Plaintiffs point to a handful of
news articles as evidence that: (1) in the 2024 election cycle
“a member of the Pinal County Board indicated he may not
certify the 2024 primary results”; and (2) election officials
across the country “are threatening to withhold certification
because of ‘election integrity.’” However, when read in
context, neither of these articles clearly shows that the events
of Cochise County are likely to re-occur. The Pinal County
Board member who threatened not to certify results
ultimately did so after voicing concerns about the election
results. And Plaintiffs’ second article notes that despite
some local officials declining to certify election results, “[i]n
every such case, after intervention by state officials or the
courts, the election was certified.” Indeed, the article goes
on to note that Arizona has “taken steps since 2020 to
explicitly clarify that local officials cannot legally refuse to
certify election results, and to spell out potential
consequences if they try, including criminal charges.”7
Even if Plaintiffs had shown the likelihood that a county
would fail to timely certify its election results, Plaintiffs
provide no evidence to undermine the intuitive conclusion
that some other statutorily bound entity would intervene to
require compliance, as the Secretary did just that in 2022
with Cochise County. As the district court and parties
recognize, a state court mandamus action would also resolve
the issue and avoid the disenfranchisement that the Canvass
Provision otherwise threatens.
7

We cite these authorities only to show that, on the record before the
district court, Plaintiffs did not clearly show that it was likely that a
county would fail to timely certify its election results. Of course, a
different record could yield a different outcome.

22

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

And standing to seek mandamus relief, under Arizona
law, is not limited to the Secretary, who “has committed to
using all lawful means to ensure” that voters would not be
disenfranchised under the scenario contemplated by the
Canvass Provision.
Arizona law, “allows a party
beneficially interested in an action to compel a public
official to perform an act imposed by law.” Ariz. Pub.
Integrity All., 475 P.3d at 307 (quotation marks omitted).
Thus, Arizona citizens and voters may “seek to compel [a
county official] to perform his non-discretionary duty
to . . . comply with Arizona law.” Id. Therefore, to
demonstrate that their injury is actual or imminent, Plaintiffs
would also need to show that it is likely that the Secretary or
any other “beneficially interested” party would fail to bring
a mandamus action in time to avoid disenfranchisement.
This is the type of “long chain of hypothetical
contingencies” and “conjectural allegations of potential
injuries,” which we have held to be insufficient to create a
“substantial risk” of harm. Lake v. Fontes, 83 F.4th 1199,
1204 (9th Cir. 2023) (citations and quotation marks omitted).
At bottom, too many hypothetical wrongs must occur before
Plaintiffs would suffer disenfranchisement: county officials
would have to violate their statutorily mandated duty to
certify the vote, and both the Secretary and any beneficially
interested parties would need to decline to seek mandamus
or other relief. Together with the threat of criminal
prosecution, see Crosby, 563 P.3d at 148, these
contingencies make it highly unlikely that the Canvass
Provision would disenfranchise any Arizona voters.
2. The Speech Provision
Turning to Plaintiffs’ First Amendment challenge, the
Secretary contends that Plaintiffs lack standing because they

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

23

have failed to show a specific or credible threat of
enforcement of the Speech Provision against them.
We have long recognized that “First Amendment cases
raise ‘unique standing considerations,’ . . . that ‘tilt[ ]
dramatically toward a finding of standing.’” Lopez, 630 F.3d
at 781 (first quoting Ariz. Right to Life Pol. Action Comm. v.
Bayless, 320 F.3d 1002, 1006 (9th Cir. 2003); then quoting
LSO, Ltd. v. Stroh, 205 F.3d 1146, 1155 (9th Cir. 2000)).
This is because “a chilling of the exercise of First
Amendment rights is, itself, a constitutionally sufficient
injury.” Libertarian Party of L.A, Cnty. v. Bowen, 709 F.3d
867, 870 (9th Cir. 2013); see also Dombrowski v. Pfister,
380 U.S. 479, 486 (1965) (“Because of the sensitive nature
of constitutionally protected expression, we have not
required that all of those subject to overbroad regulations
risk prosecution to test their rights.”).
However, “self-censorship alone is insufficient to show
injury.” Lopez, 630 F.3d at 792; see also Laird v. Tatum,
408 U.S. 1, 13–14 (1972) (“Allegations of a subjective
‘chill’ are not an adequate substitute for a claim of specific
present objective harm or a threat of specific future harm.”).
Nor does “the mere existence of a proscriptive statute [or] a
generalized threat of prosecution satisf[y] the ‘case or
controversy’ requirement.” Thomas v. Anchorage Equal
Rts. Comm’n, 220 F.3d 1134, 1139 (9th Cir. 2000) (en banc).
Instead, a plaintiff’s self-censorship must be reasonably
premised on a credible or substantial risk that the law in
question will be enforced against him. See id. (“[T]here
must be a genuine threat of imminent prosecution.”) (citation
and quotation marks omitted); Human Life of Wash. Inc. v.
Brumsickle, 624 F.3d 990, 1000 (9th Cir. 2010) (“[W]here a
plaintiff has refrained from engaging in expressive activity

24

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

for fear of prosecution under the challenged statute, such
self-censorship is a constitutionally sufficient injury as long
as it is based on an actual and well-founded fear that the
challenged statute will be enforced.”) (quotation marks
omitted); Susan B. Anthony List v. Driehaus, 573 U.S. 149,
158 (2014) (“An allegation of future injury may suffice if the
threatened injury is ‘certainly impending,’ or there is a
‘substantial risk’ that the harm will occur.”) (citations and
quotation marks omitted).
Thus, in evaluating a pre-enforcement challenge, we
look to whether the plaintiff has shown “[1] an intention to
engage in a course of conduct arguably affected with a
constitutional interest, but [2] proscribed by a statute, and
[3] there exists a credible threat of prosecution thereunder.”
See Planned Parenthood Great Nw., Haw., Alaska, Ind., Ky.
v. Labrador, 122 F.4th 825, 836 (9th Cir. 2024) (alterations
in original) (quoting Driehaus, 573 U.S. at 159).8
a. Intent To Engage In Conduct Arguably
Affected With A Constitutional Interest
First, the Secretary contends that Plaintiffs have failed to
adequately specify the conduct in which they intend to
engage. However, both the complaint and the declarations
submitted by Plaintiffs discuss past expressive conduct
engaged in by various Plaintiffs. AFPI is regularly involved
in election related activity and supports and opposes
8

Prior to Driehaus, we articulated our own factors in evaluating a
plaintiff’s standing to bring a pre-enforcement challenge, the essence of
which is partially incorporated in Driehaus’s framework. See Thomas,
220 F.3d at 1139; Peace Ranch, LLC v. Bonta, 93 F.4th 482, 487 (9th
Cir. 2024). And although we have “toggled between these tests,” we
apply the Driehaus framework, incorporating the relevant elements of
our own precedent. Id.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

25

legislation by speaking to voters, and intends to continue to
do so in future election cycles. AFPI also engages in
electioneering activities, trains volunteers and poll watchers
before and during election day, conducts grassroots
workshops, and regularly communicates with voters.
Plaintiffs have also submitted declarations specifying the
types of speech and conduct they regularly engage in, which
appear to violate the Speech Provision. Plaintiff Glennon
declares that she “regularly discuss[es] politics, voting, and
many government-related topics with people” and that
because of the Speech Provision, “this political and electionrelated speech that I regularly engage in is now subject to
criminal prosecution.” Similarly, Plaintiff AFPI works on
issues relating to legislation and public policy and promotes
voting and awareness of important issues. This work
includes training volunteers and poll watchers on election
integrity laws, issues at polling locations before elections,
and compliance with the EPM. AFPI asserts that it is
“gravely concerned” that speech that may have the effect of
offending someone “may now be subject to criminal
liability” because of the Speech Provision, and “that one of
its volunteers or poll-workers might, in genuine good faith,
say something that . . . has the ‘effect’ of offending
someone.” Further, AFPI explains that its members
routinely advocate for governmental policies, which may
also have the effect of offending someone. Consequently,
AFPI contends that it and its members must now chill their
own speech to avoid criminal sanctions in Arizona. AFPI’s
declaration also gives specific examples of speech that is
covered by the Speech Provision, e.g., “[a]n ‘All Lives
Matter’ hat; [a] shirt that says ‘Vote to Protect Unborn
Children’; . . . and [a] hoody that reads ‘Israel has a right to
exist’ or ‘Never forget October 7th.”

26

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

We have explained that “[t]he concept of ‘intention’ is
more counterfactual than practical. That is to say, courts
must ask whether the plaintiff would have the intention to
engage in the proscribed conduct, were it not proscribed.”
Peace Ranch, LLC, 93 F.4th at 488. And here it is clear that
Plaintiffs intend to engage in political and election-related
speech of whatever nature the times and issues demand9—
speech that is protected by the First Amendment.
Although Plaintiffs do not state the exact nature of the
political speech in which they intend to engage in the next
election, that they will engage in First Amendment speech is
sufficient given the vagueness and overbreadth of the Speech
Provision itself.
The Speech Provision’s purported
prohibition on activity that has the “effect” of “threatening,
harassing, intimidating, or coercing voters” could
conceivably reach any speech related to elections and
politics, rendering Plaintiffs’ self-censorship reasonably
premised on a credible and substantial risk of prosecution.
See HM Fla.-ORL, LLC v. Governor of Fla., 137 F.4th 1207,
1217 (11th Cir. 2025) (“[T]he Act’s vagueness makes
Hamburger Mary’s self-censorship more reasonable. A
speech restriction’s ‘imprecision exacerbates its chilling
effect.’ . . . This consequence of vague speech laws of
course implicates their constitutionality . . . . And it also
affects our self-censorship standing analysis by making a
broader range of self-censorship a ‘reasonable’ response.”)
(citations omitted); Kenny v. Wilson, 885 F.3d 280, 291 (4th
Cir. 2018) (“[I]t is precisely because the statutes are so vague
that plaintiffs can’t be more specific. Plaintiffs allege that
9

The 2024 election cycle has passed, and the issues and candidates for
the next election cycle are not yet teed up sufficiently to specify in which
particular speech or advocacy Plaintiffs intend to engage.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

27

they can be criminally prosecuted for just about any minor
perceived infraction and that they can’t predict the type of
conduct that will lead to an arrest.”).
Indeed, it is inherent in the very nature of political and
electoral expressive conduct that Plaintiffs may not know
which political issues may become relevant or offensive at
the polls. And it is inevitable that some political and election
speech—matters of public concern—will have the effect of
being offensive to someone. As the Supreme Court stated in
Hustler Mag., Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 51 (1988)
(citation omitted):
The sort of robust political debate
encouraged by the First Amendment is bound
to produce speech that is critical of those who
hold public office or those public figures who
are ‘intimately involved in the resolution of
important public questions or, by reason of
their fame, shape events in areas of concern
to society at large.’ . . . Such criticism,
inevitably, will not always be reasoned or
moderate; public figures as well as public
officials will be subject to ‘vehement,
caustic, and sometimes unpleasantly sharp
attacks.’
See also Babbitt v. United Farm Workers Nat. Union, 442
U.S. 289, 301 (1979) (“Although appellees do not plan to
propagate untruths, they contend—as we have observed—
that ‘erroneous statement is inevitable in free debate’”)
(quoting New York Times Co. v. Sullivan, 376 U.S. 254, 271
(1964)). “If there is a bedrock principle underlying the First
Amendment, it is that the government may not prohibit the

28

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

expression of an idea simply because society finds the idea
itself offensive or disagreeable.” Texas v. Johnson, 491 U.S.
397, 414 (1989).
And “the point of all speech
protection . . . is to shield just those choices of content that
in someone’s eyes are misguided, or even hurtful.” Hurley
v. Irish–American Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Group of
Boston, Inc., 515 U.S. 557, 574 (1995).
Accordingly, Plaintiffs have sufficiently shown that they
intend to engage in a course of conduct arguably affected by
a constitutional interest—namely, political and electionrelated speech.
b. Proscribed By Law
Second, the district court properly rejected the
Secretary’s view that Plaintiffs’ proposed speech is not
prohibited by the Speech Provision because under his
interpretation of the Speech Provision it merely summarizes
existing criminal law. A plaintiff must only show that their
“future conduct . . . [is] ‘arguably . . . proscribed by [the]
statute’ it wishes to challenge.” Peace Ranch, LLC v. Bonta,
93 F.4th 482, 489 (9th Cir. 2024) (alterations in original)
(quoting Driehaus, 573 U.S. at 162). And for the purposes
of standing, we accept Plaintiffs’ interpretation of the statute
so long as it is an arguable interpretation. See Yellen, 34
F.4th at 850.10
10

The Secretary contends that the district court erred in accepting
Plaintiffs’ construction of the Speech Provision because: (1) Yellen, on
which the district court relied in holding that it must accept Plaintiffs’
reading, was decided at the motion to dismiss stage; (2) it is wellestablished that we accept a party’s factual not legal conclusions.
However, we have extended Yellen’s holding to the preliminary
injunction context. See Isaacson v. Mayes, 84 F.4th 1089, 1095, 1097
(9th Cir. 2023). Furthermore, Warth’s instruction that “standing in no

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

29

Here, Plaintiffs provide a reasonable interpretation of the
Speech Provision—that it adds new criminal prohibitions as
opposed to summarizing the existing voter-intimidation
statutes—based on the substantial variance between the
Speech Provision’s summary of A.R.S. § 16-1013 and the
actual text of A.R.S. § 16-1013. A.R.S. § 16-1013 provides:
A. It is unlawful for a person knowingly:
1. Directly or indirectly, to make use of
force, violence or restraint, or to inflict or
threaten infliction, by himself or through
any other person, of any injury, damage,
harm or loss, or in any manner to practice
intimidation upon or against any person, in
order to induce or compel such person to
vote or refrain from voting for a particular
person or measure at any election provided
by law, or on account of such person having
voted or refrained from voting at an
election. A.R.S. § 16-1013 (emphasis
added).
By contrast, the Speech Provision provides that:
Any activity by a person with the intent or
effect of threatening, harassing, intimidating,
way depends on the merits,” 422 U.S. at 500, did not rely on the fact that
the case was at the motion to dismiss stage, see id. at 501 (noting as a
“further preliminary matter . . . [that] [f]or purposes of ruling on a
motion to dismiss for want of standing, both the trial and reviewing
courts must accept as true all material allegations of the complaint.”).
And we are not, here, reaching legal conclusions—we only ask whether
Plaintiffs’ interpretation is sufficiently arguable to confer standing.

30

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

or coercing voters (or conspiring with others
to do so) inside or outside the 75-foot limit at
a voting location is prohibited. A.R.S. § 161013.
Ariz. Sec’y of State, 2023 Elections Procedure Manual 181
(emphasis added). And it includes a number of examples of
“potentially intimidating conduct” such as “[u]sing
threatening, insulting, or offensive language to a voter or poll
worker.” Id. at 182 (emphasis added).
The Speech Provision’s broad language substantially
differs from A.R.S. § 16-1013 in three aspects. First, it
broadens the mens rea requirement in A.R.S. § 16-1013’s
from “knowingly” engaging in the prohibited conduct to
engaging in any activity with the “effect of threatening,
harassing, intimidating, or coercing voters.” And, as the
examples in the Speech Provision demonstrate, this
prohibition could encompass speech that has the effect of
“insulting[] or offending” an individual. Second, the Speech
Provision excludes the element that actions must be taken to
“induce or compel such person to vote or refrain from
voting.” Thus, even conduct that does not impact a voter’s
vote may be prohibited. Finally, it includes the undefined
term “harassing,” which may also encompass a broad range
of activities that are viewed as insulting or offensive. In
sum, the Speech Provision’s “summary” reaches conduct
beyond the confines of A.R.S. § 16-1013. And Plaintiffs’
intended speech—political and electoral speech—arguably
falls within the Speech Provision’s purported prohibition.
Furthermore, Plaintiffs have sufficiently shown that
under A.R.S. § 1642(C) a violation of the Speech Provision
may constitute a misdemeanor. Only those rules which fall
within the topics enumerated in A.R.S. § 16-452(A) can be

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

31

criminally punished. McKenna v. Soto, 481 P.3d 695, 699
(Ariz. 2021). Section 16-452(A) requires the Secretary to
prescribe rules to “achieve and maintain the maximum
degree of correctness, impartiality, uniformity and
efficiency on the procedures for early voting and voting.”
A.R.S. § 16-452(A) (emphasis added). Here, Plaintiffs
assert that the Speech Provision falls under the ambit of
A.R.S. § 16-452(A) because it is a rule that addresses the
procedure for “voting.” This is an arguable reading, which
satisfies our standing inquiry.
But even if the Speech Provision sits outside of the ambit
of A.R.S. § 16-452(A), and is not backed by criminal
prohibition, it likely still creates a chilling effect on First
Amendment conduct. The EPM is designed to provide a
uniform set of rules and guidance for election officials.
A.R.S. § 16-452(A).
The Speech Provision and its
corresponding examples were intended to be used by
election officials to identify and “promptly remedy” any
conduct that could be viewed as voter intimidation. Ariz.
Sec’y of State, 2023 Elections Procedure Manual 181. Thus,
Plaintiffs may be dissuaded from engaging in their intended
speech even if there is no threat of criminal prosecution,
because election officials may nonetheless report them to
police or remove them from the polling location based on
guidance provided in the EPM. See Speech First, Inc. v.
Schlissel, 939 F.3d 756, 765 (6th Cir. 2019) (“The Response
Team’s ability to make referrals—i.e., to inform [the Office
of Student Conflict Resolution] or the police about reported
conduct—is a real consequence that objectively chills
speech.”); White v. Lee, 227 F.3d 1214, 1228 (9th Cir. 2000)
(“Informal measures, such as ‘the threat of invoking legal
sanctions and other means of coercion, persuasion, and
intimidation,’ can violate the First Amendment also.”

32

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

(quoting Bantam Books, Inc. v. Sullivan, 372 U.S. 58, 67
(1963)); cf. Minnesota Voters All. v. Mansky, 585 U.S. 1, 21
(2018) (“[A]n election judge’s own politics may shape his
views on what counts as ‘political.’ And if voters experience
or witness episodes of unfair or inconsistent enforcement of
the ban, the State’s interest in maintaining a polling place
free of distraction and disruption would be undermined by
the very measure intended to further it.”). Accordingly,
Plaintiffs have sufficiently shown that their intended conduct
is arguably proscribed by the Speech Provision, supporting
the reasonableness of their self-censorship.
c. Credible Or
Prosecution

Substantial

Threat

Of

Finally, we reject the Secretary’s contention that
Plaintiffs have failed to make a clear showing of a credible
or substantial threat of prosecution.
In determining whether a plaintiff has shown a credible
or substantial threat of enforcement, we have identified a
number of factors that may support the reasonableness of a
plaintiff’s fear of prosecution. These include: (1) “whether
the enforcement authorities have ‘communicated a specific
warning or threat to initiate proceedings,’” Tingley, 47 F.4th
at 1067 (citation omitted); (2) whether the enforcing
authority has disavowed enforcement, LSO, Ltd, 205 F.3d at
1154–56; and (3) “whether there is a ‘history of past
prosecution or enforcement,’” Tingley, 47 F.4th at 1067
(citation omitted). Ultimately, the touchstone of our inquiry
is whether Plaintiffs have adduced enough evidence to show
that there is a realistic threat that the law in question may be
enforced against them.
First, though enforcement authorities have not
“communicated a specific warning or threat to initiate

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

33

proceedings,” id. at 1067, the Secretary’s failure to modify
the Speech Provision in response to Arizona assembly
members’ concerns that, as written, the Provision runs afoul
of the First Amendment, reasonably indicates an intent to
enforce the Provision.
Second, although the Attorney General disavowed
Plaintiffs’ interpretation of the Speech Provision, even
assuming the Attorney General will not criminally prosecute
conduct beyond the criminal conduct set forth in the statute,
A.R.S. § 16-1013, Plaintiffs have still shown a credible
threat of adverse government action by virtue of the
enforcement authority delegated by the Secretary to election
workers. In evaluating the threat of enforcement, we look to
“the threat posed collectively by the entire ‘universe of
potential complainants.’” Matsumoto v. Labrador, 122
F.4th 787, 798 (9th Cir. 2024) (emphasis in original) (citing
Driehaus, 573 U.S. at 164). The Secretary charges election
workers with the responsibility to “prevent and promptly
remedy any instances of voter intimidation.” Ariz. Sec’y of
State, 2023 Election Procedure Manual 181. To fulfill that
duty election poll workers must “preserve order and remove
disruptive persons from the voting location.” Id. at 182. The
Secretary instructs election poll workers to enforce the EPM
at polling stations and to rely upon the Speech Provision in
assessing whether to call the police or permit individuals in
or around the polling place. Id. Indeed, the potential for poll
workers to expose individuals to arrest or have them
removed from the voting location for exercising First
Amendment speech that others find offensive creates its own
chilling effect. Ariz. Sec’y of State, 2023 Elections
Procedure Manual 181. See Speech First, 939 F.3d at 765;
White v. Lee, 227 F.3d at 1228; cf. Mansky, 585 U.S. at 21.

34

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

This presents enough of a collective threat to create a
credible or substantial risk of enforcement.
In sum, Plaintiffs have shown that there is a credible or
substantial risk of enforcement of the Speech Provision
against them. Poll workers may call the police or remove
individuals from voting centers based on the Speech
Provision alone. With this threat and considering the
increasingly contentious elections our country has
experienced over time, Plaintiffs satisfy this showing.
B. Winter Factors
Next the Secretary contends that Plaintiffs failed to
satisfy the four-factor test for preliminary injunctive relief as
outlined in Winter v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 555 U.S.
7, 20 (2008). “Under the Winter test, a party is entitled to a
preliminary injunction if it demonstrates (1) ‘that [it] is
likely to succeed on the merits,’ (2) ‘that [it] is likely to
suffer irreparable harm in the absence of preliminary relief,’
(3) ‘that the balance of equities tips in [its] favor,’ and
(4) ‘that an injunction is in the public interest.’ FlatheadLolo-Bitterroot Citizen Task Force v. Montana, 98 F.4th
1180, 1190 (9th Cir. 2024) (alterations in original) (quoting
Winter, 555 U.S. at 20). “[I]njunctive relief [is] an
extraordinary remedy that may only be awarded upon a clear
showing that the plaintiff is entitled to such relief.” Winter,
555 U.S. at 22. The Secretary challenges Plaintiffs’ showing
on each factor, and we review each in turn, concluding that
the district court did not abuse its discretion in finding that
Plaintiffs had satisfied each factor.
1. Likelihood Of Success On The Merits
“Likelihood of success on the merits is a threshold
inquiry and is the most important factor.” Env’t Prot. Info.

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

35

Ctr. v. Carlson, 968 F.3d 985, 989 (9th Cir. 2020). “[I]n the
First Amendment context, the moving party bears the initial
burden of making a colorable claim that its First Amendment
rights have been infringed, or are threatened with
infringement, at which point the burden shifts to the
government to justify the restriction.” Thalheimer v. City of
San Diego, 645 F.3d 1109, 1116 (9th Cir. 2011), overruled
on other grounds by Bd. of Trs. of Glazing Health & Welfare
Tr. v. Chambers, 941 F.3d 1195 (9th Cir. 2019).
The district court found this factor met, concluding that:
(1) the Speech Provision did not summarize the existing
voter-intimidation statutes; (2) the Speech Provision likely
violated the First Amendment; and (3) the Speech Provision
was likely unconstitutionally vague. On appeal, the
Secretary does not challenge the district court’s conclusion
that the Speech Provision, as interpreted by Plaintiffs, likely
violates the First and Fourteenth Amendments.
Accordingly, the Secretary has forfeited any arguments as to
these aspects of the district court’s ruling. See Wolford v.
Lopez, 116 F.4th 959, 991 (9th Cir. 2024). Instead, the
Secretary focuses on what he contends to be the correct
construction of the Speech Provision, asserting that the
Speech Provision is no more than “an attempt to summarize
criminal prohibitions created by the [Arizona] Legislature.”
He urges us to apply the constitutional avoidance canon of
construction to read the Speech Provision narrowly and
decline Plaintiffs’ interpretation of it.
Under this canon, we “may interpret ‘ambiguous
statutory language’ to ‘avoid serious constitutional doubts.’”
Iancu v. Brunetti, 588 U.S. 388, 397 (2019) (quoting FCC v.
Fox Television Stations, Inc., 556 U.S. 502, 516 (2009)).
“But that canon of construction applies only when ambiguity
exists.” Id. Here, the text of the Speech Provision is

36

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

unambiguous—it prohibits “[a]ny activity by a person with
the . . . effect of threatening, harassing, intimidating, or
coercing voters.” Reading the more limiting language in
A.R.S. § 16-1013 into the Speech Provision directly
conflicts with the clear and broad language of the Speech
Provision—a reformulation that we cannot do. “We will not
rewrite a law to conform it to constitutional requirements.”
Iancu, 588 U.S. at 397 (citation omitted). Accordingly, the
district court correctly found that the constitutional
avoidance canon was inapplicable. And the Secretary does
not challenge Plaintiff’s First Amendment claim, as they
construe the Speech Provision. Plaintiffs have therefore
demonstrated a likelihood of success on this claim.
2. The Remaining Winter Factors
Because Plaintiffs have shown a likelihood of success on
the merits with respect to their First Amendment challenge,
the remaining factors are also met. We have held that “[t]he
loss of First Amendment freedoms, for even minimal periods
of time, unquestionably constitutes irreparable injury.”
Associated Press v. Otter, 682 F.3d 821, 826 (9th Cir. 2012).
And “it is always in the public interest to prevent the
violation of a party’s constitutional rights.” Am. Bev. Ass’n
v. City & Cnty. of San Francisco, 916 F.3d 749, 758 (9th Cir.
2019) (en banc) (citation omitted).
Nonetheless, the Secretary contends that Plaintiffs failed
to show irreparable harm because the Speech Provision had
been part of the EPM since 2019 and that Plaintiffs’
purported delay in bringing their lawsuit belies their claim
of irreparable injury. However, the district court reasonably
concluded that Plaintiffs were not unjustifiably delayed
given that they discovered the Speech Provision in 2023—
when members of the Arizona Legislature publicly

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

37

expressed First Amendment concerns—and brought suit
several months after the Secretary published the 2023 EPM.
Moreover, we reject the Secretary’s contention that an
injunction is not in the public interest given the State’s strong
interest in “protecting the ability of voters to vote safely and
securely, free of intimidation.” Vindication of constitutional
rights “is always in the public interest.” Am. Bev. Ass’n, 916
F.3d at 758. And it is doubtful that the district court’s
injunction diminishes the States’ ability to protect voters
from intimidation, given that the underlying statutes it
purports to summarize remain in effect notwithstanding the
injunction against the Speech Provision.
The Secretary also contends that the district court should
have refrained from enjoining the provision because, in a
separate case, an Arizona trial court already enjoined the
Secretary and Attorney General from enforcing the Speech
Provision. However, the district court correctly rejected the
Secretary’s argument that “[t]he public interest is not served
by having a duplicative federal injunction on the same
subject.” The Secretary points to no authority that holds that
issuing a duplicative injunction is a bar to preliminary
injunctive relief. Indeed, district courts frequently issue
overlapping preliminary injunctions on the same subject
matter. See, e.g., California v. Health & Hum. Servs., 390
F. Supp. 3d 1061, 1065–66 (N.D. Cal. 2019)
(“[O]verlapping injunctions appear to be a common outcome
of parallel litigation, rather than a reason for the Court to
pass on exercising its duty to determine whether litigants are
entitled to relief.” (collecting cases)).
Finally, we reject the Secretary’s contention that the
Purcell doctrine counsels against preliminary injunctive
relief in this case. Under Purcell, “federal courts should

38

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

ordinarily not alter the election rules on the eve of an
election.” Republican Nat’l Comm. v. Democratic Nat’l
Comm., 589 U.S. 423, 424 (2020) (citing 549 U.S. 1 (2006)
(per curiam)). Purcell prevents “the uncertainty engendered
by judicial disruptions to the status quo in the midst of
elections [that] can and often will cause eligible voters to
remain away from the polls.” Mi Familia Vota v. Fontes,
111 F.4th 976, 985 (9th Cir. 2024). It aims to ensure that
“[w]hen an election is close at hand, the rules of the road
must be clear and settled.” Merrill v. Milligan, 142 S. Ct.
879, 880–81 (Mem) (2022) (Kavanaugh, J., joined by Alito,
J., concurring). Only “under certain circumstances, such as
where an impending election is imminent and a State’s
election machinery is already in progress” is Purcell
implicated. Reynolds v. Sims, 377 U.S. 533, 585 (1964).
Moreover, “Purcell did not set forth a per se prohibition
against enjoining voting laws on the eve of an election . . . .
Rather, courts must assess the particular circumstances of
each case in light of the concerns expressed by the Purcell
court to determine whether an injunction is proper.”
Feldman v. Ariz. Sec’y of State’s Off., 843 F.3d 366, 368 (9th
Cir. 2016).
We conclude that “the factors that animated the Supreme
Court’s concern in Purcell are not present” here. Feldman,
843 F.3d at 368. First, the enjoined provision—the Speech
Provision—“does not affect the state’s election processes or
machinery.” Id. at 409. Instead, the Speech Provision
regulates the type of speech and conduct that individuals
may engage in around voting places. Thus, “unlike the
circumstances involved in Purcell . . ., the injunction at issue
here does not involve any change at all to the actual election
process.” Id. In addition, it is not clear that the injunction
would disturb the status quo or impose a significant hardship

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

39

on the State. See id. (noting that a third reason why Purcell
does not apply is because the injunction did not “disrupt long
standing state procedures”); see also Merrill, 142 S.Ct. at
881 (noting that the Purcell principle might be overcome
where, among other things, “the changes in question are at
least feasible before the election without significant, cost,
confusion, or hardship.”); compare Mi Familia Vota, 111
F.4th at 985 (“Elections officials are now subject to
conflicting criminal penalties, orders, and policies.
Identically situated voter registration applicants are treated
differently depending on the voter registration application
form they pick up.”).
The Secretary’s position is that the Speech Provision
codified only existing law, which remains enforceable and
which the Attorney General and Secretary have stated are the
main enforcement mechanisms to deal with voter
intimidation. And the record does not reveal a single
prosecution under the Speech Provision exclusively. Thus,
it is unclear how enjoining the Speech Provision would
disturb the status quo or visit a hardship on election
authorities since the main enforcement mechanism—the
underlying statute—remains in force.
Accordingly, we affirm the district court’s grant of
preliminary injunctive relief with respect to the Speech
Provision.
V. Pullman Abstention
Finally, the Secretary contends that the district court
erred by declining to abstain under the doctrine of Pullman
abstention. “Under the Pullman abstention doctrine, ‘federal
courts have the power to refrain from hearing cases’ when
‘the resolution of a federal constitutional question might be
obviated if the state courts were given the opportunity to

40

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

interpret ambiguous state law.’” Peridot Tree, Inc. v. City of
Sacramento, 94 F.4th 916, 926 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting
Quackenbush v. Allstate Ins. Co., 517 U.S. 706, 716–17
(1996)). The doctrine “is intended both to avoid ‘a collision
between the federal courts and state . . . legislatures, . . . and
to prevent ‘the premature determination of constitutional
questions.’” Porter v. Jones, 319 F.3d 483, 492 (9th Cir.
2003) (first alteration in original) (citations omitted). It
“does not exist for the benefit of either of the parties but
rather for the rightful independence of the state governments
and for the smooth working of the federal judiciary.”
Courthouse News Serv., 750 F.3d at 783 (citations omitted).
A district court does not have the authority to exercise its
discretion to abstain under Pullman, unless three
independently mandated requirements are met:
(1) the case touches on a sensitive area of
social policy upon which the federal courts
ought not enter unless no alternative to its
adjudication is open, (2) constitutional
adjudication plainly can be avoided if a
definite ruling on the state issue would
terminate the controversy, and (3) the proper
resolution of the possible determinative issue
of state law is uncertain.
Id. at 783–84.
Pullman abstention is an “extraordinary and narrow
exception to the duty of a . . . court to adjudicate a
controversy.” Chula Vista Citizens for Jobs & Fair
Competition v. Norris, 782 F.3d 520, 528 (9th Cir. 2015)
(alteration in original) (en banc) (citation omitted). And it is
“rarely appropriate for a federal court to abstain under

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

41

Pullman in a First Amendment case.” Id. (citation omitted).
This is “because the guarantee of free expression is always
an area of particular federal concern,” Courthouse News
Serv., 750 F.3d at 784 (citation omitted), and “the delay that
comes from abstention may itself chill the First Amendment
rights at issue,” Porter, 319 F.3d at 492–93. Accordingly,
“[w]e have held that, in First Amendment cases, the first
Pullman factor will almost never be present because the
guarantee of free expression is always an area of particular
federal concern.” Id. at 492 (citation omitted).
Indeed, to date, we have found the first Pullman
requirement satisfied in the First Amendment context only
once. See Almodovar v. Reiner, 832 F.2d 1138, 1140 (9th
Cir. 1987). In Almodovar, “the plaintiffs had already
reached the California Supreme Court in a pending case that
presented the same issues as their federal suit, so they would
not need to ‘undergo the expense or delay of a full state court
litigation’ while their federal case was stayed.” Courthouse
News Serv., 750 F.3d at 784 (citing Almodovar, 832 F.2d at
1140).
Measured against these precedents, the district court
correctly held that the first Pullman factor was not met. The
Secretary contends otherwise, asserting that “elections are
widely considered a sensitive area of social policy,” and that
this is the “rare case,” where abstention is warranted given
ongoing parallel state court cases challenging the same
Speech Provision. However, neither of these points is
convincing.
Although state election laws are a sensitive area of social
policy, see Burdick, 846 F.2d at 589, this does not outweigh
the significant federal interest in free expression. Indeed, we
have repeatedly declined to find the first Pullman factor met

42

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

in contexts that implicate state election law. See Porter, 319
F.3d at 487, 492 (finding that the first prong of Pullman
abstention was not met, where the plaintiff asserted that the
California Secretary of State’s threatened prosecution of
California Elections Code chilled First Amendment
conduct); Wolfson v. Brammer, 616 F.3d 1045, 1052 (9th
Cir. 2010) (finding that the first prong of Pullman abstention
was not met, where the plaintiff asserted that Arizona’s Code
of Judicial Conduct chilled his political campaign speech);
Chula Vista Citizens for Jobs & Fair Competition, 782 F.3d
at 528 (finding that the first prong of Pullman abstention was
not met, where Plaintiffs asserted a First Amendment
challenge to California’s elections code).
Moreover, the ongoing parallel state court case does not
fall under Almodovar’s unusual and aberrational procedural
setting where the question was at the doorstep of the state
supreme court. In that unique context, we concluded that
“[t]he fears of chill that justify our preference against
abstention in first amendment cases are not present in this
instance,” given the substantial likelihood that the issue of
state law would be definitively resolved by the highest
authority on that issue. Almodovar, 832 F.2d at 1140. By
contrast, here, the state court litigation has yet to be resolved,
even if it is further along than the federal case. See Modified
Scheduling Order, Ariz. Free Enter. Club et.al v. Fontes, No.
CV2024-002760 (Ariz. Super. Ct. June 20, 2025) (moving
dispositive motion deadline from June 23, 2025 to July 21,
2025). Accordingly, the district court correctly denied the
Secretary’s motion for a stay.
VI. Conclusion
In sum, we REVERSE the district court with respect to
its conclusion that Plaintiffs have demonstrated standing to

AMERICAN ENCORE V. FONTES

43

seek a preliminary injunction enjoining the Canvass
Provision and VACATE the injunction as to that provision.
However, we AFFIRM the district court’s conclusion that
Plaintiffs have standing to seek a preliminary injunction
enjoining the Speech Provision, that Plaintiffs have satisfied
the Winter factors, and that Pullman abstention was not
appropriate.
AFFIRMED in part; REVERSED in part; and
VACATED in part.

