FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JAMES EVERETT HUNT; JUAN
RODRIGUEZ; KURT VOUTAZ;
JOEL WHITE; ANDREW AUSTIN;
SCOTT KLINE; RYAN FISHMAN,

No. 24-3568
D.C. No.
4:19-cv-02935HSG

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.

OPINION

PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS
LLP (PWC),
Defendant - Appellee,
and
BLOOM ENERGY
CORPORATION, JP MORGAN
SECURITIES, LLC, MORGAN
STANLEY SMITH BARNEY, LLC,
CREDIT SUISSE SECURITIES
(USA) LLC, KEYBANC CAPITAL
MARKETS INC., MERRILL
LYNCH, PIERCE, FENNER &
SMITH INCORPORATED,
ROBERT W. BAIRD & CO.
INCORPORATED, COWEN AND
COMPANY, LLC, HSBC

2

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

SECURITIES (USA) INC.,
OPPENHEIMER & CO. INC.,
RAYMOND JAMES &
ASSOCIATES, INC.,
Defendants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Haywood S. Gilliam, Jr., District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 11, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed November 10, 2025
Before: Milan D. Smith, Jr. and N. Randy Smith, Circuit
Judges, and Douglas L. Rayes, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge N. Randy Smith

The Honorable Douglas L. Rayes, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.

*

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

3

SUMMARY **
Securities Law
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal of
claims under § 11 of the Securities Act of 1933 against
PriceWaterhouseCoopers LLP (PwC), an outside accountant
for Bloom Energy Corp., based on an audit opinion on
Bloom Energy’s financial statements included with its
registration statement for an initial public stock offering.
At issue was the manner in which Bloom Energy, a
designer, manufacturer, and seller of fuel-cell servers that
converted natural gas or biogas into electricity for on-site
power generation, accounted for Managed Services
Agreements (MSAs), a type of sale-leaseback
arrangement. On appeal, plaintiffs challenged the alleged
incorrect statements of revenue, net loss, and net loss per
share in Bloom Energy’s 2017 financial statement, due to the
improper treatment of MSAs as operating rather than capital
leases.
The panel held that under § 11, an independent
accountant is not strictly liable for the information in a
registration statement or a client’s financial statements
simply because the accountant certified the financial
statements prepared by the issuer. Instead, under 15 U.S.C.
§ 77k(b)(3)(B)(i), an independent accountant certifies the
underlying statements without liability if, “after reasonable
investigation, [the accountant has a] reasonable ground to
believe and did believe, at the time such part of the
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

4

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

registration because effective, that the statements therein
were true and that there was no omission to state a material
fact required to be stated therein or necessary to make the
statements therein not misleading." Under Omnicare, Inc. v.
Laborers Dist. Council Const. Indus. Pension Fund, 575
U.S. 175 (2015), an independent accountant is also protected
from liability for its opinions (not factual statements) made
about those underlying documents as long as the opinion was
sincerely held.
The panel held that PwC was not liable as a preparer of
Bloom Energy’s financial statements. PwC also was not
liable as a certifier of Bloom Energy’s financial statements
because PwC’s audit opinion did not make any material
misstatements of fact or omissions but rather was merely a
statement of opinion based upon the subjective judgment of
the MSA classification. The panel held that the district
court’s decision also must be affirmed because, under
Omnicare, Bloom Energy’s financial statements regarding
classification of the MSAs were opinions.

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

5

COUNSEL
Nicholas I. Porritt (argued), Levi & Korsinsky LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Adam M. Apton, Levi & Korsinsky LLP,
San Francisco, California; Reed R. Kathrein and Lucas
Gilmore, Hagens Berman Sobol Shapiro LLP, Berkeley,
California; Kevin K. Green, Hagens Berman Sobol Shapiro
LLP, San Diego, California; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
E. Joshua Rosenkranz (argued), Eliza Lehner, and Jodie C.
Liu, Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP, New York, New
York; Edward H. Williams II, Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe
LLP, Washington, D.C.; Lisa Bugni, King & Spalding LLP,
San Francisco, California; for Defendant-Appellee.
Linda T. Coberly, Winston & Strawn LLP, Chicago, Illinois;
Lauren Gailey, Winston & Strawn LLP, Washington, D.C.;
Janet Galeria and Tyler S. Badgley, U.S. Chamber Litigation
Center, Washington, D.C.; Kevin Carroll, Securities
Industry and Financial Markets Association, Washington,
D.C.; for Amici Curiae the Chamber of Commerce of the
United States of America and the Securities Industry and
Financial Markets Association.
David M. Parker and Elizabeth K. Brightwell, Hunton
Andrews Kurth LLP, Richmond, Virginia; Matthew P.
Bosher, Hunton Andrews Kurth LLP, Washington, D.C.; for
Amicus Curiae American Institute of Certified Public
Accountants.

6

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

OPINION
N.R. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
Under § 11 of the Securities Act of 1933, an independent
accountant is not strictly liable for the information in a
Registration Statement or a client’s financial statements
simply because the accountant certified the financial
statements prepared by the issuer. Instead, an independent
accountant certifies the underlying statements without
liability if, “after reasonable investigation, [the accountant
has a] reasonable ground to believe and did believe, at the
time such part of the registration statement became effective,
that the statements therein were true and that there was no
omission to state a material fact required to be stated therein
or necessary to make the statements therein not misleading.”
15 U.S.C. § 77k(b)(3)(B)(i). Moreover, an independent
accountant is also protected from liability for its opinions
(not factual statements) made about those underlying
documents as long as the opinion was sincerely held. See
Omnicare, Inc. v. Laborers Dist. Council Const. Indus.
Pension Fund, 575 U.S. 175, 187–88 (2015).
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Bloom Energy designs, manufactures, sells, and (in
some instances) installs fuel-cell servers (Energy Servers)
that convert natural gas or biogas into electricity for on-site
power generation.
This case arises because of the manner in which Bloom
Energy accounted for a type of contract that it used in
connection with these Energy Servers; such contracts are
known as Managed Services Agreements (MSA). MSAs are
a type of sale-leaseback arrangement, where Bloom Energy

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

7

first sells the Energy Server to a bank and then leases it back
from the bank. Bloom Energy then subleases the Energy
Server to a customer, whereby Bloom Energy becomes the
lessee (from the bank) and the lessor (to the customer) of the
Energy Server. At the time of the lease to the customer,
Bloom Energy also enters into another contract with the
customer to service the Energy Server (from which customer
payment for the service, Bloom Energy pays its lease to the
bank and generates income for servicing the Energy Server).
Bloom Energy can account for these types of saleleaseback arrangements in either of two ways: (1) as an
“operating lease,” accounting for the revenue it earns when
it sells the Energy Server to the bank; or (2) as a “capital
lease,” accounting for the revenue it earns when it gets the
payment from the customer over the course of the service
agreement with the customer. MSAs are classified as either
an operating lease or a capital lease based on specific
criteria. A capital lease is recognized if it meets any of the
following criteria: (1) ownership is transferred to the lessee
by the end of the lease term; (2) the lease contains a bargain
purchase option; (3) the lease term is at least 75% of the
property’s estimated remaining economic life; or (4) the
present value of the minimum lease payments is 90% or
more of the fair value of the leased property. See Accounting
Standards Codification (ASC) 840-10-25-1 1. If none of these
ASC 840-10-25-1 was superseded by Topic 842 in the
Accounting
Standards
Update
2016-02.
See
https://asc.fasb.org/1943274/1855311/GUID-4073757B-B23C-4931ABE0-8A1DF61EAFEA ((last visited Oct. 29, 2025). Lease
classification, as of February 25, 2016, can be found at ASC 842-10-252. This section does not use 75% as a benchmark but rather a majority
standard (ASC 842-10-25-2(c): “[t]he lease term is for the major part of
the remaining economic life of the underlying asset”). However, the
1

8

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

criteria are met, the MSA is classified as an operating lease.
Under an operating lease, an Energy Server would not be
recognized as an asset on Bloom Energy’s books (because
the Energy Server was sold to the bank); instead, lease
payments to the bank would be recorded as an expense and
payments from the customer would be recorded as revenue.
In contrast, a capital lease would be recorded on Bloom
Energy’s balance sheet by recognizing the Energy Server as
an asset with a corresponding liability to the bank.
Initially, Bloom Energy accounted for MSAs as
operating leases. Bloom Energy determined that the MSAs
were best classified as operating leases because the Energy
Servers were not “integral equipment,” as the cost to remove
and relocate an Energy Server would not exceed 10% of its
original installation value. Bloom Energy also determined
that its MSAs failed to meet the capital lease criteria because
Bloom Energy determined that Energy Servers had useful
lives of 15–21 years, with typical MSAs for each Energy
Server having a lease term of 6–10 years—less than 75% of
the estimated life, thus not triggering capital lease treatment.
In 2018 (after more than 15 years as a private company),
Bloom Energy decided to go public. To go public, it had to
conduct an initial public stock offering (IPO) and file a
Registration Statement with the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC). To prepare the materials for the IPO and
Registration Statement, Bloom Energy had already prepared
February 2016 amendments were not effective for public business
entities until fiscal years beginning after December 15, 2018, and the
parties and the district court relied upon ASC 840-10-25-1. Moreover,
the district court did not find the ASC to be dispositive: “ASC 840-1010-1 merely states the ‘objectives’ underlying the more detailed
provisions that follow,” and “[d]espite Plaintiffs’ urging, it does not
appear to provide the definitive method for classifying a lease.”

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

9

its own financial statements for 2016, 2017, and the first
quarter of 2018. It also retained responsibility for preparing
all other financial statements for the IPO and Statement.
However, Bloom Energy engaged PricewaterhouseCoopers
LLP (PwC), as an outside accountant, to audit its 2016 and
2017 financial statements, so it could include that audit
opinion with the Registration Statement.
PwC was hired to express an opinion on Bloom Energy’s
2016 and 2017 financial statements based on audits. In its
audits, PwC would investigate the business, operations,
financial statements, and accounting of Bloom Energy.
Those audits included “performing procedures to assess the
risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing
procedures that respond to those risks” and “examining, on
a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosure
of consolidated financial statements.” It also “conducted [its]
audits of the[] consolidated financial statements in
accordance with standards of the” Public Company
Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB). 2
Following the audit, PwC concluded:
In our opinion, the consolidated financial
statements present fairly, in all material
respects, the financial position of the
Company as of December 31, 2017 and
December 31, 2016, and the result of its
operations and its cash flows for each of the
two years in the period ended December 31,
2017 in conformity with accounting
Again, PwC did not prepare the 2016 and 2017 financial statements
because Bloom Energy’s management had prepared them.

2

10

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.
PwC’s audit did not identify any issue with Bloom Energy
classifying the MSAs as operating leases under Generally
Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) or Generally
Accepted Auditing Standards (GAAS).
When Bloom Energy prepared the Registration
Statement, it included the PwC audit opinion. The
Registration Statement also described an MSA and how the
sale-leaseback arrangement operated. The Statement
expressly stated an MSA may be “classified as a capital lease
or an operating lease”; that Bloom Energy “[d]etermine[d] if
the leaseback [was] classified as a capital lease or an
operating lease,” and stated that its MSA “are classified as
operating leases”; and it explained that this classification
affected Bloom Energy’s recognition of revenue and
liabilities.
Its Registration Statement registered over 20.7 million
Bloom Energy shares for sale. These shares were sold in the
IPO at $15 per share and began trading on July 25, 2018.
Bloom Energy received proceeds of $284.3 million, net of
underwriting discounts, commissions, and estimated
offering costs.
In 2019, Bloom Energy reviewed the accounting for an
MSA that had “closed on November 27, 2019 under an MSA
financing . . . , [wherein] PwC identified an issue it had not
previously identified related to the accounting for the
Impacted MSA transactions.” Based upon this review,
Bloom Energy reevaluated its MSAs and determined the
MSAs should be treated as capital leases (loans from the
bank rather than sales). Thus, Bloom Energy (with the

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

11

advice of its Audit Committee and PwC) reclassified certain
MSAs as capital leases. To reflect these new classifications,
Bloom Energy revised its 2016 and 2017 financial
statements, and restated its 2018 and 2019 financial
statements. 3 The next day, the price of Bloom Energy stock
dropped by 13.8%.
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
In 2019, Plaintiffs (consisting of former and current
stockholders) filed a class action against Bloom Energy, nine
of its officers and directors, and ten underwriters of the IPO.
PwC was not a named defendant in the class action
complaint. The complaint asserted claims under § 10(b) and
§ 11 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, based on
alleged misstatements Bloom Energy made from 2018 to
2019 and alleged misstatements in the Registration
Statement. None of the allegations involved PwC or the
classification of MSAs.
A year into the litigation, Bloom Energy announced the
restatements of the 2018 and 2019 financial statements that
it deemed material and revisions of the 2016 and 2017
financial statements that it deemed immaterial. After the
amendment, Plaintiffs amended their complaint to add
allegations, under § 10(b) and § 11, regarding the
classifications of the MSAs. As a part of that amendment,
PwC was added as a defendant. Plaintiffs alleged that PwC
was liable under § 11 for the actionable statements and
omissions in the Registration Statement because it purported
to have “conducted an adequate and reasonable investigation
A restatement corrects a material error in prior financial statements,
whereas a revision corrects an error that is “immaterial to the prior year
financial statements.” SEC Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 108, 71 Fed.
Reg. 54,580, 54,582 (Sept. 18, 2006).

3

12

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

into the business, operations, financial statements, and
accounting of Bloom Energy.”
All Defendants moved to dismiss all claims against
them. PwC moved to dismiss the § 11 claims against it. The
district court partially dismissed the claims against the other
defendants and dismissed the claims against PwC.
As to PwC, the court found that PwC’s audit opinion was
an inactionable opinion under Omnicare; that the PwC
opinion said only that the financial statements “present
fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the
Company . . . in conformity [with GAAP]”; that “the
financial statements are the responsibility of [Bloom
Energy’s] management”; that PwC only had the
responsibility “to express an opinion on [Bloom Energy’s]
consolidated financial statements based on [its] audits”; that
the classification of “MSAs are complex”; and thus, PwC
was not liable. The district court also rejected Plaintiffs’
argument that PwC’s opinions contained within them, as
“embedded statements of fact,” the financial statements
prepared by Bloom Energy. Lastly, the district court held
that PwC’s certification of the financial statements was not
a guarantee that they were accurate but rather was limited to
the conclusions of the audit opinion.
After the district court ruled on Defendants’ motions to
dismiss, Plaintiffs settled their claims with all Defendants
except PwC. Following the settlement, the district court
entered a final judgment, dismissing all claims against PwC.
However, the district court granted Plaintiffs leave to amend
as to PwC, but Plaintiffs conceded that an amendment would
be futile.
Instead, Plaintiffs filed this timely appeal, challenging
the alleged incorrect statements of revenue, net loss, and net

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

13

loss per share in Bloom Energy’s 2017 financial statement
(due to the improper treatment of the MSAs as operating
rather than capital leases). 4
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review de novo a district court’s order granting a
motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim. Dunn v. Castro,
621 F.3d 1196, 1198 (9th Cir. 2010). We must accept
sufficient factual allegations in the complaint as true and
construe them in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. See
Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009); In re Gilead
Scis. Sec. Litig., 536 F.3d 1049, 1055 (9th Cir. 2008).
ANALYSIS
Under Omnicare, an accountant’s opinion is actionable
under § 11 if: (1) “the speaker did not hold the belief she
professed” and the supporting fact she supplied is
objectively untrue; (2) the opinion contains false “embedded
statements of fact”; or (3) the opinion omits facts “whose
omission makes the opinion statement at issue misleading to
a reasonable person reading the statement fairly and in
context.” 575 U.S. at 185–86, 194. Before the district court,
Plaintiffs focused their arguments primarily on the assertion
that
PwC’s
audit
opinion
contained
material
In their opening brief, Plaintiffs admit that they do not challenge the
dismissal of claims arising from their allegations concerning: (1) the
alleged incorrect disclosure in Bloom Energy’s 2017 financial
statements of contingent liabilities arising from MSAs; or (2) the alleged
misrepresentations contained in PwC’s audit opinion on Bloom Energy
2017 financial statements, meaning they do not challenge the district
court’s dismissal of claims that the audit opinion itself was false or
misleading apart from its certification of the financial statements.
Accordingly, those issues are waived. See McKay v. Ingleson, 558 F.3d
888, 891 n.5 (9th Cir. 2009).

4

14

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

misrepresentations or omissions that met one or more of the
three exceptions under Omnicare. Because Plaintiffs’
allegations did not meet any of the Omnicare exceptions, the
district court dismissed their case.
On appeal, Plaintiffs have abandoned those arguments.
Plaintiffs do not deny that Bloom Energy prepared its own
financial statements or that PwC neither prepared the
statements nor repeated those statements in its opinion.
Instead, they ask us to adopt the position that PwC is strictly
liable under § 11(a)(4) for Bloom Energy’s 2017 financial
statement.
I. Section 11 of the Securities Exchange Act does not
provide for strict liability for accountants.
Section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933, 15 U.S.C.
§ 77k, provides a private cause of action for investors who
purchase securities pursuant to a registration statement
containing “an untrue statement of a material fact” or a
registration statement that omits “to state a material fact
required to be stated therein or necessary to make the
statements therein not misleading.” Id. § 77k(a). Section 11
allows purchasers to file an action against anyone who
signed or helped prepare the registration statement,
including the issuer, underwriter, director, partner,
accountant, engineer, or appraiser. See id. However, § 11
does not impose the same type of liability on all of these
potential defendants.
Section 11 is a strict liability statute with respect to
issuers of securities, company directors, and partners of
issuers, without requiring proof of intent, negligence, or
scienter. Id. § 77k(a). However, the statute provides defenses
for other non-issuer defendants, such as experts, based on
their reasonable investigation and belief in the accuracy of

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

15

the registration statement. Id. § 77k(b). We have also said
that only “issuers are held strictly liable under § 11 for
damages resulting from misrepresentations in a registration
statement.” Monroe v. Hughes, 31 F.3d 772, 774 (9th Cir.
1994).
Relevant here, § 11(a)(4) imposes liability on an
accountant “who has with his consent been named as having
prepared or certified any part of the registration statement,
or as having prepared or certified any report or valuation
which is used in connection with the registration statement,
with respect to the statement in such registration statement,
report, or valuation, which purports to have been prepared or
certified by him.” 5 However, the statute allows accountants
to raise a defense to liability if they employed due diligence
in preparing or certifying statements the registration
statement, by showing that they “had, after reasonable
investigation, reasonable ground to believe and did believe,
at the time such part of the registration statement became
effective, that the statements therein were true and that there
was no omission to state a material fact required to be stated
therein or necessary to make the statements therein not
misleading.” 6 Id. § 77k(b)(3)(B)(i). Courts have interpreted
§ 77k(b)(3)(B)(i) to require accountants “to investigate, to
various degrees, facts supporting and contradicting
inclusions in registration statements. They must undertake
that investigation which a reasonably prudent man in that
position would conduct.” Endo v. Albertine, 863 F. Supp.
“The term certified, when used in regard to financial statements, means
examined and reported upon with an opinion expressed by an
independent public or certified public accountant.” 17 C.F.R. § 230.405.

5

PwC did not raise a due diligence defense in this case because Plaintiffs
did not identify any statements of fact made by PwC.

6

16

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

708, 728 (N.D. Ill. 1994) (citation omitted); see 15 U.S.C.
§ 77k(c) (defining “standard of reasonableness” as “that
required of a prudent man in the management of his own
property”). In other words, accountants must exercise due
diligence in investigating the materials provided to them
using the accepted practices of their profession.
However, “[a]ccountants cannot be held liable under
Section 11 unless the misleading information can be
expressly attributed to them.” In re Worlds of Wonder Sec.
Litig., 694 F. Supp. 1427, 1434 (N.D. Cal. 1988). Thus,
while, § 11(a)(4) outlines that investors may sue accountants
for materially false registration statements, accountants are
only subject to suit “with respect to the statement in such
registration statement . . . , which purports to have been
prepared or certified by [that accountant].” Id. § 77k(a)(4).
The statute distinguishes between “prepar[ing]” and
“certif[ying].” This distinction limits liability for certifiers
and expands it for preparers, who may be subject to more
general liability for the content they create. See id.
Nevertheless, the statute does not impose strict liability
on accountants for the statements or omissions regardless of
whether they prepared or certified them. § 77k(b)(3)(B)(i).
Instead, because “an accountant has a due diligence defense;
§ 11 therefore imposes a negligence standard for an
accountant’s liability.” Monroe, 31 F.3d at 774 (citing Ernst
& Ernst v. Hochfelder, 425 U.S. 185, 208 (1976)); see also
In re Wachovia Equity Sec. Litig., 753 F. Supp. 2d 326, 379
(S.D.N.Y. 2011) (“[A]lthough issuers are subject to virtually
absolute liability under Section 11, experts such as
accountants who have prepared portions of the registration
statement are accorded a due diligence defense.” (cleaned
up)).

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

17

As the Second Circuit correctly explained, strict liability
is limited to those persons involved in “enumerated
distributional activities.” See In re Lehman Bros. Mortg.Backed Sec. Litig., 650 F.3d 167, 181 (2d Cir. 2011). “This
approach avoids the implausible result of transforming every
lawyer, accountant, and other professional whose work is
theoretically ‘necessary’ to bringing a security to market into
an ‘underwriter’ subject to strict liability under § 11, a
dramatic outcome that Congress provided no sign of
intending.” Id.
This approach is consistent with Omnicare and
extending its holding to accountants does not negate the due
diligence defense. In Omnicare, the Supreme Court
examined § 11 and addressed an issuer’s liability for
statements of opinion, because “Congress effectively
incorporated . . . [a] distinction [between facts and opinions]
in § 11’s first part by exposing issuers to liability not for
‘untrue statement[s]’ . . . (which would have included ones
of opinion), but only for ‘untrue statement[s] of fact.’” 575
U.S. at 183 (quoting § 77k(a)) (alterations in original).
Focusing on the language of the statute, the Supreme Court
excluded statements of opinions from liability. Under the
Supreme Court’s reasoning, accountants may be liable for
statements of fact if they did not act with due diligence;
however, accountants will not be liable for statements of
opinion, even if they reflect a subjective belief that admits
there is a possibility of error, as long as the statement of
opinion was sincerely held. See id. As the Supreme Court
aptly explained:
A fact is “a thing done or existing” or “[a]n
actual
happening.”
Webster’s
New
International Dictionary 782 (1927). An

18

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

opinion is “a belief[,] a view,” or a “sentiment
which the mind forms of persons or things.”
Most important, a statement of fact (“the
coffee is hot”) expresses certainty about a
thing, whereas a statement of opinion (“I
think the coffee is hot”) does not. . . . Indeed,
that difference between the two is so
ingrained in our everyday ways of speaking
and thinking as to make resort to old
dictionaries seem a mite silly. And Congress
effectively incorporated just that distinction
in § 11’s first part by exposing issuers to
liability not for “untrue statement[s]” full
stop (which would have included ones of
opinion), but only for “untrue statement[s] of
. . . fact.”
Id. (citations omitted). The Supreme Court further explained
a statement of opinion is not an “untrue statement of a
material fact” simply because it is later determined to be
incorrect (as here). Id. at 186–88.
That said, Omnicare did not insulate accountants from
liability. Accountants may instead be challenged based on
their audit opinion as Omnicare outlines. The opinion can
still be subject to liability under § 11 as a material
misstatement, where (1) “the speaker did not hold the belief
she professed”; (2) “the supporting fact[s] [the speaker]
supplied were untrue”; or (3) the opinion omits facts “whose
omission makes the opinion statement at issue misleading.”
See id. at 186, 194. In the district court, Plaintiffs attempted
to establish liability for PwC under these standards and
failed. Rather than appeal that decision, they abandon those
arguments.

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

19

Simply stated, an accountant’s liability is limited to
“statement[s] in such registration statement, report, or
valuation, which purports to have been prepared or certified
by him.” § 77k(a)(4). Here, the PwC audit report did not
incorporate the alleged misstatements or untrue facts, and
clearly stated, in relevant part, that “[i]n our opinion, the
consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all
material respects, the financial position of [Bloom Energy]
as of December 31, 2017 and December 31, 2016, and the
results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the two
years in the period ended December 31, 2017 in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United
States of America.”
Thus, in order for Plaintiffs to prevail, they must
establish that PwC did not have a “reasonable ground to
believe and did [not] believe, at the time such part of the
registration statement became effective, that the statements
therein were true.” § 77(k)(b)(3)(A). As explained below,
PwC made statements of opinion protected under Omnicare.
PwC did not make or prepare any statements of material fact
or omit any material statements.
A. PwC is not liable as a preparer.
In this case, Plaintiffs argue that, because PwC certified
Bloom Energy’s financial statements, it became liable for
any misstatements contained therein. However, no one
disputes that PwC did not prepare the financial statements
for 2017, or that Bloom Energy was responsible for
preparing the consolidated financial statements. Frankly,
PwC was not permitted (under the regulations) to prepare the
financial statements. The regulations make clear that an
accountant, who prepares the financial statements, is

20

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

disqualified from being the independent accountant
authorized to certify it. See 17 C.F.R. § 230.405.
Although PwC expressed an opinion in its audit with
regard to Bloom Energy’s 2016–2017 financial statements,
there is no evidence that PwC prepared materially false
statements. Accountants do not, “by virtue of auditing a
company’s financial statements, somehow make, own or
adopt the assertions contained therein.” Deephaven Priv.
Placement Trading, Ltd. v. Grant Thornton & Co., 454 F.3d
1168, 1174 (10th Cir. 2006). Instead, PwC merely affirmed
that, in its opinion, Bloom Energy followed the proper
accounting principles, and those statements of opinions are
protected under Omnicare.
B. PwC is not liable as a certifier.
Plaintiffs also seek to have us impose strict liability for
PwC for Bloom Energy’s financial statements that they
certified in their audit opinion. We decline to interpret the
term “certify” so broadly.
Bloom Energy prepared “consolidated financial
statements,” which included the “accompanying
consolidated balance sheets of Bloom Energy Corporation
and its subsidiaries as of December 31, 2016 and December
31, 2017, and the related consolidated statements of
operations, of comprehensive loss, of convertible
redeemable preferred stock and stockholders’ deficit and of
cash flows for each of the two years in the period ended
December 31, 2017, including the related notes.” PwC
certified the “consolidated financial statements” using audit
procedures aimed to obtain reasonable assurance. Section 11
does not require that PwC, by certifying the financial
statements, guarantee that the documents provided by
Bloom Energy were free from error. Instead, PwC was

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

21

required to act in compliance with GAAP and GAAS, by
performing a reasonable investigation and having reasonable
grounds to believe, and did believe, that the statements
provided by Bloom Energy were true and that there were no
omissions that made the statement misleading. See 15 U.S.C.
§ 77k(b)(3). It was not the job of PwC to “guarantee or
insure” the financial statements. Deephaven Priv. Placement
Trading, Ltd., 454 F.3d at 1174 (internal quotation marks
omitted); see also Dronsejko v. Thornton, 632 F.3d 658, 663
(10th Cir. 2011) (“A company’s management—not the
auditor—is responsible for the information contained in its
financial statements and the propriety of its underlying
accounting policies, including compliance with GAAP.”);
Fehribach v. Ernst & Young LLP, 493 F.3d 905, 910 (7th
Cir. 2007) (“The purpose of an audit report is to make sure
the audited company’s financial statements—which are
prepared by the company, not by the auditor, . . .—
correspond to reality, lest they either have been doctored by
a defalcating employee or innocently misrepresent the
company’s financial situation.”).
An accountant “is in a position to express an unqualified
opinion on the financial statements when the auditor
conducted an audit in accordance with the standards of the
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (“PCAOB”)
and concludes that the financial statements, taken as a whole,
are presented fairly, in all material respects, in conformity
with the applicable financial reporting framework.” AS
3101.02. 7 “Misstatements arising from fraudulent financial
7
AS references the Codification of Accounting Standards and
Procedures, Statement on Auditing Standards No. 1, § 150 (American
Inst. of Certified Pub. Accountants 2001). Relevant here, the PCAOB
auditing standards were reorganized and went into effect after Dec. 30,
2016, and were applicable to audits of financial statements for fiscal

22

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

reporting are intentional misstatements or omissions of
amounts or disclosures in financial statements designed to
deceive financial statement users where the effect causes the
financial statements not to be presented, in all material
respects, in conformity with [GAAP].” AS 2401.06. The
independent accountant’s objective is to express “an opinion
on the fairness with which [he or she] present[s], in all
material respects, [the company’s] financial position, results
of operations, and its cash flows in conformity with
[GAAP].” AS 1001.01. However, “[e]ven with good faith
and integrity, mistakes and errors in judgment can be made.”
AS 1015.11. “[A]ccounting presentations contain
accounting estimates, the measurement of which is
inherently uncertain and depends on the outcome of future
events. The auditor exercises professional judgment in
evaluating the reasonableness of accounting estimates based
on information that could reasonably be expected to be
available prior to the completion of field work.” Id. To be
sure, the division of responsibility is based on practical
realities: Bloom Energy “operate[s] the business daily” and
has superior knowledge of transactions, assets, and
liabilities, whereas PwC’s function was confined to
reasonable assurance through its audit. These limits placed
on accountants to assess a company’s financial statements

years
ending
before
Dec.
15,
2017.
See
https://pcaobus.org/oversight/standards/auditing-standards (last visited
Oct. 29, 2025). Other revisions occurred after December 15, 2017.
However, the reorganized standards are substantially the same and
would not alter PwC’s review of the 2016 or 2017 financial statements.

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

23

preclude its ability to ensure that there are no misstatements,
and thus, accountants should consider risk factors such as:
conditions in the company’s industry and
environment, and company-specific factors,
such as the nature of the company, its
activities, and internal control over financial
reporting. For example, external or companyspecific factors can affect the judgments
involved in determining accounting estimates
or create pressures to manipulate the
financial statements to achieve certain
financial targets. Also, risks of material
misstatement may relate to, e.g., personnel
who lack the necessary financial reporting
competencies, information systems that fail
to accurately capture business transactions,
or financial reporting processes that are not
adequately aligned with the requirements in
the applicable financial reporting framework.
AS 2110.05.
Again, “an accountant is not a guarantor of the reports he
prepares and is only duty bound to act honestly, in good faith
and with reasonable care in the discharge of his professional
obligations.” SEC v. Arthur Young & Co., 590 F.2d 785, 788
(9th Cir. 1979) (citation omitted). Nor does § 11 make
accountants guarantors of every statement made by the
issuer; to make such a holding would turn the whole
accounting world upside down. Holding accountants strictly
liable as if they were preparers would transform audits,
making them prohibitively expensive. This was not
Congress’s goal. When Congress enacted the statute,

24

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

Congress was clear that it was limiting the liability of
accountants by only requiring a “reasonable investigation
and reasonable ground for belief, [for which] the standard of
reasonableness shall be that required of a prudent man in the
management of his own property.” § 77k(c).
Moreover, an accountant’s certification of financial
statements is nothing more than an opinion. The term
“certify” has been defined to mean that an independent
public or certified public accountant has “examined and
reported upon [the financial statements] with an opinion.” 17
C.F.R. § 230.405. Omnicare protects opinions from liability
unless one of the three exceptions is met. Omnicare made
clear that “whether a statement is ‘misleading’ depends on
the perspective of a reasonable investor.” 575 U.S. at 186.
“Reasonable investors understand that opinions sometimes
rest on a weighing of competing facts; indeed, the presence
of such facts is one reason why an issuer may frame a
statement as an opinion, thus conveying uncertainty.” Id. at
189–90; see also Deephaven Priv. Placement Trading, Ltd.,
454 F.3d at 1175 (explaining that “the phrase ‘in our
opinion’ indicates that there may be some information risk
associated with the [reviewed] financial statements, even
though the statements have been audited”).
In this case, PwC did just that. It conveyed its opinion as
to Bloom Energy’s financial statements. There may have
been some differing opinions with regard to the Energy
Server’s useful life, but “[a] reasonable investor does not
expect that every fact known to an [accountant] supports its
opinion statement.” Omnicare, 575 U.S. at 176. And in this
case, the classification and reasons for classification were
provided to the investor. Thus, PwC’s “statement of opinion
[was not] viewed in a vacuum,” but rather allowed each
investor to “read[] each statement within such a document,

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

25

whether of fact or of opinion, in light of all its surrounding
text, including hedges, disclaimers, and apparently
conflicting information.” Id. at 190.
In summary, Plaintiffs’ attempts to hold PwC liable fail.
PwC’s audit opinion did not make any material
misstatements of fact or omissions but rather was merely a
statement of opinion based, again, upon the subjective
judgment of the MSA classification. Plaintiffs made no
allegation that PwC did not sincerely believe that Bloom
Energy’s classification of the MSAs aligned with proper
accounting principles based on the evidence available at that
time. See id. at 186.
Accordingly, PwC is not liable for the statements in its
audit opinion.
II. The district court’s decision should also be
affirmed because Bloom Energy’s financial
statements regarding classification of the MSAs
were opinions.
In this appeal, Plaintiffs challenge only the three line
items referenced in the Registration Statement that related to
whether MSAs should be classified as operating or capital
leases. These line items in Bloom Energy’s financial report
were based on Bloom Energy’s subjective judgments (not
statements of fact) concerning the actual useful life of the
Energy Server. Under ASC 840-10-25-1, an MSA qualifies
as a capital lease if “[t]he lease term is at least 75% of the
property’s [i.e., the Energy Servers’] estimated remaining
economic life.” Plaintiffs allege that the lease terms were 6
to 10 years; that Bloom Energy improperly estimated that the
Energy Servers’ useful lives were 15-21 years. However,
there is no dispute that Bloom Energy was basing its
estimates on newly designed Energy Servers whose useful

26

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

life was unknown. Nevertheless, Plaintiffs allege that the
actual useful lives of these Energy Servers were “much
shorter.” With that shorter lease term, Plaintiffs claim that
the 75% rule required a capital lease classification.
However, the district court correctly concluded that
Plaintiffs failed to allege sufficient facts to establish that
Bloom Energy’s judgments were untrue. Throughout the
district court opinion, it properly outlines that Bloom
Energy’s classification of its MSAs was based on an exercise
of judgment related to its information about its Energy
Servers, which Bloom Energy used to classify MSAs as
operating or capital leases. For example, the district court
highlighted that “Plaintiffs contend that the service contracts
‘typically last[] from 10 to 21 years and can last as long as
25 years,’ in total, and are renewed each year at the
customer’s option,” but failed “to explain how Defendants
could meaningfully estimate the length of future contracts
from such a large range.” “Plaintiffs also suggest that Bloom
knew the estimated life of its Energy Servers and fuel cells
because it had to replace some of its earlier generation
systems,” but “acknowledge[d], Bloom also had newer
systems in place, and Plaintiffs [did] not explain how
Defendants could extrapolate to determine the life or
replacement schedule for all its Energy Servers.”
Thus, the district court correctly concluded that Plaintiffs
failed to adequately plead that the challenged line items were
statements of fact. Instead, the district court recognized that
Bloom Energy’s classification of the MSAs was the product
of accounting judgments; it determined that those judgments
“involve[d] complex consideration[]” of various GAAP
provisions in determining how to evaluate the term of the
MSAs and the value of the Energy Servers. Thus, the district
court found those three line items to be opinions. Then,

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

27

because Plaintiff failed to plead nor argue any of the
Omnicare exceptions to establish liability, the district court
concluded that those three line items were not actionable.
We agree.
On appeal Plaintiffs argue that “statements of revenue,
net loss, and net loss per share contained within a company’s
financial statements” cannot be opinions because they are
always statements of fact. However, again Plaintiffs ignore
the language in Omnicare.
Omnicare does not limit an opinion to words over
figures. To be sure, the language of the statute is limited to
facts, not opinions. Thus, as long as Bloom Energy’s
statements were opinions and not facts, it is irrelevant
whether the subject matter being opined about were words
or figures. Instead, we need only determine whether Bloom
Energy had a “sincere statement of pure opinion.” Omnicare,
575 U.S. at 186. If it did, then it does not qualify as an
“‘untrue statement of material fact,’ regardless whether an
investor can ultimately prove the belief wrong.” Id.
An “untrue statement of a material fact,” 15 U.S. C
§ 77k(a), “limited as it is to factual statements, does not
allow investors to second-guess inherently subjective and
uncertain assessments.” Omnicare, 575 U.S. at 186
(emphasis added). Although figures, by themselves, do not
clearly convey whether it is an opinion or a fact, “an investor
[should] read[] each statement within such a document,
whether of fact or of opinion, in light of all its surrounding
text, including hedges, disclaimers, and apparently
conflicting information[,] . . . tak[ing] into account the
customs and practices of the relevant industry.” Id. at 190.
“Section 11’s omissions clause, as applied to statements of
both opinion and fact, necessarily brings the reasonable

28

HUNT V. PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS LLP

person into the analysis, and asks what she would naturally
understand a statement to convey beyond its literal
meaning.” Id. at 193–94.
The district court correctly applied Omnicare’s
reasoning to conclude that numbers can sometimes be facts
and other times be opinions, depending on whether “the
considerations underlying the figures—such as which
GAAP provisions apply and how to apply them— . . .
require the exercise of judgment.”
Plaintiffs do not explain what additional actions PwC
should have taken in its audit, nor do they allege any facts
that establish that PwC overlooked or disregarded warning
signs about the Energy Server’s useful life or Bloom
Energy’s MSA accounting.
Because Plaintiffs failed to show that Bloom Energy’s
subjective opinions were based on untrue facts or
information that it did not believe, see Omnicare, 575 U.S.
at 187, Plaintiffs cannot demonstrate that PwC certified
untrue facts or information. Accordingly, Plaintiffs have
failed to establish liability for PwC’s opinion. The record
demonstrates that the classification of MSAs was a judgment
call, and the Registration Statement thoroughly explained
how it reached the classification. PwC was reasonable under
the circumstances to certify Bloom Energy’s classification
based on the evidence at that time. 8
AFFIRMED.

Based on the foregoing, we need not decide whether the line item errors
were material.

8

