FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
TAYLOR CHEAIRS,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 24-3163
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-01343LK

CITY OF SEATTLE, and its officers,
employees and agents; SEATTLE
POLICE DEPARTMENT, and its
officers, employees and agents;
JOHN DOES, 1-10, unidentified
members of the Seattle Police
Department,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
Lauren J. King, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 21, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed August 1, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould, Richard C. Tallman, and
Morgan B. Christen, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Christen

2

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

SUMMARY *
Excessive Force/Retaliation
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment for the City of Seattle, the Seattle Police
Department, and several police officers in a 42 U.S.C.
§ 1983 action brought by Taylor Cheairs, who alleged that
Officer Anderson used excessive force and retaliated against
him in violation of the Fourth and First Amendments when
Officer Anderson threw a blast ball diversionary device
toward a crowd during a protest dispersal, injuring Cheairs,
who was filming the protest.
A blast ball diversionary device creates a flash of light,
emits a loud sound, and a chemical irritant two seconds after
it is activated. Here, the blast ball hit the pavement near the
curb where Cheairs was standing, bounced, and exploded as
it struck him in the groin. Cheairs was seriously
injured. The district court concluded that (1) there was no
Fourth Amendment violation because Cheairs was not
seized; (2) Cheairs’s First Amendment claim failed because
there was no evidence of retaliation; and (3) there could be
no municipal liability without a colorable showing of a
constitutional violation.
Affirming the district court’s summary judgment for
defendants on the Fourth Amendment claim, the panel held
that although a reasonable fact finder could conclude that
Cheairs was seized when Anderson struck him with the blast
ball, Anderson’s use of force was reasonable under the
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

3

circumstances. A person is seized when an officer uses force
with intent to restrain. On this record a reasonable fact
finder could find that Anderson’s use of force manifested an
objective intent to restrain. The use of force was not
excessive, however, given that the protesters at the front of
the crowd, near whom Cheairs stood, objectively posed an
immediate threat to the safety of officers, citizens, and
property.
Cheairs failed to establish a viable First Amendment
retaliation claim because he failed to raise a material
question as to whether his filming of the protest was a
substantial or motivating factor in Anderson’s use of force
against him.
The panel agreed with the district court that without a
viable constitutional claim, Cheairs could not establish a
claim for municipal liability.

COUNSEL
Jay S. Carlson (argued), Carlson Legal, Seattle, Washington;
Jason B. Moore, Paradigm Law PLLC, Seattle, Washington;
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Thomas P. Miller (argued) and Stuart A. Cassel, Keating
Bucklin & McCormack Inc. PS, Seattle, Washington, for
Defendants-Appellees.

4

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

OPINION
CHRISTEN, Circuit Judge:
On the evening of June 7–8, 2020, a crowd gathered in
Seattle to protest the killing of George Floyd, and Taylor
Cheairs decided to film the protesters’ interaction with the
police. Shortly after midnight, protesters advanced on the
East Precinct police station in Seattle’s Capitol Hill
Neighborhood. The police ordered the crowd to disperse,
and an officer threw several less-lethal munitions toward the
crowd. One of the munitions was a blast ball grenade, a
diversionary device that creates a flash of light and emits a
loud sound and a chemical irritant two seconds after it is
activated. The blast ball hit the pavement near the curb
where Cheairs was standing, bounced, and exploded as it
struck him in the groin. Cheairs was seriously injured.
Cheairs sued the City of Seattle, the Seattle Police
Department (SPD), and several unnamed police officers
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983. He claimed that the officer
who threw the blast ball that injured him used excessive
force and retaliated against him for filming the protest. The
district court granted summary judgment in favor of
Defendants, concluding that the City and SPD did not violate
Cheairs’s Fourth Amendment rights because he was not
seized, and did not violate his First Amendment rights
because there was no evidence that SPD acted in retaliation
for Cheairs filming the protest. The district court concluded
that there could be no municipal liability without a colorable
showing of a constitutional violation. The City’s motion did
not seek a ruling that Defendants were entitled to qualified
immunity.

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

5

We affirm the district court’s judgment. Though a
reasonable fact finder could conclude that Cheairs was
seized when an SPD officer struck him with a blast ball, the
officer’s use of force was reasonable under the
circumstances. Cheairs failed to establish a viable First
Amendment retaliation claim because he did not raise a
material question as to whether his filming of the protest was
a substantial or motivating factor in the SPD officer’s use of
force against him. We agree with the district court that
without a viable constitutional claim, Cheairs could not
establish a claim for municipal liability.
I
Protests erupted across the United States after a
Minneapolis police officer killed George Floyd while
arresting him on May 25, 2020. 1 Demonstrations began in
Seattle a few days later. The protests caused significant
property destruction in the downtown area, but they took
place throughout the city, including the Capitol Hill
neighborhood. The protests spurred Seattle Mayor Jenny
Durkan to issue a proclamation of civil emergency on May
30 that delegated authority to Seattle’s Fire and Police
Chiefs to direct any measures necessary to protect people
and property and to maintain public order.
For our statement of facts, we rely on SPD’s Police Manual; the blast
ball manufacturer’s specifications; the Seattle Police Operations Center
computer-aided dispatch log; SPD officers’ post-incident reports; SPD
officers’ body-cam videos from June 7–8, 2020; Cheairs’s sworn
deposition testimony; and the two videos Cheairs filmed of the incident.
Officer Anderson was not deposed. In large part, we rely on the video
recordings in the record. See Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 380–81
(2007) (admonishing courts to “view[] the facts in the light depicted by
the videotape” when unchallenged). The parties do not dispute the
accuracy of these materials.
1

6

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

On June 7, 2020, the day before Cheairs was injured,
protesters marched down Interstate 5; threw rocks, bottles,
and other projectiles at police officers; lit patrol cars on fire;
and threw Molotov cocktails. By then, after more than a
week of protests, SPD was following a revised “Incident
Action Plan” intended “to help de-escalate the highly
energized crowd” and to reduce the protesters’ ability to
verbally and physically engage with SPD personnel. Among
other facilities, SPD planned to protect Capitol Hill’s East
Precinct police station near the intersection of 12th Avenue
and Pine Street. At least three violent clashes between police
and protesters had already occurred near the East Precinct,
and the streets around the precinct had been closed for
several days.
SPD equipped the officers responding to the protests
with less-lethal munitions, including blast balls. 2 SPD used
two types of blast balls on the night of June 7–8: inert and
oleoresin capsicum (OC). Inert blast balls create a flash of
light and emit a loud noise. OC blast balls create a flash of
light, emit a loud noise, and also disperse OC powder,
commonly known as pepper spray. Officer Carl Anderson
was SPD’s Chemical Agent Response Team Leader on the
night Cheairs was injured. His assignment required special
training and made him responsible for deploying blast balls

The manufacturer’s label dubs these munitions “rubber ball blast
grenades,” and the parties refer to them as “grenades” and “blast balls.”
They are about three inches in diameter, are activated by pulling a pin,
and operate like grenades. Once activated, there is a 1.5-second delay
that initiates the fuse assembly separation, followed by another 0.5second delay before detonation. We use the terms “blast ball” and “blast
ball grenade” because those terms are used in SPD’s Police Manual and
by the manufacturer.
2

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

7

and other munitions as necessary to protect police officers
and citizens, and to prevent significant property damage.
SPD planned to use various barricades on June 7 to
protect the East Precinct and to maintain distance from that
night’s anticipated crowd. SPD had installed heavy-duty
metal fencing at several intersections near the East Precinct
station to prevent protesters from interfering with police
entering and exiting the facility. If protesters breached the
fence, SPD planned to form a line of officers backed by a
line of National Guard troops to prevent the protesters from
advancing on the precinct. The police captain leading the
response as the incident commander was prepared to use a
public address system, if necessary, to warn the protesters to
return to the other side of the fence.
The barricades did not hold. At 7:17 p.m., protesters
breached the police fencing, and the incident commander
used the public address system to issue multiple warnings
directing the protesters to remain on their side of the
barricades. He later recounted in his use-of-force report that
protesters disregarded his announcements and continued
crossing over to the police side of the fence. At
approximately 7:43 p.m., protesters established their own
line using some of the fencing the police had installed for
crowd control. Rather than moving back as directed, the
crowd began slowly inching toward the police line at 11th
and Pine. At approximately 7:54 p.m., SPD issued an
additional warning to the protesters breaching the police
line, and about a minute after that, the officers on the line
were ordered to activate their body cameras.
Interactions between SPD and protesters continued to
escalate. Protesters continued to disassemble the fencing the
police had installed to close off the streets surrounding the

8

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

East Precinct, and the Operations Center log indicates that at
9:20 p.m., a group of protesters on the police side of the
barricades was “making announcements to burn down the
precincts.” From 9:23 p.m. to 11:38 p.m., SPD warned the
protesters multiple times to refrain from removing fencing
and advancing toward the officers. However, the Operations
Center log noted protesters shining lasers into SPD officers’
eyes at 9:24 p.m., 10:26 p.m., and 12:07 a.m.; breaking
fencing and using it as weapons at 10:10 p.m.; throwing
bottles at 11:36 p.m.; and throwing a bottle with a chemical
irritant at 11:52 p.m.
Shortly after midnight, the situation significantly
escalated. Some protesters were holding plywood shields
with “nails in them concealed by paint,” and, at about the
same time, the video record shows protesters throwing
bottles, rocks, and fireworks at the police line. As the
incident commander later described it, the protest had
devolved into “a riot,” and he determined that “it was
tactically unsound to remain in place.” The incident
commander ordered the line officers to advance from
midblock on Pine toward 11th, 3 and authorized the officers
on the line to use less-lethal munitions to break up the crowd.
At approximately 12:04 a.m., the incident commander
authorized the officers to begin deploying OC blast balls.
Using a public address system, SPD broadcast several orders
for the crowd to immediately disperse. The dispersal orders
warned those in the crowd that they would be subject to
arrest if they did not comply. The announcements also gave
notice that the police would use chemical agents or lesslethal munitions, and informed protesters of two egress
King County Maps and Apps Gallery, King County iMap,
https://gismaps.kingcounty.gov/iMap/ (last visited July 25, 2025).

3

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

9

routes they could use to leave the area safely. As the officers
slowly advanced, they were again assaulted by the crowd
with projectiles. After SPD began deploying less-lethal
munitions, the video record and witness statements show
that the crowd alternated between retreating in response to
tear gas and blast balls, and moving forward to reengage
with the police line. At 12:05 a.m., the record shows that the
police had created space between the protesters and the
police line, but by 12:11 a.m., the Operations Center log
indicates the crowd was surrounding the officers on three
sides.
Meanwhile, Cheairs was having dinner on Capitol Hill.
He was aware of the ongoing protests and out of curiosity he
decided to walk toward the “interaction between the
protesters and the police” after dinner to “see and film what
was happening at the front.” Cheairs denied that he was
there to participate in the protest and the record contains no
evidence that he did. The video record shows that Cheairs
walked up to a position on a sidewalk at the intersection of
11th and Pine that was abreast of all but a few of the
protesters at the front of the crowd. As he approached, some
protesters were dispersing in the opposite direction. Cheairs
positioned himself to get a better vantage point but stayed on
the sidewalk. The video record suggests that, at the time
Cheairs arrived, about 15 yards separated the protesters from
the police line. The audio portion of Cheairs’s first iPhone
recording captured one of SPD’s dispersal orders. 4
Cheairs’s iPhone recorded the dispersal order that was issued at 12:08
a.m. The order consisted of the following: “I command all those
assembled at 11th and Pine to immediately disperse, which means leave
this area. If you do not do so, you may be arrested or subject to other
police action. Other police action could include the use of chemical

4

10

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

Officer Anderson’s body-cam video recorded that he
threw several blast balls in the ten minutes between 12:04
and 12:14 a.m. One of the blast balls Officer Anderson
threw overhand landed on the pavement near the curb where
Cheairs was standing, bounced and exploded, and struck
Cheairs in the groin as he was filming the protest. Cheairs
later described feeling “some of the worst [] acute pain” he
had ever experienced. His pants were shredded and he was
bleeding from his groin, but he was able to walk away from
the protest and drive to a nearby hospital where he received
emergency medical attention. Cheairs was treated at a burn
clinic about a week later. His physical injuries healed in
approximately six weeks. He testified that he also received
psychological counseling because of the trauma associated
with the experience.
II
On October 1, 2021, Cheairs filed a complaint pursuant
to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 in the United States District Court for
the Western District of Washington. The complaint
requested damages for violations of his First and Fourth
Amendment rights. The complaint did not name any
individual officers, but in a May 2022 response to Cheairs’s
discovery requests, Defendants identified Officer Anderson
as the SPD officer who threw the blast ball that struck
Cheairs.
agents or less lethal munitions, which may inflict significant pain or
result in serious injury. If you remain in the area just described,
regardless of your purpose, you will be in violation of city and state law.
The following routes of dispersal are available: Westbound on Pine.
Southbound on Twelve.” Cheairs later testified at his deposition that he
did not know if he heard this dispersal order and that there were many
different “extremely loud” sounds happening.

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

11

Defendants filed a motion for summary judgment, which
the district court granted. The court first ruled that
Defendants did not violate Cheairs’s Fourth Amendment
rights because Officer Anderson’s use of force did not
constitute a seizure. The court also ruled that Cheairs’s First
Amendment claim failed because he was present at the
protest in violation of a lawful order to disperse and because
he did not show that SPD used force in retaliation for
engaging in a protected First Amendment activity. The court
concluded that Cheairs’s failure to establish a colorable
claim for a constitutional violation foreclosed any municipal
liability claim pursuant to Monell v. Department of Social
Services, 436 U.S. 658 (1978).
III
A
We review de novo the district court’s rulings on
summary judgment. Sabbe v. Wash. Cnty. Bd. of Comm’rs,
84 F.4th 807, 815 (9th Cir. 2023). At the summary judgment
stage, we view disputed facts in the light most favorable to
the nonmoving party. Scott v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 378
(2007). However, we are “limited to considering what facts
the officer[s] could have known at the time of the incident.”
Sabbe, 84 F.4th at 816 (citations omitted). We have
jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
B
1
Cheairs first argues that SPD used excessive force
against him in violation of his Fourth Amendment rights.
The Fourth Amendment guarantees the right to be free from
unreasonable seizures. Torres v. Madrid, 592 U.S. 306, 311
(2021). As we recently explained, the Fourth Amendment

12

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

protects against “arbitrary and oppressive interference by
enforcement officials with the privacy and personal security
of individuals.” Sanderlin v. Dwyer, 116 F.4th 905, 912 (9th
Cir. 2024) (citation omitted).
Before we consider whether the force used was
reasonable, we first address whether Cheairs was seized
within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. See Seidner
v. de Vries, 39 F.4th 591, 596 (9th Cir. 2022). 5 “A person is
seized by the police and thus entitled to challenge the
government’s action under the Fourth Amendment when the
officer by means of physical force or show of authority
terminates or restrains his freedom of movement through
means intentionally applied.” Nelson v. City of Davis, 685
F.3d 867, 875 (9th Cir. 2012) (quoting Brendlin v.
California, 551 U.S. 249, 254 (2007)). “A seizure requires
the use of force with intent to restrain.” Torres, 592 U.S. at
317 (emphasis in original); see also Terry v. Ohio, 392 U.S.
1, 19 n.16 (1968). “Accidental force will not qualify. Nor
will force intentionally applied for some other purpose.”
Torres, 592 U.S. at 317 (citation omitted); see also Nelson,
685 F.3d at 876 (“To constitute a seizure, the governmental
conduct must be purposeful and cannot be an unintentional
act which merely has the effect of restraining the liberty of
the plaintiff.”). It is well settled that the inquiry into the
The district court observed that Cheairs had not specifically responded
to Defendants’ allegation that the blast ball did not effectuate a seizure,
but the court went on to address the merits of the City’s argument and
ruled that no seizure had occurred. On appeal, Cheairs denies waiving
this argument and the City maintains that the court did not rely on waiver
in reaching its decision. Because the district court extensively discussed
the merits of the seizure issue, and the City addressed it in depth at the
trial court and in its brief on appeal, we exercise our discretion to reach
it as well.
5

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

13

intentionality of the use of force considers “whether the
challenged conduct objectively manifests an intent to
restrain.” Torres, 592 U.S. at 317 (emphasis in original);
Sanderlin, 116 F.4th at 913; see also Villanueva v.
California, 986 F.3d 1158, 1166 (9th Cir. 2021) (“The intent
that counts under the Fourth Amendment is the intent
conveyed, not the officers’ subjective intent.”) (citation and
internal quotation marks omitted).
An individual need not remain immobilized to plead a
cognizable Fourth Amendment claim, because “brief
seizures are seizures all the same.” Torres, 592 U.S. at 318,
325 (holding that seizures may occur “even if the person
does not submit and is not subdued”). Our recent decision
in Sanderlin cited with approval cases from sister circuits
recognizing that seizures had occurred when officers used
force to restrict the ability of individuals to move about
freely, even if for a brief period of time, and where the force
was not applied to effectuate an arrest. 116 F.4th at 912
(citing Salmon v. Blesser, 802 F.3d 249, 254 (2d Cir. 2015)
(concluding a seizure occurred where an officer used
“painful force to control [a person’s] movements”); Hess v.
Garcia, 72 F.4th 753, 763 (7th Cir. 2023) (“Physically
grabbing someone is likely to be a seizure because it is likely
to restrict movement, at least briefly.”); West v. Davis, 767
F.3d 1063, 1070 (11th Cir. 2014) (holding a seizure occurred
when a deputy sheriff physically grabbed plaintiff’s wrist for
a brief time); United States v. Delaney, 955 F.3d 1077, 1083
(D.C. Cir. 2020) (recognizing “officers need not totally
restrict a citizen’s freedom of movement” to effectuate a
seizure (quoting United States v. Smith, 794 F.3d 681, 686
(7th Cir. 2015))).
Sanderlin considered a Fourth Amendment claim that
arose after a non-violent protester at a George Floyd protest

14

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

held in California was injured by a police officer’s
deployment of a crowd-control munition fired from a highvelocity launcher. Id. at 908. Sanderlin was standing on a
sidewalk holding a protest sign when a police officer fired a
foam baton round directly at him. Id. at 909. Discovery
showed that Sanderlin’s sign was blocking the police
officer’s view of two subjects hiding behind a dumpster. Id.
The video record showed that the officer shouted, “I’m going
to hit you, dude. You better move!” and then fired a 40mm
foam baton round that hit Sanderlin’s groin. Id. Sanderlin
suffered a severe injury that required emergency surgery. Id.
He filed suit pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, arguing that the
officer’s use of force violated his Fourth Amendment rights.
Id. The officer contended that the use of the foam baton
round did not constitute a seizure because he had intended to
disperse Sanderlin rather than to apprehend or restrain him.
Id. at 912.
We affirmed the district court’s decision denying the
officer’s motion for summary judgment. In doing so, we
reiterated that the officer’s subjective intent is not the focus
of the Fourth Amendment analysis, and we concluded that
firing a foam baton round at the plaintiff’s groin constituted
a seizure because the record showed that the 40mm foam
baton launcher used in that case was “chiefly designed,
intended, and used for the purpose of incapacitating its
target.” Id. at 913. We concluded that a seizure had occurred
because “there can be no reasonable dispute that
‘incapacitating’ an individual by firing a projectile at them
is an act that ‘meaningfully interferes’ with their freedom of
movement.” Id. (quoting United States v. Jacobsen, 466
U.S. 109, 113 n.5 (1984)) (alteration adopted). In reaching
this conclusion, we considered the police department’s
training manual, which memorialized that the foam baton

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

15

munition was designed and intended to cause incapacitation
or serious injury, especially when aimed at the groin. Id. We
also considered the video record, which corroborated
Sanderlin’s sworn statement that after he was struck, he fell
to the ground and was unable to move. Id. at 912. The fact
that Sanderlin’s freedom of movement was only temporarily
restricted—his wife later helped him to his feet and he was
able to walk away—did not change the outcome because
“the application of physical force to the body of a person
with intent to restrain is a seizure even if the person does not
submit and is not subdued.” Id. at 912 (quoting Torres, 592
U.S. at 325).
Sanderlin instructs that design, intent, and use of
munitions are factors we consider when determining
whether deployment manifests an objective intent to restrain.
Id. at 913. Here, looking first at design and intent, the
manufacturer’s specifications for the OC blast balls that
Officer Anderson used the night Cheairs was injured state:
“The purpose of the Rubber Ball Blast grenade is to
minimize the risks to all parties through temporary
distraction or disorientation of potentially violent or
dangerous subjects.” The manufacturer further explains that
the device is designed and intended to serve as an “irritant,
distraction and/or disorientation device for crowd
management.” Cf. Sanderlin, 116 F.4th at 913.
It seems plain that a fact finder could decide that
munitions that are fired at high velocity, such as foam baton
rounds or pepperballs, 6 are “chiefly designed” to inflict a
A pepperball is “an object that combines the shock of kinetic impact
(similar to paintballs) with the sensory discomfort associated with pepper
spray.” Nelson, 685 F.3d at 878 (citation and internal quotation marks
omitted).
6

16

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

greater degree of force than a hand-thrown blast ball grenade
that creates a flash-bang and cloud of pepper spray. Id. at
913. A reasonable fact finder could certainly decide that a
device like a pepperball was designed to incapacitate. See
Nelson, 685 F.3d at 873 (finding a seizure occurred where
officers used devices we described as “in essence, paintball
guns” to fire rounds containing pepper spray at 350–380 feet
per second). But the grenade that Officer Anderson used
was not designed to be deployed at high velocity; it was
designed to be thrown by hand. To be sure, the record shows
that the detonation of the blast ball causes the grenade casing
to separate two seconds after it is deployed, and as the
manufacturer’s warning makes clear, that explosion is
certainly capable of causing serious injury. Nevertheless, we
cannot say that the record shows the design of the munition
used in this case was comparable to the high-velocity
pepperballs in Nelson or designed to incapacitate like the
foam baton used in Sanderlin.
In addition to considering design, we consider the way
munitions are used because the way munitions are employed
may also manifest an objective intent to restrain and thus
result in a seizure. Id. at 913. The SPD Manual reflects
SPD’s policy that officers must have completed SPD blast
ball training in order to deploy this type of munition, and it
requires that the use of each blast ball must be individually
justified. The Manual cautions that the preferred method of
blast ball deployment is an underhand toss, “bowling style,”
but it permits throwing blast balls overhand “when the need
for a farther deployment or the need to get around an
obstruction outweighs the risk created by [overhand
deployment of] the separating sub-munition.” The SPD
Manual categorizes the force associated with various police
actions as de minimis, “handcuff discomfort,” Type I, Type

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

17

II, Type III, and deadly force. The deployment of blast balls
away from people is classified as Type I force, and within
close proximity to people as Type II force that may rise to
Type III if deployment results in certain types of injury or
complaints of injury.
Officer Anderson threw the blast ball that injured
Cheairs overhand, but the video record corroborates his
statement that he did so because he was behind a number of
other officers standing on the front line. Importantly, the
blast ball that struck Cheairs landed on the pavement
between the crowd and police, skidded across the pavement
until it struck a curb, bounced, then exploded. Throwing this
device in the space between the protesters and the police is
consistent with an objective intent to disperse the crowd and
“create space” between the protesters and the police line
because protesters can be expected to move back from a
cloud of dispersing pepper spray. Indeed, the video record
shows that the deployment of less-lethal munitions in the
space between the crowd and the police line did move the
crowd back. Had the device been thrown overhand and into
the crowd of protesters, the use of the blast ball objectively
would be more likely to risk injury for the reasons explained
in SPD’s Manual—“the risk created by the separating submunition” at head height. Throwing a blast ball grenade into
a crowd would also be less likely to create space between the
protesters and the police line because, for people standing
near the front of a crowd, moving away from a cloud of
pepper spray emerging behind them would require moving
toward the police line. Had the blast ball been deployed
overhand and into the crowd, rather than into the space
between the crowd and the police line, the use would not be
consistent with an objective intent to push the crowd back
and away from the police.

18

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

On the record before us, we conclude that whether the
use of force in this case manifested an objective intent to
restrain Cheairs is not capable of resolution at the summary
judgment stage. At the outset, we note that for the same
reasons that Sanderlin’s ability to walk away was not
dispositive of whether a seizure occurred in that case,
Cheairs’s ability to walk away from the protest in Seattle
does not foreclose his argument that he was seized when
Officer Anderson struck him with a blast ball. But there are
facts in the record that would allow a reasonable jury to
decide Cheairs was not seized. First, it is uncontested that
the device was thrown by hand, not fired at high velocity.
Second, the video record corroborates that there was a
barrier to deploying the device in the preferred “bowling
style” underhand method, and while SPD policy discourages
overhand deployment, it does not prohibit it. Third, the
device that injured Cheairs landed between the crowd and
the police line, and there is no evidence that Officer
Anderson aimed at Cheairs rather than the space between the
crowd and the police. From these facts, a reasonable jury
could decide that the use of force was objectively intended
to push back the crowd, rather than to restrain the crowd or
any member of the crowd. Indeed, the record shows the
crowd did retreat multiple times when less-lethal munitions
landed in the space between the crowd and the police.
However, a reasonable jury could also reach the contrary
conclusion because the blast ball that injured Cheairs is
capable of inflicting very serious injury—if not by design,
then if used in the way we have described. Thrown
overhand, as it was here, a blast ball presents a greater risk
of injury if it detonates at head level, and Officer Anderson
threw the device in the direction of the crowd. See Nelson,
685 F.3d at 877 (finding seizure because the officers’

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

19

“conduct was intentional, it was aimed towards [the plaintiff
and the group he was standing with], and it resulted in the
application of physical force to [the plaintiff’s] person as
well as the termination of his movement”). Finally, it is
evident from the video record that the crowd’s proximity to
the police line was fluid as protesters alternated between
engaging closely with the police and falling back in response
to SPD’s use of less-lethal munitions, and the video record
does not allow a clear picture of what a reasonable officer in
Officer Anderson’s position would have been able to see in
the moments before he threw the blast ball that injured
Cheairs.
2
Whether Cheairs’s Fourth Amendment claim survives
the motion for summary judgment depends on whether the
record supports his contention that a jury could find that
Officer Anderson’s use of force was unreasonable. Graham
v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 396 (1989) (explaining that the
critical question in determining whether a seizure comports
with the Fourth Amendment is whether the use of force was
objectively reasonable under the circumstances). This
question requires us to “balance the nature and quality of the
intrusion on the individual’s Fourth Amendment interests
against the importance of the governmental interests alleged
to justify the intrusion” to determine whether the
government’s use of force was excessive. Scott, 550 U.S. at
383 (quotation omitted). The government’s interest in the
use of force depends on: “(1) the severity of the crime;
(2) whether the suspect posed an immediate threat to the
safety of the officers or others; and (3) whether the suspect
was actively resisting arrest or attempting to evade arrest by
flight.” Sabbe, 84 F.4th at 822; Graham, 490 U.S. at 396–

20

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

97. The “immediate threat” factor is the most important.
Sabbe, 84 F.4th at 822.
When balancing these interests, we consider the “totality
of the circumstances,” Plumhoff v. Rickard, 572 U.S. 765,
774 (2014), including the “particular situation” and the
“particular type of force” used. Scott, 550 U.S. at 382. “The
reasonableness of a particular use of force must be judged
from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene,
rather than with the 20/20 vision of hindsight.” Graham, 490
U.S. at 396. We allow for an officer’s need “to make splitsecond judgments—in circumstances that are tense,
uncertain, and rapidly evolving—about the amount of force
that is necessary in a particular situation.” Id. at 397.
By midnight on June 8, the government had strong
justification to use some degree of force to respond to serious
threats to police, the public, and property.
The
comprehensive record disproves Cheairs’s assertion that the
crowd was “largely peaceful.” Officers’ body cams
recorded, and Cheairs’s own videos confirm, that protesters
near Cheairs were throwing projectiles, launching fireworks,
and shining lasers at officers in the minutes before Officer
Anderson threw the blast ball that struck Cheairs. The
protest had gone on since the afternoon and the degree of
violence appeared to be escalating. There is no question that
SPD had given orders to disperse before Cheairs was injured,
and the announcements included directions for safely exiting
the area. Some of the protesters complied, but others ignored
the orders in violation of Washington law. See Wash. Rev.
Code § 9A.84.020(1)(a)–(b) (providing that failure to
comply with a lawful order to disperse is a misdemeanor
offense). The Operations Center log includes entries
reporting that protesters had threatened to burn down the
nearby precincts.

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

21

There is little doubt based upon the video evidence that
a reasonable officer in Officer Anderson’s shoes would have
concluded, before Officer Anderson deployed the OC blast
ball grenade that injured Cheairs, that probable cause existed
to arrest at least some of the protesters for disregarding the
dispersal orders, or for assaulting or attempting to assault
police officers on the line, at the intersection of 11th and
Pine. Thus, the government had an important interest in
using force to protect officers and bystanders and to prevent
serious property damage.
Although following department policy does not
necessarily guarantee that an officer’s conduct will be
constitutional under the Fourth Amendment, we also
consider that Officer Anderson deployed the blast ball that
struck Cheairs in accordance with SPD policy and in
response to an increasingly hostile, threatening crowd. The
SPD Manual provides that “when feasible, officers will not
deploy blast balls until a dispersal order has been issued to
the crowd, the crowd has been given a reasonable amount of
time to comply, and a supervisor has authorized the
deployment.” When protesters continued shining lasers and
throwing projectiles at the line of officers, SPD issued
another dispersal order, then deployed OC blast balls. Key
to our analysis, the blast ball that injured Cheairs struck the
pavement before it detonated. Had it been thrown in a way
calculated to explode at head height, it would have presented
a far greater risk of injury and thus could have constituted an
unreasonable use of force. See Nelson, 685 F.3d at 878.
On the record before us, we conclude that it was
reasonable for the police to perceive that the protesters at the
front of the crowd, near whom Cheairs stood, objectively
posed an immediate threat to the safety of officers, citizens,
and property. Therefore, having considered the totality of

22

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

the circumstances, we conclude that the force Officer
Anderson employed was not excessive. Cf. Young v. City of
Los Angeles, 655 F.3d 1156, 1167 (9th Cir. 2011) (holding
that pepper spray and baton blows were excessive uses of
force against a non-compliant but non-violent subject who
was seated on a curb and then prone and handcuffed on the
sidewalk) (citing Headwaters Forest Def. v. County of
Humboldt, 276 F.3d 1125, 1130–31 (9th Cir. 2002) (holding
that directly applying pepper spray to the eyes of non-violent
environmental protesters who refused to unchain
themselves, by holding Q-tips doused with pepper spray to
the corners of their eyes, was unnecessary and excessive
force)).
Cheairs urges us to consider an order entered by a
different district court judge in the Western District of
Washington in response to the same protests. That order
enjoined SPD “from employing chemical irritants or
projectiles of any kind against persons peacefully engaging
in protests or demonstrations.” Black Lives Matter SeattleKing Cnty. v. City of Seattle, Case No. 2:20-cv-00887-RAJ
(W.D. Wash. 2020), Dkt. No. 34. But that order was issued
on June 12, 2020, several days after Cheairs was injured, and
it addressed the use of force against peaceful protesters.
“The reasonableness of a particular use of force must be
judged from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the
scene,” based only on what was known at the time of the
incident. Graham, 490 U.S. at 396. Because it post-dated
Cheairs’s injury, the June 12 temporary restraining order

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

23

does not impact our analysis of the reasonableness of the
force that injured Cheairs. 7
Cheairs also argues that we should take into account
evidence that Officer Anderson threw another blast ball
overhand shortly after deploying the blast ball at issue in this
case. That blast ball struck a protester in the chest and
caused serious injury. This evidence is relevant because it
confirms that the munition that injured Cheairs is capable of
inflicting very serious injury, even if it is not designed to do
so. But it does not support Cheairs’s contention that the
force Officer Anderson used was excessive under the
circumstances. Our precedent requires that we consider the
facts that were known to Officer Anderson at the time of the
incident. Graham, 490 U.S. at 396. A reasonable officer in
Officer Anderson’s position would justify the deployment of
OC blast balls aimed at the space between police and
protesters as necessary to increase the distance between
them. Id.
Finally, Cheairs relies on Nelson v. City of Davis, 685
F.3d 867 (9th Cir. 2012) and Young v. County of Los
Angeles, 655 F.3d 1156 (9th Cir. 2011) to argue that Officer
Anderson used excessive force. This precedent does not
persuade us that Officer Anderson’s use of force was
unreasonable, because the facts that pertained to the
reasonableness of the officers’ use of force in Nelson and
Young are easily distinguishable from the facts in this case.
In Nelson, the police responded to an apartment complex
where approximately 1,000 partygoers had gathered for the
Accordingly, we deny the motion for judicial notice of parts of the
docket in the Black Lives Matter Seattle-King County Case (Dkt. No.
25).

7

24

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

annual Picnic Day festivities at the University of California
at Davis. Id. at 872–73. The police responded to a request
from a property owner “in the absence of” any exigency. Id.
at 880. At some point, some members of the crowd began
throwing objects at the police, but the police testified that
none of the objects came from the direction where Nelson
and his friends were standing. Id. The police ordered the
crowd to disperse, but they did not give Nelson and his
friends an opportunity to comply with the order and the
crowd had no path to exit safely. Id. at 872, 874. Discovery
showed that the students “called out to the police, asking the
officers to inform them what they wanted the students to do,
and repeatedly raised their hands to show their willingness
to comply.” Id. at 874. Without warning, the police shot
pepperballs toward the crowd at high velocity and struck
Nelson in the eye, severely injuring him. Id. at 872.
The group of college students targeted with pepperballs
in Nelson was, at most, passively resisting police dispersal
orders and not “engaging in any other threatening or
dangerous behavior.” Id. at 880. In contrast, the large crowd
of protesters at 11th and Pine had ignored multiple dispersal
orders that included directions to exit, and the crowd was
growing increasingly violent. The severity of the protesters’
crimes in this case and the immediate threat to the safety of
the officers, the public, and property easily distinguish the
reasonableness of the use of force here from the
reasonableness of the use of force in Nelson. 8 See Graham,
490 U.S. at 396–97.
Though Nelson’s analysis of the reasonableness of the officers’ use of
force is distinguishable, Nelson’s seizure analysis does provide a helpful
guidepost, and it closely tracks the seizure analysis in Sanderlin. In both
cases, officers shot projectiles into crowds at high velocity, intending to
8

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

25

The facts of Young are similarly distinguishable. Young
involved a traffic stop in which an individual declined to get
back into his car after exiting to hand his vehicle registration
to a police officer who was writing a traffic citation. Young,
655 F.3d at 1159. After the plaintiff refused to reenter his
car, the officer pepper-sprayed him without warning as he
was sitting on the curb and later struck him repeatedly with
a baton after he was handcuffed and lying face-down on the
ground. Id. at 1159–60. We observed that it is rarely, if ever,
necessary “for a police officer to employ substantial force
without warning against an individual who . . . is not
resisting arrest or does not pose any apparent threat to officer
or public safety.” Id. at 1166–67. The facts in Young are not
at all comparable to the facts that warranted the use of force
in this case.
In light of all the relevant circumstances, we affirm the
district court’s order granting summary judgment on
Cheairs’s Fourth Amendment claim.
C
Cheairs argues that Officer Anderson retaliated against
him for filming the protest, thereby violating his First
Amendment rights. See Fordyce v. City of Seattle, 55 F.3d
436, 439 (9th Cir. 1995). To establish a First Amendment
retaliation claim, Cheairs must show that: (1) he was
“engaged in a constitutionally protected activity;” (2) the
SPD officer’s actions “would chill a person of ordinary
firmness from continuing to engage in the protected
strike members of the gatherings. In both cases, we concluded that
seizures occurred. Cf. Puente v. City of Phoenix, 123 F.4th 1035 (9th
Cir. 2024) (reasoning that dispersal of a crowd with airborne chemical
irritants or flashbang grenades, not projectiles, did not constitute a
seizure).

26

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

activity;” and (3) “the protected activity was a substantial or
motivating factor” in the SPD officer’s conduct. Index
Newspapers LLC v. U.S. Marshals Serv., 977 F.3d 817, 827
(9th Cir. 2020).
Whether an officer was motivated by discriminatory
animus “involves questions of fact that normally should be
left for trial,” id., but here, Cheairs fails to present a triable
issue with respect to the third element of his retaliation
claim. Cheairs testified in his deposition that he had no
reason to believe that Officer Anderson intended to hit him
with a blast ball as he stood filming the protest. And in
response to the summary judgment motion, he offered no
evidence that Officer Anderson was aware that Cheairs was
filming the protest, much less that Officer Anderson sought
to retaliate against him for exercising his First Amendment
rights. Indeed, the record corroborates Officer Anderson’s
statements that there was a line of SPD officers standing in
front of him, blocking his view.
In comparison, the officer in Sanderlin did not deny that
he intended to strike the plaintiff with a foam baton round,
and he even shouted a warning that Sanderlin would be hit if
he did not move. Sanderlin, 116 F.4th at 909. Based on
these facts, we held that a factfinder “could reasonably infer
that those actions were motivated by retaliatory animus.” Id.
at 911. Similarly, in Index Newspapers, we noted there was
“exceptionally strong” evidence of retaliation where
journalists wearing clothing conspicuously marked
“PRESS” and “standing nowhere near protesters” were
targeted with pepper spray at point-blank range, shot in the
chest with less-lethal munitions, and physically assaulted
while recording federal agents’ conflict with protesters.
Index Newspapers, 977 F.3d at 829. Unlike the plaintiffs in
these cases, Cheairs did not meet his burden of offering

CHEAIRS V. CITY OF SEATTLE

27

admissible evidence to show a material dispute of fact
concerning the causal relationship between his protected
activity and his subsequent injury. See Nieves v. Bartlett,
587 U.S. 391, 398–99 (2019).
We affirm the district court’s order granting summary
judgment with respect to Cheairs’s First Amendment claim.
D
Local government units may be held responsible under
Section 1983 when they maintain a policy or custom that
causes the constitutional violation at issue. Monell, 436 U.S.
at 690, 694. But without a constitutional claim that can
survive summary judgment, the district court correctly ruled
that Cheairs cannot establish Monell liability. Yousefian v.
City of Glendale, 779 F.3d 1010, 1016 (9th Cir. 2015).
We AFFIRM the judgment of the district court.

