FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CASCADIA WILDLANDS, an
Oregon non-profit corporation;
OREGON WILD, an Oregon nonprofit corporation,
v.

No. 24-4542
D.C. No.
6:23-cv-01358MC

Plaintiffs - Appellants,

UNITED STATES BUREAU OF
LAND MANAGEMENT, a federal
agency,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Michael J. McShane, Chief District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 10, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 27, 2025
Before: SIDNEY R. THOMAS and MILAN D. SMITH,
JR., Circuit Judges, and DOUGLAS L. RAYES, District
Judge. *
The Honorable Douglas L. Rayes, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.

*

2

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.
SUMMARY **
Environmental Law
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the U.S. Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) in an action brought by environmental groups
challenging BLM’s approval of the Big Weekly Elk Forest
Management Project (BWE Project).
Plaintiffs alleged that (1) the BWE Project violated an
earlier resource management plan governing coastal Oregon
forests, so its approval violated the Federal Land Policy and
Management Act (FLPMA); and (2) BLM failed to take a
“hard look” at the BWE Project’s environmental impacts as
required by the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA).
The Northwestern and Coastal Oregon Resource
Management Plan (the RMP) covers over 1.2 million acres
of BLM-administered lands. The RMP provides that all
habitat for the threatened murrelet bird that had been
designated as occupied under the earlier Northwest Forest
Plan would be designated as “Late-Successional Reserve”
(LSR), which is managed with the objective of maintaining
existing nesting habitat for the marbled murrelet and the
northern spotted owl, as well as promoting the development
of
additional
nesting
habitat
for
those
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

3

species. Approximately 65% of the BWE Project lands fall
within the LSR. The RMP sets forth resource programs that
include management directions for the marbled murrelet (the
Murrelet Management Direction).
The panel held that Kisor v. Wilkie, 588 U.S. 558 (2019),
provides the applicable framework for when to defer to an
agency’s construction of a land use plan, and therefore
analyzed the RMP under its strictures. To defer to an
agency’s interpretation of its own regulations, three criteria
must be met: the regulation is genuinely ambiguous, the
interpretation is reasonable, and the interpretation is entitled
to controlling weight. The panel held that the term
“modifying nesting habitat” in the Murrelet Management
Direction was genuinely ambiguous. The panel also held
that BLM’s narrow interpretation was reasonable. Finally,
the character and context of BLM’s interpretation indicated
that it was entitled to deference where BLM’s interpretation
represents its official position, BLM’s interpretation
depends on its substantive expertise, and BLM’s
interpretation
represents
its
fair,
considered
judgment. Applying BLM’s narrow interpretation of
“modifying nesting habitat” in the Murrelet Management
Direction to the BWE Project, the panel concluded that the
BWE Project fully conformed to the RMP. The approval of
the BWE Project was thus not arbitrary and capricious, and
there was no violation of FLPMA.
Concerning whether BLM took a “hard look” at the
environmental consequences of the BWE Project as required
by NEPA, the panel concluded that BLM did not act
arbitrarily or capriciously in preparing the Environmental
Assessment (EA) and Finding of No Significant Impact
(FONSI) for the BWE Project. In an appendix to the EA,
BLM explained the possible impacts of the project on

4

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

murrelets, including how thinning the forest pursuant to the
project could expose murrelets to possibly deleterious edge
effects. It concluded that the project was likely to ultimately
benefit the murrelet and that certain aspects of the project
would minimize the costs of edge effects. BLM concluded
that it was not required to assess the impacts to murrelets in
more detail because, inter alia, the possible impacts to
murrelets had already been thoroughly addressed in the
Environmental Impact Statement (EIS) for the RMP—a
document incorporated by reference and to which the EA
tiered. The EA also incorporated by reference the extensive
discussions in the BWE Project biological assessment (BA)
and in the correspondence between the Fish and Wildlife
Service and BLM. The panel held that this constituted a
“hard look” at the environmental impacts of the BWE
Project on murrelets, and rejected plaintiffs’ challenges to
the EA.

COUNSEL
Nicholas S. Cady (argued), Cascadia Wildlands Project,
Eugene, Oregon; John S. Persell, Oregon Wild, Portland,
Oregon; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Kyle Glynn (argued), Shannon Boylan, and Joan Pepin,
Attorneys, Environment & Natural Resources Division;
Todd Kim, Assistant Attorney General; United States
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Brian Perron,
Attorney, United States Department of the Interior, Portland,
Oregon; for Defendant-Appellant.

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

5

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
Environmental groups Cascadia Wildlands and Oregon
Wild (collectively, the Plaintiffs) appeal the district court’s
grant of summary judgment in favor of the U.S. Bureau of
Land Management (BLM). The Plaintiffs brought a civil
action challenging BLM’s approval of the Big Weekly Elk
Forest Management Project (BWE Project), raising claims
pursuant to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act
(FLPMA), 43 U.S.C. §§ 1701–1787, and the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 42 U.S.C. §§ 4321–
4370m-12. Specifically, they alleged that (1) the BWE
Project violated an earlier resource management plan
governing coastal Oregon forests, so its approval violated
FLPMA; and (2) BLM failed to take a “hard look” at the
BWE Project’s environmental impacts as required by
NEPA. The parties filed cross-motions for summary
judgment, and the district court granted summary judgment
in favor of BLM.
We affirm. For the reasons given below, we conclude
that the BWE Project does not violate the resource
management plan, so there is no violation of FLPMA. We
also conclude that BLM took the “hard look” required by
NEPA.
STATUTORY BACKGROUND
The issues that we address are buried amidst a tangle of
overlapping statutes and regulations. We begin our trek by
discussing four areas of law that are crucial to understanding
the Plaintiffs’ claims, as well as the factual and procedural
history of this case.

6

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

I. FLPMA
This case involves a claim that the BWE Project violates
FLPMA. FLPMA “establishes requirements for land use
planning on public land” and requires that BLM “‘develop,
maintain, and when appropriate, revise land use plans’ to
ensure that land management be conducted ‘on the basis of
multiple use and sustained yield.’” Or. Nat. Res. Council
Fund v. Brong, 492 F.3d 1120, 1125 (9th Cir. 2007) (quoting
43 U.S.C. §§ 1701(a)(7), 1712(a)). 1 “[L]and use plans are a
“‘Multiple use’ and ‘sustained yield’ are both technical terms.” Or.
Nat. Desert Ass’n v. BLM, 625 F.3d 1092, 1096 n.2 (9th Cir. 2010). “The
term ‘sustained yield’ means the achievement and maintenance in
perpetuity of a high-level annual or regular periodic output of the various
renewable resources of the public lands consistent with multiple use.”
Id. (quoting 43 U.S.C. § 1702(h)). For its part, multiple use is defined
to mean:
1

the management of the public lands and their various
resource values so that they are utilized in the
combination that will best meet the present and future
needs of the American people; making the most
judicious use of the land for some or all of these
resources or related services over areas large enough
to provide sufficient latitude for periodic adjustments
in use to conform to changing needs and conditions;
the use of some land for less than all of the resources;
a combination of balanced and diverse resource uses
that takes into account the long-term needs of future
generations for renewable and nonrenewable
resources, including, but not limited to, recreation,
range, timber, minerals, watershed, wildlife and fish,
and natural scenic, scientific and historical values; and
harmonious and coordinated management of the
various resources without permanent impairment of
the productivity of the land and the quality of the
environment with consideration being given to the
relative values of the resources and not necessarily to

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

7

preliminary step in the overall process of managing public
lands—‘designed to guide and control future management
actions and the development of subsequent, more detailed
and limited scope plans for resources and uses.” Norton v.
S. Utah Wilderness All., 542 U.S. 55, 69 (2004) (quoting 43
C.F.R. § 1601.0–2 (2003)). Thus, a land use plan—such as
a resource management plan—generally does not authorize
on-the-ground actions; rather, such actions are authorized
through site-specific implementations. See 43 U.S.C.
§ 1712(e); 43 C.F.R. § 1601.0-5(n).
In keeping with this structure, “FLPMA requires the
government to ‘manage the public lands . . . in accordance
with the land use plans . . . when they are available.” Mont.
Wildlife Fed’n v. Haaland, 127 F.4th 1, 42 (9th Cir. 2025)
(alterations in original) (quoting 43 U.S.C. § 1732(a)).
“Once a plan is adopted, ‘[a]ll future resource management
authorizations and actions . . . and subsequent more detailed
or specific planning, [must] conform to the approved plan.’”
Id. (alterations in original) (quoting 43 C.F.R. § 1610.53(a)). “‘The statutory directive that BLM manage “in
accordance with” land use plans, and the regulatory
requirement that authorizations and actions “conform to”
those plans, prevent BLM from taking actions inconsistent
with the provisions of a land use plan.’” Id. (quoting Norton,
542 U.S. at 69). Accordingly, “[a]ny BLM land use decision
contrary to the plan ‘can be set aside as contrary to law
pursuant to 5 U.S.C. § 706(2).’” Id. (quoting Norton, 542
U.S. at 69); see also Brong, 492 F.3d at 1135 (setting aside
a site-specific project because it was at odds with an earlier
the combination of uses that will give the greatest
economic return or the greatest unit output.
43 U.S.C. § 1702(c).

8

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

resource management plan). That is the crux of the
Plaintiffs’ first claim—that the BWE Project violates an
earlier resource management plan and thus cannot stand.
II. NEPA
The Plaintiffs’ second claim arises under section 102 of
NEPA, see 42 U.S.C. § 4332.
A. Principles of NEPA Review
“NEPA has ‘twin aims.’” Ctr. for Biological Diversity
v. BLM, 141 F.4th 976, 993 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting Kern v.
BLM, 284 F.3d 1062, 1066 (9th Cir. 2002)). “It first requires
that a federal agency ‘consider every significant aspect of the
environmental impact of a proposed action.’” Id. (quoting
Kern, 284 F.3d at 1066). “It then ensures that the agency
will ‘inform the public that it has indeed considered
environmental concerns in its decisionmaking process.’” Id.
(quoting Kern, 284 F.3d at 1066).
In short, NEPA requires the preparation of reports that
inform the agency and the public of the environmental
consequences of proposed projects. See Seven Cnty.
Infrastructure Coal. v. Eagle Cnty., 605 U.S. ----, 145 S. Ct.
1497, 1510 (2025). NEPA “‘establishes “action-forcing”
procedures that require agencies to take a “hard look” at
environmental consequences.’” Kern, 284 F.3d at 1066
(quoting Metcalf v. Daley, 214 F.3d 1135, 1141 (9th Cir.
2000)). When “[p]roperly applied, NEPA helps agencies to
make better decisions and to ensure good project
management.” Seven Cnty. Infrastructure Coal., 145 S. Ct.
at 1510.
It is important, though, to acknowledge what NEPA does
not do. As the Supreme Court recently emphasized, unlike
other environmental laws such as the Endangered Species

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

9

Act or the Clean Water Act, NEPA “is a purely procedural
statute” that “imposes no substantive environmental
obligations or restrictions.” Id. at 1507. In other words,
although NEPA requires the agency to analyze
environmental impacts and prepare documents and make
such analyses available for public inspection, “NEPA does
not require the agency to weigh environmental consequences
in any particular way.” Id. “Rather, an agency may weigh
environmental consequences as the agency reasonably sees
fit under its governing statute and any relevant substantive
environmental laws.” Id. At bottom, then, NEPA does not
require the agency to prioritize environmental concerns over
other concerns in determining whether to proceed with a
project; instead, all it requires is that the agency consider and
disclose environmental impacts. “NEPA requires no more.”
Id. at 1511 (quoting Strycker’s Bay Neighborhood Council,
Inc. v. Karlen, 444 U.S. 223, 228 (1980)).
The limited scope of NEPA also circumscribes the scope
of judicial review. As the Supreme Court emphasized in
Seven County Infrastructure Coalition, “the central principle
of judicial review in NEPA cases is deference.” Id. “The
‘role of a court in reviewing the sufficiency of an agency’s
consideration of environmental factors is a limited one.’” Id.
at 1514–15 (quoting Vt. Yankee Nuclear Power Corp. v. Nat.
Res. Def. Council, Inc., 435 U.S. 519, 555 (1978)). Courts
cannot substitute their judgment for that of the agency. See
id. at 1514 (“NEPA’s procedural mandate helps ‘to insure a
fully informed and well-considered decision, not necessarily
a decision . . . judges . . . would have reached had they been
members of the decisionmaking unit of the agency.”
(quoting Vt. Yankee, 435 U.S. at 558)).

10

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

B. NEPA Procedure
In terms of the procedure prescribed by NEPA, “[a]ny
agency undertaking a ‘major Federal action[] significantly
affecting the quality of the human environment’ must
prepare an environmental impact statement (EIS).” Mont.
Wildlife Fed’n, 127 F.4th at 20 (second alteration in original)
(quoting 42 U.S.C. § 4332(C)). “To determine whether an
EIS is required, an agency may first prepare an
Environmental Assessment (EA).” Id. “If, after preparing
the [EA], an agency determines that the action ‘will not have
a significant effect on the human environment,’ then the
agency makes a ‘Finding of No Significant Impact,’” also
called a FONSI, and it “need not prepare an EIS.” Id.
(quoting 40 C.F.R. § 1508.13 (1978)).
For the sake of efficiency, a later EA can “tier” to an
existing EIS in the right circumstances. See All. for the Wild
Rockies v. USFS, 907 F.3d 1105, 1118–19 (9th Cir. 2018).
‘“Tiering’ is defined as ‘avoiding detailed discussion by
referring to another document containing the required
discussion,’ and, under [applicable] regulations, it is
expressly permitted . . . .” Id. (citation omitted) (quoting
Kern, 284 F.3d at 1073). “Tiering is appropriate when the
sequence of statements or analyses is . . . [f]rom a program,
plan, or policy environmental impact statement to a program,
plan, or policy statement of lesser scope or to a site-specific
statement or analysis.” 40 C.F.R. § 1508.28(a) (2020). 2 But
The Executive Branch issued an interim final rule removing the NEPA
implementing regulations issued by the Council on Environmental
Quality (CEQ) from the code of federal regulations. See Removal of
National Environmental Policy Act Implementing Regulations, 90 Fed.
Reg. 10610 (Feb. 25, 2025). We agree with the Plaintiffs that this has
no bearing on the issues before us because BLM applied the regulations

2

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

11

tiering is inappropriate if the earlier documents contain only
“general statements” about the disputed issues. See
Klamath-Siskiyou Wildlands Ctr. v. BLM, 387 F.3d 989,
997–98 (9th Cir. 2004).
In this case, these rules are applied in the context of
NEPA review for a resource management plan and a
subsequent implementing action. “Under BLM regulations,
the agency must prepare an EIS when adopting a Resource
Management Plan.” Mont. Wildlife Fed’n, 127 F.4th at 20
(citing 43 C.F.R. § 1601.0-6) (1983)). “It must also prepare
an [EA] ‘for all proposed Federal actions’ not categorically
excluded or ‘covered sufficiently by an earlier
environmental document.’”
Id. (quoting 43 C.F.R.
§ 46.300(a) (2008)). “‘When available,’ BLM ‘should use
existing NEPA analyses for assessing the impacts of a
proposed action and any alternatives.’” Id. (quoting 43
C.F.R. § 46.120(a) (2008)). In other words, BLM should tier
to earlier NEPA review documents when feasible. See id.
III. Endangered Species Act Consultation
This case involves consultation between BLM and the
U.S. Fish & Wildlife Service (FWS) pursuant to the
Endangered Species Act (ESA), 16 U.S.C. §§ 1531–1544,
although the Plaintiffs do not directly raise an ESA claim.
Under section 7(a)(2) of the ESA, see 16 U.S.C.
§ 1536(a)(2), “agencies contemplating certain kinds of
federal action are required to insure [sic] that the action they
take ‘is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence’ or
‘result in the destruction or adverse modification of [critical]
habitat’ of an endangered or threatened species.”
as they existed at the time in approving the BWE Project and resource
management plan.

12

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

Conservation Cong. v. Finley, 774 F.3d 611, 615 (9th Cir.
2014) (second alteration in original) (quoting Conservation
Cong. v. USFS, 720 F.3d 1048, 1051 (9th Cir. 2013)). The
action agency (here, BLM) “must prepare a ‘biological
assessment’ to determine whether” species listed under the
ESA or critical habitat for such species “‘are likely to be
adversely affected’ by the proposed action.” Ctr. for
Biological Diversity v. BLM, 698 F.3d 1101, 1107 (9th Cir.
2012) (quoting 50 C.F.R. § 402.12 (2012)). If so, BLM is
required to consult with the appropriate wildlife agency
(here, FWS) “to determine the likely effects of [BLM’s]
proposed actions on endangered or threatened species.”
Finley, 774 F.3d at 615. FWS must “prepar[e] a ‘biological
opinion’ stating whether the proposed action, ‘taken together
with cumulative effects, is likely to jeopardize the continued
existence of listed species or result in the destruction or
adverse modification of critical habitat.’” Id. (quoting 50
C.F.R. § 402.14(g)(4)).
In short, the biological assessment (BA) involved in this
case was prepared by BLM whereas the two biological
opinions (BiOps) were prepared by FWS.
IV. O&C Act
Finally, much of the land at issue is subject to the Oregon
and California Railroad and Coos Bay Wagon Road Grant
Lands Act (O&C Act), 43 U.S.C. §§ 2601–34. The O&C
Act directs BLM “to determine which portions of the land
[granted by that act] should be set aside for logging and
which should be reserved.” Murphy Co. v. Biden, 65 F.4th
1122, 1134 (9th Cir. 2023). The statute’s primary goal is
“providing a permanent source of timber supply,” but the
statute “delineates a number of purposes for the” granted
lands. Id. (quoting 43 U.S.C. § 2601). Concordant with the

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

13

goals of the O&C Act, BLM has established the “allowable
sale quantity” (ASQ) of timber, which is “an estimate of the
volume of O&C timber that can be cut and sold in a given
year without depleting the timberland.” Am. Forest Res.
Council v. United States, 77 F.4th 787, 791 (D.C. Cir. 2023).
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
I. Factual Background
This case involves a number of administrative actions
centering around timber harvesting and wildlife protection
in coastal Oregon forests. From a bird’s-eye view, the
Plaintiffs challenge BLM’s approval of the BWE Project, a
land management action authorizing certain forms of
logging in federally owned Oregon coastal forests.
According to the Plaintiffs, the BWE Project runs afoul of
the provisions of an earlier resource management plan that
protects a species of seabird called the marbled murrelet.
They also claim that the NEPA review for the BWE Project
was insufficient because BLM failed to take a “hard look” at
the project’s impacts on marbled murrelets.
This dispute has its roots in administrative actions going
back decades. To fully situate our analysis of this case, we
discuss (A) marbled murrelets, (B) the Northwest Forest
Plan, (C) the 2016 Northwestern and Coastal Oregon
Resource Management Plan, (D) correspondence between
BLM and FWS over the meaning of a provision in that
resource management plan, and then (E) the BWE Project.
A. Marbled Murrelets
Marbled murrelets are small seabirds that can be found
along the northern Pacific coast. They are listed as
“threatened” under the ESA. FWS has also designated
“critical habitat” for the marbled murrelet in Oregon.

14

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

Unlike many other seabirds, marbled murrelets nest in
inland forests. Marbled murrelets do not build traditional
nests and instead lay their eggs on thick, flat moss-covered
branches known as “platforms.” The requisite platforms are
mostly found on trees in mature and old-growth forests.
Murrelets have high “site fidelity,” which means that they
tend to return to the same forest stand (and even the same
tree) in different years. 3
According to BLM, marbled murrelet nesting habitat is
“generally characterized by coniferous forest 80 years of age
or older within 50 miles of the coast with multi-storied
canopies, moderate canopy closure, containing large trees
that have sufficient limb size and substrate [such as moss] to
support nesting, flight accessibility, and protective cover
from ambient conditions and potential avian predators.”
Generally, suitable nesting habitat for marbled murrelets
overlaps with nesting habitat for another ESA-listed species,
the northern spotted owl.
B. The Northwest Forest Plan
From the mid-1990s through 2016, the relevant land use
plan governing the lands at issue was the Northwest Forest
Plan. The Northwest Forest Plan made certain forest stands
available for timber harvest and allocated other forest stands
to reserves, including the late-successional reserve.
Generally, lands in the late-successional reserve were
entitled to “heightened environmental protection,” Brong,
492 F.3d at 1123, and they were managed with the goal of
conserving and enhancing habitat for endangered species,
including the marbled murrelet and the northern spotted owl.
In general, a forest “stand” refers to “an aggregation of trees occupying
a specific area managed as a discrete operational or management unit.”

3

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

15

The Northwest Forest Plan required pre-project
surveying in suitable murrelet habitat that was proposed for
timber harvest; if the surveys showed murrelet activity, the
site would be designated as “occupied” and “all contiguous
existing and recruitment habitat for marbled murrelets (i.e.,
stands that are capable of becoming marbled murrelet habitat
within 25 years) within a 0.5-mile radius [would] be
protected.”
This land would be designated to the
late-successional reserve, and timber harvest would
generally be prohibited. See id. at 1126 (“Pursuant to these
goals, the [Northwest Forest Plan] makes programmed
‘stand management’ activities, such as logging,
impermissible in [late-successional reserves].”).
Not all forests allocated to the late-successional reserves
were ideal murrelet or northern spotted owl habitat; some
needed silvicultural treatment and management to qualify as
suitable nesting habitat. Thus, to meet long-term species
goals, thinning of non-habitat was permitted around
occupied sites as needed to protect or enhance existing or
recruitment habitat.
C. The Resource Management Plan
In 2016, BLM adopted new resource management plans
to govern the management of public lands in western Oregon
consistent with FLPMA’s multiple-use and sustained-yield
mandate. 43 U.S.C. § 1701(a)(7). At issue here is one
specific plan, the Northwestern and Coastal Oregon
Resource Management Plan (the RMP), which covers over
1.2 million acres of BLM-administered lands. The RMP has
several purposes, including to “[p]rovide a sustained yield of
timber” and to “[c]ontribute to the conservation and recovery
of threatened and endangered species,” including the

16

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

marbled murrelet. The RMP offers more sustained-yield
timber production than the earlier Northwest Forest Plan.
The RMP includes management objectives and
management directions for specific land use allocations as
well as for resource programs (which generally apply across
land use allocations). The BLM defines management
objectives as “descriptions of desired outcomes for BLMadministered lands and resources in [a resource management
plan.]” A management direction, in turn, “identifies where
future actions may or may not be allowed and what
restrictions or requirements may be placed on those future
actions to achieve the objectives set for the BLMadministered lands and resources.”
1. Land Use Allocations
The RMP sets forth different land use allocations to
accomplish its goals of, inter alia, timber production and
endangered species conservation. Specifically, as relevant
here, it allocates (1) 247,045 acres of land to the “Harvest
Land Base” (HLB), and (2) 576,714 acres of land to the
“Late-Successional Reserve” (LSR).
Turning first to the HLB, land in that allocation is
managed with the primary goal of sustainably producing
timber for sale and contributing to the ASQ. Commercial
thinning is permitted in the HLB for a variety of reasons,
including improving merchantability and stand health, and
heavier regeneration harvesting is also permitted.
Whereas the HLB is managed primarily for timber
production, the LSR is managed with more wildlife-oriented
goals in mind. Specifically, land in the LSR is managed with
the objectives of, inter alia, maintaining existing nesting
habitat for the marbled murrelet and the northern spotted

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

17

owl, as well as promoting the development of additional
nesting habitat for those species. To meet those objectives,
management directions include: (1) protecting stands of
older, structurally complex coniferous forest; (2) protecting
marbled murrelet occupied stands; 4 and (3) applying
silvicultural treatments to foster the growth of complex
forests, especially for northern spotted owls. “[P]rotect
marbled murrelet occupied stands means to prohibit
activities in the occupied stand,” at least generally. 5 But
certain activities “needed to protect the overall health of the
[occupied] stand or adjacent stands” are permitted, “as long
as the occupied stand continues to support marbled murrelet
nesting.” So are “felling and removal of trees for habitat
restoration” and “the construction or maintenance of linear
and nonlinear rights-of-way, spur roads, yarding corridors,
or other facilities, as long as the occupied stand continues to
support marbled murrelet nesting.” Thinning within the
LSR to promote the development of habitat (particularly for
the northern spotted owl) is one of the goals of the RMP.
The RMP provides that all murrelet habitat that had been
designated as occupied under the earlier Northwest Forest
Plan would be designated as LSR. Additionally, in the
relevant portion of the RMP lands, occupied stands

“Marbled murrelet occupied stand refers to all forest stands, regardless
of age or structure, within ¼ mile . . . of the location of marbled murrelet
behavior indicating occupancy and not separated from the location of
marbled murrelet behavior indicating occupancy by more than 328 feet
of non-forest.”
4

The Plaintiffs assert that “protect marbled murrelet occupied stands”
includes prohibiting activities in “adjacent stands.” But the Plaintiffs
misread the management objective and associated directions, which
focus on protecting the occupied stand itself.

5

18

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

discovered after the RMP’s effective date would also be
allocated to the LSR.
Only timber harvested from the HLB contributes to the
ASQ, although timber may also be harvested from the
reserves. As to the timber to be harvested from the reserves,
the RMP provides that “[t]he BLM will consider through
monitoring and plan evaluation whether the implementation
of management actions within the reserve allocations that
produce non-ASQ timber volume is consistent” with the
management objectives for the reserves.
2. Murrelet Management Direction
The RMP also sets forth resource programs that apply to
all types of land use allocations. These protect, among other
things, wildlife resources and accordingly set forth specific
management directions for certain species. At the heart of
this case are a portion of the management directions for the
marbled murrelet (the Murrelet Management Direction).
The relevant language of the Murrelet Management
Direction 6 provides that “[b]efore modifying nesting habitat
or removing nesting structure in . . . all land use allocations
within 35 miles of the Pacific Coast,” 7 BLM is required to
“assess the analysis area for marbled murrelet nesting
structure”—that is, assess the “analysis area” for trees with
certain characteristics such as the existence of a platform
There are other portions of the Murrelet Management Direction not at
issue here. For instance, a separate portion prohibits activities that
“disrupt” marbled murrelet nesting at occupied sites.” No party contends
that this portion is relevant here.

6

This direction also applies to certain land use allocations farther from
the coast, but that is not relevant to this appeal, as the BWE Project takes
place close to the coast.

7

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

19

(regardless of actual occupancy). “The analysis area
consists of the proposed project and lands within 726 feet of
the project boundary” in consideration of potential edge
effects, and it “includes all nesting structures that could be
affected by habitat modification.” If the analysis area
contains no such structure, no further consideration of
murrelet habitat is required.
If enough nesting structures are located in the analysis
area, additional steps would need to be taken. Specifically,
“[b]efore modifying forest stands in any 5-acre portion . . .
of the analysis area that contains at least 6 trees with nesting
structure,” BLM must choose from a menu of additional
protective procedures to ensure murrelets are not harmed.
Only one of these options is relevant here: Option One,
which involves surveying and buffering.
Under Option One, BLM must “[s]urvey for the marbled
murrelet” in the analysis area. If no occupancy is found from
the survey, no further consideration of marbled murrelet
habitat is necessary. If, however, occupancy is determined,
BLM cannot conduct activities within the “occupied
stand”—defined as all forest stands within a quarter mile of
the marbled murrelet behavior indicating occupancy, see
supra n.4—and all forest within 300 feet of the occupied
stand. There are limited exceptions to Option One for
certain actions, such as felling hazard trees or constructing
roads, so long as the stand continues to support nesting.
3. EIS
BLM authored a comprehensive EIS for the RMP; this
EIS included a whole section on marbled murrelets. The EIS
concluded that the RMP would result in an increase in the
amount of murrelet nesting habitat over the long term, even
if there would be a decline in the short term.

20

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

The EIS provided that surveys would be required prior
to timber harvest in “nesting habitat in all land use
allocations” within 35 miles of the Pacific Coast. The EIS
further explained that the RMP “would protect lands within
300 feet . . . of forecasted, occupied site delineations.” It
expressly explained that this coverage would extend to
“forecasted” marbled murrelet sites.
The EIS also
considered habitat fragmentation and “edge effects”—
deleterious impacts to nesting habitat (such as microclimate
changes) arising from the creation of an “edge” by logging
in adjacent forest.
4. ESA Consultation
Pursuant to the ESA consultation procedure, FWS
prepared a BiOp analyzing the impacts of the RMP on the
marbled murrelet. FWS ultimately concluded that the RMP
“is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the
murrelet, and is not likely to destroy or adversely modify
murrelet critical habitat.”
In relevant part, FWS reasoned that “[a]lthough there are
likely to be some adverse effects to murrelets and murrelet
critical habitat . . ., the overall outcome of [RMP]
implementation will be the protection of the vast majority of
extant murrelet nesting habitat, and a large long-term net
increase in total area and amount of murrelet habitat during
the life of the plan.” It further noted that the RMP would
provide for the survival and recovery of the murrelet in part
because the RMP “will significantly minimize habitat
modification by applying protective measures to activities in
[the zone within 35 miles of the Pacific Coast] and to
activities in the [LSR]” further inland.
With respect to the Murrelet Management Direction,
FWS stated that “BLM protection measures apply for

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

21

occupied stands (including stands with an unknown
occupancy status) in all” coastal land use allocations. FWS
specifically interpreted the “modify nesting habitat or
remove nesting structure” language in a manner that would
encompass edge effects from activities in adjacent stands:
To determine if protective measures apply,
BLM will conduct an analysis of all activities
that modify nesting habitat or remove nesting
structure. Modify nesting habitat includes
affecting adjacent stands that would modify
the nesting structure[’]s wind firmness,
microclimate and/or predation risks. . . .
Although impacts from treating adjacent
stands without nesting structure (referred to
as buffer habitat) is expected within 300 to
600 feet from nesting structure, the analysis
of habitat goes out 726 feet from the
treatment boundary to properly identify low
density nesting structure in younger
stands . . . .
As to Option One, FWS explained that this option would
ensure that timber harvest would not “remove occupied
habitat” because “[i]f occupancy is detected,” a circle of
protection and buffer is applied. FWS reiterated this
reasoning later on, concluding that any timber harvest within
the LSR “will be subject to protection of occupied habitat
under the Wildlife Resource Program’s Management
Direction for murrelets and will only be harvested if no
adverse effects are anticipated to occupied murrelet habitat
either within or adjacent to the harvest unit.” FWS also
stated that “[b]ased on the [Murrelet Management
Direction], timber harvest will not negatively impact

22

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

murrelets in any [land use allocations] within 35 miles of the
Pacific Coast.”
5. Record of Decision
The RMP was approved in a Record of Decision issued
by BLM. In large part, the Record of Decision reiterated
what was already provided in the RMP and the
accompanying EIS. As relevant here, it again explained that
marbled murrelet occupied sites found after the issuance of
the RMP would be reallocated to the LSR. The Record of
Decision concluded that the RMP would contribute to the
conservation and recovery of the marbled murrelet because
it would protect older, structurally complex forests. It
further provided that the RMP “will require pre-project
surveys for marbled murrelets and the protection of occupied
sites” up to 35 miles inland, but it did not delineate
specifically when those surveys would be required. 8
D. Interpretive Memoranda
As memorialized by agency memoranda, it soon became
clear that BLM and FWS interpreted the Murrelet
Management Direction differently.
Specifically, the
agencies disagreed about when the 300-foot buffer applied
and when the direction’s protective requirement would be
triggered by modifications that occurred outside of occupied
sites.
In June 2018, BLM explained that the term “modifying
nesting habitat” in the Murrelet Management Direction
A panel of our court upheld the EIS for the RMP over a challenge
brought by environmental groups based on NEPA and the ESA. See Pac.
Rivers v. BLM, 815 F. App’x 107, 109 (9th Cir. 2020) (unpublished).
The D.C. Circuit also upheld the RMP over a challenge by the logging
industry. See Am. Forest Res. Council, 77 F.4th at 802.
8

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

23

“refers to direct alteration of nesting habitat; that is, habitataltering activities occurring within a polygon that BLM
identifies as marbled murrelet habitat.” BLM explained that
its “delineation of nesting habitat may contain an entire
stand, multiple stands, or a portion of a stand, and is based
on a site-specific evaluation of forest conditions.” Thus,
“[t]he requirement to ‘assess the analysis area for marbled
murrelet nesting structure’ is not triggered by actions outside
of nesting habitat unless the action would remove nesting
structure.” According to BLM, FWS’s BiOp for the RMP
“mischaracterized” the Murrelet Management Direction
insofar as it construed the direction as being triggered by
modification to adjacent non-habitat. BLM admitted that
“[i]ndirect effects on nesting habitat of actions outside of
nesting habitat may still need to be addressed in NEPA
compliance and ESA consultation.”
FWS then responded with its own memo specifically
addressing whether its murrelet BiOp conclusion “would be
the same if the BLM conducts harvest activities (thinning
and regeneration harvest) directly adjacent to stands mapped
as occupied under the Northwest Forest Plan” and later
incorporated in the LSR by the RMP.
FWS first addressed the interpretive differences,
indicating that although it had originally interpreted the
Murrelet Management Direction in the RMP to provide for
a 300-foot buffer around all occupied stands, BLM’s
interpretation was that this direction applied only to “‘newly’
delineated occupied sites.” As indicated above, FWS in the
RMP BiOp indicated that “modifying nesting habitat” would
encompass affecting adjacent stands through edge effects
and that it expected BLM to include a 300-foot buffer on all
occupied habitat. Revisiting this interpretation, FWS
acknowledged that BLM’s own modeling of ASQ harvest

24

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

did not account for a 300-foot buffer around all occupied
stands.
It also acknowledged that BLM “intended
modification” in the Murrelet Management Direction “to
refer only to direct impacts on murrelet habitat” and not to
“actions adjacent to an occupied stand [that] would modify
habitat” through increased edge effects.
FWS then analyzed impacts to murrelets under BLM’s
interpretation. It concluded that marbled murrelets would be
adversely impacted by activities on adjacent stands within
300 feet of occupied stands but that BLM’s interpretation
would not change the outcome of the jeopardy analysis in its
BiOp. FWS ultimately recommended that BLM adhere to
FWS’s initial understanding (that the 300-foot buffer would
apply for all occupied marbled murrelet sites, whether newly
discovered or designated as LSR in the RMP and thus
preclude action in stands adjacent to occupied sites), but it
made clear that either interpretation would not change the
no-jeopardy determination in FWS’s BiOp for the RMP.
Specifically, FWS did a fresh effects analysis and section
7 ESA consultation under BLM’s understanding that logging
could occur up to the edge of occupied sites identified under
the Northwest Forest Plan without triggering requirements
for surveying or buffering. FWS concluded that this new
interpretation would lead to greater harvesting of forest
adjacent to marbled murrelet habitat, which would have
impacts on marbled murrelets by increasing edge effects,
such as increasing predation levels and wind throw risks, and
changing microclimates. Although such increased edge
effects might adversely affect murrelets, FWS noted that
there was some disagreement about the strength of the true
impact of such effects. Ultimately, it concluded that its
original no-jeopardy determination would still stand, as the
thinning of adjacent forests could actually increase the total

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

25

habitat for marbled murrelets in the long term and because
the thinned forests would be expected to maintain “some
buffer function.”
E. The BWE Project
1. Overview
The BWE Project proposes forest management activities
on BLM-administered lands in Coos County, Oregon, within
28 miles of the Pacific Coast—land that is already subject to
the RMP. In a nutshell, the site-specific BWE Project
authorizes thinning of forest in the LSR and heavier
regeneration harvesting in the HLB, as well as
“transportation management actions,” such as road
construction. The BWE Project is supposed to be carried out
through various sales between 2021 and 2026.
Approximately 65% of the BWE Project lands fall within
the LSR. BLM concluded that certain portions of the LSR
need to be thinned to speed habitat development for the
northern spotted owl (which, again, occupies similar habitat
to the murrelet), as such treatment would improve tree
diversity and canopy structure as well as reduce tree density.
BLM thus targeted forest stands within the LSR that do not
meet the desired habitat conditions for northern spotted
owls. Generally, these stands are highly dense, plantationstyle groupings of trees that BLM identified through various
methods. Under the BWE Project, BLM will authorize
heavy commercial thinning in certain of these stands, light
commercial thinning elsewhere, and non-commercial
thinning for older growth-forests without the requisite
canopy features.
Importantly, no treatment is proposed for LSR stands
within the well-developed habitat for northern spotted owls

26

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

or murrelets or within murrelet occupied sites. But although
BLM does not propose LSR thinning “in stands with suitable
murrelet habitat or in stands delineated as occupied habitat,”
it does propose thinning “adjacent to these stands” with the
stated goal of developing, in the long term, large contiguous
areas of murrelet and northern spotted owl nesting habitat.
In the HLB, the BWE Project proposes thinning and
regeneration harvest. This harvest was authorized in part to
meet the ASQ. Some of this harvest will take place in
suitable murrelet habitat within the HLB, but BLM indicates
that it will assess an analysis area and apply Option One in
the Murrelet Management Direction when doing so. BLM
will not harvest in areas that have been previously surveyed
as occupied; instead, it will “assume[] that occupied sites
continue to be occupied and [will] not re-survey[] those
areas.”
In other words, murrelet survey protocols under Option
One of the Murrelet Management Direction will be
conducted prior to the removal of trees with murrelet nesting
platforms or the direct modification of murrelet nesting
habitat. If the surveys indicate occupancy, the stand will be
delineated as occupied per the RMP, and no treatments will
occur in the occupied stand or within a 300-foot buffer.
However, BLM will not assess an analysis area or apply
Option One prior to thinning in non-habitat adjacent to
existing nesting habitat or occupied sites. The BWE Project
thus does not incorporate a 300-foot buffer around all
occupied sites.
The number of acres to be harvested or thinned adjacent
to murrelet habitat and occupied sites is substantial. Indeed,
if a 300-foot buffer were applied around all occupied sites,
many of the LSR units in the BWE Project would be

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

27

eliminated from consideration. And some of the harvesting
within the HLB also occurs within 300 feet of occupied,
protected habitat.
To mitigate impacts, the BWE Project includes project
design features (PDFs) that will help to protect murrelets
from edge effects and disturbances, such as seasonal and
timing restrictions during murrelet breeding season and
smaller, voluntary buffers not required by the Murrelet
Management Direction.
It bears noting that the parties frame the BWE Project in
starkly different terms. According to BLM, the thinning in
the LSRs will ultimately benefit the murrelet because it will,
in the long term, result in the creation of diverse forests that
support murrelet nesting. From the Plaintiffs’ perspective,
the BWE Project is a thinly veiled attempt to maximize
timber production and circumvent murrelet protections.
2. ESA Consultation
a. BLM Biological Assessment
As part of the ESA consultation process, BLM drafted a
BA for the BWE Project. Again, BLM made clear that
(1) “all suitable habitat within the HLB is in the process of
being surveyed”; (2) it was not proposing thinning within the
LSR “in stands with suitable murrelet habitat or in stands
delineated as occupied habitat” but (3) that it would propose
thinning adjacent to such stands.
The BA drew a distinction between the RMP’s surveying
and buffering requirements and the broader concept of
alterations to adjacent stands that could possibly harm
murrelets through edge effects. Specifically, the BA
indicated that BLM interpreted the Murrelet Management
Direction to be triggered only by activity that would directly

28

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

modify nesting habitat or remove nesting structure.
However, BLM used a broader definition including edge
effects flowing from actions in adjacent stands when it
evaluated whether the proposed timber sales would cause an
adverse impact to the murrelet for purposes of section 7 of
the ESA. Thus, for the purpose of deciding whether there
would be an impact on murrelets and whether the PDFs
would mitigate that impact (but not for delineating when
surveys were required), BLM used a 300-foot edge effects
calculation. The BA expressly referenced and “tier[ed] to”
the interpretive memoranda between FWS and BLM. 9
In line with the other BWE Project documents, the BA
indicated that BLM would not conduct regeneration harvests
within occupied stands or within 300 feet of newly occupied
stands, although no such buffer would be required adjacent
to older occupied stands or suitable nesting habitat.
However, to minimize edge effects, BLM indicated that it
would apply the voluntary-buffer PDFs.
b. FWS Biological Opinion
FWS issued a BiOp stating that although the BWE
Project would adversely impact listed species, including
murrelets and northern spotted owls, the project was (1) not
likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the murrelet
or the northern spotted owl and (2) not likely to destroy or
Still elsewhere, the BA defined “modify habitat” as “to alter the
conditions around murrelet nesting habitat reducing the nesting function
of the habitat stand.” BLM indicated that it “refine[d] this definition into
direct and indirect effects.” With respect to the latter, BLM observed
that “[i]ndirect effects to adjacent stands can occur when the stand
surrounding the nesting platforms is altered, which may increase
predation and alter wind-firmness, temperature, and affect moss on
branches.”
9

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

29

adversely modify critical habitat for the murrelet or the
northern spotted owl. The BiOp incorporated BLM’s
understanding of the Murrelet Management Direction as
memorialized in the interpretive memoranda—that is, that
the requirement to assess an analysis area and possibly
implement Option One was not triggered by actions merely
adjacent to nesting habitat or occupied stands.
The BWE Project BiOp defined “[m]odify or
treat/maintain habitat” as “to alter the conditions around
murrelet nesting habitat reducing the nesting function of the
habitat stand,” but noted that BLM had refined this definition
based on “direct and indirect effects to habitat.” See supra
n.9. The BWE Project BiOp acknowledged that some of the
“assumptions and terminology” in the earlier BiOp for the
RMP would be “applied differently within the [BWE
Project].” Specifically, “[t]he proposed action [would] not
apply 300-foot buffers to occupied sites in HLB known to
occur prior to 2016.” Instead, BLM would voluntarily apply
smaller PDF buffers based on the age and makeup of the
harvest unit. FWS followed BLM’s methodology and
divided modifications into “indirect” and “direct” effects.
FWS acknowledged that the proposed actions could lead to
increased edge effects that would be harmful for the
murrelet, partially due to the lack of required buffers. But it
concluded that there would be beneficial long-term effects
through the development of stagnated adjacent stands into
suitable nesting habitat.
3. EA for the BWE Project
BLM produced an EA for the BWE Project that tiered to
the EIS for the RMP. It analyzed a variety of alternatives,
including the alternative ultimately chosen, which included
road construction not included in the other alternatives. In

30

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

general, the EA discussed the contours of the BWE Project,
described which areas would be thinned and harvested, and
comprehensively addressed the impacts on northern spotted
owls.
In an appendix to the EA, BLM addressed a number of
issues that it concluded were not necessary to analyze in
detail. This is where we find the primary analysis of the
impact of the BWE Project on marbled murrelets.
First, BLM indicated in the appendix that it was not
required to address in detail the issue of how “the proposed
management activities” would “affect marbled murrelet
nesting habitat and/or marbled murrelet nesting structures”
going forward. It reasoned that a detailed analysis was not
necessary because it was not relevant to the “Purpose and
Need” of the BWE Project and because the impacts would
be the same as those addressed in the EIS prepared for the
RMP. BLM reasoned that the analysis it conducted with
respect to the impacts on spotted owls applied largely to
murrelets, so it is likely that murrelets would benefit.
Additionally, negative impacts would be minimal because of
the PDFs it was applying, including buffers. It also
explained that impacts would be minimal in the HLB
because, where required, it was surveying for murrelets
under Option One.
Second, BLM indicated that it was not required to
analyze in detail the impacts of “direct vegetation
modification activities” on marbled murrelet occupied sites
because that issue was already analyzed in the EIS prepared
for the RMP. Additionally, no harvest was proposed within
any occupied murrelet sites, and surveys were being
conducted in the HLB when logging was conducted in units
that qualified as suitable, but unoccupied, nesting habitat.

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

31

BLM did not re-survey the occupied sites because it assumed
that they remained occupied.
Third, BLM indicated that it was not required to analyze
in detail the question of how activities in adjacent stands
would indirectly impact murrelet occupied sites and suitable
nesting habitat. BLM admitted that although newly
identified occupied murrelet sites would be designated and
buffered per Option One, harvest activities would occur
directly adjacent to stands that were designated as occupied
at the time the RMP was issued and in unoccupied suitable
nesting habitat.
BLM ultimately concluded that, for several reasons, it
was not required to analyze edge effects in detail. It
reasoned that the BWE Project was within the scope of the
RMP EIS already prepared and there would be no significant
impacts beyond that.
BLM also pointed to its
correspondence with FWS in the interpretive memoranda,
which indicated that even if logging occurred within 300 feet
of occupied sites without surveying, there would be no
jeopardy to the continued existence to the murrelet—and, in
fact, implementation of the RMP would still result in an
increased murrelet population. Moreover, BLM reasoned
that the science around edge effects did not show a
consistently strong impact to murrelets. Finally, BLM
further noted that it was applying voluntary buffers and other
PDFs to minimize edge effects “unless protocol surveys
determine that the area is not occupied or if a biologist
determines through field review that” edge effects would be
unlikely due to forest structure.
4. FONSI
Finally, BLM issued a FONSI for the BWE Project,
which incorporated the EA by reference. The FONSI

32

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

indicated that “there would not be a significant impact on the
quality of the human environment from the no action
alternative or the implementation of either of the action
alternatives.” It also concluded that an EIS was not required
and that “the effects of the proposed activities would be in
conformance with the 2016 [RMP].” The FONSI itself did
not mention murrelets, but an appendix thereto contained
responses to questions about the project’s impacts on
murrelets—some of which were filed by the Plaintiffs. In
large part, BLM’s responses involved citations to the EA.
II. Procedural History
The Plaintiffs filed the operative First Amended
Complaint against BLM on December 5, 2023. The First
Amended Complaint challenged the approval of the BWE
Project as well as the issuance of the EA and FONSI under
NEPA and FLPMA.
The parties filed cross-motions for summary judgment.
The Plaintiffs argued, inter alia, that the BWE Project does
not adhere to the Murrelet Management Direction because
BLM refused to buffer occupied sites designated prior to the
issuance of the RMP and because BLM failed to survey for
marbled murrelets. According to the Plaintiffs, BLM’s
interpretation of “modifying nesting habitat” runs counter to
the language of the RMP, BLM’s own contemporaneous
understanding, and the understanding of FWS. The
Plaintiffs further argued that they were entitled to summary
judgment because BLM violated NEPA by not preparing an
EIS or taking a hard look at the effects of the BWE Project
on marbled murrelets.
In its cross-motion, BLM admitted that the BWE Project
provided for timber harvest within 300 feet of sites known
to be occupied but argued that the buffering responsibilities

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

33

under the Murrelet Management Direction apply only to
newly discovered sites. As in the BWE Project documents
and the interpretive memoranda, it interpreted “modifying
nesting habitat” as applying only to actions that directly
modify suitable nesting habitat, such as the logging of
nesting habitat itself. BLM also argued that it had satisfied
NEPA because the EA for the BWE Project was tiered to the
RMP and because it took a hard look at impacts to murrelets.
After a hearing, the district court granted BLM’s crossmotion for summary judgment and denied the Plaintiffs’
motion. First, the district court rejected the claim that BLM
violated FLPMA because the BWE Project did not conform
to the RMP. It reasoned that “BLM’s interpretation of
‘modifying nesting habitat’ is, at worst, a reasonable
interpretation of an ambiguous term” and thus entitled to
deference under the framework of Kisor v. Wilkie, 588 U.S.
558 (2019).
It further found that, under BLM’s
interpretation of the Murrelet Management Direction, the
BWE Project did not violate the RMP because the BWE
Project did not involve any actions “modifying nesting
habitat or removing nesting structure,” so additional
protective steps, like Option One, need not be taken.
Second, the district court also rejected the Plaintiffs’
NEPA claims. As relevant here, it reasoned that the decision
not to prepare an EIS was reasonable because the BWE
Project was consistent with, and tiered to, the RMP.
Likewise, BLM took the requisite “hard look” at the
environmental impacts of the BWE Project and did not
ignore edge effects.
The district court entered judgment on July 3, 2024, and
the Plaintiffs timely appealed.

34

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
Because this case involves purported violations of NEPA
and FLPMA, the district court had original jurisdiction
pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331.
We have appellate
jurisdiction—including over the denial of the Plaintiffs’
motion for summary judgment—pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 1291. See McGregor v. Nat’l R.R. Passenger Corp., 187
F.3d 1113, 1114 (9th Cir. 1999).
“We review de novo a district court’s grant or denial of
summary judgment.” Siino v. Foresters Life Ins. & Annuity
Co., 133 F.4th 936, 943 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting Botosan v.
Paul McNally Realty, 216 F.3d 827, 830 (9th Cir. 2000)).
“Thus, on appellate review, we employ the same standard
used by the trial court under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
56(c).” Id. (quoting Animal Legal Def. Fund v. U.S. FDA,
836 F.3d 987, 988 (9th Cir. 2016) (en banc) (per curiam)).
“Under that standard, ‘[s]ummary judgment is appropriate
only if, taking the evidence and all reasonable inferences
drawn therefrom in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party, there are no genuine issues of material fact
and the moving party is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law.’” Id. (alteration in original) (quoting Furnace v.
Sullivan, 705 F.3d 1021, 1026 (9th Cir. 2013)).
“We review the BLM’s compliance with FLPMA and
NEPA de novo.” Brong, 492 F.3d at 1124. “Decisions that
allegedly violate NEPA and FLPMA are reviewed under the
Administrative Procedure Act (‘APA’), which ‘dictates that
we should “hold unlawful and set aside any agency
action . . . [that is] arbitrary, capricious, an abuse of
discretion, or otherwise not in accordance with law.”’” Id.
at 1124–25 (alterations in original) (quoting Nat. Res. Def.
Council v. Nat’l Marine Fisheries Serv., 421 F.3d 872, 877

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

35

(9th Cir. 2005)). Although the scope of this review is
“narrow and a court is not to substitute its judgment for that
of the agency,” the agency must nevertheless “examine the
relevant data and articulate a satisfactory explanation for its
action.” All. for the Wild Rockies, 907 F.3d at 1112 (first
quoting Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of the U.S., Inc. v. State
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983); then
quoting Turtle Island Restoration Network v. U.S. Dep’t of
Com., 878 F.3d 725, 732 (9th Cir. 2017)).
“We will strike down an agency action as arbitrary and
capricious ‘if the agency has relied on factors which
Congress has not intended it to consider, entirely failed to
consider an important aspect of the problem, offered an
explanation for its decision that runs counter to the evidence
before the agency, or if the agency’s decision is so
implausible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in
view or the product of agency expertise.’” Id. (quoting
Turtle Island, 878 F.3d at 732–33).
Additionally,
“‘[u]nexplained inconsistency’ between agency actions is ‘a
reason for holding an interpretation to be an arbitrary and
capricious change.’” Mont. Wildlife Fed’n, 127 F.4th at 36
(quoting Nat’l Cable & Telecomms. Ass’n v. Brand X
Internet Servs., 545 U.S. 967, 981 (2005)).
ANALYSIS
This case presents two main questions: (1) whether the
contours of the BWE Project, including its authorization of
logging in stands adjacent to murrelet nesting habitat and
occupied stands, conforms to the terms of the RMP, and
(2) whether BLM took the “hard look” required by NEPA
when it prepared the BWE Project EA. For the reasons given
below, the answer to both questions is “yes,” and we affirm.

36

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

I. Whether the BWE Project Violates the RMP
The crux of the Plaintiffs’ first claim is that the BWE
Project fails to conform to the RMP (and thus violates
FLPMA, see Brong, 492 F.3d at 1125). According to the
Plaintiffs, logging in stands adjacent to suitable marbled
murrelet habitat—including logging in stands adjacent to
occupied habitat—constitutes “modifying nesting habitat,”
thus triggering the requirements of the Murrelet
Management Direction to survey for murrelets and
implement Option One. The Plaintiffs insist that because the
BWE Project permits thinning in such adjacent stands
without calling for application of the Murrelet Management
Direction’s protective measures, the BWE Project violates
the RMP. 10
In contrast, BLM insists that the BWE Project fully
comports with the RMP because logging in adjacent stands
is not “modifying nesting habitat” that would trigger the
Murrelet Management Direction. BLM insists that only
“direct alteration of nesting habitat” counts as “modifying
nesting habitat,” and thus the obligations to assess the
analysis area and survey for murrelets “is not triggered by
actions outside of nesting habitat unless the action would
remove nesting structure.” BLM does admit that, under the
In their reply brief, the Plaintiffs shift position and argue that the BWE
Project authorizes thinning within murrelet nesting habitat because
“nesting habitat” should be broadly interpreted to encompass younger
stands. We conclude that this argument is forfeited because it was raised
neither in the opening brief nor before the district court. See Lui v.
DeJoy, 129 F.4th 770, 780 (9th Cir. 2025). Contrary to the Plaintiffs’
argument, this represents a substantial shift in position and
fundamentally alters the contours of our analysis; it is not simply a
response to an argument made by BLM. We thus decline to reach it and
will consider only the Plaintiffs’ original argument.
10

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

37

BWE Project, it is directly modifying murrelet habitat in the
HLB but insists that it is surveying and buffering as required
in that circumstance.
Our analysis proceeds in two steps. First, we must (A)
interpret the RMP to determine when the protective
requirements of the Murrelet Management Direction must be
carried out. See Brong, 492 F.3d at 1125 (“Because the [land
use plan] embodies the substantive management directives
with which the BLM must comply under FLPMA, our
review must start with, and remain anchored in, an
understanding of the [land use plan].”). Then we must (B)
determine whether, under the proper interpretation, the BWE
Project violates the requirements of the RMP. See id. at
1127–32.
A. Interpreting the RMP
In interpreting the RMP, the district court turned to the
framework for deference provided by Kisor v. Wilkie, 588
U.S. 558 (2019). On appeal, the Plaintiffs do the same. We
agree that Kisor provides the applicable framework for when
we can defer to an agency’s construction of a land use plan
such as a resource management plan, so we analyze the RMP
under its strictures. 11
We have not always applied this precise framework for agency
deference in the context of land use plans. For example, in Brong, we
explained that “[t]hough we normally afford deference to an
administrative agency’s interpretation of its own regulations, ‘an
agency’s interpretation “does not control, where . . . it is plainly
inconsistent with the regulation at issue.”’” 492 F.3d at 1125 (omission
in original) (quoting Native Ecosystems Council v. USFS, 418 F.3d 953,
960 (9th Cir. 2005)). But this articulation of agency deference, which is
derived from the Supreme Court’s early decision in Bowles v. Seminole
Rock & Sand Co., 325 U.S. 410, 414 (1945), is imprecise after Kisor.
11

38

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

In Kisor, the Supreme Court articulated the
circumstances in which a court may defer to an
administrative agency’s interpretation of its regulation. 12
Often, we do not need to resort to deference to interpret a
regulation. “‘If [a] regulation is unambiguous and “there is
only one reasonable construction of [the] regulation,” then
we’ simply apply that meaning.” United States v. Cal. Stem
Cell Treatment Ctr., Inc., 117 F.4th 1213, 1222 (9th Cir.
2024) (alterations in original) (quoting Mountain Cmtys. for
Fire Safety v. Elliott, 25 F.4th 667, 675 (9th Cir. 2022)). “If
the text seems to have more than one plausible meaning, then
we must try to resolve the ambiguity by ‘carefully
consider[ing] the text, structure, history, and purpose of [the]
regulation.’” Id. (alterations in original) (quoting Kisor, 588
U.S. at 575). “If, after ‘exhaust[ing] all the “traditional
tools” of construction,’ we determine that ‘the interpretive
question still has no single right answer,’ then we consider
whether the agency’s interpretation is reasonable, and, if so,
See 588 U.S. at 568, 574; see also United States v. Castillo, 69 F.4th 648,
655–56 (9th Cir. 2023).
To be sure, Kisor was simply a refinement of an existing deference
doctrine, commonly called Auer deference or Seminole Rock deference,
which governed when courts defer to agency interpretations of their own
regulations. See 588 U.S. at 563 (discussing Auer v. Robbins, 519 U.S.
452 (1997), and Seminole Rock & Sand Co., 325 U.S. 410 (1945)). For
the sake of simplicity, and consistent with current practice, see, e.g.,
United States v. Trumbull, 114 F.4th 1114, 1117 (9th Cir. 2024), we refer
to the currently governing scheme as “Kisor deference.”
12

We note also that “[t]he Supreme Court’s decision in Loper Bright
Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369 (2024), overruling Chevron,
U.S.A., Inc. v. Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837
(1984), ‘did not call Kisor into question . . ., so we continue to apply it.’”
United States v. Yafa, 136 F.4th 1194, 1197 n.4 (9th Cir. 2025) (omission
in original) (quoting Trumbull, 114 F.4th at 1118 n.2).

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

39

whether it is entitled to deference . . . .” Id. (alteration in
original) (quoting Kisor, 588 U.S. at 575–76).
In sum, for us to defer to an agency’s interpretation of its
own regulation, three criteria must be met: “(1) the
regulation is ‘genuinely ambiguous,’ (2) the interpretation is
‘reasonable,’ and (3) the interpretation is entitled to
‘controlling weight.’” United States v. Yafa, 136 F.4th 1194,
1197 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting Kisor, 588 U.S. at 574–79).
Applying this framework, we agree that this is one of the
circumstances in which we defer to the agency’s
construction of its own regulation.
1. Ambiguity
We begin with ambiguity. For an agency interpretation
to be entitled to deference, the regulation at issue must be
“genuinely ambiguous.” Kisor, 588 U.S. at 574. “‘[B]efore
concluding that a rule is genuinely ambiguous, a court must
exhaust all the “traditional tools” of construction.’” United
States v. Castillo, 69 F.4th 648, 655 (9th Cir. 2023) (quoting
Kisor, 588 U.S. at 575).
The Murrelet Management Direction provides that
“[b]efore modifying nesting habitat or removing nesting
structure in . . . all land use allocations within 35 miles of the
Pacific Coast,” BLM is required to “assess the analysis area
for marbled murrelet nesting structure” and, if enough
structures are present, implement protective measures,
including Option One. Everyone agrees that this case turns
on the meaning of “modifying nesting habitat,” which is not
expressly defined in the RMP.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, both parties argue that the
Murrelet Management Direction is unambiguous and
supports only their reading.
According to BLM,

40

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

“‘modifying nesting habitat’ refers to direct alteration of
nesting habitat; that is, habitat-altering activities occurring
within a polygon that BLM identifies as marbled murrelet
habitat.” Put differently, BLM views direct alterations to
suitable nesting habitat, including occupied sites, to be the
trigger that activates the rest of the protective measures in
the Murrelet Management Direction.
In contrast, the Plaintiffs take a much more expansive
view of “modifying nesting habitat.” According to the
Plaintiffs, “modifying nesting habitat” includes activities
that take place outside the borders of suitable nesting habitat
that would have indirect impacts—through edge effects—on
the suitable nesting habitat. The Plaintiffs insist that this
definition of “modifying nesting habitat” flows from the
structure of the Murrelet Management Direction and its
delineation of the relevant “analysis area.”
We conclude that the Murrelet Management Direction is
“genuinely ambiguous” on this point. See Kisor, 588 U.S. at
574. This is not a scenario where “there is only one
reasonable construction of a regulation.” Id. at 575. After
considering the “text, structure, history, and purpose,” id., of
the RMP—all of the tools in our interpretive toolbox—we
conclude that the Murrelet Management Direction is
susceptible to more than one reasonable reading.
Beginning with the text, the RMP does not expressly
explain whether “modifying nesting habitat” encompasses
only direct alterations of suitable nesting habitat—such as
thinning of nesting habitat itself—or whether it sweeps more
broadly to encompass indirect modifications flowing from
projects taking place nearby. Despite how the Plaintiffs
view it, we do not see the portion of the Murrelet
Management Direction explaining the contours of the

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

41

“analysis area” to be decisive on this point. It is unclear from
the text alone whether the “analysis area” is meant to
elucidate the scope of “modifying nesting habitat.”
Additionally, there is no mention of “adjacent stands” in the
Murrelet Management Direction itself even though,
elsewhere in the RMP, BLM mentioned when “adjacent
stands” should be considered. And although the inclusion of
the 300-foot buffer around occupied sites in the Murrelet
Management Direction does indicate that BLM considered
edge effect impacts to be a relevant concern, that does not
answer the question of whether the term “modifying” was
meant to encompass indirect edge effects flowing from
thinning activities in adjacent stands.
Shifting our focus to the RMP as a whole, we still find
mixed signals about how far “modifying nesting habitat”
extends. There are portions of the RMP favoring BLM’s
narrow interpretation. That reading facilitates thinning in
non-habitat adjacent to habitat, which accords with the
management objectives for the LSR—namely, that BLM
“[p]romote the development of nesting habitat for the
marbled murrelet in stands that do not currently meet nesting
habitat criteria.” It likewise accords with the LSR
management directions to “apply silvicultural treatments to
speed the development of northern spotted owl nestingroosting habitat” and to “utilize integrated vegetation
management,” including “thinning,” to promote the
development of structurally complex forest and restore
species habitat.
Moreover, reading the protective measures of the
Murrelet Management Direction to apply only when nesting
structures are removed or when nesting habitat itself is
directly modified tracks the management objectives and
directions for the HLB. The focus of the HLB is on

42

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

generating a sustained yield in timber—an RMP goal that
must be considered alongside the goal of protecting
murrelets. In modeling the ASQ from the HLB, although
BLM factored in a 300-foot buffer around newly discovered
occupied murrelet sites, it, as FWS later acknowledged,
“assum[ed] that harvest would occur up to the edge of
occupied sites identified under the Northwest Forest Plan.”
That assumption accords with a narrow interpretation of the
Murrelet Management Direction because such an
assumption would be invalid if BLM were required to assess
an analysis area and survey for murrelets anytime it
proposed logging adjacent to an occupied site. Indeed, FWS
admitted in the interpretive memoranda that the ASQ
modeling was consistent with a narrower interpretation of
“modifying nesting habitat.”
On the other hand, certain parts of the RMP point to a
broader interpretation of “modifying nesting habitat”—one
more protective of murrelets. For instance, FWS’s BiOp for
the RMP contemporaneously defined “modifying nesting
structure” in the context of the Murrelet Management
Direction broadly to encompass even indirect impacts from
edge effects. Additionally, the RMP was designed to be
more protective of murrelets than the Northwest Forest Plan,
which protected only isolated fragments of habitat.
Moreover, there are indications that, in the RMP, expansive
surveying was expected. The structure of the RMP thus does
not resolve the interpretive quandary.
History, too, points in multiple directions. A review of
the record reveals that the proper interpretation of this
provision engendered disagreement even between federal
agencies. As detailed above, FWS originally interpreted
“modifying nesting habitat” to include modifications
flowing from edge effects because, in part, it viewed the 300-

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

43

foot buffer to expand outwards from sites previously
designated as occupied under the Northwest Forest Plan.
Although FWS later hewed to BLM’s interpretation and
conducted a fresh jeopardy analysis, the initial disagreement
about the meaning of the phrase—as demonstrated in the
agencies’ interpretive memoranda—is yet another indication
of ambiguity.
Finally, we look to the purpose of the Murrelet
Management Direction. Again, we discern no clear guiding
light. To be sure, the provision—and a good portion of the
RMP in general—was designed to help protect habitat for
the marbled murrelet and contribute to the recovery and
growth of that species. But a land use plan, such as the RMP,
is an exercise in balancing various goals. Those goals
include ecological and environmental goals, such as helping
to ensure the recovery of the marbled murrelet, as well as
commercial and productivity goals—including the
requirement to consistently produce timber that would meet
the demands of the O&C Act. We thus do not see purpose
as dissolving the ambiguity that hangs over the Murrelet
Management Direction and the term “modifying nesting
habitat” specifically.
We are unpersuaded by the Plaintiffs’ arguments as to
why the Murrelet Management Direction is unambiguous.
We disagree with their position that the plain language and
purpose of the Murrelet Management Direction indicates
only one permissible reading. Additionally, the fact that
FWS interpreted the Murrelet Management Direction
broadly does not indicate that the RMP is unambiguous in
the manner that the Plaintiffs insist—although it does deal a
sharp blow to BLM’s position that the Murrelet Management
Direction unambiguously requires a narrow reading.

44

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

Their remaining arguments also fail. For example, they
argue that there are indications in the record that BLM itself
has applied a broader definition of “modify habitat” for
purposes of biological assessments. But, as BLM explains,
a BA aims to assess the distinct question of whether a listed
species would be “adversely affected” by a project for
purposes of the ESA; it does not purport to set management
objectives for public lands as a resource management plan
does. Indeed, BLM specifically contemplated that a broader
view encompassing edge effects would apply for purposes
of FWS consultation but not for purposes of interpreting the
Murrelet Management Direction. And BLM makes clear
elsewhere that for purposes of interpreting the RMP
language, the narrower understanding governs.
In sum, after “‘exhaust[ing] all the “traditional tools” of
construction,’” Castillo, 69 F.4th at 655 (alteration in
original) (quoting Kisor, 588 U.S. at 575), we are left with
the conviction that the Murrelet Management Direction is
genuinely ambiguous.
2. Reasonableness
Even if a regulation is genuinely ambiguous, “the
agency’s reading must still be ‘reasonable’” for it to be
entitled to deference. Kisor, 588 U.S. at 575 (quoting
Thomas Jefferson Univ. v. Shalala, 512 U.S. 504, 515
(1994). “In other words, it must come within the zone of
ambiguity the court has identified after employing all its
interpretive tools.” Id. at 576. In conducting this step of the
analysis, the same considerations that came into play at the
first stage of the inquiry—text, structure, history, and
purpose—remain relevant. See id.
We find BLM’s narrower interpretation to be within the
permissible zone of ambiguity. Although the reasonableness

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

45

analysis is not coextensive with the ambiguity analysis, see
id., many of the circumstances indicating that the Murrelet
Management Direction is ambiguous also lead us to
conclude that BLM’s interpretation is reasonable. In other
words, the tools in our interpretive toolkit led us to conclude
that “modifying nesting habitat” could be read narrowly or
broadly. It follows for many of those same reasons that
BLM’s narrow reading is reasonable.
The Plaintiffs raise several arguments as to why BLM’s
interpretation is unreasonable. We are unpersuaded. First,
the Plaintiffs insist that this interpretation results in
surplusage because, under BLM’s view, “modifying nesting
habitat” and “removing nesting structure” mean the same
thing. Not so. Even if “modifying nesting habitat” is
restricted to direct modifications, it would still maintain a
unique meaning because it would be possible to “modify[]
nesting habitat” without removing a nesting structure.
Likewise, it would be possible to “remov[e] nesting
structure” without modifying suitable habitat.
Second, the Plaintiffs suggest that BLM’s interpretation
essentially results in the enactment of an alternative that was
rejected during the NEPA analysis. But the key difference
between the RMP and Alternative C is that, under
Alternative C, when surveying under Option One, BLM
would need to survey only “in stands 120 years old or older”
rather than in all land use allocations. This is a difference in
the scope of the surveys, not how the survey requirement is
triggered. Alternative C also had a larger HLB, which is not
implicated by BLM’s interpretation, and it also
contemplated that BLM could resurvey sites and remove
them from the LSR if they were found to be unoccupied. It
is hard to see how BLM’s interpretation could result in the
sub silentio adoption of Alternative C.

46

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

Third, the Plaintiffs argue that BLM’s reading is
impermissible because, as applied, it results in the taking of
more murrelets than the RMP initially intended. But
although the RMP does include broad language about
protecting occupied sites, a close reading of the portions
pointed to by the Plaintiffs shows that it did not anticipate
that there would be no impact to murrelets whatsoever;
rather, it anticipated that there would be no loss of occupied
sites within 35 miles of the coast. That is consistent with
BLM’s interpretation. 13
Fourth, the Plaintiffs broadly suggest that BLM’s
reading is unreasonable because it results in outcomes that
are insufficiently protective of murrelets. Again, we are
unpersuaded. The RMP does not protect murrelets at all
costs; rather, the protections given the murrelet must be
understood in the context of the RMP’s multi-use nature.
Given this reality, we cannot say that the lesser protections
given to murrelets under BLM’s interpretation makes that
interpretation unreasonable.
In sum, then, we conclude that BLM’s narrow
interpretation of the “modifying nesting habitat” language in
the Murrelet Management Provision is reasonable.
3. Entitled to Deference
The fact that BLM has advanced a reasonable
interpretation of an ambiguous provision still does not end
the inquiry. We will defer to BLM’s interpretation of the
13
The Plaintiffs point out that the BiOp for the RMP indicates that timber
harvest will not negatively impact murrelets within 35 miles of the coast.
True enough. But the BiOp was prepared by FWS pursuant to their
original interpretation of the Murrelet Management Direction. When
FWS re-analyzed the impacts to murrelets under BLM’s interpretation,
it did identify that there could be impacts to murrelets.

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

47

RMP only if it is “entitled to ‘controlling weight.’” Yafa,
136 F.4th at 1197 (quoting Kisor, 588 U.S. at 576). At this
step of the Kisor analysis, we consider “the character and
context” of the agency’s interpretation. Id. at 1199. “While
this inquiry ‘does not reduce to any exhaustive test,’ Kisor
instructs courts to consider whether the interpretation
(1) constitutes the agency’s ‘official position, rather than any
more ad hoc statement not reflecting the agency’s views,’
(2) implicates the agency’s ‘substantive expertise,’ and
(3) reflects the agency’s ‘fair and considered judgment.’”
Id. (quoting Kisor, 588 U.S. at 576–79). These three
considerations are “‘especially important markers for
identifying’ when deference is appropriate.” United States
v. Trumbull, 114 F.4th 1114, 1120 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting
Kisor, 588 U.S. at 576–77).
The district court pretermitted its analysis and did not
reach this portion of the Kisor test, at least not explicitly.
That was improper. As the Supreme Court explained in
Kisor, “not all reasonable agency constructions of . . .
ambiguous rules are entitled to deference.” 588 U.S. at 573.
Before deferring to BLM’s interpretation of the Murrelet
Management Direction, the district court should have
analyzed whether “the character and context of the agency
interpretation entitles it to controlling weight.” Id. at 576.
However, given that we are reviewing de novo and can
affirm the grant of summary judgment for any reason
supported by the record, see Brown v. Arizona, 82 F.4th 863,
874 (9th Cir. 2023) (en banc), we may overlook the truncated
nature of the district court’s analysis and reach the third step
of the Kisor framework ourselves. 14 See Omnicare, Inc. v.
Framed differently, under the circumstances of this case, our de novo
review renders the district court’s analytical misstep harmless. See
14

48

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

UnitedHealth Grp., Inc., 629 F.3d 697, 717 (7th Cir. 2011)
(“If the district court did misstep . . ., our de novo review
should go far toward rectifying any errors.”); see also
Deltoro-Aguilera v. United States, 625 F.3d 434, 438 (8th
Cir. 2010) (“Because our review is de novo, it is of no
moment that we analyze [the] claim without the benefit of
full consideration by the court below.”). At bottom, the
Kisor analysis seeks to answer a question of law—
interpretation. And we are convinced that a remand to the
district court to analyze this issue would be unnecessary and
formalistic.
Undertaking the analysis ourselves, we have little
difficulty in concluding that the character and context of
BLM’s interpretation indicates that it is entitled to deference.
Indeed, all three of the “especially important markers” that
an agency’s interpretation is entitled to controlling weight
are present here. Trumbull, 114 F.4th at 1120 (quoting
Kisor, 588 U.S. at 576).
First, BLM’s interpretation represents its official
position. The interpretation appears in public-facing
documents related to the BWE Project—namely, the BWE
Project BA and the BWE Project BiOp, as well as (at least
implicitly) in the BWE Project EA. As explained above, the
position is also, to at least some extent, baked into the
structure of the RMP. Finally, the agency took this position
in its interpretive memoranda that it exchanged with FWS,
Ratanasen v. Cal. Dep’t of Health Servs., 11 F.3d 1467, 1469 (9th Cir.
1993); cf. Singh v. Holder, 591 F.3d 1190, 1199 (9th Cir. 2010) (noting
that any legal error by an immigration judge was rendered harmless by
de novo review by the board of immigration appeals); see also Maydak
v. SeaFirst, No. 96-35660, 108 F.3d 338, 1997 WL 75685, at *2 n.2 (9th
Cir. Feb. 20, 1997) (unpublished).

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

49

which are referenced in the BWE Project documents.
Considering these together, we are satisfied that the
interpretation by BLM is the agency’s “‘authoritative’”
position rather than an “ad hoc statement not reflecting the
agency’s views.” Kisor, 588 U.S. at 577 (quoting United
States v. Mead Corp., 533 U.S. 218, 257–59, 258 n.6 (2001)
(Scalia, J., dissenting)). 15
Second, BLM’s interpretation depends on its substantive
expertise. See id. at 577–78. As we explained at the outset,
a resource management plan is prepared by BLM and
balances multiple interests, including wildlife conservation.
See Norton, 542 U.S. at 58–60; Brong, 492 F.3d at 1125. It
is hard to conceive of a regulatory document that more
clearly is derived from an agency’s substantive expertise. It
is clear beyond peradventure that Congress would delegate
interpretive power to BLM in this context. See Kisor, 588
U.S. at 578.
The Plaintiffs suggest that it is FWS, not BLM, that has
primary substantive expertise because this case involves
murrelets. The Plaintiffs are mistaken. While FWS may
indeed be the expert on murrelet conservation and what is
necessary for murrelet recovery, this case involves the
interpretation of a land use plan that seeks to balance many
different uses, including murrelet conservation. This case
does not fall outside the ambit of BLM’s expertise simply
because the portion of the RMP at issue involves an
endangered species that is also regulated by FWS.
Third, BLM’s interpretation represents its fair,
considered judgment. See id. at 579. This is not a situation
In their appellate briefing, the Plaintiffs do not contest that the
interpretation represents BLM’s official position.
15

50

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

where the agency presents a “‘post hoc rationalizatio[n]
advanced’ to ‘defend past agency action against attack.’” Id.
(alteration in original) (quoting Christopher v. SmithKline
Beecham Corp., 567 U.S. 142, 155 (2012)). To a meaningful
degree, BLM’s interpretation is built into the structure of the
RMP. And long before approval of the BWE Project, BLM
made its interpretation clear in the memoranda between it
and FWS. Nor is this a case where an agency provides an
interpretation conflicting with its own previous
interpretation. See id. Although BLM and FWS have
disagreed, BLM has not altered its position on what the
relevant language means.
The Plaintiffs argue that BLM’s interpretation results in
undue surprise because, until this litigation, it was unaware
that BLM disagreed with FWS’s interpretation of the
Murrelet Management Direction. We disagree. To be sure,
that an agency’s interpretation creates unfair surprise can be
a reason not to defer. See id. But that general principle is
inapplicable here. A close inspection of the RMP and the
BiOp would have revealed the interpretive disagreement
lurking beneath the surface. Moreover, the “unfair surprise”
that the Plaintiffs point to is of a different nature than the
kind discussed in Kisor or its predecessors. See id. at 579
(discussing unfair surprise “to regulated parties”);
Christopher, 567 U.S. at 155–56 (declining to defer to an
interpretation that would provide “potentially massive”
retroactive liability). We are not convinced that the fact that
an interpretation is surprising to an interested party is a
reason to decline to defer—particularly when, as here, there
are numerous other indicia that the agency’s interpretation
constitutes its fair, considered judgment and that the
interpretation is entitled to controlling weight.

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

51

In sum, then, after undertaking the Kisor analysis, we
conclude that BLM’s narrow interpretation of “modifying
nesting habitat” in the Murrelet Management Direction is a
reasonable interpretation of a genuinely ambiguous term and
that this interpretation is entitled to controlling weight.
B. Application to the BWE Project
The question now becomes whether the BWE Project
conforms to the RMP, as properly understood. If not, we
must set aside the BWE Project. See Mont. Wildlife Fed’n,
127 F.4th at 42; Brong, 492 F.3d at 1132.
Once we view the Murrelet Management Direction
through the lens of BLM’s interpretation, we need not linger
long. The BWE Project fully conforms to the RMP. BLM
is required to assess an analysis area and, if applicable,
survey for murrelets if nesting structure would be removed
or nesting habitat would be thinned (or otherwise modified).
It is not required to assess an analysis area and survey when
it merely modifies non-habitat adjacent to existing habitat
and occupied sites.
The actions that the BWE Project authorizes in both the
LSR and HLB conform to this requirement. In the LSRs, no
thinning will occur within any existing nesting habitat (or
occupied sites). To be sure (and leaving aside the voluntary
PDF buffers which serve to mitigate some edge effects),
thinning will take place in stands adjacent to suitable habitat
and sites previously designated as occupied. But, as
explained, that is insufficient to trigger the obligation to
survey and buffer under the Murrelet Management Direction
because it does not constitute “modifying nesting habitat.”
In the HLB, where logging occurs in suitable murrelet
habitat, the required surveys are being conducted. And,

52

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

BLM is not proposing to log in any sites that have been
designated as occupied on the assumption that those sites
remain occupied. 16 There is thus no violation of the terms
of the Murrelet Management Direction by the thinning
authorized by the BWE Project.
The Plaintiffs suggest two other areas of conflict. First,
they contend that the BWE Project authorizes the “take” of
up to four murrelets, which they say is entirely at odds with
the RMP. As noted above, we do not agree. As understood
by BLM, the RMP required that there would be no loss of
occupied sites in the coastal region—not that there would be
no impact to murrelets whatsoever. That remains true under
the BWE Project.
Second, the Plaintiffs briefly assert that even if BLM’s
interpretation is entitled to deference, the BWE Project is
still at loggerheads with the RMP because the BWE Project
authorizes the removal of murrelet nesting structures for
purposes of road construction and yarding corridors.
According to the Plaintiffs, this removal of nesting structure
“triggers the murrelet management directions and requires
the implementation of one of the protective options.” In
The Plaintiffs repeatedly assail BLM for assuming occupancy of areas
previously designated as occupied as a means to bypass the strictures of
the Murrelet Management Direction. We are unconvinced. Such an
approach accords with the RMP and BLM’s interpretation. And we see
BLM’s practice of assuming occupancy not as a means of avoiding
surveying, but rather to delineate what sites are off-limits to harvesting.
Despite the Plaintiffs’ fervor in arguing this point, we do not think it is
of much importance in the overall scheme of the questions presented. In
the same vein, the Plaintiffs conceded below and here that the 300-foot
buffers contemplated in Option One do not necessarily apply to sites
designated as occupied under the Northwest Forest Plan. We agree,
although we note that is of limited utility in resolving this case.
16

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

53

response, BLM contends that roadbuilding falls within an
“exception” to Option One. The Plaintiffs disagree.
We decline to reach this argument. “[A]n appellate court
will not consider issues not properly raised before the district
court.” Smith v. Marsh, 194 F.3d 1045, 1052 (9th Cir. 1999);
see also In re Mercury Interactive Corp. Secs. Litig., 618
F.3d 988, 992 (9th Cir. 2010). This argument was not raised
in any developed manner in the Plaintiffs’ motion for
summary judgment. Tellingly, the district court did not pass
on it. And, indeed, on appeal, the Plaintiffs’ opening brief
never so much as mentions the relevant exception. We thus
deem this argument waived and will not reach it. 17 See In re
Mercury, 618 F.3d at 992 (“Although ‘no “bright line rule”
exists to determine whether a matter [h]as been properly
raised below,’ an issue will generally be deemed waived on
appeal if the argument was not ‘“raised sufficiently for the
trial court to rule on it.”’ ‘This principle accords to the
district court the opportunity to reconsider its rulings and
correct its errors.’” (citation omitted) (quoting Whittaker
Corp. v. Execuair Corp., 953 F.2d 510, 515 (9th Cir. 1992))).
Accordingly, the BWE Project is consistent with the
RMP. The approval of the BWE Project is thus not arbitrary
and capricious, and there was no violation of FLPMA. The
district court properly granted summary judgment to BLM
on the Plaintiffs’ FLPMA claims.

Even if the issue had been properly preserved, the Plaintiffs still fail to
grapple with whether, under the Kisor framework, BLM’s interpretation
of the exception to Option One represents a reasonable interpretation of
an ambiguous regulation and would be entitled to controlling weight.
17

54

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

II. NEPA Hard Look Claim
With the FLPMA claim resolved, we turned to the
Plaintiffs’ remaining claim—that BLM failed to take a “hard
look” at the environmental consequences of the BWE
Project as required by NEPA. As with the FLPMA claim,
“[w]e review the BLM’s compliance with NEPA under the
deferential ‘arbitrary and capricious’ standard of the
Administrative Procedure Act.”
Ctr. for Biological
Diversity v. U.S. Dep’t of the Interior, 623 F.3d 633, 641 (9th
Cir. 2010) (quoting 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A)).
A. Contours of the “Hard Look” Analysis
“We examine the EA with two purposes in mind: to
determine whether it has adequately considered and
elaborated the possible consequences of the proposed
agency action when concluding that it will have no
significant impact on the environment, and whether its
determination that no EIS is required is a reasonable
conclusion.” 350 Mont. v. Haaland, 50 F.4th 1254, 1265
(9th Cir. 2022) (quoting Ctr. for Biological Diversity v.
NHTSA, 538 F.3d 1172, 1215 (9th Cir. 2008)). “‘Federal
agencies must undertake a “full and fair” analysis of the
environmental impacts of their activities,’ and ‘NEPA
imposes procedural requirements designed to force agencies
to take a “hard look” at environmental consequences’ of
their proposed actions.” Id. (quoting League of Wilderness
Defs./Blue Mountains Biodiversity Project v. Connaughton,
752 F.3d 755, 762–63 (9th Cir. 2014)); see also Ctr. for
Biological Diversity, 623 F.3d at 641 (“Under NEPA, ‘we
must ensure that the agency has taken a “hard look” at the
environmental consequences of its proposed action. . . .
[W]e must defer to an agency’s decision that is “fully
informed and well-considered.”’” (alterations in original)

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

55

(quoting Blue Mountains Biodiversity Project v. Blackwood,
161 F.3d 1208, 1211 (9th Cir. 1998))).
“To satisfy the ‘hard look’ requirement, an agency must
provide ‘a reasonably thorough discussion of the significant
aspects of the probable environmental consequences.’” 350
Mont., 50 F.4th at 1265 (quoting NHTSA, 538 F.3d at 1194).
“In reviewing an agency’s decision not to prepare an EIS,
the arbitrary and capricious standard under the APA requires
this court to determine whether the agency has taken a hard
look at the consequences of its actions, based its decision on
a consideration of the relevant factors, and provided a
convincing statement of reasons to explain why a project’s
impacts are insignificant.” Id. (citation modified) (quoting
Barnes v. U.S. Dep’t of Transp., 655 F.3d 1124, 1132 (9th
Cir. 2011)). “The statement of reasons is crucial to
determining whether the agency took a hard look at the
potential environmental impact of a project.” NHTSA, 538
F.3d at 1220 (citation modified) (quoting Blackwood, 161
F.3d at 1212).
We find guidance in the Supreme Court’s recent decision
in Seven County Infrastructure Coalition, 605 U.S. ----, 145
S. Ct. 1497. The Supreme Court emphasized that in
determining whether a document “complied with NEPA, a
court should afford substantial deference to the agency.” Id.
at 1511–12. That includes deferring to the agency regarding
what level of detail is required, what alternatives are
feasible, and the scope of the environmental effects that the
NEPA document will address. See id. at 1512–13. That is
because “[w]hen assessing significant environmental effects
and feasible alternatives for purposes of NEPA, an agency
will invariably make a series of fact-dependent, contextspecific, and policy-laden choices about the depth and
breadth of its inquiry—and also about the length, content,

56

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

and level of detail of the resulting” NEPA documents. Id. at
1513. “Courts should afford substantial deference and
should not micromanage those agency choices so long as
they fall within a broad zone of reasonableness.” Id.
Accordingly, the role that the judicial branch plays in
policing NEPA compliance is “a limited one.” Id. at 1515
(quoting Vt. Yankee, 435 U.S. at 555). Although Seven
County Infrastructure Coalition involved a different NEPA
posture from the case before us—it arose in the context of
evaluating plaintiffs’ challenge to an EIS rather than an
EA—we find its teachings fully applicable here.
B. Application to the BWE Project EA
Keeping those principles in mind, we conclude that BLM
did not act arbitrarily or capriciously in preparing the EA and
FONSI for the BWE Project. BLM took the required “hard
look” at the BWE Project’s impacts on marbled murrelets.
In an appendix to the EA, BLM explained the possible
impacts of the project on murrelets, including how thinning
pursuant to the project could expose murrelets to possibly
deleterious edge effects. It concluded that the project was
likely to ultimately benefit the murrelet and that certain
aspects of it, such as the voluntary PDFs, would minimize
the costs of edge effects. It also noted that in its judgment,
“the science around edge effects does not show a consistent
edge effect.”
BLM concluded that it was not required to assess the
impacts to murrelets in more detail because, inter alia, the
possible impacts to murrelets had already been thoroughly
addressed in the EIS for the RMP—a document incorporated
by reference and to which the EA tiered. The EA also
incorporated by reference the extensive discussions in the

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

57

BWE Project BA and in the correspondence between FWS
and BLM.
This was sufficient for BLM to discharge its requirement
to take a “hard look” at the environmental impacts of the
BWE Project on murrelets. The EIS for the RMP already
addressed the possible impacts on murrelets at length.
Documents discussing the possible edge effects of logging
in stands adjacent to murrelet occupied sites were
incorporated by reference. Particularly in light of the
Supreme Court’s guidance in Seven County Infrastructure
Coalition, we will not micromanage or unduly scrutinize the
agency’s assessment as to the level of detail to provide on
the murrelet issue.
Some of the Plaintiffs’ arguments boil down to
substantive disagreements with BLM’s ultimate
conclusions. For instance, the Plaintiffs assert that it is a
mischaracterization of the evidence to suggest that the
thinning and regeneration harvesting would ultimately
benefit the murrelet and outweigh the short-term impacts of
edge effects.
But NEPA does not set substantive
environmental requirements; it requires only analysis and
disclosure of potential environmental impacts. Moreover,
whether the possible benefits to the murrelet from thinning
will ultimately outweigh the increased edge effects is a
quintessential matter of agency judgment that this Court
cannot disturb on NEPA review so long as the agency
considered the relevant information and based its conclusion
on such information. See Ctr. for Biological Diversity v.
Ilano, 928 F.3d 774, 783 (9th Cir. 2019) (“Plaintiffs take
issue with the Forest Service’s conclusion. We conclude
however, that the Forest Service considered relevant
scientific data, engaged in a careful analysis, and reached its
conclusion based on evidence supported by the record.

58

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

Therefore, its decision was not arbitrary or capricious.”);
Protect Our Cmtys. Found. v. Jewell, 825 F.3d 571, 584 (9th
Cir. 2016) (observing that because NEPA is a procedural
statute,
the
plaintiffs’
“underlying
substantive
disagreement” with the conclusions in an EIS was an
unavailing argument). BLM met this standard here.
The Plaintiffs point to several purported flaws with the
EA that they contend indicate that BLM failed to take the
requisite “hard look” at impacts to murrelets. 18 None of
these arguments persuade.
1. Brevity of Discussion
The Plaintiffs first point out that the BWE Project EA
relegates its primary discussion of impacts on murrelets to
an appendix. According to them, that is an indication that
BLM failed to take a “hard look” at murrelet impacts.
We disagree. The BWE Project EA adequately discusses
the possible impacts on murrelets. The BWE Project EA
tiered to the RMP EIS, which exhaustively discussed the
impacts of the RMP and its land use allocations on murrelets.
It incorporated by reference the extensive discussions in the
BWE Project BA and in the correspondence between FWS
and BLM. Additionally, the body of the EA substantially
discusses impacts to northern spotted owls, which share

The Plaintiffs’ additional argument that the EA failed to address
BLM’s novel “interpretive dance” to avoid the Murrelet Management
Direction is unpersuasive and not worthy of extended discussion. As we
indicated above, we conclude that what the Plaintiffs term an
“interpretive dance” is a reasonable interpretation of an ambiguous
regulation that is entitled to deference.
Additionally, the EA
incorporated the BA for the BWE Project, as well as the interpretive
memoranda, which fully discussed this issue.

18

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

59

habitat with the murrelet, and provides more detail about
where logging will occur.
Moreover, asserting that the EA discussed impacts to
murrelets only in the appendix understates the detailed
discussion that the appendix actually contains. “Brevity
should not be mistaken for lack of detail. A relatively brief
agency explanation can be reasoned and detailed . . . .”
Seven Cnty. Infrastructure Coal., 145 S. Ct. at 1512. NEPA
documents “need not meander on for hundreds or thousands
of pages.” Id. An agency is not required to compose the
Aeneid whenever it assesses a particular issue or decides that
a particular issue does not warrant a full analysis.
Nor are we convinced by the argument that because the
BWE Project area is “particularly significant for marbled
murrelets,” a more detailed analysis was required. The
question of how detailed a report must be “requires the
exercise of agency discretion—which should not be
excessively second-guessed by a court.” Id. The agency
acted within that discretion in concluding that although the
BWE Project would doubtless have some impact on
murrelets and it would consider those impacts, there did not
need to be an exhaustively detailed discussion of the issue.
That reality is particularly salient given the fact that EA tiers
to the far more detailed EIS. 19

The Plaintiffs also fault BLM for not mentioning murrelets in its
statements of reasons in the FONSI for the BWE Project. But the CEQ
regulations provided that if the FONSI incorporates the EA, the FONSI
“need not repeat any of the discussion in the assessment.” 40 C.F.R.
§ 1508.13 (2020). Moreover, the record shows that an appendix to the
FONSI specifically responds to comments about the BWE Project’s
potential impacts on the murrelets—some of which were filed by the
Plaintiffs.
19

60

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

2. Site Specificity
Second, and relatedly, the Plaintiffs argue that the
discussion of murrelet impacts contained in the EA appendix
fails the “hard look” test because its analysis is insufficiently
site-specific. For example, the Plaintiffs take issue with the
fact that the EA utilizes “rough acreage” rather than
discussing each logging unit and that there is substantial
discretion as to when and how BLM will apply the PDFs,
including the voluntary buffers.
This argument, too, fails. To be sure, NEPA documents
should generally analyze impacts to imperiled species at a
site-specific level rather than through an overly general lens.
See Anderson v. Evans, 314 F.3d 1006, 1019–20 (9th Cir.
2002). Here, though, the EIS for the RMP contained a great
deal of detail about impacts to murrelets. The EA built upon
that and analyzed the impacts to murrelets in both the LSR
and HLB. Reviewing the totality of the EA, the incorporated
documents, and the EIS—and keeping in mind that the level
of detail for a NEPA document is itself a matter within
agency discretion—we are satisfied that BLM’s analysis was
sufficiently site-specific. It was not required to conduct a
parcel-by-parcel analysis of the issue or identify each
individual stand where PDFs would be applied.
3. Potential Take of Murrelets
The Plaintiffs next contend that BLM failed to take a
“hard look” because the EA did not disclose that the BWE
Project could result in the “take” of murrelet eggs or young
at four sites. This is unpersuasive.
The EA and the incorporated documents explained that
there would be impacts on murrelets; they just did not list
the specific number of sites at which eggs could be taken.

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

61

This was sufficient. The applicable regulations required
only that BLM consider “[t]he degree to which the action
may adversely affect an endangered or threatened species or
its habitat” in an EA. 40 C.F.R. § 1508.27(b)(9) (2020). The
Plaintiffs have pointed to no case law or regulation requiring
the EA/FONSI to discuss the specific number of sites at
which take could occur. Indeed, case law makes clear that
“NEPA regulations direct the agency to consider the degree
of adverse effect on a species, not the impact on individuals
of that species.” Env’t Prot. Info. Ctr. v. USFS, 451 F.3d
1005, 1010 (9th Cir. 2006). That was certainly done here. 20
This is thus not a basis for concluding that BLM failed to
take a hard look at impacts to the murrelet.
4. Alleged Misrepresentation of the Science of
Edge Effects
The Plaintiffs’ final NEPA argument is that BLM
distorted the relevant science regarding edge effects when it
discussed the impact of edge effects on the murrelet in the
EA. The Plaintiffs specifically take issue with BLM’s
discussion in the appendix to the EA about why it did not
analyze in detail the edge effects that would be caused by
thinning in stands adjacent to occupied sites. In the relevant
portion of the EA appendix, BLM concluded that there were
no significant edge effects beyond those evaluated in the
RMP EIS and discussed by FWS in the interpretive
memoranda. BLM then went on to say that, as discussed in
the BA, “the science around edge effects does not show a
consistent edge effect.” Both the relevant portion of the EA
and the BA cited a number of scientific papers on the topic.
Additionally, as a factual matter, the EA does expressly disclose
adverse impacts from regeneration harvest on some of the relevant sites
even if it does not expressly use the word “take.”

20

62

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

According
to
the
Plaintiffs,
BLM
“gross[ly]
mischaracteriz[ed]” the scientific literature relating to
murrelet edge effects, and this runs afoul of its duty to
present “high quality” data and “[a]ccurate scientific
analysis.” See 40 C.F.R. § 1500.1(b) (2024).
This argument fails. In essence, the Plaintiffs challenge
BLM’s conclusions about the severity and existence of
deleterious edge effects. This is a technical, scientific issue
where deference to agency technical expertise is at its
apogee. See Idaho Wool Growers Ass’n v. Vilsack, 816 F.3d
1095, 1107 (9th Cir. 2016); Native Ecosystems Council v.
Weldon, 697 F.3d 1043, 1051 (9th Cir. 2012). That dooms
the Plaintiffs’ claim. Although they nitpick issues with the
studies cited by BLM—such as critiquing the methodology
of one study and the geographic relevancy of another—they
have not shown that BLM’s reliance on these studies was
arbitrary and capricious. At a high level, the studies are
relevant and generally support BLM’s conclusion about the
uncertainty of the impacts of edge effects on murrelets.
That is sufficient to end the inquiry, as we must “defer to
agency decisions so long as those conclusions are supported
by studies ‘that the agency deems reliable.’” Native
Ecosystems Council, 697 F.3d at 1053 (emphasis omitted)
(quoting N. Plains Res. Council, Inc. v. Surface Transp. Bd.,
668 F.3d 1067, 1075 (9th Cir. 2011)). That is the case here.
We have reviewed the record evidence alongside BLM’s
conclusions and have concluded that BLM did not act
arbitrarily or capriciously in reaching its conclusion
regarding edge effects.
“We are not to ‘act as a panel of scientists, instructing
the agency, choosing among scientific studies, and ordering
the agency to explain every possible scientific uncertainty.’”

CASCADIA WILDLANDS V. BUREAU OF LAND MGMT.

63

Lands Council v. McNair, 629 F.3d 1070, 1074 (9th Cir.
2010) (quoting Lands Council v. McNair, 537 F.3d 981, 988
(9th Cir. 2008) (en banc)). That is precisely what the
Plaintiffs ask us to do here: don a lab coat, sharpen our peerreview pencils, and dissect BLM’s conclusion in the EA that
the science does not show a consistent edge effect to
murrelets from modifications to nearby stands. We decline
that invitation. We may set aside agency action only if it is
arbitrary and capricious—and that is an exacting standard
that the Plaintiffs have not met here.
Accordingly, we reject the Plaintiffs’ arguments that
BLM failed to take the required “hard look” at impacts to
murrelets in the EA for the BWE Project.
CONCLUSION
Emerging from the thicket of overlapping statutes,
regulations, and administrative actions, we are satisfied that
BLM did not act arbitrarily or capriciously. We defer to the
agency’s reasonable interpretation of the ambiguous term
“modifying nesting habitat” in its resource management
plan. Under that interpretation, the BWE Project fully
comports with the resource management plan. Additionally,
we conclude that the EA and FONSI for the BWE Project
satisfy NEPA. The district court thus properly granted
summary judgment to BLM on the Plaintiffs’ FLPMA and
NEPA claims, and it likewise properly denied the Plaintiffs’
motion for summary judgment.
AFFIRMED.

