FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
MARICRUZ MARISOL ROJASESPINOZA; ROBERT SALVADORGOMEZ; DAVID SALVADORROJAS; KORINA SALVADORROJAS,
Petitioners,
v.
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney General,
Respondent.

No. 24-7536
Agency Nos.
A246-606-483
A246-606-482
A246-606-484
A246-606-485
ORDER
AMENDING
ORDER
DENYING STAY
OF REMOVAL

Filed October 24, 2025
Amended November 25, 2025

2

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

ORDER
The order filed on October 24, 2025 is amended by
(1) inserting, in a new line above “PER CURIAM” at the
beginning of the order, the following: “Before: Ryan D.
Nelson, Daniel P. Collins, and Lawrence VanDyke, Circuit
Judges.” and (2) deleting the double-asterisked footnote
following “PER CURIAM”. An amended version of the
October 24, 2025 order, reflecting these changes,
accompanies this order. The stay of the October 24, 2025
order, as set forth in the November 10, 2025 order of the En
Banc Coordinator, is not affected by this amendment and
remains in effect.

3

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

SUMMARY *
Immigration/Stay of Removal
In an order entered by the Clerk at the direction of the
assigned three-judge panel, the panel denied a motion for a
stay of removal, concluding that Petitioners had not made a
showing of a strong likelihood of success on the merits or a
probability of irreparable harm, and that the public interest
considerations in this case weighed heavily against a stay.
Applying the stay factors set forth in Nken v. Holder, 556
U.S. 418 (2009), the panel concluded that Petitioners failed
to show a likelihood of success on the merits, where they
filed a barebones motion merely asserting in conclusory
fashion that their appeal would raise substantial and novel
issues of law as to whether the Board of Immigration
Appeals applied the law correctly to their case, failed to file
a supplemental stay motion as permitted by the court’s
General Orders, and failed to reply to the Government’s
opposition to the motion or to otherwise seek leave to
supplement their motion. Petitioners also failed to establish
irreparable harm. Under Nken, the burden of removal alone
cannot constitute the requisite irreparable injury. Rather, an
alien seeking a stay of removal must show irreparable harm
that is specific to his or her case, as opposed to a reason that
would apply equally well to all aliens and all cases, and must
show that an irreparable injury is the more probable or likely
outcome, a showing Petitioners failed to make here, even
considering the more developed record in the fully briefed
petition for review. Finally, the public interest weighed
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

4

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

heavily against a stay, and Petitioners had not made a
sufficient showing on the merits to overcome the heavy
weight of that public interest factor.
The panel further explained that Petitioners exploited a
defect in this court’s internal procedures and thereby secured
an unwarranted stay of their removal for the last 10 months,
and that the public interest in putting a prompt end to
Petitioners’ misuse of the court’s stay processes was not
mitigated by the fact that this court itself erred in creating the
process that Petitioners abused. Specifically, by filing their
barebones stay motion, Petitioners secured an automatic
administrative stay, pending resolution of that stay motion,
by virtue of this court’s General Order 6.4(c)(1) (“Upon the
filing of an initial motion or request for stay of removal or
deportation, the order of removal or deportation is
temporarily stayed until further order of the
Court.”). Thereafter, consistent with what has become the
widespread practice of this court’s internal operations,
Petitioners’ opposed stay motion was held by the Clerk’s
Office until it could be presented to the merits panel that
would be assigned after the completion of briefing. The
result was that the supposedly “temporary” stay remained in
place for 10 months—and a full seven months after the
Government filed its opposition. The panel wrote that this
practice squarely violates Nken’s instruction that courts may
not reflexively hold a final order in abeyance pending
review. Once the opposed stay motion was fully briefed, it
should have been presented by the Clerk’s Office to the next
available motions panel, and going forward, that is the
practice that must be followed in disposing of fully briefed
opposed stay motions.

5

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

This order will be amended to include the identity of the
assigned three-judge panel when it is publicly disclosed on
November 24, 2025.

COUNSEL
Murray D. Hilts, Law Offices of Murray D. Hilts, San Diego,
California, for Petitioners.
Matthew A. Spurlock, Trial Attorney; John S. Hogan,
Assistant Director; Office of Immigration Litigation; Brett
A. Shumate, Assistant Attorney General; Civil Division,
United States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for
Respondent.

ORDER
Before: Ryan D. Nelson, Daniel P. Collins, and Lawrence
VanDyke, Circuit Judges.
PER CURIAM:
Petitioners Maricruz Marisol Rojas-Espinoza, her
domestic partner Robert Salvador-Gomez, and their two
minor children David Angel Salvador-Rojas and Korina
Salvador-Rojas, who are all citizens of Peru, have moved for
a stay of their removal pending disposition of their petition
for review challenging a Board of Immigration Appeals
(“BIA”) ruling upholding a decision by an Immigration
Judge (“IJ”) ordering their removal to Peru and denying their

6

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

requests for relief from removal. We deny the motion for a
stay of removal.
I
A
Petitioners unlawfully entered the United States without
inspection near Sasabe, Arizona, in early January 2023. In
May 2023, the Department of Homeland Security instituted
removal proceedings by filing and serving notices to appear
that charged Petitioners with being removable under
§ 212(a)(6)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act
(“INA”) as aliens who are present in the United States
without having been admitted or paroled after inspection by
an immigration officer. See 8 U.S.C. § 1182(a)(6)(A)(i). At
a hearing before the IJ, Petitioners admitted the charge and
conceded removability.
The two adult Petitioners filed separate applications for
asylum, withholding of removal, and relief under the
Convention Against Torture (“Torture Convention”), with
their two children seeking derivative relief solely with
respect to their father’s asylum request. See Ali v. Ashcroft,
394 F.3d 780, 782 n.1 (9th Cir. 2005) (noting that, unlike
asylum, derivative relief is not available with respect to
withholding of removal or relief under the Torture
Convention). The applications were based on nearly
identically worded declarations from the two adult
Petitioners recounting the same underlying events. In
addition, Rojas-Espinoza testified concerning those events at
a hearing before the IJ.
Based on that evidence, the IJ made the following
findings of fact. Rojas-Espinoza’s brother was physically
attacked in February 2021 by members of a union. Rojas-

7

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

Espinoza did not know why he specifically was threatened,
but she believed that it related to a dispute among the
workers within the union. Nearly two years later, in
December 2022, two hooded men attacked Rojas-Espinoza,
asking for her brother and threatening to kill her. They
choked her and attempted to rape her, but police appeared on
the scene and the two men fled. Ten days later, Petitioners
moved to Rojas-Espinoza’s cousin’s house in Lima. RojasEspinoza claims that, before leaving for Lima, she filed a
police report about the assault against her. Six days after
their arrival in Lima, Petitioners’ family found a threatening
note outside her cousin’s house, together with a bullet.
Rojas-Espinoza again claimed that she reported this incident
to the police. Shortly thereafter, Petitioners left for the
United States. Since their arrival in the United States,
Petitioners have received no further threats and their “family
in Peru has not been threatened.”
The IJ denied Petitioners’ applications for relief and
ordered them removed to Peru. Petitioners appealed, and the
BIA upheld the IJ’s decision. The BIA concluded that, even
if the harm Rojas-Espinoza experienced rose to the level of
persecution, Rojas-Espinoza failed to establish the requisite
connection to a protected ground for purposes of either
asylum or withholding of removal. See Umana-Escobar v.
Garland, 69 F.4th 544, 551 (9th Cir. 2023) (“A nexus
between the harm and a protected ground is a necessary
element of asylum and withholding of removal.”); see also
8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42)(A) (stating that the protected
grounds for purposes of asylum are “race, religion,
nationality, membership in a particular social group, or
political opinion”); id. § 1231(b)(3)(A) (same for
withholding of removal).

8

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

Specifically, the BIA held that Petitioners’ proposed
social groups—“witnesses to organized crime,” “those
opposing gang operations,” and “kinships who are targeted
by gangs”—were not cognizable social groups for purposes
of the INA, because they “lack[ed] sufficient particularity
and social distinction.” In addition, the BIA alternatively
upheld the IJ’s conclusion that Petitioners’ past or feared
mistreatment was not on account of their claimed
membership in these particular social groups. The BIA
concluded that Rojas-Espinoza “was an unfortunate victim
of criminals in Peru who appear to have had personal issues
with her brother” and that this was insufficient to establish a
nexus to her proposed social groups for purposes of either
asylum or withholding of removal. See Barajas-Romero v.
Lynch, 846 F.3d 351, 358–59 (9th Cir. 2017) (holding that,
for purposes of asylum, the applicant must show that the
protected ground constitutes “one central reason” for the
alleged persecution, but that, for withholding of removal, the
applicant need only show that a protected ground constitutes
“a reason” for the persecution).
The BIA also upheld the IJ’s denial of the adult
Petitioners’ applications for relief under the Torture
Convention. As the BIA explained, the applicants had failed
to establish that they had suffered past torture or that they
would likely experience future harm rising to the level of
torture, much less “with the requisite degree of state action.”
In reaching this conclusion, the BIA expressly considered
both Rojas-Espinoza’s testimony and the country conditions
evidence that had been submitted concerning Peru.
B
On December 13, 2024, Petitioners filed a timely petition
for review in this court, and in the same document, they

9

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

moved for a stay of removal pending resolution of the
petition. Pursuant to this court’s General Order 6.4(c)(1),
the filing of this motion automatically resulted in a
temporary administrative stay pending resolution of that
motion. See Ninth Cir. Gen. Order 6.4(c)(1) (“Upon the
filing of an initial motion or request for stay of removal or
deportation, the order of removal or deportation is
temporarily stayed until further order of the Court.”); see
also De Leon v. INS, 115 F.3d 643, 644 (9th Cir. 1997)
(adopting, in light of the “large number of stay requests”
presented to this court in immigration cases, a similar
practice of automatically granting administrative stays “until
the court rules on the stay motion”). Although General
Order 6.4(c)(2) allows a petitioner in certain circumstances
to file a “supplemental motion” in support of such a stay
request, no such supplemental motion was filed by
Petitioners here.
In accordance with the schedule established by the Clerk,
the Government timely filed the certified administrative
record on December 27, 2024 and timely filed its opposition
to the stay motion on February 11, 2025. Any reply by
Petitioners to that opposition was due on February 18, 2025,
see FED. R. APP. P. 27(a)(4); Ninth Cir. Gen. Order 6.4(c)(4),
but none was filed. The stay motion was thus fully briefed
by February 18, 2025.
Rather than present the stay motion to the next motions
panel of this court for decision, see Ninth Cir. Gen. Order
6.2(a) (establishing monthly motions panels of judges), the
Clerk’s Office held the motion for seven months until the
completion of merits briefing concerning the petition for
review. Cf. Ninth Cir. Gen. Order 6.4(c)(6) (stating that
merits briefing shall proceed, regardless of whether a stay
motion is filed). On September 21, 2025, the Clerk

10

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

calendared this case for argument before a merits panel in
San Francisco on December 2, 2025. At approximately the
same time, the case materials for this matter, including both
the merits briefing and the stay motion, were forwarded to
the assigned judges on the merits panel for our consideration.
II
We begin by reviewing the standards that govern stays
of removal pending judicial review. We thereafter turn to
applying those standards to the original motion papers that
were presented to us, before then considering whether the
more complete record now available warrants a different
conclusion.
A
The power of an appellate court to stay an order pending
review “has historically been justified by the perceived need
‘to prevent irreparable injury to the parties or to the public’
pending review.” Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 432 (2009)
(citation omitted). Resolving an appeal “takes time,” and the
authority to grant stays helps to resolve the resulting
“dilemma” as to “what to do when there is insufficient time
to resolve the merits and irreparable harm may result from
delay.” Id. at 421, 432. Prior to 1996, Congress resolved
that dilemma, in the context of judicial review of removal
orders, “through a provision providing most aliens with an
automatic stay of their removal order while judicial review
was pending.” Id. at 424; see 8 U.S.C. § 1105a(a)(3) (1994
ed.) (“The service of the petition for review . . . shall stay the
deportation of the alien pending determination of the petition
by the court, unless the court otherwise directs.”). That prior
“presumption of an automatic stay” was predicated on the
fact that the pre-1996 statute stated that an alien’s removal
during the pendency of a petition for review would bar

11

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

judicial review of the removal order. Nken, 556 U.S. at 424–
25; see also 8 U.S.C. § 1105a(c) (1994 ed.) (“An order of
deportation or of exclusion shall not be reviewed by any
court . . . if [the alien] has departed from the United States
after the issuance of the order.”). That is, in order to avoid
the loss of judicial review associated with execution of the
removal order, Congress directed that aliens would
presumably receive an automatic stay upon the filing of a
petition for review.
In 1996, however, Congress drastically altered the legal
landscape with the enactment of the Illegal Immigration
Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act (“IIRIRA”). See
Pub. L. No. 104-208, div. C, 110 Stat. 3009-546 (1996).
“[T]o allow for more prompt removal,” IIRIRA “inverted”
the prior rules by “lift[ing] the ban on adjudication of a
petition for review once an alien has departed” and
“repeal[ing] the presumption of an automatic stay, and
replac[ing] it” with the opposite presumption that an alien’s
removal will not be stayed unless the court orders otherwise.
Nken, 556 U.S. at 424–25. Thus, under § 242(b)(3)(B) of
the INA, the filing and service of a petition for review in a
court of appeals “does not stay the removal of an alien
pending the court’s decision on the petition, unless the court
orders otherwise.” 8 U.S.C. § 1252(b)(3)(B) (emphasis
added).
The Court in Nken held that, in determining whether to
affirmatively grant a stay of removal in any given case, a
court of appeals must apply the “traditional stay factors.”
556 U.S. at 426. Those factors are:
(1) whether the stay applicant has made a
strong showing that he is likely to succeed on
the merits; (2) whether the applicant will be

12

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

irreparably injured absent a stay; (3) whether
issuance of the stay will substantially injure
the other parties interested in the proceeding;
and (4) where the public interest lies.
Id. (quoting Hilton v. Braunskill, 481 U.S. 770, 776 (1987)).
Where, as here, the Government is the opposing party, the
last two factors—“the harm to the opposing party” and “the
public interest”—“merge” together. Id. at 435. In applying
these factors, we must keep in mind that “[a] stay is not a
matter of right, even if irreparable injury might otherwise
result,” and that the alien seeking a stay of removal “bears
the burden of showing that the circumstances justify an
exercise” of “judicial discretion” in his favor. Id. at 433–34
(citation omitted); see also id. at 437 (Kennedy, J.,
concurring) (noting that this is a “demanding standard”).
We have construed the Nken four-factor standard as
establishing a “continuum” in which the requisite showing
on the merits depends upon the strength of the alien’s
showing of irreparable injury and the potential harm to the
public interest:
[A] petitioner seeking a stay of removal must
show that irreparable harm is probable and
either: (a) a strong likelihood of success on
the merits and that the public interest does not
weigh heavily against a stay; or (b) a
substantial case on the merits and that the
balance of hardships tips sharply in the
petitioner’s favor. As has long been the case,
these standards represent the outer extremes
of a continuum, with the relative hardships to
the parties providing the critical element in

13

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

determining at what point on the continuum a
stay pending review is justified.
Leiva-Perez v. Holder, 640 F.3d 962, 970 (9th Cir. 2011)
(simplified).
B
Having reviewed these general standards, we consider
how they apply to the fully briefed motion for a stay that has
been presented to us.
As a threshold matter, we reject Petitioners’ assertion
that they are entitled to a stay under “INA 106(a)(3),
8 U.S.C. 1105(a)(3) [sic],” which they say “provides that
deportation shall automatically be stayed upon filing a
petition for review in the Circuit Court of Appeals.” This
contention is patently frivolous, because it relies on the
presumptively automatic stay contained in the pre-1996
statute that, as Nken explained, was explicitly repealed more
than 25 years ago. 556 U.S. at 424–25. Equally frivolous
under Nken is Petitioners’ related assertion that the
constitutional guarantee of due process requires that they be
granted an automatic stay of removal. Petitioners provide no
basis for concluding that the Due Process Clause requires
application of a more generous standard than the “traditional
test for stays” described in Nken. 556 U.S. at 433 (citation
omitted).
With respect to the crucial factor of a likelihood of
success on the merits, Petitioners’ stay motion merely
asserts, in conclusory fashion, that their “appeal will raise
substantial and novel issues of law as to whether the BIA
applied the law correctly to this case.” On its face, this
unexplained assertion manifestly falls far short of what Nken
and Leiva-Perez require. Petitioners’ motion does not even

14

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

bother to say anything about what those supposedly
meritorious legal issues might be, and it therefore made no
attempt to establish a “substantial case on the merits” with
respect to any such points. Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at 970. In
the absence of any such threshold showing on the merits,
Petitioners’ motion fails to carry their burden to “justify an
exercise” of “judicial discretion” in their favor. Nken, 556
U.S. at 433–34; see also Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at 968
(holding that, “in order to justify a stay, a petitioner must
show, at a minimum, that she has a substantial case for relief
on the merits”).
Petitioners’ showing with respect to irreparable harm is
likewise insufficient. Given that, under the post-1996 INA,
an alien’s petition for removal will no longer “abate[] upon
removal,” Nken held that it is “plain that the burden of
removal alone cannot constitute the requisite irreparable
injury.” 556 U.S. at 435 (emphasis added). Rather, an alien
seeking a stay of removal “must show that there is a reason
specific to his or her case, as opposed to a reason that would
apply equally well to all aliens and all cases, that removal
would inflict irreparable harm.” Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at
969; see also Nken, 556 U.S. at 438 (Kennedy, J.,
concurring) (explaining that “there must be a particularized,
irreparable harm beyond mere removal to justify a stay”
(emphasis added)). Moreover, the alien “must show that an
irreparable injury is the more probable or likely outcome.”
Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at 968 (emphasis added).
No such showing has been made in Petitioners’ motion.
Although Petitioners contend that “substantial immigration
equities” weigh in their favor, their motion makes no effort
to spell out what those equities are. Even if we generously
assume that this comment should be construed as referring
to the same asserted probability of harm that they asserted in

15

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

the proceedings before the agency, we conclude that
Petitioners have not shown that such an alleged future harm
is likely. See Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at 969 (holding that
consideration of the “likelihood” of the underlying merits
claim of “physical danger” if the alien is removed “should
be part of the irreparable harm inquiry” and should be
“determined apart from merits issues such as whether any
physical abuse would be on account of a protected ground
for asylum and withholding purposes, or whether the alien is
barred from relief as a criminal alien” (emphasis added)).
Assessing the likelihood of future harm independently for
purposes of the irreparable-harm prong of the Nken standard,
we conclude that Petitioners have failed to show that they
are likely to face such harm. As the IJ persuasively noted,
since leaving Peru, “no threats have been received in the
United States,” and Petitioners’ “family in Peru has not been
threatened.”
Petitioners’ motion asserts that they have a “right to live
with [their] family in [their] adopted country,” but that is
merely another way of saying that Petitioners will be
harmed, as a family, by their removal from the advantages
of life in the United States, and Nken is clear that such
removal alone does not establish the requisite particularized
irreparable injury. To the extent that Petitioners contend that
their removal will separate them from Rojas-Espinoza’s
three siblings who are in the United States, that factor is
entitled no weight, given that those siblings are themselves
in removal proceedings and Petitioners have made no
showing that those siblings will be allowed to remain in the
United States. And although Petitioners contend that their
removal to Peru would moot this case, they have not made
the requisite showing that, if their petition for review is
granted, this court cannot provide any “effective relief.” Del

16

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

Cid Marroquin v. Lynch, 823 F.3d 933, 936 (9th Cir. 2016);
see also Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at 969.
Petitioners’ failure to make any sufficient showing of
irreparable injury dooms Petitioners’ stay motion. As we
explained in Leiva-Perez, “Nken held that if the petitioner
has not made a certain threshold showing regarding
irreparable harm . . . then a stay may not issue, regardless of
the petitioner’s proof regarding the other stay factors.” 640
F.3d at 965 (emphasis added). And when this failure of
proof on irreparable injury is considered together with
Petitioners’ feeble showing on the merits, their stay motion
is patently lacking in merit.
The largely threadbare nature of Petitioners’ stay motion
is all the more inexcusable, because this court’s General
Orders expressly allow aliens seeking a stay pending judicial
review to file a “supplemental” motion for stay of removal.
Recognizing that the exigencies of time might lead an alien
to file a somewhat terse initial stay motion, General Order
6.4(c)(2) generously states that, “[i]f the initial motion for
stay of removal or deportation fails to discuss the merits of
the petition for review or to identify the potential hardships
faced by the petitioner due to deportation or removal during
the pendency of the petition, petitioner may, within 14 days
from the filing of the initial motion, file a supplemental
motion for stay.” Petitioners nonetheless did not file any
supplemental motion in this case, nor did they seek
additional time within which to file such a supplemental
motion. And even after the Government filed a written
opposition pointing out the various ways in which
Petitioners’ motion plainly fell far short of their burden
under Nken, Petitioners did not bother to file a reply, nor did
they seek leave to file anything further in support of their
stay request.

17

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

In short, Petitioners’ stay motion wholly fails to make an
adequate showing as to either the likelihood of success on
the merits or as to irreparable injury. In the absence of such
a showing, there is no basis for a stay of removal. See Nken,
556 U.S. at 434; Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at 968.
C
The only remaining question is whether our analysis of
Petitioners’ request for a stay should be affected by the fact
that, by the time that stay motion was presented to a panel of
judges for decision, that motion was paired with the fully
briefed merits of the petition for review. We conclude that,
even considering the more developed record before us, a stay
of removal is not warranted.
As an initial matter, we note that Petitioners’ merits brief
does not even arguably provide any supplemental
information that might be said to establish a particularized
showing of irreparable injury to Petitioners from the denial
of a stay. As such, the more complete record before us does
not cure the fatal deficiencies in Petitioners’ showing as to
irreparable injury. See supra at 13–15.
But even if we assume arguendo that Petitioners have
made some threshold showing of irreparable injury, it
nonetheless falls far short of showing “that the balance of
hardships tips sharply in the petitioner’s favor.” LeivaPerez, 640 F.3d at 970. As such, this case, at best, falls at
the other end of the continuum we described in LeivaPerez—meaning that, to obtain a stay, Petitioners must show
both “a strong likelihood of success on the merits and that
the public interest does not weigh heavily against a stay.” Id.
(emphasis added). Our preliminary review of Petitioners’
merits brief does not persuade us that they have now made a

18

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

“showing of a strong likelihood of success on the merits.” 1
Id. at 971. But in all events, we conclude that the public
interest “weigh[s] heavily against a stay,” and that
Petitioners have not made a sufficient showing on the merits
to overcome the heavy weight of that public interest factor.
Id.
The Supreme Court acknowledged in Nken that “there is
a public interest in preventing aliens from being wrongfully
removed.” 556 U.S. at 436. Accordingly, to the extent that
Petitioners have made some showing as to a likelihood of
success, there would be a commensurate public interest in
avoiding that erroneous removal. But in our preliminary
view Petitioners have not made a strong showing of a
likelihood of success on the merits, and so the risk of a
removal that might ultimately be judged erroneous is
therefore somewhat limited here. And, as we have
explained, Petitioners also have not shown that “they are
likely to face substantial harm” if erroneously removed to
Peru, nor have they shown that, if their petition for review is
granted, they would not “be afforded effective relief by
facilitation of their return, along with restoration of the
immigration status they had upon removal.” Id. at 435–36.
Petitioners thus have made, at best, only a weak showing of
the sort of public interest considerations that might weigh in
favor of a stay. By contrast, we conclude that there are
countervailing public interest considerations that weigh
decidedly against a stay in this case.
Nken reaffirmed that “[t]here is always a public interest
in prompt execution of removal orders: The continued
We emphasize that we have not yet decided the ultimate merits of this
case, which is not scheduled for argument and submission for decision
until December 2, 2025.

1

19

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

presence of an alien lawfully deemed removable undermines
the streamlined removal proceedings IIRIRA established,
and permits and prolongs a continuing violation of United
States law.” 556 U.S. at 436 (emphasis added) (simplified).
Furthermore, this “interest in prompt removal may be
heightened by the circumstances as well,” including if the
alien “has substantially prolonged his stay by abusing the
processes provided to him.” Id. (emphasis added). That is
precisely what has occurred here, and it weighs decisively in
favor of denying a stay of removal to Petitioners.
As we have noted, in seeking a stay in this court,
Petitioners filed nothing beyond their barebones initial stay
motion, which consisted of two pages containing a mixture
of conclusory and frivolous arguments. See supra at 12–13.
They did not bother to file any supplemental motion, as
allowed by our General Orders, and even when the
Government filed an opposition noting the patent
deficiencies in their stay motion, they neither filed a reply
nor later did they seek leave to supplement their motion. In
so doing, Petitioners successfully exploited a defect in this
court’s internal procedures and thereby secured an
unwarranted stay of their removal for the last 10 months—
and for a full seven months after the Government filed its
opposition.
Specifically, merely by filing their barebones stay
motion, Petitioners secured an automatic administrative
stay, pending resolution of that stay motion, by virtue of this
court’s General Order 6.4(c)(1). See Ninth Cir. Gen. Order
6.4(c)(1) (“Upon the filing of an initial motion or request for
stay of removal or deportation, the order of removal or
deportation is temporarily stayed until further order of the
Court.”). Thereafter, consistent with what has become the
widespread, if not standard, practice of this court’s internal

20

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

operations, Petitioners’ opposed stay motion was held by the
Clerk’s Office until it could be presented to the merits panel
that would be assigned to this matter after the completion of
The result is that the supposedly
merits briefing. 2
“temporary” stay that Petitioners obtained with their
threadbare (if not frivolous) stay motion remained in place
Between 2005 and April 2019, our General Orders provided that, upon
the filing of a pre-merits-briefing motion for a stay of removal, “[a]
briefing schedule will not be set until the motion for stay is resolved,”
thereby ensuring that such a pre-briefing motion would generally be
decided in short order by an available motions panel. See Ninth Cir. Gen.
Orders 6.4(c)(1) (2012 ed.) (noting that this provision had last been
amended in Sept. 2005); see also Ninth Cir. Gen. Orders 6.4(c)(1) (2018
ed.). Effective April 1, 2019, however, this language was removed,
thereby allowing merits briefing to go forward while the motion for a
stay was still pending. See Ninth Cir. Gen. Orders 6.4(c)(1) (2020 ed.);
see also Ninth Cir. Gen. Orders 6.4(c)(6) (2024 ed.) (expressly adding
language, effective June 21, 2023, confirming that “[a] briefing schedule
will be established upon the filing of a petition for review, whether or
not a motion for stay of removal is filed”). The inevitable result was a
widespread practice of holding stay motions until the completion of
merits briefing and assignment to a merits panel. And given that, by the
time the matter is assigned to a merits panel, the disposition of the entire
matter is only 12–14 weeks away, hundreds of panels (as indicated by a
Westlaw search) have chosen to decide any still-pending stay motion at
the same time that the merits are decided. See, e.g., Haro Mendoza v.
Bondi, 2025 WL 518147, at *1 n.1 (9th Cir. 2025) (denying the petition
for review on the merits and denying the stay motion “as moot”); Elias
Cruz v. Barr, 793 F. App’x 636, 637 (9th Cir. 2020) (same). Indeed, in
a very large number of cases, we have denied the petition for review and,
after stating that the “temporary stay of removal [under General Order
6.4(c)(1)] remains in place until issuance of the mandate,” we have then
stated that the stay motion is “otherwise denied.” See, e.g., Fu v.
Garland, 848 F. App’x 751, 752 (9th Cir. 2021). Of course, there is no
meaningful sense, in such cases, in which the stay motion can be said to
have been “denied”; on the contrary, because the “temporary” stay
remained in effect all the way through the disposition of the appeal, the
stays in such cases were, for all practical purposes, granted in full.
2

21

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

for a full seven months over the Government’s objection.
Regardless of whether Petitioners intended or foresaw that
their near-frivolous stay motion would parlay them into such
an extended stay of their removal, the reality is that,
objectively, they have “substantially prolonged [their] stay
by abusing the processes provided to [them].” Nken, 556
U.S. at 436.
The public interest in putting a prompt end to Petitioners’
misuse of our stay processes is not in any way mitigated by
the fact that this court itself erred in creating the process that
Petitioners succeeded in using to obtain a 10-month
“temporary” administrative stay of their removal. On the
contrary, the ultra vires nature of that process weighs heavily
in favor of denying Petitioners any further stay of their
removal. 3
Precisely because “[a]dministrative stays”—such as the
automatic temporary stay granted by our General Order
6.4(c)(1)—“do not typically reflect the court’s consideration
of the merits of the stay application,” such “an administrative
stay is supposed to be a short-lived prelude to the main
event: a ruling on the motion for a stay pending appeal.”
United States v. Texas, 144 S. Ct. 797, 798–99 (2024)
(Barrett, J., concurring in denial of applications to vacate
stay) (emphasis added). As we have explained, a “temporary
stay” or “administrative stay” is “only intended to preserve
the status quo until the substantive motion for a stay pending
Despite the frequency with which panels of this court have combined
rulings on stay motions with rulings on the merits, we have never before
today considered the lawfulness of that practice in a published decision.
See United States v. Marin, 90 F.4th 1235, 1240 (9th Cir. 2024)
(“[Q]uestions which merely lurk in the record, neither brought to the
attention of the court nor ruled upon, are not to be considered as having
been so decided as to constitute precedents.” (citation omitted)).

3

22

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

appeal can be considered on the merits, and does not
constitute in any way a decision as to the merits of the
motion for stay pending appeal.” Doe #1 v. Trump, 944 F.3d
1222, 1223 (9th Cir. 2019) (emphasis added); see also
National Urban League v. Ross, 977 F.3d 698, 702 (9th Cir.
2020) (stating that, under Doe #1, “distinct legal analyses”
apply to “an administrative stay and a motion for stay
pending appeal”: “When considering the request for an
administrative stay, our touchstone is the need to preserve
the status quo,” and “[w]e defer weighing the Nken factors
until the motion for stay pending appeal is considered”
(footnote omitted)). Accordingly, to eliminate “the risk that
a court will avoid Nken for too long,” an “administrative stay
should last no longer than necessary to make an intelligent
decision on the motion for a stay pending appeal.” United
States v. Texas, 144 S. Ct. at 799 (Barrett, J., concurring).
Here, the extended stay that Petitioners have already
obtained flagrantly violates these principles. Once the stay
motion in this case was fully briefed in February 2025, “the
court [was] equipped to rule,” and “its obligation to apply
the Nken factors [was] triggered.” Id. But rather than
present Petitioners’ stay motion to the next available motions
panel for decision, the Clerk’s Office (consistent with our
general internal practices) held the motion until it could be
presented to a merits panel together with the fully completed
merits briefing. As a result, by the time that the stay motion
was presented to us for decision, the ostensible
“administrative stay ha[d] effectively become a stay pending
appeal,” but without any consideration of the Nken factors.
Id. at 800. Indeed, the 10-month stay that Petitioners
obtained with their barebones motion was accomplished
without any involvement of an Article III judge.

23

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

It is manifestly unlawful to allow a temporary
administrative stay to be continued for such an undue length
of time after an opposed stay motion has been fully briefed,
much less to do so without any case-specific judicial
involvement. See Nken, 556 U.S. at 433–34 (holding that
granting an opposed stay motion requires application of the
traditional stay factors in “an exercise of judicial discretion”
(emphasis added)); Doe #1, 944 F.3d at 1223 (holding that a
temporary administrative stay “is only intended to preserve
the status quo until the substantive motion for a stay pending
appeal can be considered on the merits” (emphasis added));
cf. United States v. Johnson, 48 F.3d 806, 809 (4th Cir. 1995)
(noting that the settled principle that substantive judicial
functions “cannot be delegated to nonjudicial officers for
resolution” does not “prohibit courts from using nonjudicial
officers to support judicial functions, as long as a judicial
officer retains and exercises ultimate responsibility”).
Moreover, the practice of generally holding stay motions
until they can be presented to the merits panel together with
the completed merits briefing squarely violates Nken’s
instruction that courts may not “reflexively hold[] a final
order in abeyance pending review.” 556 U.S. at 427. Under
these principles, once the opposed stay motion in this case
was fully briefed, it should have been presented by the
Clerk’s Office to the next available motions panel. And,
going forward, that is the practice that must be followed in
disposing of fully briefed opposed stay motions.
The public interest considerations in this case thus
“weigh heavily against a stay.” Leiva-Perez, 640 F.3d at
970. And because Petitioners have not made “a showing of
a strong likelihood of success on the merits” and have not
shown that particularized “irreparable harm is probable,” id.
at 971, they are not entitled to a stay of removal.

24

ROJAS-ESPINOZA V. BONDI

*

*

*

Petitioners’ opposed motion to stay removal (Dkt. No. 3)
is denied. The temporary stay of removal entered pursuant
to General Order 6.4(c)(1) is lifted, effective immediately.

