FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
GENOA JONES; CORNELL
TINSLEY,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,

No. 24-3374
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-00241CDS-DJA

v.
OPINION
CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS;
SCOTT SALKOFF; MICHAEL
ROSE,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Cristina D. Silva, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 22, 2025
San Francisco, California
September 8, 2025
Before: Michelle T. Friedland and Salvador Mendoza, Jr.,
Circuit Judges, and Robert S. Lasnik, District Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Mendoza
*

The Honorable Robert S. Lasnik, United States District Judge for the
Western District of Washington, sitting by designation.

2

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

SUMMARY**
Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s summary judgment in favor of the City of
North Las Vegas and two police officers in plaintiffs’ action
alleging that defendants violated their Fourth and Fourteenth
Amendment rights when the officers physically intruded into
plaintiffs’ backyard without permission while searching for
a suspect, and one of the officers shot and killed two of
plaintiffs’ dogs after the dogs attacked the police K-9.
The panel reversed the district court’s grant of qualified
immunity and summary judgment to the individual police
officers with respect to their search of plaintiffs’
backyard. Defendants could not avail themselves of the “hot
pursuit” exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant
requirement, which only applies when officers are in
“immediate” and “continuous” pursuit of a suspect from the
scene of the crime. Here, the continuity of the pursuit was
broken when defendants lost track of the suspect’s
whereabouts for eighteen minutes. Because defendants
lacked an exigent circumstance to search plaintiffs’ yard
under clearly established law at the time of the incident, they
were not entitled to qualified immunity.
The panel reversed the district court’s dismissal of
plaintiffs’ state law claim because the district court declined
to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the claim solely

**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

3

based on its grant of summary judgment to defendants on all
of plaintiffs’ federal claims.
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment for Lieutenant Salkoff, holding that he was entitled
to qualified immunity with respect to his use of force against
plaintiffs’ dogs because, given the spontaneous
confrontation, the panel could not say that he violated clearly
established law.
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment on plaintiffs’ Monell claims pertaining to both the
warrantless search and use-of-force claims. Plaintiffs
offered no evidence of a pattern of warrantless search
violations or other evidence establishing that the City was
deliberately indifferent to plaintiffs’ Fourth Amendment
rights or that its conduct had become a traditional method for
carrying out policy.
The panel remanded for further proceedings.

COUNSEL
Margaret A. McLetchie (argued) and Leo S. Wolpert,
McLetchie Law, Las Vegas, Nevada; Jennifer L. Braster,
Naylor & Braster, Las Vegas, Nevada; for PlaintiffsAppellants.
Rhiann J. Denman (argued) and Noel E. Eidsmore, Chief
Deputy City Attorneys; Micaela R. Moore, Former City
Attorney; Andrew D. Moore, City Attorney; North Las
Vegas Office of the City Attorney, North Las Vegas,
Nevada; for Defendants-Appellees.

4

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

OPINION
MENDOZA, Circuit Judge:
When does a hot pursuit turn cold? Today we conclude
that a pursuit is at best lukewarm, and certainly no longer hot
pursuit, when officers lose a suspect’s trail in a residential
neighborhood for eighteen minutes.
A police officer saw a suspect flee from the back of a
house into a neighboring backyard. Instead of directly
following the suspect, the officer hurried to his car, called
for backup, and drove two blocks south to establish a
perimeter around the area. At least eighteen minutes passed
before a K-9 unit alerted in the direction of Plaintiffs’
backyard, several houses away from where the suspect had
disappeared. An officer with a K-9 searched the yard,
rousing Plaintiffs’ three dogs. Two of the dogs attacked the
police K-9 and were shot and killed by an officer.
Plaintiffs Genoa Jones and Cornell Tinsley sued under
42 U.S.C. § 1983, claiming the officers and the City of North
Las Vegas violated their Fourth Amendment right to be free
from unwarranted searches and seizures. The district court
granted summary judgment for the officers, reasoning that
the officers’ intrusion was permitted by the hot pursuit
exception to the warrant requirement and that the use of
force was reasonable under the circumstances. The district
court also granted summary judgment for the city, finding no
support for Plaintiffs’ failure-to-train theory.
We reverse, in part, holding that there is no hot pursuit
where officers lose track of a suspect for eighteen minutes.
We affirm with respect to the K-9 handler’s use of force and

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

the claims against the city.
proceedings.

5

We remand for further

I.
On February 15, 2019, at 3:47 p.m., North Las Vegas
Police Department (“NLVPD”) Officers Joseph Minelli
(“Officer Minelli”) and Michael Rose (“Officer Rose”)
responded to a possible domestic battery at a house on a
residential cul-de-sac. While Officer Minelli spoke with a
woman at the door, Officer Rose moved to the side of the
house, where he witnessed a person flee over the back wall
to the south into a neighboring yard. Officer Rose ran to his
patrol car to request assistance. He drove two streets south
hoping to cut off whomever had fled but did not catch sight
of the person again. Several units quickly responded and
helped Officer Rose establish a multiple-block perimeter
around the area.
Meanwhile, Officer Minelli stayed at the home to
investigate the domestic battery allegation. The woman who
answered the door denied that there was any domestic
violence, but Officer Minelli observed injuries on her face,
including several injuries around her eyes and a long cut
across her chin that had been stitched. The woman told
Officer Minelli that police were not welcome at her house
and that her boyfriend—whom officers suspected had
battered the woman and whom they believed to be the person
who fled—would be back that evening and police would
need a warrant to apprehend him at the home. Officer
Minelli remained at the address in case the suspect returned.
With a perimeter in place, officers believed nobody
could leave the area without crossing their line of sight. A
sergeant on scene decided to call for a K-9 unit to search for
the suspect. NLVPD Lieutenant Scott Salkoff (“Lieutenant

6

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

Salkoff”) and his police K-9 Storm (“Storm”) responded to
the scene around 4:05 p.m., approximately eighteen minutes
after Officer Rose saw the suspect flee.
Lieutenant Salkoff used Storm—who is trained to detect
the odor of apocrine, a hormone some people release when
they are afraid—to search within the perimeter. Lieutenant
Salkoff informed residents of the searches using his patrol
car’s public address system. He also sent NLVPD Officer
Lee Young (“Officer Young”) ahead to seek consent from
residents to search their yards.
Lieutenant Salkoff was searching a backyard four houses
east and one house south of where the suspect vanished when
Storm alerted to an odor coming from a distant, elevated
position in the direction of Plaintiffs’ walled-in backyard.1
Lieutenant Salkoff decided to search Plaintiffs’
backyard. He had Officer Young check the gate, which was
locked and posted with a “Beware of Dog” sign. Officer
Young knocked on Plaintiffs’ door to request their consent
to search the yard but received no response because they
were not home. To gain a vantage, Lieutenant Salkoff
jumped onto the six-foot cinderblock wall that enclosed
Plaintiffs’ yard. He observed trash cans, where he thought
the suspect might be hiding, and a fenced-in kennel area with
1

We know Storm’s alert came at least eighteen minutes after officers
had last seen the person they were looking for—and, on the record before
us, it may have been much later. Officer Rose saw someone flee at
around 3:47 p.m. and Lieutenant Salkoff responded to the scene with
Storm at approximately 4:05 p.m. Lieutenant Salkoff does not recall
precisely when or where he started his search and says he may have
searched one yard or more than a dozen yards before Storm smelled fear
in the air. Officer Rose recalls that the search lasted for more than an
hour and possibly for two or three hours.

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

7

an open gate and three dog houses and bowls but did not see
any dogs.
With neither a warrant nor Plaintiffs’ consent, Lieutenant
Salkoff hopped down from the wall into their backyard.
Officer Rose then passed Storm over the wall. Plaintiffs’
three dogs were stirred from their doghouses, emerging to
investigate the unwelcome strangers in their yard.
Lieutenant Salkoff attempted to keep the dogs at bay,
kicking them and placing trash cans between them and
Storm. His efforts deterred one dog, but the other two—
Shadow and Whitewall—attacked Storm.
Lieutenant
Salkoff drew his service weapon and killed both Shadow and
Whitewall.
Despite officers scouring the neighborhood, they never
found the person they were looking for.
Plaintiffs sued Lieutenant Salkoff, Officer Rose, and the
City of North Las Vegas (“the City”), asserting several
claims under 42 U.S.C. § 1983: Lieutenant Salkoff violated
the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendments when, without a
warrant, he entered Plaintiffs’ backyard, and Officer Rose
violated the same when he passed Storm into the yard;
Lieutenant Salkoff violated the Fourth and Fourteenth
Amendments when he unreasonably seized their dogs by
shooting them dead; and the City was deliberately indifferent
to the risk of these violations. Plaintiffs also brought a state
law claim that Lieutenant Salkoff and the City violated
Nevada Revised Statutes § 41.130.
The district court granted Defendants’ motion for
summary judgment on the constitutional claims, declined to
exercise supplemental jurisdiction over the remaining state
law claim, and entered judgment for Defendants. Plaintiffs
timely appeal.

8

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

II.
We review a district court’s grant of summary judgment
de novo, Spencer v. Pew, 117 F.4th 1130, 1137 (9th Cir.
2024), including officers’ entitlement to qualified immunity,
Sanderlin v. Dwyer, 116 F.4th 905, 910 (9th Cir. 2024). In
conducting this review, we take “the facts in the light most
favorable to the nonmoving party and draw all inferences in
that party’s favor.” Nehad v. Browder, 929 F.3d 1125, 1132
(9th Cir. 2019); Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(e).
Qualified immunity protects government officials from
liability under § 1983 “unless (1) they violated a federal
statutory or constitutional right, and (2) the unlawfulness of
their conduct was clearly established at the time.” Waid v.
County of Lyon, 87 F.4th 383, 387 (9th Cir. 2023) (quoting
District of Columbia v. Wesby, 583 U.S. 48, 62–63 (2018)).
“Either prong can be adjudicated on appeal by taking the
facts as most favorable to the plaintiffs and applying the
pertinent legal standards to those facts.” Isayeva v.
Sacramento Sheriff’s Dep’t, 872 F.3d 938, 945 (9th Cir.
2017). Defendants are entitled to qualified immunity where
we find “a negative answer at either step.” Sabbe v. Wash.
Cnty. Bd. of Comm’rs, 84 F.4th 807, 819 (9th Cir. 2023).
III.
“When a law enforcement officer physically intrudes on
the curtilage” of a home, like a walled-in backyard, “a search
within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment has occurred.”
Collins v. Virginia, 584 U.S. 586, 593 (2018). “[A] small,
enclosed yard adjacent to a home in a residential
neighborhood . . . is ‘curtilage’ subject to Fourth
Amendment protection.” United States v. Struckman, 603
F.3d 731, 739 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting United States v.
Romero-Bustamente, 337 F.3d 1104, 1108 (9th Cir. 2003)).

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

9

Such searches are “presumptively unreasonable absent a
warrant.” Collins, 584 U.S. at 593.
But the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement “is
subject to certain exceptions.” Brigham City v. Stuart, 547
U.S. 398, 403 (2006). An “exigent circumstance” such as
“the hot pursuit of a fleeing suspect,” “the need to prevent
the imminent destruction of relevant evidence,” and “the
need to prevent the escape of a suspect” may constitute such
an exception. Struckman, 603 F.3d at 743. To rely on the
exigent circumstances exception, the government “must
satisfy two requirements: first, the government must prove
that the officer had probable cause to search,” and “second,
the government must prove that exigent circumstances
justified the warrantless intrusion.” United States v.
Johnson, 256 F.3d 895, 905 (9th Cir. 2001) (en banc) (per
curiam). Probable cause exists where “the ‘facts and
circumstances’ before the officer are sufficient to warrant a
person of reasonable caution to believe” that a suspect would
be found in a place. Id. (quoting Brinegar v. United States,
338 U.S. 160, 175 (1949)); see also Newman v. Underhill,
134 F.4th 1025, 1031 (9th Cir. 2025).
Lieutenant Salkoff and Officer Rose do not dispute that
they physically intruded into Plaintiffs’ walled-in
backyard—Lieutenant Salkoff by entering the yard and
Officer Rose by passing Storm over the wall. Such a
warrantless search is presumptively unreasonable. See
Collins, 584 U.S. at 593. The district court assumed, without
explanation, that Lieutenant Salkoff and Officer Rose
conducted this warrantless search while in hot pursuit of a
fleeing suspect. We disagree.
Hot pursuit fundamentally “means some sort of a chase.”
United States v. Santana, 427 U.S. 38, 43 (1976). “The hot

10

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

pursuit exception to the warrant requirement only applies
when officers are in ‘immediate’ and ‘continuous’ pursuit of
a suspect from the scene of the crime.” Johnson, 256 F.3d
at 907 (quoting Welsh v. Wisconsin, 466 U.S. 740, 753
(1984)). To qualify as hot pursuit, a chase “need not be
reminiscent of the opening scene of a James Bond film,”
Lange v. California, 594 U.S. 295, 329 (2021) (Roberts, C.J.,
concurring). Officers act with sufficient speed to qualify as
hot pursuit when they act immediately, making a “splitsecond decision” to pursue a suspect. Stanton v. Sims, 571
U.S. 3, 10 (2013) (per curiam).
But there is no hot pursuit where “the continuity of the
chase was terminated permanently.” Johnson, 256 F.3d at
908. In Johnson, a suspect “ran into a wooded area where
he was free to run for over a half hour” rather than “into a
confined area where [the police] could monitor his
movements.” Id. On that basis, we determined that “the
continuity of the chase was clearly broken and a warrant was
required.” Id. We further noted that, “[a]lthough this
requirement may be inconvenient to law enforcement, any
other outcome renders the concept of ‘hot pursuit’
meaningless and allows the police to conduct warrantless
searches while investigating a suspect’s whereabouts.” Id.
We recently observed in Newman that whether a
pursuit’s continuity has been broken is a function of “two
interrelated considerations.” 134 F.4th at 1033. First,
“whether, and to what degree, the officer[] lost track of the
suspect’s whereabouts.” Id. Second, whether, after losing
sight of a suspect, the officer “continued to act with speed in
attempting to apprehend the suspect.” Id. Timing is relevant
to both considerations. As seconds and minutes tick by, the
officer’s once-clear knowledge of a suspect’s position fades
till they are no longer chasing a suspect but instead searching

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

11

for him. “The more time passes without the officer’s
physically chasing after the suspect . . . the more likely the
continuity of the chase is to break.” Id.
In Newman, officers followed a suspect’s truck down a
dead-end street where the suspect exited his vehicle and ran
directly toward the back of the plaintiff’s house. Id. at 1028–
29. Officers lost sight of the suspect for nine minutes but
had probable cause to believe he was in the plaintiff’s house,
given that the suspect had been headed in that direction, he
was not in the backyard, the terrain and fences would have
hindered his flight to an adjacent property, the plaintiff’s
backdoor was unlocked, and the officer perceived someone
interacting with the backdoor at some point during the
pursuit. Id. at 1031. We held that the pursuit’s continuity
was unbroken because the officers “had a reasonably good
idea where [the suspect] was hiding” for the duration of the
nine minutes after they lost sight of him. Id. at 1033.
Comparatively, here, Officer Rose last saw the suspect
fleeing toward a different property—three houses west of
Plaintiffs’ home—rather than directly to the property that
was later searched. Officer Rose neither chased after the
person nor peered over the wall to monitor the person’s
movements, and instead unsuccessfully attempted to cut the
suspect off by patrol car. Officers had seen neither hide nor
hair of the suspect for at least eighteen minutes preceding
their search, in which time the suspect’s movements through
a suburban neighborhood were completely unknown.
Defendants suggest that they reasonably believed the
suspect was somewhere within the neighborhood, and
therefore, the continuity of their search was unbroken. If we
were to accept this argument, it would threaten to swallow
the warrant requirement whole. Officers may not riffle

12

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

through private spaces in an entire neighborhood merely
because police have lost track of someone who earlier fled
from them in the general vicinity. Lieutenant Salkoff and
Officer Rose had no “reasonably good” basis for knowing
where the suspect was—beyond that he was likely still in the
neighborhood. Id. at 1033. Therefore, Defendants may not
avail themselves of the hot pursuit exception to the Fourth
Amendment’s warrant requirement.
Defendants urge that Storm’s alert salvaged the hot
pursuit and gave them probable cause to search Plaintiffs’
yard. Not so. Even if the dog sniff did give officers probable
cause to believe the suspect was in Plaintiffs’ yard, probable
cause alone is insufficient to obviate the Fourth
Amendment’s warrant requirement—there must be both
probable cause and an exigent circumstance. Johnson, 256
F.3d at 905.
Our case law was clear when these unfortunate events
unfolded in February 2019 that a pursuit’s continuity is
broken when officers lose a suspect’s trail, as happened here.
We note that Newman, decided this year, is not only
distinguishable but also does not bear on what was clearly
established law in 2019. See Sanderlin, 116 F.4th at 916
(noting that “neither favorable nor damning subsequent legal
developments can be used to demonstrate what law was or
was not clearly established at the time of an officer’s
challenged conduct”). But Johnson, decided in 2001, made
it abundantly clear to officers in 2019 that they may not
sweep through an area and search the properties within it
simply because they believe a suspect is somewhere therein.
256 F.3d at 907–08. Allowing such searches would turn
back the clock to the age of English general warrants, which
our founders firmly rejected with the inclusion of the Fourth

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

13

Amendment. See Payton v. New York, 445 U.S. 573, 583
(1980).
Because Defendants lacked an exigent circumstance to
search Plaintiffs’ yard under clearly established law at the
time of the incident, they are not entitled to qualified
immunity and summary judgment was improper.
IV.
We turn now to the fate of Shadow and Whitewall.
“Reasonableness is the touchstone of any seizure under the
Fourth Amendment.” San Jose Charter of Hells Angels
Motorcycle Club v. City of San Jose, 402 F.3d 962, 975 (9th
Cir. 2005). “To determine whether the shooting of the dogs
was reasonable, we balance ‘the nature and quality of the
intrusion on the individual’s Fourth Amendment interests
against the countervailing governmental interests at stake.’”
Id. (quoting Graham v. Connor, 490 U.S. 386, 396 (1989)).
We must judge the reasonableness of a particular use of force
“from the perspective of a reasonable officer on the scene,
rather than with the 20/20 vision of hindsight.” Graham, 490
U.S. at 396.
When we evaluate an officer’s use of force following a
warrantless intrusion into private space, we must not
conflate the unreasonable seizure claim with the
unreasonable search claim challenging the entry. County of
Los Angeles v. Mendez, 581 U.S. 420, 428 (2017) (“[T]he
objective reasonableness analysis must be conducted
separately for each search or seizure that is alleged to be
unconstitutional.”). Even where officers have violated
clearly established law with a warrantless search, we cannot
rely on that warrantless search to say that an officer’s
otherwise reasonable subsequent use of force was
excessive. See id. at 428–29.

14

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

Plaintiffs argue that Lieutenant Salkoff violated rights
that were clearly established under Hells Angels when he
shot their dogs. In Hells Angels, recognizing “that dogs are
more than just a personal effect,” we found that killing dogs
is a “severe” intrusion on Fourth Amendment protections.
402 F.3d at 975. But, in that case, officers had a week to
plan the execution of the warrants, were aware guard dogs
resided at the premises to be searched, and devised only to
use a shotgun to handle any encounters with the dogs rather
than employing less-intrusive means. Id. at 976. We
emphasized in our decision that it was not a case “where the
officer was reacting to a sudden unexpected situation” or
needed to make a split-second judgment. Id. at 978.
By contrast, in this case, officers had minutes—not
days—to discover and plan for handling any dogs in
Plaintiffs’ backyard. Lieutenant Salkoff attempted to stir
any dogs that might have been home before he entered the
yard but saw no indications that dogs were present. Officers
were unaware that the resident dogs were pit bulls, as
opposed to a breed that may have been less sensitive to the
intrusion or more readily controllable by Lieutenant Salkoff.
For these reasons, the facts in this case are sufficiently
distinguishable from those in Hells Angels that we cannot
say Lieutenant Salkoff’s actions in this more spontaneous
confrontation violated clearly established law.
Because Plaintiffs do not offer, and we cannot find, any
cases clearly establishing that Lieutenant Salkoff’s actions
were unreasonable, he is entitled to qualified immunity and
summary judgment with respect to his use of force against
Plaintiffs’ dogs.
We note, however, that Lieutenant Salkoff and Officer
Rose may still be liable to Plaintiffs for the deaths of their

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

15

dogs as a natural consequence of the warrantless search of
their yard. Tatum v. Moody, 768 F.3d 806, 817 (9th Cir.
2014) (“Under § 1983, ‘a person is responsible for the
natural consequences of his actions.’” (simplified)) (quoting
Monroe v. Pape, 365 U.S. 167, 187 (1961), overruled in part
on other grounds by Monell v. Dep’t of Soc. Servs., 436 U.S.
658 (1978)); Mendez, 581 U.S. at 431 (stating that, even
where plaintiffs “cannot recover on their excessive force
claim, that will not foreclose recovery for injuries
proximately caused by the warrantless entry”).
V.
Cities may be held liable under § 1983 for constitutional
violations committed by their officers. See Monell, 436 U.S.
at 694. To establish such liability, Plaintiffs must prove
“(1) [they were] deprived of a constitutional right; (2) the
municipality had a policy; (3) the policy amounted to
deliberate indifference to [their] constitutional right; and
(4) the policy was the moving force behind the constitutional
violation.” Lockett v. County of Los Angeles, 977 F.3d 737,
741 (9th Cir. 2020). A municipal policy can be, among other
things, “a failure to train [or] supervise.” Horton by Horton
v. City of Santa Maria, 915 F.3d 592, 603 (9th Cir. 2019).
Plaintiffs contend that the City failed to provide officers
with adequate training and supervision regarding
warrantless searches and the lawful use of a service weapon
on pet dogs. To establish municipal liability under such a
theory, the failure to train must “amount to ‘deliberate
indifference to the rights of persons with whom the
[untrained employees] come into contact.’” Connick v.
Thompson, 563 U.S. 51, 61 (2011) (alteration in original)
(quoting City of Canton v. Harris, 489 U.S. 378, 388
(1989)). Because the municipality must have had “actual or

16

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

constructive notice [of] a particular omission in their training
program” to demonstrate deliberate indifference, a plaintiff
must typically provide evidence of “[a] pattern of similar
constitutional violations by untrained employees.” Id. at 61–
62.
Plaintiffs’ Monell claim on warrantless searches fails
because Plaintiffs have not offered any evidence of a pattern
of warrantless search violations or other evidence of
constructive notice such that the City was deliberately
indifferent to Plaintiffs’ Fourth Amendment rights. As for
the use-of-force claim, Plaintiffs note that the City settled
three prior suits involving dog-shootings, each with different
facts than those presented here, during a five-year period.
Even if those settlements suggest that the police may have
acted wrongfully in those cases, evidence of “sporadic” or
“isolated” wrongdoing is generally insufficient to establish
“that the conduct has become a traditional method of
carrying out policy.” Trevino v. Gates, 99 F.3d 911, 918 (9th
Cir. 1996); see also Connick, 563 U.S. at 62–63. Therefore,
the City is entitled to summary judgment on Plaintiffs’
Monell claims.2
VI.
We reverse the district court’s grant of qualified
immunity and summary judgment to Lieutenant Salkoff and
Officer Rose with respect to their search of Plaintiffs’
backyard. Because the district court declined to exercise
supplemental jurisdiction over Plaintiffs’ state law claim
solely based on its grant of summary judgment to
2

Plaintiffs also do not argue that the consequences of a failure to train
on warrantless searches are so “patently obvious” that the City could be
liable “without proof of a pre-existing pattern of violations.” Connick,
563 U.S. at 64.

JONES V. CITY OF NORTH LAS VEGAS

17

Defendants on all of Plaintiffs’ federal claims, its dismissal
of that claim is also reversed. See Brodheim v. Cry, 584 F.3d
1262, 1273 (9th Cir. 2009). We affirm the district court’s
grant of summary judgment in all other respects. We remand
for further proceedings.
The parties shall bear their own costs on appeal.
AFFIRMED IN PART; REVERSED IN PART;
REMANDED.

