FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CARLOS PENA,

No. 24-2422

Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
CITY OF LOS ANGELES,
Defendant - Appellee.

D.C. No.
2:23-cv-05821JFW-MAA

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
John F. Walter, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted January 16, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed November 4, 2025
Before: Richard C. Tallman, Michelle T. Friedland, and
Mark J. Bennett, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bennett;
Concurrence by Judge Friedland

2

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

SUMMARY *
Fifth Amendment’s Takings Clause
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment for the
City of Los Angeles in a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 action brought by
Carlos Pena seeking compensation under the Fifth
Amendment’s Takings Clause for property destruction that
occurred after Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD)
officers pursued an armed fugitive inside his shop.
After a thirteen-hour standoff, in an attempt to subdue
the fugitive, LAPD SWAT officers fired dozens of tear gas
canisters through the walls, door, roof and windows of
Pena’s store. The tear gas damaged the shop, as well as the
inventory and equipment inside. The parties do not dispute
that the officers’ conduct was authorized, reasonable, and
lawful.
The panel held that the meaning of the Takings Clause at
the Founding and two centuries of precedent demonstrate
that the government’s destruction of private property when
necessary for the defense of public safety is exempt from the
scope of the Takings Clause. Because law enforcement took
reasonable and necessary actions to ensure public safety in
this case, their actions were beyond the scope of the Takings
Clause. Accordingly, Pena failed to state a claim under the
Takings Clause.
Concurring in the judgment, Judge Friedland wrote that
although she agreed with the majority that Pena did not state
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

3

a Takings Clause claim, she would reach that conclusion for
a different reason. She would hold that the Los Angeles
police’s actions fell under the search-and-arrest privilege
that serves as a background limitation on all property rights,
including Pena’s here, so no property right was infringed at
all and, accordingly, no compensation was owed.

COUNSEL
Jeffrey H. Redfern (argued) and Suranjan M. Sen, Institute
for Justice, Arlington, Virginia; Luke Hasskamp and Jarod
M. Bona, Bona Law PC, La Jolla, California; for PlaintiffAppellant.
Michael M. Walsh (argued), Deputy City Attorney; Shaun
D. Jacobs, Supervisory Assistant City Attorney; Kathleen A.
Kenealy, Chief Assistant City Attorney; Denise C. Mills,
Chief Deputy City Attorney; Hydee F. Soto, City Attorney;
Los Angeles Office of the City Attorney, Los Angeles,
California; for Defendant-Appellee.

4

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

OPINION
BENNETT, Circuit Judge:
When an armed fugitive barricaded himself inside
Plaintiff-Appellant Carlos Pena’s print shop, officers of the
Los Angeles Police Department (LAPD) pursued the armed
fugitive inside Pena’s store and damaged Pena’s property.
As Pena acknowledges, the officers acted reasonably and
lawfully in all their actions. Pena nevertheless alleges that
the damage caused by the officers constituted a compensable
taking under the Takings Clause of the Fifth Amendment to
the United States Constitution and that he is entitled to just
compensation from Defendant-Appellee the City of Los
Angeles for the destruction of his property. We hold that
Pena fails to state a Takings Clause claim. The meaning of
the Takings Clause at the Founding and two centuries of
precedent demonstrate that the government’s destruction of
private property when necessary for the defense of public
safety is exempt from the scope of the Takings Clause.
Because history and precedent show that Pena’s claim falls
outside the scope of the Takings Clause, we affirm the
district court’s judgment.
I. FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
a. Factual Background
Carlos Pena owns and operates a print shop in Los
Angeles. On August 3, 2022, an armed fugitive fleeing from
law enforcement officers entered Pena’s store, threw Pena
out the front door, and barricaded himself inside. 1 The shop
The fugitive was armed with at least one firearm, “a pistol with an
extended magazine,” which he left at Pena’s shop. On August 15, 2022,

1

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

5

was then surrounded by LAPD officers and deputy United
States Marshals. After a thirteen-hour standoff, in an
attempt to subdue the fugitive, LAPD SWAT officers fired
dozens of tear gas canisters through the walls, door, roof and
windows of Pena’s store. 2 The tear gas damaged the shop,
as well as the inventory and equipment inside. Pena alleges
that the damages exceed $60,000. 3 The parties do not
dispute that the officers’ conduct was authorized,
reasonable, and lawful. 4
b. Procedural Background
Pena first sought compensation from the United States
Marshals Service. The Service denied Pena’s claim and
advised him to seek compensation from LAPD. Pena filed
two claims with the City of Los Angeles, but the City did not
respond. Pena’s attorney sent a letter to the Los Angeles
City Attorney seeking compensation but again received no
following a second barricade incident, the fugitive “was discovered
deceased with a self-inflicted gun shot [sic] wound.”
When police officers eventually entered the shop, they discovered that
the fugitive had escaped.
2

In the original claim for damages Pena submitted to the City, Pena
alleged that the fugitive—not the police—caused much of the damage.
But in his federal court complaint, Pena alleges that the damages were
caused exclusively by the LAPD. Because the City does not challenge
this version of the facts, and the district court’s order relied on Pena’s
statement of facts in his complaint, we assume that the destruction of
Pena’s property was caused entirely by the City.
3

For example, Pena’s complaint states: “[Pena] does not question the
City’s officers’ determination that the public good required the
destruction of his shop, but he does not believe that he should be left to
bear the resulting costs.” And Pena’s declaration in support of his
motion for partial summary judgment states that he does “not fault the
City’s police officers for acting in the public’s interest.”

4

6

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

response. Pena then filed a complaint in federal court
seeking compensatory damages against the City under 42
U.S.C. § 1983, alleging a claim for the taking of private
property without just compensation in violation of the Fifth
Amendment. See U.S. CONST. amend. V (“[N]or shall
private property be taken for public use, without just
compensation.”).
The City filed a motion for judgment on the pleadings,
arguing that Pena’s claim failed because the Takings Clause
carries an implicit exception for property destroyed pursuant
to a valid exercise of the police power, and “the Takings
Clause does not require compensation for damaged or
destroyed property when it was objectively necessary for
officers to damage or destroy that property in an active
emergency to prevent imminent harm to persons.” The
district court denied that motion because the issues raised
would be more appropriately resolved on a motion for
summary judgment. Following discovery, Pena moved for
partial summary judgment, arguing that when the
government intentionally destroys private property for
public purposes, it is a taking. The district court denied
Pena’s motion on the grounds that the destruction of Pena’s
store in pursuit of the fugitive “constituted a valid use of
police power and did not constitute a taking for purposes of
the Fifth Amendment.” Based on the district court’s
determinations, the parties stipulated to judgment for the
City, and Pena now appeals.
II. JURISDICTION
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

7

III. STANDARD OF REVIEW
Whether this type of police action constitutes a
compensable taking is a question of law that we review de
novo. See Yeager v. Bowlin, 693 F.3d 1076, 1079 (9th Cir.
2012).
IV. DISCUSSION
The parties agree that the law enforcement officers’
destruction of Pena’s property in pursuit of an armed fugitive
was a reasonable and lawful exercise of the City’s police
powers. But Pena contends that even though the actions
were reasonable and lawful, the City’s destruction of his
property nonetheless comes with a price—just compensation
under the Takings Clause. In response, the City argues that
the Takings Clause does not provide any recovery for
property damage caused by police officers’ lawful and
reasonable efforts to enforce criminal laws and pursue
criminal suspects.
In determining whether Pena’s claim has merit, we look
first to history to determine the scope of the constitutional
right granted by the Takings Clause. 5 At the time of the
The concurrence suggests that we should instead begin with an analysis
of the scope of the property right itself and identifies statements in
federal cases suggesting that no property right was invaded here because
“a traditional common law privilege . . . limits property rights” to exclude
an official searching for or arresting a criminal. Concurrence at 32–33.
But under our precedent, “whether a property right exists . . . is a question
of state law . . . . [W]e look to state law to determine what property rights
exist and therefore are subject to ‘taking’ under the Fifth Amendment.”
Vandevere v. Lloyd, 644 F.3d 957, 963 (9th Cir. 2011); see also S. Cal.
Edison Co. v. Orange Cnty. Transp. Auth., 96 F.4th 1099, 1104 (9th Cir.
2024). Thus, whether Pena’s property rights were invaded is a question
of California law. But faced with substantially the same claim as Pena’s,
the Supreme Court of California did not find that no property right was

5

8

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

Founding, the principle of just compensation did not require
payment in cases where, like here, the government
reasonably and necessarily destroyed property in pursuit of
a dangerous fugitive. History counsels that such reasonable
and necessary destruction by law enforcement officers falls
outside the scope of the Takings Clause.
Jurisprudence since the Founding also provides Pena
with no recourse. The Supreme Court has repeatedly
affirmed the principle that the government’s destruction of
private property in the necessary defense of public safety
does not give rise to a compensable taking. In sum, history
and precedent establish that Pena does not plead a
compensable taking under the Fifth Amendment, so we
affirm the district court’s grant of summary judgment
dismissing Pena’s claim. 6 Finally, we note that States and
invaded; rather, it found that the case fell outside the scope of
California’s analogue of the Takings Clause. Customer Co. v. City of
Sacramento, 895 P.2d 900, 907 (Cal. 1995) (“There is nothing that
indicates the provision was intended to . . . require the payment of just
compensation for damage caused by the government’s efforts to enforce
the criminal laws.”). While the court did state that such injuries as Pena’s
are “damnum absque injuria (i.e., a loss not giving rise to a cause of
action),” id. at 908, that term does not indicate the lack of a property
right, but rather the lack of a tort claim for damage to property. See
EDWARD P. WEEKS, THE DOCTRINE OF DAMNUM ABSQUE INJURIA § 4
(1879); see also Gray v. Reclamation Dist. No. 1500, 163 P. 1024, 1032
(Cal. 1917) (holding that amendments to California’s analogue of the
Takings Clause “did not, touching the exercise of the police power, give
a right of action for damages which theretofore were damnum absque
injuria” even though “that a taking or damage is worked is universally
conceded, and the sole ground upon which the denial of compensation is
placed is that [the taking] is but a legitimate enforcement of the police
power.”).
The district court denied Pena’s motion for partial summary judgment
because it found that “the damage to Plaintiff’s shop was caused by the

6

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

9

municipalities may still provide relief for individuals in
Pena’s position under state and local law.
a. The Circuit Split
The parties dispute whether the government’s
destruction of private property pursuant to the police power
(rather than its seizure via eminent domain or otherwise)
may ever constitute a compensable taking under the Fifth
Amendment. This raises an issue of first impression for us.
Many of our sister circuits, however, have already addressed
the issue, and this “important question . . . had divided the
courts of appeals.” See Baker v. City of McKinney, 145 S.
Ct. 11, 11 (2024) (Sotomayor, J., joined by Gorsuch, J.,
respecting denial of certiorari) (noting the circuit split
respecting “whether the Takings Clause requires
compensation when the government damages private
property pursuant to its police power”). Specifically, our
sister circuits have split on whether there is a categorical
police power exception to the Takings Clause for the
government’s destruction of private property.
The States’ police powers authorize law enforcement
officers to prevent and combat crime, including violent
crime. 7 United States v. Morrison, 529 U.S. 598, 618 (2000)
LAPD SWAT team’s use of the police power that Plaintiff concedes was
reasonable.” While we affirm the district court’s conclusion, our
reasoning does not go as far as the district court’s. As explained below,
we do not hold that there is, or is not, a broad police power exception to
the Takings Clause. Rather, we hold that because law enforcement took
reasonable and necessary actions to ensure public safety in this case,
their actions were beyond the scope of the Takings Clause.
Although the City is a municipality, a municipality’s exercise of the
police power is analogous to that of the State. See Cal. Reduction Co. v.
Sanitary Reduction Works, 126 F. 29, 34 (9th Cir. 1903) (identifying “the

7

10

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

(“Indeed, we can think of no better example of
the police power . . . than the suppression of violent crime
and vindication of its victims.”). The government may
damage or destroy private property under its inherent police
powers. See Miller v. Schoene, 276 U.S. 272, 279–80 (1928)
(“[W]here the public interest is involved preferment of that
interest over the property interest of the individual, to the
extent even of its destruction, is one of the distinguishing
characteristics of every exercise of the police power which
affects property.”). But the parties dispute whether the
government’s destruction of private property pursuant to the
police power—rather than its seizure via eminent domain or
otherwise, such as via so-called “regulatory” takings—may
ever constitute a compensable taking under the Fifth
Amendment.
Our sister circuits are split on the issue. Four courts—
the Fourth, Fifth, Sixth, and Federal Circuits—have held that
there exists no categorical police-power exception to the
Takings Clause. The Fifth and Sixth Circuits confronted
cases that presented very similar facts to Pena’s. In those
cases, the Fifth and Sixth Circuits each held that there exists
no categorical police-power exception to the Takings Clause
but, based on other exceptions to the Takings Clause, also
held that no compensation was owed to the plaintiffs. In
Baker v. City of McKinney, the Fifth Circuit held that
“history, tradition, [and] historical precedent” counseled
against the existence of a categorical police power
exception. 84 F.4th 378, 383–84 (5th Cir. 2023), cert.
denied, 145 S. Ct. 11 (2024) (“Indeed, the mere fact that
power of the Legislature or municipality under what is commonly
designated as the ‘police power of the state’”), aff’d, 199 U.S. 306
(1905).

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

11

Baker’s property has been damaged or destroyed pursuant to
the City’s police power cannot decide this case.”). But the
Fifth Circuit nevertheless rejected Baker’s takings claim,
reasoning that “as a matter of history and precedent, the
Takings Clause does not require compensation for damaged
or destroyed property when it was objectively necessary for
officers to damage or destroy that property in an active
emergency to prevent imminent harm to persons.” 8 Id. at
379. The Fifth Circuit referred to this as the “necessity
exception to the Takings Clause.” Id. at 388. As explained
further below, we agree with the Fifth Circuit’s rationale and
find that law enforcement’s reasonable and necessary
destruction of property to protect public safety falls outside
the scope of the Takings Clause.
In Slaybaugh v. Rutherford County, 114 F.4th 593 (6th
Cir. 2024), cert. denied, 145 S. Ct. 1959 (2025), the Sixth
Circuit also held that there exists no categorical police power
exception to the Takings Clause. 9 Id. at 597. The Sixth
Circuit found that it was “questionable” whether a police
power exception to the Takings Clause “comport[ed] with
the text and history of the Takings Clause or with precedent
interpreting it.” Id. (citing Baker, 84 F.4th at 384). It also
recognized that a categorical police exception to the Takings
Clause “would run afoul of Supreme Court precedent
recognizing that the government’s exercise of its police
Baker’s home suffered severe damage when “police officers employed
armored vehicles, explosives, and toxic-gas grenades” while trying to
apprehend an “armed fugitive [holding] a 15-year-old girl hostage
inside” the house. Baker, 84 F.4th at 379.
8

In Slaybaugh, police pursuing a murder suspect barricaded inside his
parents’ home “fired approximately 35 tear gas cannisters into the
dwelling” attempting to “smoke him out” before entering the home and
arresting the suspect. 114 F.4th at 595.

9

12

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

powers can, in some circumstances, amount to a taking.” Id.
Instead of adopting the Fifth Circuit’s “necessity” exception,
however, the Slaybaugh court held that the plaintiffs were
not entitled to compensation because the police actions were
justified by a “search-and-arrest privilege” “rooted in the
common law [and] long recognized in our court system as a
defense to trespass claims.” Id. at 603–04. It held that
“under the search-and-arrest privilege, law enforcement may
forcibly enter a home to arrest someone, so long as (1) the
arrest is lawful and (2) the use of force in carrying out the
arrest is reasonable.” Id. at 599.
The Fourth and Federal Circuits addressed this question
in cases that were factually distinct from Pena’s. The Fourth
Circuit held it to be “axiomatic in the Supreme Court’s
jurisprudence” “[t]hat Government actions taken pursuant to
the police power are not per se exempt from the Takings
Clause.” 10 Yawn v. Dorchester County, 1 F.4th 191, 195
(4th Cir. 2021). The Federal Circuit also rejected the idea of
an absolute categorical police power exception to the
Takings Clause, holding that “it is insufficient to avoid the
burdens imposed by the Takings Clause simply to invoke the
‘police powers’ of the state, regardless of the respective
benefits to the public and burdens on the property owner.”
Acadia Tech., Inc. v. United States, 458 F.3d 1327, 1332

The Yawn plaintiffs sought compensation for the killing of their bees
following the county’s use of an aerial pesticide spray to target
mosquitos as part of efforts to combat the spread of the Zika virus. 1
F.4th at 192–93. The Fourth Circuit rejected the plaintiffs’ claim
because “the death of [their] bees was neither intentional nor
foreseeable,” and if the government “invasion [of property] is not
intended or foreseeable, then it does not constitute a taking.” Id. at 195.
10

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

13

(Fed. Cir. 2006). 11 But the Federal Circuit cited with
approval the notion that “items properly seized by the
government under its police power are not seized for ‘public
use’ within the meaning of the Fifth Amendment,” and thus
such seizures are not compensable takings. Id. (quoting Seay
v. United States, 61 Fed. Cl. 32, 35 (2004)). 12
On the other side of this split, the Seventh Circuit has
held that “the Takings Clause does not apply when property
is retained or damaged as the result of the government’s
exercise of its authority pursuant to some power other than
the power of eminent domain.” Johnson v. Manitowoc
In Acadia, the plaintiffs, importers of computer parts, argued that the
government violated their Fifth Amendment rights when it seized their
goods upon importation and did not return them for over four years. 458
F.3d at 1328. The Federal Circuit rejected the plaintiffs’ claims because
“the prohibition on importing goods bearing counterfeit marks that
misrepresent their quality and safety is the kind of exercise of the police
power that has repeatedly been treated as legitimate even in the absence
of compensation to the owners of the imported property.” Id. at 1332–
33.
11

We also note that in a case before the Court of Federal Claims, the
federal government took the position—in what appears to be its most
recent formal stance on the issue—that “a valid exercise of the . . . police
power . . . do[es] not constitute a compensable Fifth Amendment
taking.” United States’ Mot. to Dismiss for Failure to State a Claim at
2, Bachmann v. United States, 134 Fed. Cl. 694 (2017) (No. 17-cv00528), ECF No. 5. In that case, the Court of Federal Claims held:
12

When private property is damaged incident to the
exercise of the police power, such damage is not a
taking for the public use, because the property has not
been altered or turned over for public benefit. Instead,
both the owner of the property and the public can be
said to be benefited by the enforcement of criminal
laws and cessation of the criminal activity.
Bachmann, 134 Fed. Cl. at 696.

14

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

County, 635 F.3d 331, 336 (7th Cir. 2011). 13 In so doing,
the Seventh Circuit adopted a broad police-power exception
to the Takings Clause. Id. Applying that broad exception in
Johnson, the Seventh Circuit held that because the actions
resulting in property destruction “were taken under the
state’s police power . . . [t]he Takings Clause claim [was] a
non-starter.” Id. In unpublished decisions, the Third and
Tenth Circuits have also adopted a broad police-power
exception to the Takings Clause.
See Zitter v.
Petruccelli, 744 F. App’x 90, 96 (3d Cir. 2018) (finding no
taking under the Takings Clause where law enforcement
officers acquired plaintiff’s property pursuant to a lawful
search warrant, and quoting Johnson, 635 F.3d at 333–36,
for the principle that the seizure of property pursuant to
lawful search warrants under the police power cannot be a
taking); Lech v. Jackson, 791 F. App’x 711, 717 (10th Cir.
2019) (“[W]hen the state acts pursuant to its police power,
rather than the power of eminent domain, its actions do not
constitute a taking for purposes of the Takings Clause.”).
But because “it is not necessary to decide” whether there
exists a categorical police-power exception to the Takings
Clause, “it is necessary not to decide” whether such a broad
exception exists. Cf. Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health
Org., 597 U.S. 215, 348 (2022) (Roberts, C.J., concurring in
the judgment). Accordingly, we hold only that no taking
occurs for the purposes of the Takings Clause when law
enforcement officers destroy private property while acting
reasonably in the necessary defense of public safety.
In Johnson, the plaintiff alleged that law enforcement violated his Fifth
Amendment rights by extensively damaging his property while
executing search warrants related to the allegedly criminal activities of
the plaintiff’s tenant. 635 F.3d at 332–33.
13

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

15

That, Pena admits, is what occurred here. Law
enforcement officers destroyed Pena’s property while acting
reasonably to capture an armed fugitive fleeing from police.
The “necessity exception to the Takings Clause,” Baker, 84
F.4th at 388, therefore applies to Pena’s claim, and no
compensable taking occurred.
b. The Takings Clause at the Founding
Our decision to recognize a necessity exception to the
Takings Clause is supported by both the scope of the Takings
Clause at the Founding and Takings Clause jurisprudence.
The Fifth Amendment’s Takings Clause provides that
“private property” shall not “be taken for public use, without
just compensation.” 14 U.S. CONST. amend. V. In Pena’s
telling, the lawful, necessary, and reasonable destruction of
private property by law enforcement in pursuit of an armed
fugitive falls within the scope of the Takings Clause. 15 But
at the Founding, the principle of just compensation was
inconsistently applied by various state and colonial
legislatures and courts. And in the limited Founding-era
instances where courts were presented with takings claims
following the government’s seizure of private property as
part of necessary efforts to protect public safety, those claims
were rejected as outside the scope of the Takings Clause.
14
The Takings Clause is sometimes referred to as the Just Compensation
Clause. See Tahoe-Sierra Pres. Council, Inc. v. Tahoe Reg’l Plan.
Agency, 535 U.S. 302, 306 n.1 (2002).
15
Pena has consistently argued that the Takings Clause requires
compensation no matter the reason government destroys private
property. At oral argument, for example, Pena’s counsel confirmed that
his construct would cover law enforcement’s destruction of property in
pursuit of fugitives holding hostages or during an attempt to rescue
individuals buried alive by criminals. Oral Arg. at 4:08–5:28.

16

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

The Supreme Court has urged lower courts to examine
the historical record when attempting to determine the scope
of constitutional rights. See, e.g., N.Y. State Rifle & Pistol
Ass’n v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 18 (2022) (holding that in
construing the scope of the Second Amendment, “[t]he
Courts of Appeals” are to “ascertain the original scope of the
right based on its historical meaning”); see also Tyler v.
Hennepin County, 598 U.S. 631, 637–44 (2023)
(determining the applicability of the Takings Clause from
“[h]istory and precedent” reaching back to Magna Carta).
So, we look first to history to determine whether, at the
Founding, the destruction of private property pursuant to
reasonable law enforcement actions necessary to ensure
public safety fell within the meaning of the Takings Clause.
The Supreme Court has traced the roots of the Takings
Clause (and the constitutional principle of just
compensation) to Magna Carta. See Horne v. Dep’t of
Agric., 576 U.S. 350, 358 (2015). The Supreme Court has
specifically invoked Clause 28 of Magna Carta as laying the
foundation for the Takings Clause: that clause forbade the
English government’s seizure of “corn or other
provisions . . . without immediately tendering money
therefor, unless he can have postponement thereof by
permission of the seller.” Id. (quoting MAGNA CARTA, cl.
28, reprinted in WILLIAM SHARP MCKECHNIE, MAGNA
CARTA: A COMMENTARY ON THE GREAT CHARTER OF KING
JOHN 329 (2d ed. 1914) (“Magna Carta”)).
Magna Carta’s treatment of personal property differs
from its treatment of “real property”—land and attached
structures—whose uncompensated seizure was authorized
so long as the state abided by procedural regularities. “As
originally drafted, the Great Charter provided that ‘[n]o
freeman shall be . . . disseised of his freehold . . . but by

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

17

lawful judgment of his peers, or by the law of the land.’”
Kerry v. Din, 576 U.S. 86, 91 (2015) (alteration in original)
(emphasis removed) (quoting MAGNA CARTA, ch. 29,
reprinted in 1 EDWARD COKE, THE SECOND PART OF THE
INSTITUTES OF THE LAWS OF ENGLAND 45 (1797)). But
although Magna Carta itself distinguishes between personal
and “real” property, in practice, the English Parliament’s
“acquisition of [real] property for fortifications, roads,
bridges, and river improvements . . . regularly provided for
a compensation scheme.” James W. Ely Jr., “All Temperate
and Civilized Governments”; A Brief History of Just
Compensation in the Nineteenth Century, 10 BRIGHAMKANNER PROP. RTS. J. 275, 276 (2021) (emphasis added).
And when publishing his Commentaries on the Laws of
England (1765–1769), “Blackstone treated [such]
compensation as an established principle of the common
law.” Id.; see also The Case of the King’s Prerogative in
Saltpetre (1606) 77 Eng. Rep. 1294, 1295 (allowing King
James VI to seize English salt mines for the production of
gunpowder, so long as the King’s ministers left the
“inheritance of the subject in so good plight as they found
it”).
The colonists looked to both Magna Carta and English
common law in defining and establishing their own
principles of self-governance. See Horne, 576 U.S. at 358–
59. But the principle of just compensation was not a
universal (or even common) feature of early state
constitutions. See William Michael Treanor, Note, The
Origins and Original Significance of the Just Compensation
Clause of the Fifth Amendment, 94 YALE L.J. 694, 698
(1985).
Indeed, some colonial-era laws expressly
disallowed compensation when the state seized privately
owned but unimproved land for public use. See 1760 N.Y.

18

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

Laws 191 (providing compensation only for the seizure of
“cleared and improved Lands”); 1750 N.Y. Laws 421 (same
for “inclosed or improved lands”). 16
But other very early state and colonial statutes did
mandate that the government provide just compensation for
the seizure of private property.
In 1641, for example, Massachusetts adopted
its Body of Liberties, prohibiting “mans
Cattel or goods of what kinde soever” from
being “pressed or taken for any publique use
or service, unlesse it be by warrant grounded
upon some act of the generall Court, nor
without such reasonable prices and hire as the
ordinarie rates of the Countrie do afford.”
Massachusetts Body of Liberties ¶ 8, in R.
Perry, SOURCES OF OUR LIBERTIES 149
(1978). Virginia allowed the seizure of
surplus “live stock, or beef, pork, or bacon”
for the military, but only upon “paying or
tendering to the owner the price so estimated
by the appraisers.” 1777 Va. Acts ch. XII.
And South Carolina authorized the seizure of
“necessaries” for public use, but provided
that “said articles so seized shall be paid for
agreeable to the prices such and the like

16
The rejection by some colonists of the principles of just compensation
has been identified as reflecting the “reigning ideology” of the Founding
era, republicanism, in which “[i]ndividual rights played no more than a
secondary role.” Treanor, supra, at 699. A core tenet of republicanism
was the idea that “the state could abridge the property right in order to
promote common interests.” Id. at 700.

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

19

articles sold for on the ninth day of October
last.” 1779 S.C. Acts § 4.
Horne, 576 U.S. at 358–59.
Many States that adopted just compensation
requirements did so in response to what Blackstone
described as “the arbitrary and oppressive mode of obtaining
supplies for the army, and other public uses, by impressment,
as was too frequently practised during the revolutionary war,
without any compensation whatever.” ST. GEORGE TUCKER,
1 BLACKSTONE’S COMMENTARIES, note D, at 305–06
(1803). In 1778, John Jay publicly denounced “the Practice
of impressing Horses, Teems, & Carriages by the military,
without the Intervention of a civil Magistrate, and without
any Authority from the Law of the Land.” 1 JOHN JAY, A
Hint to the Legislature of the State of New York, [Jan. 15,
1778–Apr. 2, 1778] in THE SELECTED PAPERS OF JOHN JAY,
503–05 (Elizabeth M. Nuxoll ed., 2010). 17
Against this backdrop, James Madison authored the
Takings Clause animated by concerns that although the
rights of property had been “for obvious reasons, unattended
to in the commencement of the Revolution,” “more correct
ideas on th[e] subject” required that the government
expressly safeguard those rights. Treanor, supra, at 709
(quoting James Madison, Observations on Jefferson’s Draft
of a Constitution of Virginia (Oct. 15, 1788), reprinted in 8
THOMAS JEFFERSON, THE PAPERS OF THOMAS JEFFERSON
308, 310 (Julian P. Boyd ed., 1953)). The Takings Clause,
as enacted, provided: “[N]or shall private property be taken
These uncompensated seizures contributed to a broader societal trend
towards “liberalism” and its emphasis on “individual rights—
particularly property rights.” Treanor, supra, at 701, 704.
17

20

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

for public use, without just compensation.” 18 U.S. CONST.
amend. V.
Following independence, States themselves remained
divided over the principle of just compensation. Vermont’s
1786 constitution, for example, established that while
“private property ought to be subservient to public
uses . . . whenever any particular man’s property is taken for
the use of the public, the owner ought to receive an
equivalent in money.” VT. CONST. ch. I, art. II (1786); see
also 1777 Va. Acts ch. XII (allowing the government to seize
surplus “live stock, or beef, pork, or bacon” upon “paying or
tendering to the owner the [estimated] price”). In both
Pennsylvania and South Carolina, however, courts held that
the government’s seizure of unimproved land did not entitle
landowners to just compensation. See, e.g., M’Clenachan v.
Curwen, 6 Binn. 509, 511, 516 (Pa. 1802) (denying
compensation for the building of a road across unimproved
Madison’s original proposal for the Takings Clause reflects a greater
concern with the government’s direct physical seizure of property than
the language ultimately adopted: “No person shall be . . . obliged to
relinquish his property, where it may be necessary for public use, without
a just compensation.” 12 JAMES MADISON, Amendments to the
Constitution, [8 June] 1789, THE PAPERS OF JAMES MADISON, 2 MARCH
1789–20 JANUARY 1790 AND SUPPLEMENT 24 OCTOBER 1775–24
JANUARY 1789, 196–210 (Charles F. Hobson & Robert A. Rutland, eds.
1979) (emphasis added). We know of nothing in the historical record
explaining the departure from this wording of the Takings Clause.
Madison’s introduction of the Takings Clause has been described as “sua
sponte,” and there is no recorded debate on the meaning, scope, or
interpretation of the Takings Clause at the time of its adoption. David J.
Wenthold, Comment, Murr and Wisconsin: The Badger State’s Take on
Regulatory Takings, 102 MARQ. L. REV. 261, 267 (2018); see also
Treanor, supra, at 711 (arguing that Madison “intended the clause to
apply only to direct, physical taking of property by the federal
government”).
18

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

21

land in colonial Pennsylvania); Lindsay v. East Bay St.
Comm’rs, 2 S.C.L. (2 Bay) 38, 47–51, 62 (1796) (denying
compensation for the seizure of unimproved land in colonial
South Carolina because the judges were “equally divided”).
As this history shows, the principle of just compensation
was irregularly adopted by various state and colonial
legislatures and courts, both preceding and during the
Founding era. But Pena cites no Founding-era examples—
and we could find none—of either states or the federal
government establishing that the state’s destruction of
property out of necessity in the defense of public safety
required (or even warranted) the payment of just
compensation. And when the historical record does not
support the scope of a constitutional claim as alleged, “[t]he
absence” of such support is itself “weighty evidence”
counseling against the expansion of constitutional claims.
Culley v. Marshall, 601 U.S. 377, 392 (2024).
And when contemplating governmental takings in the
context of defending public safety, at least one Founding-era
state supreme court held that the colonial government’s
seizure of property in the defense of public safety did not
constitute a taking. Respublica v. Sparhawk, 1 Dall. 357 (Pa.
1788), is a pre-Takings Clause case that addressed the
common law right to just compensation at the time of the
Founding. 19 There, the Pennsylvania Supreme Court held
that just compensation was not warranted for the colonial
19
We find Sparhawk particularly persuasive given that, as discussed
further below, the Supreme Court has repeatedly cited Sparhawk for the
principle that the government’s destruction of private property in
wartime does not warrant just compensation. See, e.g., United States v.
Caltex, 344 U.S. 149, 154 & n.6 (1952); United States v. Pac. R.R., 120
U.S. 227, 234 (1887).

22

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

government’s seizure of private property during the
Revolutionary War. Id. at 363. The Sparhawk plaintiff
specifically sought compensation for flour seized by the
government “in order to prevent its falling into the hands of
the enemy.” Id. at 360. As the Pennsylvania Supreme Court
reasoned, “Congress might lawfully direct the removal of
any articles that were necessary to the maintenance of the
Continental army, or useful to the enemy . . . for they were
vested with the powers of peace and war” without providing
compensation for such seizure. Id. at 363. In other words,
no compensation was due because the seizure of the relevant
property was, as here, undertaken by the State in the defense
of public safety. See also id. (“In time of war, bulwarks may
be built on private ground . . . because it is for the public
safety.”).
Indeed, this understanding of the relationship between
the government’s need to protect public safety and the
principle of just compensation predates the Founding.
Emmerich de Vattel’s The Law of Nations—first published
in 1758—discussed how:
The sovereign, indeed, ought to shew an
equitable regard for the sufferers, if the
situation of his affairs will admit of it:
but no action lies against the state for
misfortunes of this nature,—for losses which
she has occasioned, not willfully, but through
necessity and by mere accident, in the
exertion of her rights. The same may be said
of damages caused by the enemy. All the
subjects are exposed to such damages: and
woe to him on whom they fall! The members
of a society may well encounter such risk of

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

23

property, since they encounter a similar risk
of life itself. Were the state strictly to
indemnify all those whose property is injured
in this manner, the public finances would
soon be exhausted; and every individual in
the state would be obliged to contribute his
share in due proportion,—a thing utterly
impracticable.
Emmerich de Vattel, THE LAW OF NATIONS 403 (London,
G.G. and J. Robinson ed. 1797) (emphasis added).
Although Vattel understood damages “done deliberately
and by way of precaution” as within the scope of just
compensation, he distinguished those damages from the
destruction of property which occurs “through necessity and
by mere accident, in the [State’s] exertion of her rights.” Id.
at 402–03. Here, the destruction of Pena’s property occurred
through necessity. Once Pena’s property had been seized by
a hostile force outside the City’s control—an armed
fugitive—the City was required to act. Its failure to do so
would have represented an abdication of its role as the
defender of public safety, which the Supreme Court has
described as the “paramount governmental interest.” Scott
v. Harris, 550 U.S. 372, 383 (2007).
c. Takings Clause Jurisprudence Since the Founding
Takings Clause jurisprudence since the Founding
provides no support for Pena’s position. Since 1791, the
Supreme Court has held that the Takings Clause covers
certain circumstances in which the government overrides
various types of private property rights in service of the
public good. These include the government’s flooding of
private property, see Pumpelly v. Green Bay & Miss. Canal

24

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

Co., 80 U.S. 166, 179–81 (1871); 20 the government’s formal
condemnation of property, see United States v. Gen. Motors
Corp., 323 U.S. 373, 374–80, 384 (1945); and the
government’s imposition of regulations requiring property
owners to admit union organizers onto their lands, see Cedar
Point Nursery v. Hassid, 594 U.S. 139, 149–52 (2021). The
Supreme Court has also identified the concept of
“regulatory” taking[s]”, in which government regulations go
“too far” and thus deprive property owners of their property
rights. See Horne, 576 U.S. at 360 (quoting Pa. Coal Co. v.
Mahon, 260 U.S. 393, 415 (1922)).
But the Supreme Court has never held that the State’s
reasonable and necessary destruction of property under its
police power constitutes a compensable taking. The
Pena cites Pumpelly as establishing that the government’s absolute
destruction of property always constitutes a taking under the Takings
Clause. Certain judges of our sister courts have agreed with this position.
See Baker v. City of McKinney, 93 F.4th 251, 252 (5th Cir. 2024) (Elrod
& Oldham, JJ., dissenting from denial of rehearing en banc) (citing
Pumpelly for the proposition that “[i]t has been settled law for over 150
years that the destruction of property constitutes a taking”). We decline
to endorse this position: first, the Pumpelly Court was construing the
Wisconsin Constitution. 80 U.S. at 176–77. The Pumpelly Court also
noted:
20

We are not unaware of the numerous cases in the State
courts in which the doctrine has been successfully
invoked that for a consequential injury to the property
of the individual arising from the prosecution of
improvements of roads, streets, rivers, and other
highways, for the public good, there is no redress; and
we do not deny that the principle is a sound one, in its
proper application, to many injuries to property so
originating.
Id. at 180–81.

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

25

Supreme Court has also acknowledged that not all
government actions infringing on property rights are takings,
including because of the history discussed above:
[M]any government-authorized physical
invasions will not amount to takings because
they are consistent with longstanding
background restrictions on property
rights . . . .
These background limitations . . . encompass
traditional common law privileges to access
private property. One such privilege allowed
individuals to enter property in the event of
public or private necessity.
See
RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS § 196
(1964) (entry to avert an imminent public
disaster); § 197 (entry to avert serious harm
to a person, land, or chattels).
Cedar Point, 594 U.S. at 160–61.
In addition to the common law right to enter private
property, the common law has long recognized a “necessity”
privilege for the destruction of private property. As the
Supreme Court identified in 1879:
At the common law every one had the right
to destroy real and personal property, in cases
of actual necessity, to prevent the spreading
of a fire, and there was no responsibility on
the part of such destroyer, and no remedy for
the owner. In the case of the Prerogative, 12
Rep. 13, it is said: ‘For the Commonwealth a
man shall suffer damage, as for saving a city

26

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

or town a house shall be plucked down if the
next one be on fire; and a thing for the
Commonwealth every man may do without
being liable to an action.’ There are many
other cases besides that of fire,—some of
them involving the destruction of life
itself,—where the same rule is applied. ‘The
rights of necessity are a part of the law.’
Bowditch v. Boston, 101 U.S. 16, 18 (citing Sparhawk, 1
Dall. at 362). In short, the necessity privilege’s “basis in
history and tradition is longstanding and long recognized.”
Baker, 84 F.4th at 387.
And for more than two centuries, the Supreme Court has
continued to invoke Sparhawk’s principle that “in times of
imminent peril . . . the sovereign could, with immunity,
destroy the property of a few that the property of many and
the lives of many more could be saved.” United States v.
Caltex, 344 U.S. 149, 154 & n.6, 156 (1952) (citing
Sparhawk and holding that the destruction of plaintiffs’
property during World War II was exempt from the scope of
the Takings Clause); see also United States v. Pac. R.R., 120
U.S. 227, 239 (1887) (holding that “the government [could
not] be charged for injuries to, or destruction of, private
property caused by military operations of armies in the field”
during the Civil War). 21 “Indeed, [at the time of the
The concurrence distinguishes these cases from the present suit
because the former both involve destruction of property during war.
Concurrence at 35–37. However, the Supreme Court’s reasoning in
these cases is not limited to the wartime context. In Pacific Railroad,
the Supreme Court quoted with approval President Grant’s statement that
there is no “legal obligation . . . to compensate the owner” when property
is “temporarily occupied, or even actually destroyed, in times of great
21

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

27

Founding,] it was [the commanding general’s] imperative
duty to direct the[] destruction” of private property in
warmaking, if doing so advanced the objectives of winning
the war. Caltex, 344 U.S. at 153–54 (quoting Pac. R.R., 120
U.S. at 234). This destruction has been exempted from the
scope of the Takings Clause because “[t]he safety of the state
in such cases overrides all considerations of private loss.”
Id. (quoting Pac. R.R., 120 U.S. at 234) (emphasis added).
These cases specifically discuss private property
destruction during wartime. While there are obvious
distinctions between the government’s exercise of its
wartime powers and the actions of domestic law
enforcement, this does not mean that the Supreme Court’s
treatment of the Takings Clause in the wartime context
provides us with no meaningful guidelines in the
circumstances before us. The rationale of Sparhawk,
adopted by the Supreme Court in Caltex and Pacific
Railroad, is directly applicable to Pena’s situation, as in
Caltex and Pacific Railroad, the Supreme Court addressed
the Government’s destruction of private property through
state actions taken to further public safety—the same
circumstances present here.

public danger, and when the public safety demands it” and that the
“destruction of property, caused by actual and necessary military
operations, is generally considered to fall within the last-mentioned
principle.” 120 U.S. at 238 (emphasis added) (quoting Cong. Globe, 42d
Cong. 2d Sess. 4155–56 (1872)). Similarly, in Caltex, the Supreme
Court noted that “the principles expressed” in Pacific Railroad “were
neither novel nor startling, for the common law had long recognized that
in times of imminent peril—such as when fire threatened a whole
community—the sovereign could, with immunity, destroy the
property . . . .” 344 U.S. at 154 (emphasis added).

28

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

Finally, although the question of practical consequences
is distinct from the question we address here, we note that
the Supreme Court has considered the practical
consequences of expanding the Takings Clause when
determining its scope. See, e.g., Lingle v. Chevron U.S.A.
Inc., 544 U.S. 528, 544 (2005) (identifying defendant’s
theory of takings not only as “doctrinally untenable” but also
as presenting “serious practical difficulties”); Nat’l Bd. of
Young Men’s Christian Ass’ns v. United States, 395 U.S. 85,
92 (1969) (identifying the pragmatic concern that under
petitioners’ conception of takings, “governmental bodies
would be liable . . . every time policemen break down the
doors of buildings to foil burglars thought to be inside”).
Expanding the scope of the Takings Clause as Pena
envisions it would cover essentially all government
destruction of private property, including when ambulances
carrying patients sideswipe private vehicles; errant bullets
break store windows in firefights with criminal suspects; and
police commit any form of property damage in pursuit of
criminal suspects, no matter how reasonable, lawful, or
necessary as part of the State’s duty to protect public safety
and save the lives of its citizens.
The practical consequences of adopting Pena’s view
would be that law enforcement officers (and other
government actors) faced with split-second decisions
regarding protecting the public and saving lives would need
to be constantly attendant to the potential financial
consequences of their actions. In real and practical terms,
this would improperly interfere with the State’s primary
obligation to protect public safety.

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

29

d. Firefighting and Necessity
The history of takings jurisprudence in the context of fire
management complicates our analysis.
When the
government destroys private property as part of its
firefighting duties, it has done so out of necessity. And some
State courts in the nineteenth century found such necessary
destruction constitutes a taking requiring just compensation.
See, e.g., Bishop & Parsons v. City of Macon, 7 Ga. 200, 202
(1849) (holding that it is “well settled, that in a case of actual
necessity, to prevent the spreading of a fire, the ravages of a
pestilence, the advance of a hostile army, or any other great
public calamity, the private property of an individual may be
lawfully taken, and used or destroyed for the relief,
protection or safety of the many. And . . . the sufferers are
nevertheless entitled, under the Constitution, to just
compensation from the public for the loss”); Hale v.
Lawrence, 21 N.J.L. 714, 739 (1848). Other State courts
disagreed. See Am. Print Works v. Lawrence, 23 N.J.L. 590,
594 (1851); Field v. City of Des Moines, 39 Iowa 575, 583,
587 (1874) (collecting cases); see also McDonald v. City of
Red Wing, 13 Minn. 38, 41–42 (1868). Moreover, the
Supreme Court’s reasoning in Takings Clause cases suggests
that such destruction does not always constitute a
compensable taking. See Bowditch, 101 U.S. at 16, 18
(holding the “city . . . not responsible to the owner of
buildings . . . which are destroyed in order to prevent the
spreading of a fire, unless a joint order for their
destruction be given by three or more engineers of the fire
department,” and identifying that “[a]t the common law
every one had the right to destroy real and personal property,
in cases of actual necessity, to prevent the spreading of a fire,
and there was no responsibility on the part of such destroyer,
and no remedy for the owner”); see also Lucas v. S.C.

30

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1029 & n.16 (1992)
(identifying the State’s “complementary power” to destroy
“‘real and personal property, in cases of actual necessity, to
prevent the spreading of a fire’ or to forestall other grave
threats to the lives and property of others” (quoting
Bowditch, 101 U.S. at 18–19)). In sum, the weight of
judicial authority respecting takings in the firefighting
context supports our holding that no compensable taking
occurs when the government destroys private property in the
course of necessary and reasonable exercise of the police
power to protect public safety. 22
e. Alternative Remedies at the State and Municipal
Level
We are cognizant of the Supreme Court’s description of
the Takings Clause as “designed to bar Government from
forcing some people alone to bear public burdens which, in
all fairness and justice, should be borne by the public as a
whole.” Armstrong v. United States, 364 U.S. 40, 49 (1960).
But the Takings Clause is not the only recourse for
individuals in Pena’s position: any injustice in such cases
may be addressed through legislative or administrative
remedies, or through more expansive corollaries to the
Takings Clause in State constitutions. Municipalities may

We have not directly addressed whether the destruction of private
property by the government while fighting fires is compensable under
the Takings Clause. However, we have found that a fire crew’s decision
to set a backfire on private property while fighting oncoming fires falls
within the discretionary function exception to the Federal Tort Claims
Act, thus barring claims for damages under the Act based on damage
caused by the backfire. See Esquivel v. United States, 21 F.4th 565, 576
(9th Cir. 2021).
22

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

31

also possess the authority to resolve any perceived injustices
that arise in circumstances akin to those here.
*

*

*

The reckless actions of a fugitive and, consequently, the
necessary and reasonable actions of law enforcement
officers caused Pena to suffer a personal loss. The Takings
Clause, however, provides Pena no remedy. As understood
at the time of the Founding, and as centuries of precedent
confirm, when law enforcement officers destroy or damage
private property in the necessary and reasonable defense of
public safety, such destruction is exempt from the scope of
the federal Takings Clause. Pena therefore fails to state a
Takings Clause claim under the U.S. Constitution.
AFFIRMED.
FRIEDLAND, Circuit Judge, concurring in the judgment:
Although I agree with the majority that Pena does not
state a Takings Clause claim, I would reach that conclusion
for a different reason. As the Supreme Court has instructed,
before analyzing whether compensation for a taking of
property is required by history and tradition, we must begin
with the “logically antecedent inquiry” into whether
property has been taken at all. Lucas v. S.C. Coastal
Council, 505 U.S. 1003, 1027 (1992). Following that
methodology, I would hold that the Los Angeles police’s
actions fell under the search-and-arrest privilege that serves
as a background limitation on all property rights, including

32

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

Pena’s here, so no property right was infringed at all and,
accordingly, no compensation is owed. 1
“[B]efore deciding whether the government has taken a
property interest, we first must determine whether any
property interest exists.” S. Cal. Edison Co. v. Orange Cnty.
Transp. Auth., 96 F.4th 1099, 1104 (9th Cir. 2024), cert.
denied, 145 S. Ct. 1310 (2025). In Lucas v. South Carolina
Coastal Council, 505 U.S. 1003 (1992), the Supreme Court
explained that takings jurisprudence “has traditionally been
guided by the understandings of our citizens regarding the
content of, and the State’s power over, the ‘bundle of rights’
that they acquire when they obtain title to property.” Id. at
1027. The Court further explained in Cedar Point Nursery
1
The majority argues that Customer Co. v. City of Sacramento, 895 P.2d
900 (Cal. 1995) forecloses this result. Maj. Op. at 7 n. 5. I disagree. It
is true that the California Supreme Court described the plaintiff—who
experienced similar law enforcement conduct to Pena—as a “property
owner,” and resolved the issue on the scope of the state constitution
rather than on the scope of property rights. Id. at 915. But the California
Supreme Court had no obligation to follow Lucas’s instruction about
which question is antecedent. And the California Supreme Court’s
language suggests that it was using the word “property” to refer to
material or tangible objects rather than to the rights of an owner (or limits
thereon) . Property, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024) (describing
how the word “property” can refer to multiple concepts, including “the
rights in a valued resource such as land, chattel, or an intangible . . . a
‘bundle of rights,’” or an “external thing over which the rights of
possession, use, and enjoyment are exercised”); Wesley Newcomb
Hohfeld, Some Fundamental Legal Conceptions as Applied in Judicial
Reasoning, 23 Yale L. J. 16, 21-22 (1913) (“Frequently there is a rapid
and fallacious shift from the one meaning [of property] to the other. At
times, also, the term is used in such a ‘blended’ sense as to convey no
definite meaning whatever.”). As I read it, the court did not reckon in
Customer Co. with the scope of background restrictions on property
rights.

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

33

v. Hassid, 594 U.S. 139 (2021), that “many governmentauthorized physical invasions will not amount to takings
because they are consistent with longstanding background
restrictions on property rights.” Id. at 160. The Court noted
that those background restrictions “encompass traditional
common law privileges to access private property.” Id. at
160. In other words, if the common law traditionally allows
a government-authorized physical invasion, then the
owner’s property rights do not include the right to prevent
that physical invasion, and the invasion therefore cannot
constitute a taking of property without just compensation.
As one example of a traditional common law privilege
that limits property rights, the Supreme Court in Cedar Point
cited the privilege “to enter property to effect an arrest or
enforce the criminal law under certain circumstances.” Id.
at 161. The Court explained that an entry of that type would
not be a taking, provided that the entry is reasonable and
consistent with the Fourth Amendment and state law,
because “a property owner traditionally had no right to
exclude an official engaged in” such conduct. Id. The entry
therefore “cannot be said to take any property right from
landowners.” Id.
Courts have recognized that common law search-andarrest privilege for more than two centuries. Early state
court cases, for example, held that police officers who
conducted searches or arrests pursuant to valid warrants
were not liable to property owners for any resulting damage.
See, e.g., Sandford v. Nichols, 13 Mass. 286, 288-89 (1816)
(explaining that if officers forcibly entered the plaintiff’s
home under a lawful warrant, they would not be liable for
trespass); Bell v. Clapp, 10 Johns. 263, 265-66 (N.Y. Sup.
Ct. 1813) (per curiam) (holding that officers executing a
valid search warrant who forcefully opened the door to a

34

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

home and seized stolen goods “in as peaceable a manner as
possible” were not liable for trespass); Kelsy v. Wright, 1
Root 83, 84 (Conn. Super. Ct. 1783) (holding that an officer
who had a valid warrant to arrest a fugitive was not liable for
breaking down the fugitive’s door and entering his house
where the officer had “good reason” to believe that the
fugitive was inside); see also Slaybaugh v. Rutherford
County, 114 F.4th 593, 599-601 (6th Cir. 2024) (discussing
the history of the search-and-arrest privilege), cert. denied,
145 S. Ct. 1959 (2025).
The Restatement (Second) of Torts accordingly
recognizes the privilege “to enter land in the possession of
another” to make an arrest for a criminal offense, recapture
a person previously arrested, or prevent someone from
committing a serious crime. Restatement (Second) of Torts
§§ 204-205 (Am. L. Inst. 1965). That privilege carries with
it the privilege to break and enter a building and use force
against others, if reasonably believed to be necessary. Id.
§§ 212-213.
The search-and-arrest privilege, however, does not
exempt all police searches and arrests from liability. As
Cedar Point and the common law recognize, the search and
arrest must be lawful (including under the Fourth
Amendment).
See Cedar Point, 594 U.S. at 161;
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 204 cmt. g. And the
officers conducting the search and arrest must “reasonably
believe[]” that the person sought is on the land being entered.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 204. Further, officers may
be liable for damage to property if they “unreasonably
exercise[]” the privilege by intentionally or negligently
causing unnecessary harm to the land or chattels on it. Id.
§§ 214 cmt. a, 204 cmt. g; see also United States v. Ramirez,
523 U.S. 65, 71 (1998) (“Excessive or unnecessary

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

35

destruction of property in the course of a search may violate
the Fourth Amendment.”).
The police’s intrusion on Pena’s shop falls within the
search-and-arrest privilege and thus within a “pre-existing
limitation” on Pena’s property rights. Lucas, 505 U.S. at
1028. Pena alleges that after the fugitive had barricaded
himself in Pena’s shop, the police sought to capture and
arrest the fugitive by firing tear gas canisters into the shop in
an attempt to subdue him before they eventually entered the
shop. The police’s entry to Pena’s land is thus plainly an
entry to make an arrest for a criminal offense. See
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 204. And Pena does not
dispute that the police’s entry was lawful, or that the police’s
actions (including the destruction of his shop equipment)
were reasonable and necessary for the purpose of arresting
the fugitive. I would therefore rely on the privilege to reject
Pena’s claim at the first step of the analysis, holding only
that the background restriction on property rights means no
taking occurred.
The majority frames its public safety exception as falling
within the necessity exception that courts have long
understood as limiting the Takings Clause, but the cases the
majority relies upon did not actually create an exception for
circumstances like Pena’s. The majority relies heavily on
Respublica v. Sparhawk, 1 U.S. (1 Dall.) 357 (Pa. 1788),
which held that Congress did not owe just compensation for
seizing flour to prevent it from falling into enemy hands
during the Revolutionary War. Id. at 363. The court in
Sparhawk emphasized, however: “The transaction, it must
be remembered, happened flagrante bello [during a state of
war]; and many things are lawful in that season, which
would not be permitted in a time of peace. The seizure of
the property in question, can, indeed, only be justified under

36

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

this distinction.” Id. at 362 (emphasis added). Sparhawk
thus expressly relied on the fact that the country was in a
state of war, and the government’s uncompensated seizure
of private property was justified only by its need to protect
the property from enemy forces. And the only Supreme
Court cases I am aware of that have followed Sparhawk’s
reasoning—and the only ones cited by the majority—also
originated in wartime contexts. See United States v. Caltex
(Philippines), Inc., 344 U.S. 149, 155 (1952) (holding that
the government was not required to pay for oil terminals
destroyed during a military invasion because doing so was
necessary to prevent the enemy from gaining any strategic
value from them); United States v. Pac. R.R., 120 U.S. 227,
234 (1887) (explaining that “[f]or all injuries and destruction
which followed necessarily” from the Civil War armies’
operations, “no compensation could be claimed from the
government”). I do not think those cases established a
general public safety exception that would apply to the
actions of domestic law enforcement here, which were
undertaken in a time of peace to protect against a domestic
criminal. 2 By contrast, the search-and-arrest privilege is
already well-enumerated in common law and Fourth
Amendment doctrine, so its application in the Takings
Clause context would be clear. See Slaybaugh, 114 F.4th at
604 (explaining that the search-and-arrest privilege “is
rooted in the common law, has been long recognized in our
The passage from Emmerich de Vattel’s The Law of Nations, upon
which the majority relies, was also clearly focused on wartime. The
excerpted paragraph begins with a question, “Is the state bound to
indemnify individuals for the damages they have sustained in war?”
and falls within a chapter discussing the “Right of Private
Persons in War.” Emmerich de Vattel, The Law of Nations 402 (London,
G.G. and J. Robinson
ed. 1797) (emphasis added),
https://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=hvd.32044105475818&seq=500.

2

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

37

court system as a defense to trespass claims, and maps neatly
onto our caselaw holding that persons who suffered an
unreasonable search or seizure may be entitled to damages
under the Fourth Amendment”).
Recognizing the search-and-arrest privilege as a
background limitation on property rights also does not
conflict with the Taking Clause’s overarching purpose “to
bar Government from forcing some people alone to bear
public burdens which, in all fairness and justice, should be
borne by the public as a whole.” Armstrong v. United States,
364 U.S. 40, 49 (1960) (emphasis added). Here, it was not
the government’s choice to select Pena’s store as the place
the fugitive would hide and need to be arrested. Instead, the
fugitive chose Pena’s store to hide in, and the police
responded to the crime without making a choice that Pena
should incur the costs of the arrest. In that sense, it was the
fugitive who forced Pena to bear a public burden, not the
government—and, again, Pena has not argued that the
police’s actions were unreasonable or unnecessary to effect
the arrest once the fugitive was inside the store.
I offer two additional thoughts on the methodological
differences between my concurrence and the majority. First,
relying on background limitations on property rights
correctly places the burden on the government to
demonstrate the existence of such limits, not on the plaintiff
to show historical examples of compensation in similar
circumstances. See Lucas, 505 U.S. at 1031 (describing how
on remand, “South Carolina must identify background
principles of nuisance and property law” (emphasis added)).
Yet the majority, citing a case discussing the Due Process
Clause rather than the Takings Clause, penalizes the plaintiff
for history’s silence. Maj. Op. at 21 (citing Culley v.
Marshall, 601 U.S. 377, 392 (2024)).

38

PENA V. CITY OF LOS ANGELES

Second, a focus on background limitations on property
rights allows the Takings Clause to account for evolving
realities of property ownership. History and precedent are
of course essential to understanding the Takings Clause, but
the focus of Takings Clause analysis is on the scope of
property rights as they existed at the time the owner acquired
title to the property that was allegedly taken. Lucas, 505
U.S. at 1029 (describing how a background restriction must
“inhere in the title itself”). Focusing too heavily on just
compensation at the Founding could cause courts to fail to
recognize that the Takings Clause does not bind us to any
one era’s understanding of “property.”
Because I agree with the majority that Pena fails to state
a takings claim but think that the search-and-arrest privilege
would be a better-supported and more straightforward
ground on which to dismiss the claim, I concur only in the
judgment.

