FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
STUART REGES,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
ANA MARI CAUCE, in her official
capacity as President of the
University of Washington;
MAGDALENA BALAZINSKA, in
her official and individual capacities
as Director of the Paul G. Allen
School of Computer Science &
Engineering; DAN GROSSMAN, in
his official and individual capacities
as Vice Director of the Paul G. Allen
School of Computer Science &
Engineering; NANCY
ALLBRITTON, in her official and
individual capacities as Dean of the
College of Engineering,

No. 24-3518
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-00964JHC

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
John H. Chun, District Judge, Presiding

2

REGES V. CAUCE

Argued and Submitted May 15, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed December 19, 2025
Before: Sidney R. Thomas, Milan D. Smith, Jr., and Daniel
A. Bress, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bress;
Partial Concurrence and Partial Dissent by Judge S.R.
Thomas
SUMMARY *
First Amendment
The panel reversed the district court’s judgment in favor
of University of Washington officials (UW) and remanded
for further proceedings in an action brought by UW teaching
professor Stuart Reges, alleging First Amendment violations
when UW investigated, reprimanded, and threatened to
discipline him for contentious statements he made in a class
syllabus mocking the University's recommended indigenous
land acknowledgment statement.
Recognizing that debate and disagreement are hallmarks
of higher education, the panel held that UW violated the First

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

REGES V. CAUCE

3

Amendment in taking adverse action against Reges based on
his view on a matter of public concern.
Specifically, the panel first held that the district court
erred in granting summary judgment to UW on Reges’s First
Amendment retaliation claim. Reges established a prima
facie retaliation claim in that he experienced adverse
employment actions, including a lengthy disciplinary
investigation and reprimand, because of his protected
speech. The speech was protected speech, not government
speech, because Reges spoke in his own capacity as a
professor, and not on behalf of his employer, and he
unquestionably spoke on a matter of public concern. UW
did not meet its burden under the Pickering balancing test of
demonstrating that its legitimate interests outweighed
Reges’s interest in speaking on a matter of public concern in
the university setting. Accordingly, the panel reversed the
district court’s summary judgment for defendants and
directed that summary judgment be entered for Reges on his
First Amendment retaliation claim.
Because Reges’s viewpoint discrimination claim was
also subject to the same Pickering analysis, summary
judgment for Reges was warranted on this claim as
well. The record is clear that the University took action
against Reges as a result of the views he expressed in his
mock land acknowledgment statement. On remand, the
district court should determine the appropriate relief on the
retaliation and viewpoint discrimination claims.
The panel held that the district court erred by dismissing
under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) Reges’s overbreadth and
vagueness facial challenge to UW’s Nondiscrimination and
Affirmative Action policy, which targets “any conduct that
is deemed unacceptable or inappropriate, regardless of

4

REGES V. CAUCE

whether the conduct rises to the level of unlawful
discrimination, harassment, or retaliation.” Because the
district court’s limiting construction of the policy conflicts
with the policy’s plain text, it was improper. The panel
remanded for the district court to determine, in the first
instance, whether the policy was unconstitutional, taking
into account how the policy has been enforced and applied
in practice.
Concurring in part and dissenting in part, Judge S.R.
Thomas agreed with the majority that the Pickering
balancing test applied to Reges’s First Amendment
retaliation and viewpoint discrimination claims. However,
he disagreed with the majority’s conclusion that Reges’s
speech interests outweighed the University of Washington’s
interests. Universities have a responsibility to protect their
students. This University, like other universities in the
American West, has a particular obligation to its Native
students. The disruption Reges’s speech caused to Native
students’ learning outweighed his own First Amendment
interests. Judge Thomas also disagreed with the majority’s
conclusion that the University’s Nondiscrimination and
Affirmative Action policy was not readily susceptible to the
district court’s limiting construction.

COUNSEL
Joshua T. Bleisch (argued) and Ronald London, Foundation
for Individual Rights and Expression, Washington, D.C.;
Sara Berinhout and James M. Diaz, Foundation for
Individual Rights and Expression, Philadelphia,

REGES V. CAUCE

5

Pennsylvania; Carl J. Marquardt, Law Office of Carl J.
Marquardt, Seattle, Washington; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
R. David Hosp (argued) and Katherine Kerrick, Orrick
Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP, Boston, Massachusetts; Aaron
Brecher and Robert M. McKenna, Orrick Herrington &
Sutcliffe LLP, Seattle, Washington; for DefendantsAppellees.
Ilya Shapiro and Tim Rosenberger, Manhattan Institute,
New York, New York, for Amicus Curiae Manhattan
Institute.
Katherine Blankenship, PEN America Center Inc., Coral
Gables, Florida, for Amicus Curiae PEN America Center
Inc..
Ethan W. Blevins, Pacific Legal Foundation, Sacramento,
California, for Amicus Curiae Pacific Legal Foundation.
Michael H. McGinley, Ross Ufberg, and Andrew F.
Figueiredo, Dechert LLP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, for
Amicus Curiae Students for Liberty.
Omer A. Khan, Rocklin, California, for Amici Curiae James
G. Martin Center for Academic Renewal.
Matthew P. Gordon and Jonathan P. Hawley, Perkins Coie
LLP, Seattle, Washington, for Amicus Curiae Washington
State University.

6

REGES V. CAUCE

OPINION
BRESS, Circuit Judge:
A public university investigated, reprimanded, and
threatened to discipline a professor for contentious
statements he made in a class syllabus. The statements,
which mocked the university’s model syllabus statement on
an issue of public concern, caused offense in the university
community. Yet debate and disagreement are hallmarks of
higher education. Student discomfort with a professor’s
views can prompt discussion and disapproval. But this
discomfort is not grounds for the university retaliating
against the professor. We hold that the university’s actions
toward the professor violated his First Amendment rights.
We reverse and remand for further proceedings.
I
A
Stuart Reges is a Teaching Professor at the University of
Washington’s (UW) Paul G. Allen School of Computer
Science and Engineering. Reges has taught introductory
computer science courses at the Allen School since 2004.
Before coming to UW, Reges taught computer science at the
University of Arizona for eight years and at Stanford
University for ten years.
Reges has publicly commented on sensitive issues
throughout his career. For example, he has spoken with local
and national media about his identity and mental health as a
gay man. In 2018, Reges wrote an article entitled “Why
Women Don’t Code,” which led a group of students to
petition against the renewal of his contract.

REGES V. CAUCE

7

The present controversy relates to UW’s adoption of an
official school “land acknowledgment.”
A land
acknowledgment is a formal statement acknowledging that
certain land was originally home to the Indigenous people
who historically resided there. UW’s main campus is in
Seattle, Washington, and Washington State is home to
numerous federally recognized tribes.
In 2015, the
university adopted the following land acknowledgment:
“The University of Washington acknowledges the Coast
Salish peoples of this land, the land which touches the shared
waters of all tribes and bands within the Suquamish, Tulalip
and Muckleshoot nations.” According to UW’s Office of
Minority Affairs & Diversity, this land acknowledgment was
developed, with input from local tribes, “to acknowledge
that our campus sits on occupied land” and to recognize the
“difficult, painful[,] and long history” associated with this
state of affairs.
Land acknowledgments are sometimes recited at public
events, and as more institutions have adopted them, they
have become “the subject of myriad mainstream
media articles, social media posts[,] and online
videos” weighing in on their value. Chloe Veltman, So You
Began Your Event with An Indigenous Land
Acknowledgment. Now What?, NPR (Mar. 15, 2023),
https://www.npr.org/2023/03/15/1160204144/indigenousland-acknowledgments. This debate is understandable,
because “[a]fter millennia of Native history, and
centuries of displacement and dispossession, acknowledging
original
Indigenous
inhabitants
is
complex.”
Honoring Original Indigenous Inhabitants: Land
Acknowledgment, Nat’l Museum of the Am. Indian,
https://americanindian.si.edu/nk360/informational/landacknowledgment. While proponents believe that land

8

REGES V. CAUCE

acknowledgments show respect and bring awareness to
tribes and tribal issues, others have criticized
land acknowledgments as “hollow gestures” which
amount to mere “moral exhibitionism.”
Emily St.
James, The Rise of Land Acknowledgments—and Their
Limitations, Vox (July 18, 2022), https://www.vox.com/thehighlight/23200329/land-acknowledgments-indigenouslandback; Graeme Wood, ‘Land Acknowledgments’ Are Just
Moral Exhibitionism, The Atlantic (Nov. 28, 2021),
https://www.theatlantic.com/ideas/archive/2021/11/againstland-acknowledgements-native-american/620820/.
We of course take no position on this policy or societal
debate. But we identify this disagreement to underscore that
the wisdom and appropriateness of land acknowledgments is
a matter of public concern and ongoing discussion.
Testimony from UW officials in this case likewise reflects
the present debate and controversy over the practice of land
acknowledgments.
In 2019, the Allen School revised its “Best Practices for
Inclusive Teaching” to recommend that instructors include
an “Indigenous Land Acknowledgement” in their course
syllabi.
This document offered UW’s official land
acknowledgment as an example, while making clear that its
suggestions were “not prescriptions,” but only “ideas”
intended to help faculty be “more effective teacher[s] and
better role model[s] for more of your students.”
Professor Reges viewed UW’s land acknowledgment,
and the recommendation to include it in syllabi, as a political
statement. Reges believes that land acknowledgments are
part of “an agenda of ‘diversity, equity, and inclusion’ that
treats some groups of students as more deserving of
recognition and welcome than others on account of their race

REGES V. CAUCE

9

or other immutable characteristic.” He therefore did not
think it was appropriate for the Allen School to recommend
the inclusion of this “political statement” in syllabi. Reges
also disagreed with the factual premise of the land
acknowledgment, as he believed that “most of the land
currently occupied by UW was densely forested before the
land was cleared to make way for the campus.” He thought
the land acknowledgment expressed “that UW’s presence is
somehow illegitimate, shameful, morally wrong, or
unlawful,” and considered it “an empty, performative act of
moralism” ripe for parody.
Reges was not alone in his skepticism. On December 8,
2021, another faculty member emailed UW’s “diversityallies” and faculty mailing lists to share a “thoughtprovoking” article from The Atlantic (cited above)
criticizing land acknowledgments. In a reply-all, Reges
wrote that he had “been thinking a lot about land
acknowledgments” and that he was considering including
his own version of a land acknowledgment on his computer
science syllabus next quarter, “because the Allen School lists
this as a diversity best practice.” Reges’s reply included a
draft of his own proposed land acknowledgement.
B
On January 3, 2022, the first day of UW’s Winter
Quarter, Reges met with his Computer Science and
Engineering 143: Computer Programming II (CSE 143)
class in an online session. This introductory course is
required for certain majors and included roughly 500
students. During the session, students accessed Reges’s
syllabus, which contained the following statement: “I
acknowledge that by the labor theory of property the Coast
Salish people can claim historical ownership of almost none

10

REGES V. CAUCE

of the land currently occupied by the University of
Washington.” Although Reges briefly mentioned the
statement during class, it appears most students did not
notice it at the time.
The statement drew significant attention after class.
Later that day, a student submitted a complaint expressing
her concerns with the parody statement. She also mentioned
that “[a]fter further research,” she had discovered Reges’s
“Why Women Don’t Code” article, which the student had
“not been able to fully read because it is very triggering.”
The student wrote that she felt “intimidated” and unwelcome
in Reges’s class and believed that she would not “be
supported and led to be successful in this required course for
my major.” On the same day, another student shared a
screenshot of Reges’s land acknowledgment on Reddit,
where it received significant criticism.
The Director of the Allen School, Professor Magdalena
Balazinska, learned of Reges’s land acknowledgment on
January 4, 2022, when a colleague forwarded her the Reddit
thread. The statement was also brought to the school’s
attention by its Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion (DEI)
student committee. That committee emailed the school’s
assistant director for DEI to complain about the inclusion of
“this offensive language . . . in the intro-to-CS course, where
students, including those from under-represented indigenous
communities, first encounter CS and the Allen School
culture.” The committee called for the statement to be
removed from the syllabus and replaced “with a statement
acknowledging the right of [indigenous] people to the land
taken from them through years of colonialism.” The student
DEI committee further charged that “Stuart Reges has
repeatedly expressed prejudiced views where he has no right

REGES V. CAUCE

11

to do so” because of the Allen School’s failure to hold Reges
and others accountable in the past.
Later that day, Balazinska emailed Reges asking him to
remove the statement from his syllabus “immediately”
because it was creating a “toxic environment” in a required
course for the computer science major. Balazinska caveated
that Reges was “welcome to voice your opinion and
opposition to land acknowledgments, as you have, in other
settings.” In addition to sharing his draft statement with
other faculty, Reges had included it in the signature block of
some of his emails.
After Reges refused to remove the statement from his
syllabus, Balazinska directed school IT staff to replace the
online syllabus with a version excluding the statement.
Balazinska and Professor Daniel Grossman, the Allen
School’s Vice Director, also approved a tweet from the
school’s Twitter account condemning the “offensive”
statement and relaying that the school was “horrified” and
working to replace Reges’s syllabus on the course website.
In an email to other administrators, Balazinska also proposed
asking Reges’s students to submit official complaints, which
would “help[ ] us to take action.”
On January 5, 2022, Balazinska emailed the CSE 143
students to apologize for the “offensive” land
acknowledgment, inform them that the statement had been
removed from the syllabus, and encourage those who felt
they had not been “treated fairly and respectfully” to submit
a complaint via one of three linked reporting channels. In
addition to verbal complaints, the record contains a set of
thirteen written complaints made between January 3, 2022,
and March 28, 2022.

12

REGES V. CAUCE

These complaints were critical of Reges and his views.
One student stated that “[t]his sort of factually wrong,
intentionally inflammatory, and trauma-mocking statement
tarnishes the reputation of the Allen School,” and that
“[h]aving a professor like this, with a history of misogynistic
and racist statements, and who places statements like this in
their course policies,” was antithetical to creating an
inclusive environment. This student further took issue with
Reges’s reference to the labor theory of property, “a
problematic theory of property rights,” and opined that
“even using the problematic theory of property rights used
here, this land still ought to belong to the Coast Salish
peoples.”
Another student, who identified as Native, wrote that
“this whole incident has made me feel so directly despised
and unsafe that I’m certain if I hadn’t transferred in I
wouldn’t be at the Paul Allen school right now.” A different
student wrote that the Allen School should part ways with
Reges because he “does not believe in present-day
systematic racism or sexism, ideas that are core to improving
our systems of education.” Similarly, the school’s Assistant
Director for Diversity and Access reported that student
ambassadors were struggling with “whether to be fully
honest about their experiences at the Allen School” with
prospective students, that some current students resented
having to take CSE 143 with Reges, and that her staff felt
undermined and disillusioned. The Assistant Director
believed that “Stuart’s words have a very real negative
impact on our entire community including staff.”
On January 7, 2022, the Allen School opened a second
section of CSE 143 led by a different faculty member.
Around 170 of Reges’s roughly 500 students transferred to
the new section. After several students asked about grading

REGES V. CAUCE

13

policies for the new section, the professor leading it stated
that he planned to use the same grading system as Reges.
The controversy over Reges’s mock land
acknowledgment also attracted media attention. On January
6, 2022, Reges appeared on a local conservative talk show
to discuss UW’s response to his land acknowledgment.
Reges also published an opinion piece and gave interviews
to the press, including to a student paper.
C
On February 23, 2022, Reges emailed UW’s “diversityallies” mailing list to link an article covering the events in
January surrounding his parody land acknowledgment. In
his email, Reges also publicized his plans to “continue this
protest when I teach the CSE142 course in spring and will
have the opportunity to distribute a syllabus on paper (more
difficult to censor).”
Reges’s post led to additional complaints. Citing the
“emotional harm to students,” the school’s Recruiter for
Diversity & Access asked how she could recruit Native
students “into an environment where their history is
questioned and their rights are denied.” For its part, the
student employee union relayed that teaching assistants “no
longer feel comfortable mentioning their own views on
topics related to land acknowledgements and DEI, for fear
of retaliation from Stuart Reges.” The union asked the
school to “take prompt action” because Reges’s behavior
violated the school’s commitment to inclusion and the nondiscrimination and harassment provision of UW’s collective
bargaining agreement.
On March 2, 2022, Balazinska informed Reges that she
was initiating disciplinary process based on potential

14

REGES V. CAUCE

violations of the Faculty Code, university policy, and the
collective bargaining agreement. She requested a meeting,
at which she asked Reges to agree not to include his
statement in any future syllabi. When Reges refused,
Balazinska escalated the matter to Dean Nancy Allbritton,
the head of the College of Engineering (which oversees the
Allen School). Around this time, Reges posted a copy of his
land acknowledgment outside his faculty office.
On April 21, 2022, Allbritton informed Reges that she
was convening a special faculty committee to investigate
potential violations of university policy. On October 14,
2022, the committee delivered an oral report to Allbritton
finding that the parody statement had a “significant impact”
on the “morale of Native American students, and their
learning,” among other things, and that “[t]he level of
disruption was extraordinary.” In addition to the discomfort
and emotional harm that some students experienced, the
committee reported that as a result of Reges’s statement, one
Native student had taken a leave of absence, and another had
dropped out. As we discuss below, the first student, who was
not in Reges’s class, also gave other reasons for taking a
leave of absence, including feeling “used” after meeting with
Balazinska to discuss the student’s complaint and that the
Allen School was excessively focused on testing. The record
does not support the existence of the second student who
reportedly dropped out.
Several months later, on June 13, 2023, Allbritton sent
Reges a letter summarizing the committee’s findings and
closing the investigation. The committee found that Reges
had likely violated university policy and caused “significant
disruption”—which included the one student who took a
leave of absence and the other who supposedly dropped out.
But Allbritton declined to impose sanctions because of the

REGES V. CAUCE

15

possibility that Reges’s “actions were intended to generate
discussion.” Allbritton further observed that UW had not
restricted Reges’s “ability to express your views or publicize
your land acknowledgement statement outside the context of
your course syllabus,” noting that Reges had shared his land
acknowledgment through his email signature block and by
posting it on his office door.
Nevertheless, Allbritton warned that if Reges included
his land acknowledgment in future syllabi, “and if that
inclusion leads to further disruption, I will have no option
but to conclude that your intent is to cause deliberate offense
and further that disruption” in violation of UW’s Executive
Order 31 (EO-31) and the Faculty Code, and to “proceed
with
next
steps.”
EO-31, the
university’s
“Nondiscrimination and Affirmative Action” policy, is
directed at “the goal of promoting an environment that is free
of discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.” It provides
that UW may discipline “any conduct that is deemed
unacceptable or inappropriate, regardless of whether the
conduct rises to the level of unlawful discrimination,
harassment, or retaliation.”
Allbritton’s letter also reinstated Reges’s merit pay
increase, which had “been automatically held in abeyance
pending this investigation in accordance with University
policy” for academic years 2021–22 and 2022–23. Reges
claims he had not previously been informed that he was
approved for a merit increase or that it had been withheld
during the disciplinary investigation.
D
On July 13, 2022, while he was still under investigation,
Reges sued Director Balazinska, Vice Director Grossman,
Dean Allbritton, and Ana Marie Cauce, UW’s President,

16

REGES V. CAUCE

raising claims of First Amendment retaliation and viewpoint
discrimination. Reges also challenged EO-31 as facially
overbroad and unconstitutionally vague. The defendants
moved to dismiss for failure to state a claim, and while that
motion was pending, the parties cross-moved for summary
judgment. The parties agreed that there were no material
factual disputes and that summary judgment could be
adjudicated.
The district court resolved the motion to dismiss and
summary judgment motions together. The court first found
that Reges had stated claims for First Amendment retaliation
and viewpoint discrimination because he engaged in
protected speech. The court reasoned that these claims were
subject to balancing under Pickering v. Board of Education,
391 U.S. 563 (1968), because Reges’s suit arose in the
government employment context. Although the court found
that Reges spoke on a matter of public concern, it granted
summary judgment to defendants because, under Pickering,
UW’s interest in mitigating disruption to university staff
functions, teaching assistants, and the learning environment
outweighed Reges’s First Amendment interests.
As evidence of disruption, the district court noted that
students, including Native students, had reported feeling
unwelcome and intimidated, and that 30% of Reges’s
students had transferred to the new CSE 143 section. The
court also relied on the faculty committee’s claim that one
Native student dropped out. Although Reges objected to the
faculty committee’s report on hearsay grounds, the court
explained that it did not consider this evidence for the truth
of the matter asserted, but as reflecting UW’s understanding
of the disruption caused by Reges’s speech.

REGES V. CAUCE

17

The district court also dismissed Reges’s overbreadth
and vagueness challenges to EO-31 under Federal Rule of
Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) and denied leave to amend. The
court rejected Reges’s position that EO-31’s restriction on
“unacceptable or inappropriate” conduct was impermissibly
open-ended and subjective, reasoning that EO-31 tied these
terms to UW’s goal of “promoting an environment that is
free of discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.” The
court construed EO-31 to reach conduct that “‘resemble[s]’
discrimination, harassment, or retaliation, even if not
unlawful under employment laws.” It concluded that by this
construction, EO-31 was not overbroad or vague.
Reges appeals.
II
The public university occupies a central place in the law
of the First Amendment. The First Amendment protects the
free exchange of ideas. The university is a primary generator
and repository of ideas, a place in which unfettered academic
debate and open discourse promotes the search for truth and
prepares students for a discordant world lacking in
orthodoxy. When we place limits on what professors may
say or impose punishment for the views they express, we
destock the marketplace of ideas and imperil future
generations who must be exposed to a range of ideas and
readied for the disharmony of a democratic society.
This special relationship between the First Amendment
and the university is firmly enshrined in precedent. Because
“[t]he classroom is peculiarly the ‘marketplace of ideas,’”
academic freedom is “a special concern of the First
Amendment.” Keyishian v. Bd. of Regents of the Univ. of the
State of N.Y., 385 U.S. 589, 603 (1967); see also Grutter v.
Bollinger, 539 U.S. 306, 329 (2003) (“We have long

18

REGES V. CAUCE

recognized that, given the important purpose of public
education and the expansive freedoms of speech and thought
associated with the university environment, universities
occupy a special niche in our constitutional tradition.”);
Healy v. James, 408 U.S. 169, 180–81 (1972) (“[W]e break
no new constitutional ground in reaffirming this Nation’s
dedication to safeguarding academic freedom.”).
The Supreme Court has thus long reiterated that under
the First Amendment, “[o]ur Nation is deeply committed to
safeguarding academic freedom, which is of transcendent
value to all of us and not merely to the teachers concerned.”
Keyishian, 385 U.S. at 603. Faculty at universities play a
significant role in driving the development of ideas in our
country; that important responsibility cannot be carried out
without the protections that the First Amendment affords.
See id. (“Scholarship cannot flourish in an atmosphere of
suspicion and distrust.” (quoting Sweezy v. New Hampshire,
354 U.S. 234, 250 (1957) (plurality opinion))). Indeed, “[t]o
impose any strait jacket upon the intellectual leaders in our
colleges and universities would imperil the future of our
Nation.” Id. (quoting Sweezy, 354 U.S. at 250).
This is not merely because such a restraint would stifle
academic thought and advancement, but because “the
Nation’s future depends upon leaders trained through wide
exposure to that robust exchange of ideas.” Id. (alterations
omitted). The Supreme Court said many years ago that
“[t]eachers and students must always remain free to inquire,
to study and to evaluate, to gain new maturity and
understanding; otherwise our civilization will stagnate and
die.” Sweezy, 354 U.S. at 250. This central teaching of First
Amendment law remains just as relevant today.

REGES V. CAUCE

19

The First Amendment’s commitment to academic
freedom is, of course, not without some costs. Open
discourse often “induces a condition of unrest, creates
dissatisfaction with conditions as they are, or even stirs
people to anger.” Terminiello v. City of Chicago, 337 U.S.
1, 4 (1949). But if these are downsides, they are considered
too fleeting to outweigh the foundational values underlying
the First Amendment’s protections for academic speech.
“Any word spoken, in class, in the lunchroom, or on the
campus, that deviates from the views of another person may
start an argument or cause a disturbance. But our
Constitution says we must take this risk.” Tinker v. Des
Moines Indep. Cmty. Sch. Dist., 393 U.S. 503, 508 (1969).
This “hazardous freedom . . . is the basis of our national
strength and of the independence and vigor of Americans.”
Id. at 508–09.
These important First Amendment principles guide our
analysis of UW’s response to Professor Reges’s speech. The
UW community was free to regard Reges’s speech as
disrespectful, self-aggrandizing, or worse. We do not doubt
the sincerity of their objections. Students, faculty, and staff
at the University honored the traditions of the First
Amendment by speaking out against Reges and his views, as
was their right. But Reges has rights, too. And here, we
conclude that UW violated the First Amendment in taking
adverse action against Reges based on his views on a matter
of public concern.
III
We first address Reges’s retaliation claim. “To establish
a prima facie First Amendment retaliation claim, the plaintiff
must prove that ‘(1) [ ]he engaged in protected speech;
(2) the defendants took an “adverse employment action”

20

REGES V. CAUCE

against h[im]; and (3) h[is] speech was a “substantial or
motivating” factor for the adverse employment action.’”
Dodge v. Evergreen Sch. Dist. #114, 56 F.4th 767, 776 (9th
Cir. 2022) (alterations in original) (quoting Howard v. City
of Coos Bay, 871 F.3d 1032, 1044 (9th Cir. 2017)). In the
public employment context, a government employer can
defeat a prima facie retaliation claim by demonstrating that
its “legitimate administrative interests outweigh the
employee’s First Amendment rights” under the Pickering
balancing test. Howard, 871 F.3d at 1044–45 (quoting
Thomas v. City of Beaverton, 379 F.3d 802, 808 (9th Cir.
2004)).
We conclude that Reges’s speech is protected and that his
First Amendment interests outweigh UW’s interests under
Pickering. We therefore reverse the district court’s grant of
summary judgment for UW and direct the entry of summary
judgment for Reges on his First Amendment retaliation
claim.
A
Reges has established a prima facie retaliation claim. As
the district court noted, UW does not meaningfully dispute
that Reges experienced adverse employment action because
of his speech. “In a First Amendment retaliation case, an
adverse employment action is an act that is reasonably likely
to deter employees from engaging in constitutionally
protected speech.” Coszalter v. City of Salem, 320 F.3d 968,
970 (9th Cir. 2003). “[A] government act of retaliation need
not be severe and it need not be of a certain kind,” with the
“relevant inquiry” being whether the government took
“‘action designed to retaliate against and chill political
expression.’” Id. at 975 (quoting Thomas v. Carpenter, 881
F.2d 828, 829 (9th Cir. 1989)).

REGES V. CAUCE

21

UW was free to ask Reges to consider removing his
parody statement. But its ensuing conduct—which included
opening a lengthy disciplinary investigation (during which a
merit pay increase was withheld), reprimanding Reges, and
threatening him with further discipline—plainly qualifies as
adverse employment action under our precedents. See, e.g.,
Dodge, 56 F.4th at 779 (recognizing “that the insinuation or
threat that ‘some form of punishment or adverse regulatory
action’ may follow” can constitute adverse employment
action (quoting Greisen v. Hanken, 925 F.3d 1097, 1114 (9th
Cir. 2019))); Coszalter, 320 F.3d at 976 (concluding that “an
unwarranted disciplinary investigation” could constitute
adverse employment action). There is similarly no dispute
that Reges’s speech was the substantial or motivating factor
for these adverse employment actions. Reges has therefore
satisfied the second and third elements of a First Amendment
retaliation claim.
UW instead challenges the district court’s determination
that Reges satisfied the remaining element of a prima facie
claim: that he engaged in protected speech. Defendants
argue that because UW requires professors to distribute
syllabi, Reges’s statement does not relate to his own
scholarship or teaching and should instead be considered
“government speech” that UW could rightfully control. This
position rests on two connected strands of First Amendment
jurisprudence.
UW first invokes the Supreme Court’s holding in
Garcetti v. Ceballos, 547 U.S. 410 (2006), that “when public
employees make statements pursuant to their official duties,
the employees are not speaking as citizens for First
Amendment purposes, and the Constitution does not insulate
their communications from employer discipline.” Id. at 421.
This is because “[r]estricting speech that owes its existence

22

REGES V. CAUCE

to a public employee’s professional responsibilities . . .
simply reflects the exercise of employer control over what
the employer itself has commissioned or created.” Id. at
421–22.
Garcetti involved a deputy district attorney, Ceballos,
who determined that an affidavit used to secure a search
warrant contained serious misrepresentations. Id. at 414.
Ceballos’s supervisors in the district attorney’s office
disagreed with Ceballos’s assessment of the warrant, and
Ceballos claimed they retaliated against him for his allegedly
protected speech concerning the warrant. Id. at 414–15.
The Supreme Court held that Ceballos’s claim was not
subject to Pickering balancing because his “expressions
were made pursuant to his duties” as a prosecutor. Id. at 421.
That Ceballos’s “duties sometimes required him to speak or
write does not mean his supervisors were prohibited from
evaluating his performance.” Id. at 422; see also id.
(explaining that although government employees “retain the
prospect of constitutional protection for their contributions
to the civic discourse,” this “does not invest them with a right
to perform their jobs however they see fit”). The Court
further justified its holding on the ground that government
employers must have “sufficient discretion to manage their
operations,” including by “ensur[ing] that their employees’
official communications are accurate, demonstrate sound
judgment, and promote the employer’s mission.” Id. at 422–
23.
But Garcetti importantly reserved the question of
whether its holding “would apply in the same manner to a
case involving speech related to scholarship or teaching,”
acknowledging the possibility “that expression related to
academic scholarship or classroom instruction implicates

REGES V. CAUCE

23

additional constitutional interests that are not fully
accounted for by this Court’s customary employee-speech
jurisprudence.” Id. at 425. We addressed this open question
in Demers v. Austin, 746 F.3d 402 (9th Cir. 2014). There, we
squarely held that “Garcetti does not apply to ‘speech related
to scholarship or teaching’” and that “such speech is
governed by Pickering.” Id. at 406 (quoting Garcetti, 547
U.S. at 425). We reasoned that “teaching and academic
writing are at the core of the official duties of teachers and
professors” and “a special concern of the First Amendment.”
Id. at 411 (quoting Keyishian, 385 U.S. at 603). Applying
Garcetti to this academic speech would therefore “directly
conflict with the important First Amendment values
previously articulated by the Supreme Court.” Id.
As the district court correctly concluded below, Reges’s
parody land acknowledgment falls within Demers’s carveout for speech related to scholarship or teaching. “[S]peech
about a school’s curriculum” or “concern[ing] ‘what was
taught at the school’” is “related to scholarship or teaching”
even when “not made while teaching a class or producing
scholarship.” Jensen v. Brown, 131 F.4th 677, 689 (9th Cir.
2025) (quoting Demers, 746 F.3d at 415). In the university
setting, we have applied this exception to a pamphlet by a
communications professor weighing in on an active debate
about how to restructure his school, Demers, 746 F.3d at
406–07, and to a math professor’s handout criticizing
changes to math department policy. Jensen, 131 F.4th at
684, 689.
In this case, Reges’s statement relates to teaching
because it addresses “what was taught at the school.” Id. at
689 (quoting Demers, 746 F.3d at 415). The Allen School’s
“Best Practices for Inclusive Teaching” specifically
suggested that professors include a land acknowledgment in

24

REGES V. CAUCE

their syllabi to make professors’ “teaching [ ] as effective as
possible,” with the land acknowledgment part of a set of
“ideas” “designed to help you be a more effective teacher
and better role model.”
And UW’s own land
acknowledgment, which the Allen School offered as an
example for inclusion on syllabi, itself reflected not only a
particular pedagogy and view of history (“our campus sits
on occupied land”), but also the university’s position on the
appropriateness of publicly acknowledging the presence of
“the original caretakers of this land.” Reges sought to
counter this teaching with his own teaching on these issues.
By commenting on an issue that the faculty was “actively
debating,” Demers, 746 F.3d at 407, and criticizing a school
policy, see Jensen, 131 F.4th at 689, Reges operated outside
of Garcetti’s purview. The dissent says that “Reges has not
argued that the propriety of land acknowledgments on
syllabi is remotely related to the fundamentals of computer
science.” But it was, of course, the Allen School that first
recommended that its instructors include land
acknowledgments on their syllabi.
UW additionally contends that Reges’s syllabus
statement is not protected scholarship or teaching because
syllabi are not “independently published” documents. In its
view, because Reges’s speech was in a document that
professors were required to distribute, it falls within the
scope of Garcetti. That is not correct. Our case law does not
restrict Demers to speech made in “independently
published” publications. This would undermine Demers’s
central premise that academic speech is protected even when
made pursuant to a professor’s official duties. 746 F.3d at
409. To say that UW required Reges to distribute a syllabus
merely restates the legally inert proposition that the
statement relates to his official duties. And in any event, in

REGES V. CAUCE

25

this case the record reflects that at UW, “the syllabus is the
purview of the faculty.” The university does not review the
contents of syllabi before they are posted, and faculty have
“great flexibility” in determining the contents of their
syllabi.
UW also advances the closely related proposition that
Reges’s statement should be treated as “government speech”
because the university sought to convey its own message in
course syllabi and could “‘take legitimate and appropriate
steps to ensure that its message is neither garbled nor
distorted’ by its individual messengers.” Downs v. L.A.
Unified Sch. Dist., 228 F.3d 1003, 1013 (9th Cir. 2000)
(quoting Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of the Univ. of Va.,
515 U.S. 819, 833 (1995)). We have already explained why,
as a general matter, Reges’s dissenting speech on a matter of
public concern is not government speech under Garcetti.
See Kennedy v. Bremerton Sch. Dist., 597 U.S. 507, 527
(2022) (explaining that speech pursuant to official duties is
“the government’s own speech”). Characterizing professors’
speech in an academic context as “government speech”
would effectively swallow the academic speech exception to
Garcetti that we recognized in Demers.
As to the syllabus in particular, we also reject UW’s
government speech argument on its own terms. When the
government speaks, it “‘is entitled to say what it wishes,’ and
to select the views that it wants to express.” Pleasant Grove
City v. Summum, 555 U.S. 460, 467–68 (2009) (citation
omitted) (quoting Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 833). In
assessing what constitutes government speech, courts
“conduct a holistic inquiry designed to determine whether
the government intends to speak for itself or to regulate
private expression,” which includes “the history of the
expression at issue; the public’s likely perception as to who

26

REGES V. CAUCE

(the government or a private person) is speaking; and the
extent to which the government has actively shaped or
controlled the expression.” Shurtleff v. City of Bos., 596 U.S.
243, 252 (2022).
Reges’s statement does not constitute “government
speech” under this standard. The record shows that Reges
was speaking in his own capacity as a professor, and not on
behalf of his employer. As we noted above, UW
acknowledges that “the syllabus is the purview of the
faculty,” syllabi are not reviewed by the university before
posting, and faculty have “great flexibility” in determining
the contents of their syllabi. As an objective matter, it is also
highly unlikely that students could reasonably perceive
Reges as speaking on UW’s behalf when his statement
begins: “I acknowledge . . . .” In fact, the record reflects that
students attributed the speech to Reges, as they argued that
Reges’s speech warranted condemnation because it
conflicted with UW’s views and policies on inclusivity. We
do not decide whether a statement contained in a syllabus
could never constitute government speech, or whether a
university may limit the kinds of information that professors
include in their syllabi (such as the course readings and class
policies). But in the present circumstances, UW cannot
claim that Reges is speaking on its behalf.
The Sixth Circuit’s decision in Meriwether v. Hartop,
992 F.3d 492 (6th Cir. 2021), is instructive here. In that case,
Professor Meriwether, a philosophy professor at Shawnee
State University, sued after he was investigated for not
complying with a policy requiring faculty to refer to students
by their preferred pronouns. Meriwether, 992 F.3d at 498–
502. Before opening its investigation, Shawnee State
refused a proposed compromise under which Meriwether
would “use students’ preferred pronouns but place a

REGES V. CAUCE

27

disclaimer in his syllabus ‘noting that he was doing so under
compulsion and setting forth his personal and religious
beliefs about gender identity.’” Id. at 500.
The Sixth Circuit rejected Shawnee State’s contention
that Garcetti governed Professor Meriwether’s speech,
explaining that Shawnee State’s move to prevent
“Meriwether from describing his views on gender identity
even in his syllabus” still had to be justified under Pickering
balancing. Id. at 506 (emphasis added). The court explained
that “the academic-freedom exception to Garcetti covers all
classroom speech related to matters of public concern,
whether that speech is germane to the contents of the lecture
or not.” Id. at 507. This is so because “[t]he need for the
free exchange of ideas in the college classroom is unlike that
in other public workplace settings.” Id. Some classroom
speech, such as “call[ing] roll at the start of class,” may be
the “type of non-ideological ministerial task” falling outside
of the academic-speech exception to Garcetti. Id. But when
a university “wants its professors . . . to communicate a
message” on a matter of public concern and a professor
“does not want to communicate [that message] to his
students,” that is “not a matter of classroom management”
but one “of academic speech.” Id. This same basic
observation applies here.
Defendants’ reliance on Johnson v. Poway Unified
School District, 658 F.3d 954 (9th Cir. 2011), and Downs v.
Los Angeles Unified School District, 228 F.3d 1003 (9th Cir.
2000), does not alter our analysis. In Johnson, a high school
math teacher hung banners in his classroom with statements
such as “IN GOD WE TRUST” and “All men are created
equal, they are endowed by their CREATOR.” 658 F.3d at
958. School policy permitted such decorations “subject to
specific limitations and the satisfaction of the principal or a

28

REGES V. CAUCE

District administrator.” Id. at 967. We rejected the teacher’s
free speech challenge because his banners were properly
understood as government speech. Id. at 970. Similarly, in
Downs, we found that a high school teacher’s bulletin board
criticizing homosexuality “contained only ‘government
speech’” where school policy gave administrators authority
over the contents of bulletin boards. 228 F.3d at 1006–07,
1009, 1011–12.
Unlike Reges’s land acknowledgment, the messages we
considered in Johnson and Downs were not directly
attributed to an individual speaker and concerned spaces that
were not acknowledged to be “the purview of the faculty,”
as UW regards syllabi. Defendants’ appeal to cases
involving high schools also ignores our observation that “the
degree of freedom an instructor should have in choosing
what and how to teach will vary depending on whether the
instructor is a high school teacher or a university professor.”
Demers, 746 F.3d at 413; see also Johnson, 658 F.3d at 966
n.12 (noting that Garcetti’s “‘academic freedom’ carve-out”
does not apply to “primary and secondary school teachers”
(quoting Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 425)). Because universities
“occupy a special niche in our constitutional tradition,”
Grutter, 539 U.S. at 329, we cannot conclude that university
faculty can be restricted on the same basis as high school
teachers.
For these reasons, we agree with the district court that
Reges engaged in protected speech, not government speech.
He engaged in academic speech that falls outside of
Garcetti’s exception to Pickering.
B
Because Reges’s statement was not government speech,
we therefore consider whether his retaliation claim survives

REGES V. CAUCE

29

Pickering balancing. Under Pickering, an employee must
first “show that his or her speech addressed ‘matters of
public concern.’” Demers, 746 F.3d at 412 (quoting
Pickering, 391 U.S. at 568)). If so, we then assess whether
“the employee’s interest ‘in commenting upon matters of
public concern’ . . . outweigh[s] ‘the interest of the State, as
an employer, in promoting the efficiency of the public
services it performs through its employees.’” Id. (quoting
Pickering, 391 U.S. at 568).
UW does not contest the district court’s determination
that Reges’s statement addressed matters of public concern.
It instead argues that Reges’s First Amendment interest is
outweighed by UW’s interest in avoiding disruption on
campus. We conclude that Pickering balancing favors
Reges.
1
As an initial matter, Reges unquestionably spoke on a
matter of public concern. “Speech involves a matter of
public concern when it can fairly be considered to relate to
‘any matter of political, social, or other concern to the
community.’” Johnson v. Multnomah Cnty., 48 F.3d 420,
422 (9th Cir. 1995) (quoting Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138,
146 (1983)). We have said that “[t]he ‘essential question is
whether the speech addressed matters of public as opposed
to personal interest.’” Demers, 746 F.3d 415 (quoting
Desrochers v. City of San Bernadino, 572 F.3d 703, 709 (9th
Cir. 2009)). Government employee speech touches on a
matter of public concern “[e]ven if only ‘a relatively small
segment of the general public’ might have been interested”
in the speech. Jensen, 131 F.4th at 687 (quoting Hernandez
v. City of Phoenix, 43 F.4th 966, 978 (9th Cir. 2022)). Speech
that addresses matters of public concern is therefore “defined

30

REGES V. CAUCE

broadly.” Demers, 746 F.3d at 415 (quoting Ulrich v. City &
Cnty. of S.F., 308 F.3d 968, 978 (9th Cir. 2002)).
In this case, Reges did not speak about a private
grievance or personnel dispute, see id., but about a matter of
public concern both within the UW community and more
broadly. He included a parody land acknowledgment in his
syllabus to comment on the propriety of land
acknowledgments, to challenge the Allen School’s
recommendation to include a land acknowledgment on
syllabi, and to question the factual basis for UW’s land
acknowledgment. Reges also sought to situate land
acknowledgments within a broader “agenda of ‘diversity,
equity, and inclusion,’” which he opposes. Reges’s
statement waded into a significant public debate about land
acknowledgments and the political environment that favors
them. As UW acknowledges, there is a live controversy even
in the field of Native American studies over land
acknowledgments. Reges’s speech, however misguided one
might regard it, was core political speech that merits the
highest First Amendment protection.
Indeed, even UW’s administrators saw apparent value in
Reges’s speech, as shown by the fact that they permitted
Reges to post the statement on his office door and in his
email signature, to discuss it with colleagues, and to give
interviews
expressing
his
views
about
land
acknowledgments and UW’s reaction. Dean Allbritton
herself acknowledged that Reges’s land acknowledgment
could be understood as “intended to generate discussion,
rather than merely to denigrate members of the community.”
Because we agree that Reges’s speech was not merely
denigrating, we are not called upon to determine what
protection, if any, such speech would receive in this context.
See Meriwether, 992 F.3d at 508 (explaining that “[a]

REGES V. CAUCE

31

basketball coach using racial epithets to motivate his players
does not” address “a matter of public concern”); Buchanan
v. Alexander, 919 F.3d 847, 853–54 (5th Cir. 2019) (rejecting
a First Amendment retaliation claim where a professor used
profanity and discussed her sex life and the sex lives of her
students). Reges’s statement sought to contribute to the
debate on land acknowledgments and the culture that
promotes them.
The context in which Reges offered his mock land
acknowledgment—the
public
university
setting—
underscores both that Reges spoke on a matter of public
concern and the high value of his speech under the First
Amendment. See Demers, 746 F.3d at 415 (explaining that
“[w]e consider ‘the content, form, and context of a given
statement’” (quoting Connick, 461 U.S. at 147–48)). Given
“the important purpose of public education and the
expansive freedoms of speech and thought associated with
the university environment,” Grutter, 539 U.S. at 329, Reges
spoke in a unique setting that is of “special concern” to the
First Amendment, Keyishian, 385 U.S. at 603. We therefore
agree with the Sixth Circuit that “what constitutes a matter
of public concern and what raises academic freedom
concerns is of essentially the same character.” Meriwether,
992 F.3d at 507 (quoting Dambrot v. Cent. Mich. Univ., 55
F.3d 1177, 1188 (6th Cir. 1995)).
The parodic manner of Reges’s speech does not detract
from its First Amendment value. See Dr. Seuss Enters., L.P.
v. Penguin Books USA, Inc., 109 F.3d 1394, 1400 (9th Cir.
1997) (“Parody is regarded as a form of social and literary
criticism, having a socially significant value as free speech
under the First Amendment.”); see also, e.g., Hustler Mag.,
Inc. v. Falwell, 485 U.S. 46, 54–55 (1988). Nor does the fact
that some listeners may have found it disrespectful or

32

REGES V. CAUCE

distasteful. The First Amendment protects “a teacher’s
freedom to express himself on political issues in vigorous,
argumentative, unmeasured, and even distinctly unpleasant
terms.” Adamian v. Jacobsen, 523 F.2d 929, 934 (9th Cir.
1975).
Defendants nevertheless argue that Reges has only a de
minimis First Amendment interest because he remained free
to express his views on land acknowledgments through other
channels. UW points out that it allowed Reges to display his
mock land acknowledgment on his office door and email
signature, and even in other syllabi (if doing so would not
cause more disruption). Because UW allowed all of this, it
believes that Reges’s expressive rights as to the syllabus in
question “count for little in the Pickering balance.”
We reject this curious argument as inconsistent with the
First Amendment. It is basic First Amendment law that in
the absence of a neutral restriction, like one based on time,
place, or manner, the government may not escape First
Amendment scrutiny by limiting a speaker to certain places
or modes of expression. See, e.g., Se. Promotions, Ltd. v.
Conrad, 420 U.S. 546, 556 (1975) (“[O]ne is not to have the
exercise of his liberty of expression in appropriate places
abridged on the plea that it may be exercised in some other
place.” (quoting Schneider v. New Jersey, 308 U.S. 147, 163
(1939))). UW offers no authority countenancing a different
approach when analyzing the strength of a public university
professor’s First Amendment interest. And there is no small
degree of irony in UW’s position, considering that
permitting Reges to speak on the topic of land
acknowledgments elsewhere effectively concedes that this
speech has value, is not totally out of bounds, and could be
offered without causing unwarranted disruption.

REGES V. CAUCE

33

We therefore conclude that, based on its content and the
context in which it was offered, Reges’s speech had
significant First Amendment value.
2
We turn next to whether UW has demonstrated “a
legitimate administrative interest in suppressing the speech
that outweigh[s] the plaintiff’s First Amendment rights.”
Dodge, 56 F.4th at 776–77 (citing Pickering, 391 U.S. at
568). In assessing whether the government has met this
burden, we must necessarily weigh the high value of Reges’s
speech, for “[t]he more tightly the First Amendment
embraces the speech[,] the more vigorous a showing of
disruption must be made.” Id. at 782 (quoting Hyland v.
Wonder, 972 F.2d 1129, 1139 (9th Cir. 1992)). Given that
Reges spoke on a contested issue of public concern in a
public university setting, UW faces “a particularly heavy
burden under the Pickering test.” Id.; see also id. (“The
government’s burden in proving disruption ‘varies with the
content of the speech.’” (quoting Hyland, 972 F.2d at 1139)).
In a standard Pickering inquiry, we consider the fact that
“government employers have a strong interest in prohibiting
speech by their employees that impairs close working
relationships among co-workers, impedes performance of
the speaker’s job duties, interferes with the effective
functioning of the employer’s operations, or undermines the
employer’s mission.” Hernandez, 43 F.4th at 976 (citing
Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 388, 390 (1987);
Connick, 461 U.S. at 151–52; Pickering, 391 U.S. at 570,
572–73). But “the Pickering analysis ‘requires a factsensitive, context-specific balancing of competing
interests.’” Dodge, 56 F.4th at 784 (quoting Brewster v. Bd.
of Educ. of Lynwood Unified Sch. Dist., 149 F.3d 971, 980

34

REGES V. CAUCE

(9th Cir. 1998)). What counts as a legitimate administrative
interest in managing a police department, for example, does
not necessarily carry over to the public university setting.
We have already recognized that in the context of higher
education, the government does not have the same interest
in maintaining “close working relationship[s]” between
professors and university leadership, because “anyone who
has spent time on college campuses knows that the vigorous
exchange of ideas and resulting tension between an
administration and its faculty is as much a part of college life
as homecoming and final exams.” Bauer v. Sampson, 261
F.3d 775, 785 (9th Cir. 2001); see also Jorjani v. N.J. Inst. of
Tech., 151 F.4th 135, 143 (3d Cir. 2025) (observing that
Pickering’s concern about maintaining close working
relationships “is irrelevant inside the university”). Given the
vital First Amendment interest in promoting the free
exchange of ideas in the university setting, this insight about
Pickering’s application in the university context extends to
relationships within the university more broadly.
In this case, it is readily apparent that the disruption that
occurred at UW after Reges included his land
acknowledgment in his Winter 2022 syllabus is attributable
to one irreducible source: student discomfort and anger with
Reges’s views. It is unclear from the record whether the
complaints were limited to a relatively small subset of the
student population. Some of the written complaints may
have been prompted by the Allen School’s own possible
solicitation of student complaints. But the larger point is that
in the public university setting, student disagreement with a
professor’s academic speech on an issue of public concern
cannot alter the Pickering analysis in the government’s
favor. The reason is foundational: the First Amendment’s
protections for academic freedom in public universities will

REGES V. CAUCE

35

necessarily lead to disagreements on campus. Student unrest
is an inevitable byproduct of our core First Amendment
safeguards in the higher education context. This unrest
therefore cannot be the type of disruption that permits
restricting or punishing a professor’s academic speech.
Higher education may reaffirm students’ perspectives,
but it can also challenge them. And to have one’s views
challenged can be unsettling. But that is the very nature of
the public university experience under a First Amendment
that reflects “this Nation’s dedication to safeguarding
academic freedom.” Healy, 408 U.S. at 180–81; see also
Blum v. Schlegel, 18 F.3d 1005, 1012 (2d Cir. 1994)
(explaining that a university’s “efficient provision of
services . . . actually depends, to a degree, on the
dissemination in public fora of controversial speech
implicating matters of public concern”).
If student anxiety or outrage toward a professor’s
academic speech could justify restricting what a professor
says, then universities would cease to occupy any “special
niche” in our First Amendment traditions. Grutter, 539 U.S.
at 329.
Student discontent that leads university
administrators to censor professors would “cast a pall of
orthodoxy over the classroom.” Keyishian, 385 U.S. at 603.
And the tides of popular campus sentiment would drown out
dissenting viewpoints, with the adverse reactions of students
and staff operating as an impermissible “heckler’s veto” that
restricts speech based on a hostile audience reaction. See
Meinecke v. City of Seattle, 99 F.4th 514, 522 (9th Cir. 2024).
If criticizing land acknowledgments creates disruption on
campus and warrants investigation and reprimand, what
other views would cause offense and be excluded next? All
of this would be contrary to long-established First
Amendment precedents, which protect academic freedom to

36

REGES V. CAUCE

promote the development of ideas and expose students to a
range of views. See Keyishian, 385 U.S. at 603; Sweezy, 354
U.S. at 250.
Under Pickering, therefore, avoiding the disruption on
college campuses “that necessarily accompanies
controversial speech,” Dodge, 56 F.4th at 782 (brackets and
quotations omitted), cannot justify the suppression of the
very diversity of views that is central to the mission of higher
education. Some types of government employers depend on
command and control. But under the First Amendment, a
public university’s oversight of academic speech lacks any
comparable justification. We said fifty years ago that “[t]he
desire to maintain a sedate academic environment, ‘to avoid
the discomfort and unpleasantness that always accompany
an unpopular viewpoint,’ is not an interest sufficiently
compelling . . . to justify limitations on a teacher’s freedom
to express himself on political issues in vigorous,
argumentative, unmeasured, and even distinctly unpleasant
terms.” Adamian, 523 F.2d at 934 (quoting Tinker, 393 U.S.
at 509). That time-tested observation resolves the Pickering
analysis in Reges’s favor.
The dissent’s focus on student “distress” fails for the
same reason, as it would allow students’ emotional reactions
to academic speech to “cast a pall of orthodoxy over the
classroom.” Keyishian, 385 U.S. at 603. Although the
dissent would hold that universities can retaliate against
professors for their academic speech when it causes
“distress” that impacts “student learning,” exposure to views
that distress and offend is a form of education unto itself. As
the Supreme Court has said, “[t]he Nation’s future depends
upon leaders trained through wide exposure to that robust
exchange of ideas which discovers truth out of a multitude
of tongues, rather than through any kind of authoritative

REGES V. CAUCE

37

selection.” Id. (quotations and parentheses omitted). The
dissent would seemingly grant college students the power to
restrict their professors’ academic speech in the name of
avoiding distress—a surefire way to silence unpopular or
controversial speech that the First Amendment robustly
protects.
We draw additional support from our decision in
Rodriguez v. Maricopa County Community College District,
605 F.3d 703 (9th Cir. 2010), the facts of which bear a fair
resemblance to the immediate case. In Rodriguez, a math
professor, Kehowksi, sent “racially-charged” emails to a
community college listserv that went to every college
employee. Id. at 705. In one email, Kehowski criticized
“Dia de la raza,” asking, “Why is the district endorsing an
explicitly racist event?” Id. In another, Kehowski wrote,
“YES! Today’s Columbus Day! It’s time to acknowledge
and celebrate the superiority of Western Civilization.” Id.
Although the college condemned Kehowski’s statements, it
declined to pursue disciplinary action against him, citing
academic freedom considerations. Id. at 706. Other college
employees then sued, claiming that the college’s failure to
take action against Kehowski created a hostile work
environment. Id. at 705–06.
We held that the college was not required to discipline
the professor. Although Rodriguez did not involve a First
Amendment claim for retaliation—the point of the suit was
to challenge the school’s failure to investigate and punish the
professor—our reasoning in Rodriguez accords with our
reasoning here. We explained that “the problem with
plaintiffs’ suit” was that “[t]heir objection to Kehowski’s
speech [was] based entirely on his point of view, and it is
axiomatic that the government may not silence speech
because the ideas it promotes are thought to be offensive.”

38

REGES V. CAUCE

Id. at 708. This was “particularly so on college campuses,”
as “[i]ntellectual advancement has traditionally progressed
through discord and dissent,” and institutions of higher
education “have historically fostered that exchange.” Id. If
“certain points of view may be declared beyond the pale,”
we explained, colleges and universities could not fulfill their
role. Id. Indeed, we “doubt[ed] that a college professor’s
expression on a matter of public concern, directed to the
college community, could ever constitute unlawful
harassment and justify the judicial intervention that plaintiffs
seek.” Id. at 710. These same considerations guide us to our
holding that the negative reaction to Reges’s land
acknowledgment cannot justify retaliating against Reges for
his academic speech.
3
UW nevertheless argues that it relied on more tangible
forms of disruption beyond student unrest, such as Native
students dropping out or taking leaves of absence, greater
difficulties recruiting Native students, and students in
Reges’s computer science course switching to the other
section that the Allen School made available. Our fine
dissenting colleague raises some of these same points. But
all these forms of disruption are just further manifestations
of on-campus disagreement with the message in Reges’s
syllabus statement and the way Reges communicated his
views. For the reasons we have just explained, these
disruptions cannot alter our Pickering calculus.
On this record, the alleged disruption also suffers from
problems of proof. Under Pickering, speech “is disruptive
only when there is an ‘actual, material and substantial
disruption, or there are reasonable predictions of disruption
in the workplace.’” Dodge, 56 F.4th at 782 (alterations

REGES V. CAUCE

39

omitted) (quoting Robinson v. York, 566 F.3d 817, 824 (9th
Cir. 2009)). Even setting aside that the disruption that
invariably accompanies controversial academic speech is
insufficient, Adamian, 523 F.2d at 934, UW’s claims of more
tangible disruption are inadequately substantiated. Cf.
Jorjani, 151 F.4th at 142–44 (concluding that the record
contained insufficient evidence of on-campus disruption to
warrant public university’s decision to not renew professor’s
contract based on his controversial speech).
Dean Albritton’s final letter to Reges referenced “[o]ne
Native American student feeling compelled to take a leave
of absence from the University” and “[o]ne Native American
student feeling compelled to drop out of the University.”
That two of the thousands of students at the University of
Washington decided to leave the school likely would not
qualify as materially disruptive under any circumstances.
But even setting that aside, the two students in question are
not compelling evidence of disruption.
The first student—who was not a student in Reges’s
class—described other factors influencing the decision to
take a leave of absence, including the lack of available
tutoring services, the Allen School’s focus on testing, and
feeling “used” after meeting with Balazinska to discuss
Reges. UW also could not explain whether this student’s
mental health problems began with or pre-dated Reges’s
speech. The dissent references student “absences” and notes
that “students cannot be educated when they are absent.”
But the absence of this single student who did not even take
Reges’s course is the only absence the dissent identifies.
As for the second student, it appears undisputed that this
student does not exist. UW claims that whether the second
student existed is “irrelevant,” apparently because it believed

40

REGES V. CAUCE

the student had dropped out. UW identifies nothing in the
record to support the reasonableness of this belief. But
suffice it to say, the university cannot justify retaliating
against Reges based on phantom evidence of disruption.
UW’s other assertions of disruption are similarly
unsupported. It is speculative whether the university faced
or would face difficulties recruiting Native students because
of a statement on Reges’s Winter 2022 computer science
syllabus. UW has supplied no concrete evidence supporting
this speculation. See Nichols v. Dancer, 657 F.3d 929, 933–
34 (9th Cir. 2011) (“[A]n employer cannot prevail under
Pickering based on mere speculation that an employee’s
conduct will cause disruption.”). The complaint from the
Allen School’s Recruiter for Diversity & Access likewise
provides no specifics on how Reges’s statement impacted
recruiting and instead reflects bare disagreement with
Reges’s views and the “emotional harm” they caused. It
provides no support for UW’s theory that Reges’s class
syllabus land acknowledgment materially harmed the Allen
School’s efforts to recruit Native students. There is also no
factual support for any allegation that Reges would “target”
Native American students and disadvantage them in their
education, or that he would retaliate against teaching
assistants. Nor can we say that such disruption was
reasonably predictable, Dodge, 56 F.4th at 782, when Reges
spoke about his land acknowledgment in other contexts—
including in other syllabi—and there is no indication that
disruption ensued.
Similarly, although UW points out that roughly 170 of
Reges’s 500 students switched to the new section of CSE
143, the record does not indicate why they did so. While it
is true that these students were informed that the grading
system would not change for this alternative section, the new

REGES V. CAUCE

41

instructor had a preexisting reputation for more lenient
grading and a different lecture style. The record also does
not reveal whether these students would have dropped
Reges’s course if the new section were not offered. There
are many reasons why students would leave one class for
another, including general dislike for the professor (or, as
may be the case here, his expression of other unpopular
views that UW does not claim are unprotected). None of this
demonstrates disruption sufficient to justify limiting or
punishing Reges’s academic speech. On this record, there is
a shortage of evidence that Reges’s syllabus statement “was
the source of” students switching to another class. Bauer,
261 F.3d at 785. Nor is there evidence that Reges’s land
acknowledgment affected the quality of his classroom
instruction or denied educational benefits to his students.
Finally, UW’s assertions of disruption are significantly
undermined by the fact that defendants permitted Reges to
express the same views about land acknowledgments in
other settings, such as on his office door, his email signature,
and in interviews with the media. As UW acknowledges,
Reges has also included his mock land acknowledgment
statement in all syllabi after Winter 2022, with far less
incident.
Although defendants tout Reges’s other speech about
land acknowledgments as evidence that UW has given Reges
beneficent leeway, Reges’s other speech only raises further
questions as to why a statement on one syllabus would prove
so disruptive as to warrant an extensive investigation into
Reges. UW maintains that it acted only as to the Winter 2022
syllabus statement because that statement, in particular,
proved disruptive. But First Amendment protection that
rises and falls depending on how upset students become at a
professor’s message is little protection at all.

42

REGES V. CAUCE

We hold that UW has not met its burden under Pickering
of demonstrating that its legitimate interests outweigh
Reges’s interest in speaking on a matter of public concern in
the university setting. The district court erred in granting
summary judgment to defendants, and we direct that
summary judgment be entered for Reges on his First
Amendment retaliation claim. Because Reges’s viewpoint
discrimination claim is also “subject to the same Pickering
analysis,” Damiano v. Grants Pass Sch. Dist. No. 7, 140
F.4th 1117, 1149 (9th Cir. 2025), summary judgment for
Reges is warranted on this claim as well. The record is clear
that the University took action against Reges as a result of
the views he expressed in his mock land acknowledgment.
That is viewpoint discrimination. On remand, it will be for
the district court to determine the appropriate relief on the
retaliation and viewpoint discrimination claims.
IV
We now address Reges’s overbreadth and vagueness
challenges to Executive Order 31, UW’s “Nondiscrimination
and Affirmative Action” policy.
EO-31 begins with the
following paragraph:
The University of Washington, as an
institution established and maintained by the
people of the state, is committed to providing
equality of opportunity and an environment
that fosters respect for all members of the
University community. This policy has the
goal of promoting an environment that is free
of
discrimination,
harassment,
and
retaliation. To facilitate that goal, the
University retains the authority to discipline
or take appropriate corrective action for any

REGES V. CAUCE

43

conduct that is deemed unacceptable or
inappropriate, regardless of whether the
conduct rises to the level of unlawful
discrimination, harassment, or retaliation.
(Emphasis added). The order then defines the terms
“discrimination,” “harassment,” and “retaliation,” and
provides that “[t]erms used in this policy are intended to
have the meaning given to them by applicable federal or state
laws and regulations.” Reges maintains that EO-31, and
specifically its coverage of “unacceptable or inappropriate”
conduct, is vague and overbroad under the First Amendment.
The district court rejected Reges’s facial challenges
under Rule 12(b)(6). As we recounted above, the court
construed EO-31’s restriction on “unacceptable or
inappropriate” conduct in light of the policy’s goal of
“promoting an environment that is free of discrimination,
harassment, and retaliation.” It then concluded that the
policy only reaches conduct that “‘resemble[s]’
discrimination, harassment, or retaliation, even if not
unlawful under employment laws.” The court reasoned that
by this limiting construction, the policy was not facially
overbroad or vague “because the terms ‘discrimination,’
‘harassment,’ and ‘retaliation’ are defined” by reference to
federal and state law.
Relying on the district court’s narrowing construction,
defendants argue that EO-31 is neither vague nor overbroad.
But at least at the Rule 12(b)(6) stage, the district court’s
narrowing construction was untenable. Courts “may impose
a limiting construction on a statute only if it is ‘readily
susceptible’ to such a construction.” United States v.
Stevens, 559 U.S. 460, 481 (2010) (quoting Reno v. Am. Civil
Liberties Union, 521 U.S. 844, 884 (1997)). We apply state

44

REGES V. CAUCE

canons of construction when interpreting state statutes. See
Santa Clarita Valley Water Agency v. Whittaker Corp., 99
F.4th 458, 485 (9th Cir. 2024). EO-31 is a regulation, see
Wash. Rev. Code § 34.05.010(2)–(3), which, under
Washington law, is interpreted using “the same principles
used to interpret statutes.” Puget Soundkeeper All. v. State,
356 P.3d 753, 757 (Wash. Ct. App. 2015). “When the words
in a statute are clear and unequivocal,” Washington courts
“assume the Legislature meant exactly what it said and apply
the statute as written.” In re Recall of Pearsall-Stipek, 10
P.3d 1034, 1041 (Wash. 2000) (quoting In re Custody of
Smith, 969 P.2d 21, 25 (Wash. 1998)).
EO-31 targets “any conduct that is deemed unacceptable
or inappropriate, regardless of whether the conduct rises to
the level of unlawful discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation.” Despite the broad sweep of this text, UW, like
the district court, reads EO-31 to “tether[ ]” the terms
“unacceptable” and “inappropriate” to the concepts of
unlawful discrimination and retaliation. As further support,
UW notes that EO-31 lists specific policies aimed at
discrimination, harassment, and retaliation immediately
after its prohibition on “unacceptable or inappropriate”
conduct; provides that its terms “have the meaning given to
them by applicable federal or state law and regulations”; and
includes “Nondiscrimination” and “Non-Retaliation” in its
title and the titles of its subsections.
Although this language standing alone provides some
support for UW’s reading, the inference of any “tether” to
the legal definitions of harassment, discrimination, and
retaliation is broken by EO-31’s plain text, which reaches
“any conduct,” including (there is no dispute) expression,
“regardless of whether the conduct rises to the level of
unlawful discrimination, harassment, or retaliation.” Given

REGES V. CAUCE

45

this language, EO-31 is not “readily susceptible” to the
district court’s interpretation that only conduct “resembling”
unlawful discrimination, harassment, or retaliation is
covered. See Stevens, 559 U.S. at 481 (quoting Reno, 521
U.S. at 884).
Because the district court’s limiting construction
conflicts with the plain text of EO-31, it was improper.
Although Reges asks us to answer the constitutional question
without the district court’s narrowing construction, we think
that question is best left to the district court in the first
instance. In evaluating that issue, the district court may also
consider whether a proper understanding of EO-31 may be
informed by how the policy has been enforced and applied
in practice. See Moody v. NetChoice, LLC, 603 U.S. 707,
726 (2024) (directing further exploration of the law and facts
in a First Amendment facial challenge).
*

*

*

For the foregoing reasons, we reverse and remand for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

46

REGES V. CAUCE

S.R. THOMAS, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and
dissenting in part:
I agree with the majority that Pickering balancing applies
to Professor Stuart Reges’s First Amendment retaliation and
viewpoint discrimination claims.
However, I respectfully disagree with the majority’s
conclusion that Reges’s speech interests outweigh the
University of Washington’s interests. Universities have a
responsibility to protect their students. This University, like
other universities in the American West, has a particular
obligation to its Native students. The disruption Reges’s
speech caused to Native students’ learning outweighed his
own First Amendment interests.
I also respectfully disagree with the majority’s
conclusion that the University’s policy, EO-31, is not readily
susceptible to the district court’s limiting construction.
I
I agree with the majority that Reges’s First Amendment
retaliation and viewpoint discrimination claims depend on
the outcome of Pickering balancing, but I respectfully
disagree as to the outcome of that balancing. “In Pickering,
the Supreme Court instructed that courts must conduct ‘“a
fact-sensitive and deferential weighing of the government’s
legitimate interests” as employer against the First
Amendment rights of the employee.’” Dodge v. Evergreen
Sch. Dist. #114, 56 F.4th 767, 781 (9th Cir. 2022) (quoting
Riley’s Am. Heritage Farms v. Elsasser, 32 F.4th 707, 720
(9th Cir. 2022)). We do not consider Reges’s statement “in
a vacuum; the manner, time, and place of the employee’s
expression are relevant, as is the context in which the dispute
arose.” Rankin v. McPherson, 483 U.S. 378, 388 (1987).

REGES V. CAUCE

47

A
The University had weighty interests in educating and
enrolling Native students. In Pickering balancing, the
government has a legitimate interest in avoiding “speech by
their employees that impairs close working relationships
among co-workers, impedes performance of the speaker’s
job duties, interferes with the effective functioning of the
employer’s operations, or undermines the employer’s
mission.” Hernandez v. City of Phoenix, 43 F.4th 966, 976
(9th Cir. 2022). “Reasonable predictions of disruption” can
be sufficient to justify speech restrictions. See Dodge, 56
F.4th at 782 (quoting Robinson v. York, 566 F.3d 817, 824
(9th Cir. 2009)). A government employer need not “allow
events to unfold to the extent that the disruption of the office
and the destruction of working relationships is manifest
before taking action.” Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S. 138, 152
(1983).
Educating and enrolling Native students is a core part of
the University’s “mission,” as well as the “effective
functioning” of its “operations.” Hernandez, 43 F.4th at 976.
Universities have a responsibility to educate all their
students. American universities, especially in the West, have
a special responsibility to their Native students. The
University has repeatedly acknowledged this responsibility.
The University has a memorandum of understanding with
regional tribes, which commits the University to, among
other things, “[e]nhance efforts to recruit, retain[,] and
successfully graduate more American Indian undergraduate,
graduate and professional students.” The University’s
Office of Tribal Relations has said that “it is important for
the University of Washington to work together to develop
strong working relationships with tribal citizens and leaders.
Existing relationships between the UW and certain tribal

48

REGES V. CAUCE

communities have demonstrated benefits for both sides
including sharing knowledge, research opportunities, and
educational opportunities for tribal members and
descendants.” And of course, the University has its own land
acknowledgment, which it developed in consultation with
tribal leaders throughout the state and region.
Reges’s “land acknowledgment” disrupted student
learning, especially for Native students. Students reported
that “they will not attend class or will be dropping [Reges’s]
course rather than take the course.” One Native student took
a leave of absence, in significant part because of Reges’s
statement. To be sure, as the majority notes, this student had
other reasons for taking leave.
But Reges’s “land
acknowledgment” was one of the primary reasons that
student stopped receiving an education. As any educator
knows, students cannot be educated when they are absent.
Moreover, several students, in written complaints,
showed how Reges went beyond offense to threaten their
learning: “this whole incident has made me feel so directly
despised and unsafe that I’m certain if I hadn’t transferred in
I wouldn’t be at the Paul Allen school right now”; “I am
intimidated and already do not feel welcome in this class,
nor do I feel like I will be supported and led to be successful
in this required course for my major.” The University noted
that the volume of written complaints was “unprecedented.”
Based on all this information, the University reasonably
concluded that there was “significant impact” to the “morale
of Native American students, and their learning.” That is a
disruption to the University’s ability to educate its Native
students.
It also matters that Reges included the statement on a
syllabus for a fundamentals of computer science class. That

REGES V. CAUCE

49

is part of the “context” of the statement. See Rankin, 483
U.S. at 388. Reges has not argued that the propriety of land
acknowledgments on syllabi is remotely related to the
fundamentals of computer science. The University has an
interest in their students learning about topics related to their
classes, rather than engaging in whatever controversial
discussion their professor feels like having; that interest is
part of the University’s interest in the “effective functioning”
of its educational curriculum. See Hernandez, 43 F.4th at
976.
The majority suggests that this kind of disruption to
student learning is categorically inadequate to outweigh a
professor’s speech interests. It holds that “[t]his [student]
unrest . . . cannot be the type of disruption that permits
restricting or punishing a professor’s academic speech,” and
it reasons that “First Amendment protection that rises and
falls depending on how upset students become at a
professor’s message is little protection at all.” There are
good reasons to be concerned about student unrest becoming
a heckler’s veto. But student learning is the heart of any
university’s mission, and it is common sense that students do
not learn well when they experience extreme distress, as
happened here. In a case like this, where student unrest went
beyond mere offense and rose to the level of distress and
absences, and where the University’s particular
responsibility to Native students is implicated, such
disruption can outweigh a professor’s speech interests.
Rodriguez v. Maricopa County Community College
District, 605 F.3d 703 (9th Cir. 2010), is not to the contrary.
First, as the majority acknowledges, Rodriguez only held
that the college did not create a hostile work environment by
not disciplining a professor, not that the college would have
violated the First Amendment had it done the opposite and

50

REGES V. CAUCE

disciplined the professor. Id. at 711. Rodriguez thus did not
address Pickering balancing at all. See generally id.
Second, Rodriguez focused on university employee distress,
not student distress. Id. at 705, 708. That distinction matters
because university employee distress is worth little in
Pickering balancing. See Dodge, 56 F.4th at 782; Bauer v.
Sampson, 261 F.3d 775, 785 (9th Cir. 2001) (“[A]nyone who
has spent time on college campuses knows that the vigorous
exchange of ideas and resulting tension between an
administration and its faculty is as much a part of college
life as homecoming and final exams.” (emphasis added)).
But our precedents have not similarly discounted university
student distress, and wisely so, because of the fundamental
impact that extreme student distress can have on student
learning.
The University also reasonably predicted that Reges’s
“land acknowledgment” would disrupt enrollment of Native
students. A current Native student complained that they
would never have enrolled had they seen Reges’s statement.
The University’s diversity and access recruiter noted that
Reges’s “land acknowledgment” undermined her operations:
“How am I supposed to recruit students into an environment
where their history is questioned and their rights are
denied?” Contrary to the majority’s reasoning, the predicted
disruption to enrollment was not mere “speculation.” The
current students’ statements, along with the “unprecedented”
volume of complaints, make the prediction of disruption
reasonable.
In sum, the actual and reasonably anticipated disruption
to the University’s education and enrollment of Native
students was significant.

REGES V. CAUCE

51

B
Compared to the University’s interests, Reges’s interests
are far less weighty, even though he spoke on a matter of
public concern.
He was allowed to put his “land
acknowledgment” at the bottom of his emails. He was
allowed to send it to his colleagues. He was allowed to post
it outside his office. He was allowed to discuss it in
interviews with the press, including a University student
newspaper. The only forum the University disallowed him
from repeating his “land acknowledgment” was a syllabus
for an introduction to computer science course—a course
that is required for certain majors. Reges’s interest in
speaking about land acknowledgments in this single forum
does not outweigh the University’s interest in avoiding
disruption to its Native students’ learning.
I would hold that these alternative fora available to
Reges are part of the “context in which the dispute arose”
that must be considered in Pickering balancing. Rankin, 483
U.S. at 388. The majority argues that this is a “curious
argument” that is “inconsistent with the First Amendment.”
It is admittedly novel, because our cases have not addressed,
one way or another, 1 what alternative avenues for speech
mean for a government employee’s interests under
Pickering. On the facts here, Reges’s interest in putting his
“land acknowledgment” on his syllabus is slim, because he
was still allowed to repeat it everywhere else.
And allowing Reges to speak in these alternative fora
does not diminish the University’s argument that Reges’s
The majority’s citation to Southeastern Promotions, Ltd. v. Conrad, 420
U.S. 546, 556 (1975), does not address Pickering balancing in the
government employment context.

1

52

REGES V. CAUCE

“land acknowledgment” was disruptive, because sharing it
in these alternative fora did not cause the same kind of
disruption that adding it to the syllabus did. That is not a
surprising difference: a Professor’s speech has a different
significance when it is in a document that governs how he
will run his class and grade students, than it does when he is
talking outside of class with colleagues or giving interviews
to the press.
***
Because the disruption to the University’s mission and
operations was great, I would hold that the University’s
interests prevail over Reges’s, and would thus affirm the
district court.
II
I also respectfully disagree with the majority’s
conclusion that the University’s policy, EO-31, is not
susceptible to the district court’s limiting construction. The
disputed language in EO-31 says:
This policy has the goal of promoting an
environment that is free of discrimination,
harassment, and retaliation. To facilitate that
goal, the University retains the authority to
discipline or take appropriate corrective
action for any conduct that is deemed
unacceptable or inappropriate, regardless of
whether the conduct rises to the level of
unlawful discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation.
The district court construed the phrase “conduct that is
deemed unacceptable or inappropriate” to be limited to

REGES V. CAUCE

53

conduct that “‘resemble[s]’ discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation, even if not unlawful under employment laws.”
The majority determines that there is no “tether” to
unlawful discrimination, harassment, or retaliation because
of the words “any conduct” and “regardless.” If EO-31 said
“any conduct” is sanctionable “regardless of whether the
conduct is unlawful discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation,” then I would agree. But EO-31 instead says
“any conduct” is sanctionable “regardless of whether the
conduct rises to the level of unlawful discrimination,
harassment, or retaliation.” That preserves the tether: under
the plain language of EO-31, sanctionable conduct still must
resemble unlawful discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation, but need not be as extreme. Thus, EO-31 is
“readily susceptible” to the district court’s limiting
construction. United States v. Stevens, 559 U.S. 460, 481
(2010) (quoting Reno v. ACLU, 521 U.S. 844, 884 (1997)).
Other tools of statutory interpretation bolster this view,
as the majority acknowledges. The purpose of this
provision, stated in the sentence immediately preceding the
disputed language, is to “promot[e] an environment that is
free of discrimination, harassment, and retaliation.” The title
of EO-31 includes “Nondiscrimination,” and the subtitle of
the relevant provision is “Nondiscrimination and NonRetaliation.” Immediately after the disputed provision, EO31 lists specific policies aimed at discrimination,
harassment, and retaliation.
And EO-31 defines
discrimination, harassment, and retaliation as “hav[ing] the
meaning given to them by applicable federal or state laws
and regulations.” In sum, this provision is all about unlawful
discrimination, harassment, and retaliation, so the district
court’s limiting construction—that prohibited conduct must

54

REGES V. CAUCE

“resemble” unlawful discrimination, harassment,
retaliation—is sound. I would affirm the district court.

or

III
Because the University’s interest in avoiding disruption
to the education and enrollment of Native students
outweighs Reges’s interest in repeating his “land
acknowledgment” in this particular forum, the district court
was correct to grant summary judgment to the University on
the First Amendment retaliation and viewpoint
discrimination claims.
Because EO-31’s “tether” to “unlawful discrimination,
harassment, or retaliation” is not severed, it is readily
susceptible to the district court’s limiting construction, to
conduct that “‘resemble[s]’ discrimination, harassment, or
retaliation, even if not unlawful under employment laws.”
Under that limiting construction, EO-31 is not
unconstitutionally vague or overbroad, at least as an
employment policy.
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent.

