FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
RODOLFO T. ASUNCION, Jr.,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 23-4044
D.C. No.
1:23-cv-00119LEK-KJM

PETER HEGSETH,*in his official
capacity as Secretary of Defense,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Hawaii
Leslie E. Kobayashi, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 3, 2025
Honolulu, Hawaii
Filed September 4, 2025
Before: William A. Fletcher, Morgan B. Christen, and
Roopali H. Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge W. Fletcher

*

Peter Hegseth is substituted as Secretary of Defense pursuant to Fed.
R. App. P. 43(c)(2).

2

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

SUMMARY**
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 / Timeliness
The panel reversed the district court’s judgment in favor
of the Secretary of Defense in an action alleging
employment discrimination on the basis of disability in
violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
The district court concluded that plaintiff’s claims were
time-barred because they were not filed within 90 days of
receipt of the Defense Logistics Agency’s Office of Equal
Opportunity and Diversity’s final agency decision (FAD),
and equitable tolling was not warranted.
Claims brought under the Rehabilitation Act are
governed by the same remedies, procedures, and rights
applicable to Title VII employment discrimination claims
brought by federal employees against federal
defendants. Under Title VII, a federal employee’s civil
action must be brought within 90 days of receipt of notice of
the final agency action. The 90-day period functions as a
statute of limitations. The panel held that for notices
transmitted via traditional mail services, the case law on
Title VII statutes of limitations is clear, but electronically
transmitted notices present new complications.
The panel held that the 90-day limitation period did not
begin until plaintiff’s attorney could realistically be held
responsible for having access to the FAD and learning what
the agency had decided. Here, the agency made numerous
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

3

errors when transmitting the passphrase necessary to decrypt
the FAD. The panel held that under the circumstances,
plaintiff’s attorney did not have effective notice of the
agency’s decision until December 5, the day he received by
email a decrypted copy of the FAD. Because plaintiff’s
attorney filed suit in the district court within 90 days of
receiving the accessible FAD, the complaint was timely.
Alternatively, the panel held that plaintiff was entitled to
equitable tolling because plaintiff’s attorney was diligent in
trying to gain access to the agency’s decision and
extraordinary circumstances prevented him from
succeeding. Applying equitable tolling, the panel held that
plaintiff’s statute of limitations period did not begin to run
until he received the decrypted copy of the FAD on
December 5. Because he filed his complaint 88 days later,
the complaint was timely filed.

COUNSEL
Shawn A. Luiz I (argued), Law Office of Shawn A. Luiz,
Honolulu, Hawaii, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Tracy J. Weinstein (argued) and Sydney Spector, Assistant
United States Attorneys; Clare E. Conners, United States
Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Honolulu, Hawaii; for DefendantAppellee.

4

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

OPINION
W. FLETCHER, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiff-Appellant Rodolfo T. Asuncion, Jr. brought suit
against his former employer the Defense Logistics Agency
(“DLA”), alleging discrimination on the basis of disability
in violation of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973. The district
court concluded that Asuncion’s claims were time-barred
and entered judgment against him.
We reverse and remand.
I. Background
Asuncion worked as a civilian Electronic Duplicating
System Technician for the DLA in Pearl Harbor, Hawaiʻi for
30 years. Asuncion alleges in his complaint that he
developed post-traumatic stress disorder (“PTSD”) during
his deployment in Iraq as a member of the National Guard.
He alleges that his PTSD, among other impairments, made
“it difficult and burdensome for [him] to complete his work
tasks without a reasonable accommodation,” and that he was
“a handicapped person within the meaning of the
Rehabilitation Act.”
After a series of incidents in which Asuncion made
threatening statements in the workplace, the DLA
indefinitely suspended Asuncion’s employment without pay
on April 21, 2021, based on its determination that he should
no longer be permitted to access classified and sensitive
information. Asuncion argues the DLA violated the
Rehabilitation Act because it “discriminated against [him]
by claiming he was a direct threat and failed to provide
meaningful and effective accommodations.”

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

5

Asuncion filed an Equal Employment Opportunity
(“EEO”) claim with the DLA’s Office of Equal Employment
Opportunity and Diversity (“DLA’s EEO Office” or
“Office”) in December 2019. He filed a formal complaint
with the Office in December 2020. The agency did not
receive a hard copy of the complaint until September 2021
because of the COVID-19 pandemic. The Office issued its
final agency decision (“FAD”) regarding his complaint on
November 4, 2022.
The DLA Case Number assigned to the FAD was
“DLAF-20-0424.” This case number appeared on the letter
enclosing the FAD and on every page of the FAD. A
different case number, “DLAF-21-0424,” also appeared
once on the first page of the FAD. Asuncion alleged in his
district court complaint, however, that the correct case
number for his EEO claim was “DLAF-20-0424.” The
government does not dispute that “DLAF-20-0424” was the
correct case number.
In the FAD, the DLA concluded that Asuncion “failed to
establish that he was subjected to disparate treatment and
harassment based on disability, or reprisal.” It notified
Asuncion about his right to file a civil action “within 90
calendar days of receipt of the final Agency decision.”
The DLA’s EEO Office transmits FADs using the
Department of Defense’s Secure Access File Exchange
(“DoD SAFE”). DoD SAFE allows the Office to send
sensitive documents securely. To send a FAD through DoD
SAFE, an EEO official “drop[s] off” the FAD into the DoD
SAFE system. The system then sends an email to the EEO
official and the specified recipients with a “Claim ID,” a
“Claim Passcode,” and a link to the FAD. The EEO official
also encrypts the FAD with a “passphrase” in the DoD SAFE

6

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

system, which the official then sends to the recipients in a
separate email. A recipient clicks on the link and enters the
Claim ID, Claim Passcode, and passphrase into DoD SAFE
in order to access the FAD.
On November 8, 2022, EEO Complaints Manager
Joseph S. Somerville III dropped off Asuncion’s FAD and a
certificate of service into DoD SAFE, designating as
recipients Asuncion and his attorney Shawn A. Luiz. The
certificate of service stated: “For timeliness purposes, it
shall be presumed that the parties received the foregoing
DLA final agency decision dated November 4, 2022 for
DLA Case Number DLAN-22-0051 within five (5) calendar
days after it was mailed. I certify that the DLA final agency
decision was mailed to the following parties on November
8, 2022.” (Underlining in original.) It is undisputed that the
certificate of service contained the wrong case number.
Asuncion’s FAD was assigned the case number DLAF-200424, not DLAN-22-0051. (Italics added.) The certificate of
service did not indicate the substance of the “final agency
decision.”
On November 8, Somerville received an email from
DoD SAFE, confirming that Asuncion and Luiz received the
Claim ID and Claim Passcode. Somerville separately
emailed Asuncion and Luiz the passphrase necessary to
decrypt the FAD. Under the subject line “Passphrase to
DLAF-20-0420,” Somerville wrote: “The passphrase for
your DoD Safe is DLAF-20-0420FAD.” (Italic added.)
This, again, did not match the case number assigned to
Asuncion’s FAD. (As noted above, that number was DLAF20-0424. (Italic added.)) Nor did it match the case number
in the certificate of service, DLAN-22-0051.

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

7

On November 11, Luiz replied to the November 8 email
from Somerville, stating: “I could not access the file. Can
you please resend in a different format?” Somerville
responded on November 14: “The file expired, so I will have
to resend it to you. Please pick-up the file as soon as you
receive the notification.” That same day, Somerville
repeated the process for transmitting the FAD through DoD
SAFE. He dropped off the FAD and certificate of service
into the DoD SAFE system, designating Asuncion and Luiz
as recipients. Again, Somerville received a confirmation
email that Asuncion and Luiz received the Claim ID and
Claim Passcode.
This time, Somerville sent two different passphrases. On
November 14, Luiz received an email from Somerville
stating: “The passphrase for the DoD Safe is DLAF-200420FAD please pick this up within 48 hours.” (Italic
added.) This was an incorrect passphrase. Almost an hour
later, Luiz received a different email from Somerville. This
one stated: “Good morning all, Please use the following
passphrase to open up your DoD Safe file DLAF-200424FAD.” (Italic added.) The second passphrase was
correct, but Somerville did not state in his second email that
he was sending a different and correct passphrase. Neither
party disputes that Somerville sent these two different
passphrases for the same DoD SAFE “drop-off.”
Luiz responded to Somerville later that day, stating:
“Sorry; I could not access the files still.” Almost two hours
later, he emailed Somerville again, stating: “Sorry, I still
cannot open the attachment.” Somerville did not respond to
either email.
On November 20, Luiz received an automatic email
message from DoD SAFE reminding him that he had a

8

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

“drop-off” that would expire in 24 hours. Luiz forwarded
this email to Somerville on November 21 stating: “I cannot
open it. Please mail via U.S. Mail.”
Asuncion himself also tried to access the FAD through
DoD SAFE in November. He stated in a sworn declaration
that he “was unable to do so with [his] personal devices.”
Asuncion explained that the DLA mailed “voluminous”
copies of the record through the mail, and he did “not
understand why the DLA did not just mail . . . a copy of the
FAD.”
On December 3, 2022, Luiz emailed Somerville and
DLA’s EEO Office Deputy Director Kimberly R. Lewis. He
wrote:
Please be advised I gave notice on Nov. 11,
14, 21, 2022, that I could not open the file for
the Final Agency Decision in Rodolpho
Asuncion v. DLA. It has been 3 weeks.
Would someone please email me a FAD
PDF that is not encrypted OR mail to me via
U.S. MAIL a hard copy? Thank you.
(Emphasis in original.) Luiz forwarded a copy of this email
to the DLA’s General Counsel the same day, requesting that
the General Counsel email him a copy of the FAD.
On December 5, Lewis emailed Luiz a decrypted PDF
copy of the FAD. That same day, Luiz confirmed receipt of
the FAD. He emailed Lewis the following:
I am confirming receipt of the FAD. Thank
you for sending it in a format that is not
encrypted on DODSafe which I can finally
access.

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

9

Please confirm my time to respond to the
timelines triggered by the FAD starts from
today, December 5, 2022. Will I receive a
Certificate of Service indicating today’s
date? Please let me know?
I never received an email on Nov. 4, 2022.
The first email giving notice of a DODSafe
document was November 8, 2022. I sent the
Nov. 11, 14, 21, 2022, notices to the email
address [for Somerville]. I received more
DODSafe notices (Nov. 14 and Nov. 20,
2022) but was still unable to open the
documents each time. (Emphasis added.)
Luiz followed up on December 13, eight days later, with
another email to Lewis:
Please be advised I am still awaiting a
response to my email of December 5, 2022 (8
days ago) where I confirmed receipt of the
FAD (it was sent in a format that was not
encrypted on DODSafe which I could finally
access).
My unanswered questions were, “Please
confirm my time to respond to the timelines
triggered by the FAD starts from today,
December 5, 2022.
Will I receive a
Certificate of Service indicating today’s
date? Please let me know?”
A response would be greatly appreciated.
Thank you very much!

10

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

(Emphasis added in first paragraph; emphasis in original in
second paragraph.)
On December 14, Lewis responded, “According to 29
CFR 1614 the time starts when you as the Attorney received
the FAD. We will not issue a new [certificate of service]
since we have proof you received the FAD via email. A copy
will be placed in the complaint file.” Luiz responded the
next day, “Thank you!”
Once he received the FAD and learned of the adverse
decision of the agency, Asuncion was able to decide whether
to bring suit. Understanding Lewis’s response as confirming
that he had not “received” the FAD until he received it by
email on December 5, 2022, Luiz filed the complaint on
March 3, 2023. This was 115 days after Somerville first
dropped off the FAD into the DoD SAFE link on November
8, 2022, and 88 days after Luiz actually received the emailed
copy of the decrypted FAD on December 5, 2022.
The government moved to dismiss the complaint, or, in
the alternative, for summary judgment. The government
argued that Asuncion’s complaint was untimely because it
was not filed within 90 days of receipt of the FAD. The
district court agreed that Asuncion’s complaint was
untimely, concluded that equitable tolling was not
warranted, and granted summary judgment against
Asuncion. Asuncion moved for reconsideration. The
district court denied his motion.
Asuncion’s timely appeal followed. We issued a focus
order asking the parties to be prepared to explain at oral
argument the incorrect number on the certificate of service,
the discrepancies between the FAD case numbers, and the
discrepancies between the DoD SAFE passphrases provided
to Asuncion and Luiz.

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

11

II. Standard of Review
We review de novo a district court’s order granting
summary judgment based on the statute of limitations.
Payan v. Aramark Mgmt. Servs. Ltd. P’ship, 495 F.3d 1119,
1121 (9th Cir. 2007). “[V]iewing the evidence in the light
most favorable to the nonmoving party,” we must decide
“whether the district court correctly applied the relevant
substantive law and whether there are any genuine issues of
material fact.” Lyons v. England, 307 F.3d 1092, 1103 (9th
Cir. 2002) (quoting Balint v. Carson City, 180 F.3d 1047,
1050 (9th Cir. 1999) (en banc)).
III. Discussion
A. Timely Filing
We first address whether Asuncion’s complaint was
timely filed. Claims brought under the Rehabilitation Act
are governed by the same “remedies, procedures, and rights”
applicable to Title VII employment discrimination claims
brought by federal employees against federal defendants. 29
U.S.C. § 794a(a)(1). Under Title VII, civil actions brought
by federal employees must be brought “[w]ithin 90 days of
receipt of notice of final [agency] action.” 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000e-16(c); see also 29 C.F.R. § 1614.407(a) (providing
that civil actions must be brought “[w]ithin 90 days of
receipt of the agency final action on an individual or class
complaint”); 42 U.S.C. § 2000e-5(f)(1) (“If a charge filed
with the [Equal Employment Opportunity] Commission
. . . is dismissed . . . the Commission . . . shall so notify
thehttps://www.law.cornell.edu/definitions/uscode.php?wid
th=840&height=800&iframe=true&def_id=42-USC991716523-1546477204&term_occur=999&term_src=
person aggrieved and within ninety days after the giving of
such notice a civil action may be brought . . . .”). The 90-

12

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

day period functions as a statute of limitations. Payan, 495
F.3d at 1121. Claimants can receive notice through their
attorneys. Irwin v. Dep’t of Veterans Affs., 498 U.S. 89, 93
(1990).
The parties disagree as to which email constituted
“receipt of notice” of the agency’s final agency action and,
thus, triggered the start of the 90-day period. Despite
sending the wrong passphrase on November 8, the
government argues that the period started on that date, when
Asuncion and Luiz received the initial DoD SAFE email
linking to the encrypted FAD. Asuncion argues that the
period did not begin until December 5, when his attorney,
Luiz, first received the decrypted copy of the FAD.
For notices transmitted via traditional mail service, our
case law on Title VII’s statute of limitations is clear and
uncomplicated. “We measure the start of the limitations
period from the date on which a right-to-sue notice letter
arrived at the claimant’s address of record.” Payan, 495
F.3d at 1122; see also Scholar v. Pac. Bell, 963 F.2d 264,
267 (9th Cir. 1992) (explaining the claimant need not have
the notice “in hand” for the 90-day period to begin). But as
this appeal and others demonstrate, electronically
transmitted notices present new complications, such as
delays caused by encryption, not considered by our previous
case law. For help in deciding this appeal, we look to recent
decisions by our sister circuits.
In Lax v. Mayorkas, 20 F.4th 1178 (7th Cir. 2021), the
Seventh Circuit held that the Title VII statute of limitations
began when employee Brian Lax received an email attaching
a password-protected copy of his FAD. Id. at 1182. Lax had
filed an EEO complaint against his employer, the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (“FEMA”). Id. at 1180.

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

13

EEO transmitted its decision to Lax via email, attaching a
password-protected copy of the FAD, a “Notice of Appeal
Rights,” a privacy statement, and a certificate of service. Id.
at 1180–81. One minute later, EEO sent the password in a
separate email. Id. at 1181. Lax read the emails that day,
but he claimed he was unable to open the attached FAD until
the next day because of technical errors on his work-issued
phone. Id. Lax filed suit 91 days after he received the email
with his FAD attached, but 90 days after he read the FAD.
Id. The Seventh Circuit rejected Lax’s argument that the 90
days began to run when he opened and read the attached
FAD. Id. at 1182. Even though Lax contended he was
“unable—rather than simply unwilling—to read the [FAD]
on the day he received it,” the court reasoned that “under the
present set of circumstances, this distinction does not
warrant a different result.” Id. The Seventh Circuit
explained that Lax “knew at that time (without needing to
open the attachment) that what he had received was the
[FAD].” Id. at 1183.
The Eighth Circuit recently considered and extended Lax
in McDonald v. St. Louis University, 109 F.4th 1068 (8th
Cir. 2024). In McDonald, employee Rachel McDonald filed
a discrimination charge with the Equal Employment
Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”) against her employer.
Id. at 1070. After making its final decision not to bring suit
itself, the EEOC emailed McDonald’s lawyer on May 10,
2022, notifying the lawyer that “a new document” had been
added to McDonald’s case file on the EEOC’s online portal.
Id. The email contained a hyperlink that led to McDonald’s
right-to-sue notice. Id. The lawyer read the email but could
not access the notice because he had lost his password for
the portal. Id. The EEOC sent a “REMINDER” email on
May 18. Id. Without the password, however, the lawyer still

14

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

could not access the portal. Id. On June 21, McDonald’s
lawyer emailed the EEOC asking for the right-to-sue letter.
Id. The EEO emailed the right-to-sue letter as an attachment
on June 28. Id. McDonald filed her complaint on September
23—137 days after May 10, and 87 days after June 28. Id.
The court held that the 90-day period began to run on May
10, when the EEOC first emailed McDonald’s lawyer the
hyperlink to her right-to-sue letter in the portal. Id. at 1071.
“That her lawyer never read the right-to-sue letter until the
EEOC emailed it as an attachment . . . ‘does not save her
claims from being time-barred.’” Id. (quoting Williams v.
Thomson Corp., 383 F.3d 789, 790–91 (8th Cir. 2004)). The
court declined to apply equitable tolling, writing, “[w]e do
not think the record shows that her lawyer did much to get
the password.” Id.
Even more recently, the Seventh Circuit extended Lax in
Kinder v. Marion County Prosecutor’s Office, 132 F.4th
1005 (7th Cir. 2025). The employee, Susan Kinder, filed a
discrimination claim against her employer with the EEOC.
Id. at 1007. On April 28, 2022, the EEOC uploaded her
right-to-sue letter to the EEOC’s online portal. Id. Kinder’s
lawyer received an email from the EEOC that same day
informing him that a “new document” had been added to the
portal. Id. The lawyer was unable to access the document,
and he called the EEOC multiple times for help. Id. The
EEOC emailed him on June 15, explaining that Kinder’s
“charge was closed” and that he had to view the notice on
the portal. Id. Again, Kinder’s lawyer could not access the
letter on the portal and asked the EEOC to send him the
letter. Id. Eventually, the EEOC emailed the letter to
Kinder’s lawyer. Id. The Seventh Circuit held that the 90day period began when Kinder had notice of the agency’s
final decision, not when Kinder was able to read the right-

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

15

to-sue letter. Id. at 1009. Because there was no dispute that
the June 15 email informed her lawyer that a right-to-sue
letter was available in the portal, the court measured the 90day period from June 15. Id.
Finally, the First Circuit recently addressed a case
similar to the case before us. García-Gesualdo v. Honeywell
Aerospace of P.R., Inc., 135 F.4th 10 (1st Cir. 2025). The
employee, Leika Joanna García-Gesualdo, filed a charge
against her employer with the EEOC. Id. at 13. After
considering the charge, the EEOC emailed GarcíaGesualdo’s lawyer on March 29 with the subject line
“Document Added to [García-Gesualdo’s] EEOC Charge.”
Id. The body of the email stated that a “new document” had
been added to García-Gesualdo’s case file on the EEOC
Public Portal and contained a hyperlink that led to the portal.
Id. Neither the subject line nor the body of the email
described the substance of the “new document.” Id. On
April 6, the EEOC sent García-Gesualdo’s lawyer a second
email with the subject line “REMINDER: Important
Document Available for [García-Gesualdo’s] EEOC
Charge.” Id. The body of the email stated that the “EEOC
has made a decision regarding [García-Gesualdo’s] charge”
and directed her lawyer to “review the decision” on the
EEOC Public Portal. Id. The second email also contained a
hyperlink to the portal. Id. García-Gesualdo’s lawyer was
not able to access the document because the EEOC Public
Portal was not functioning properly. Id. at 14 (noting that
the EEOC acknowledged that the problem with the portal
was a “known issue”). García-Gesualdo’s lawyer did not
access the right-to-sue letter until April 11 when the EEOC
emailed him a PDF copy. Id.
The First Circuit held that neither the March 29 email nor
the April 6 email provided sufficient information to

16

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

constitute notice of García-Gesualdo’s right to sue. Id. at
16–17. The court concluded, “[I]n order for an email that
does not attach the right-to-sue letter itself to provide notice,
it must ‘indicate[ ] without ambiguity’ that the EEOC has
reached a final decision and that the claimant has ninety days
to bring suit if they so wish.” Id. at 18. The March 29 email
did not provide notice because it “merely note[d] the
existence of a ‘new’ document without attaching the new
document to the email” and did not contain sufficient
information about the existence of a final decision. Id.
Although the April 6 email indicated that the EEOC “made
a decision” and instructed García-Gesualdo to view an
“important document” on the EEOC Public Portal, it did not
provide notice because there are other important EEOC
decisions unrelated to the termination of EEOC processes
and commencement of the 90-day filing period. Id. The
court explained that “[a]lthough we agree that providing a
link (as opposed to an attachment) via email could be
sufficient to provide notice, as we have explained, the
transmitting email must also provide information with
respect to the link that would satisfy the notice requirement.”
Id. at 19.
We are persuaded by the First Circuit’s reasoning in
García-Gesualdo and find that the facts in that case are more
similar to Asuncion’s circumstances than those in the
Seventh and Eighth Circuit cases. The certificate of service
in this case stated that the inaccessible document was a “final
agency decision” without indicating what that decision was
or that Asuncion had 90 days to file suit. Despite his
repeated attempts, Asuncion’s lawyer was unable to access
the FAD because of errors made by the DLA, just as GarcíaGesualdo’s lawyer was unable to access the EEOC Public
Portal because of technical issues with the portal.

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

17

Asuncion’s lawyer did not receive an accessible copy of the
FAD until the DLA emailed him the decrypted copy on
December 5. Under similar circumstances, the First Circuit
concluded that García-Gesualdo’s lawyer received notice of
the FAD only when the EEOC emailed an accessible copy
of the right-to-sue letter.
We hold that the 90-day limitation period did not begin
until Luiz could realistically be held responsible for having
access to the FAD and learning what the agency had decided.
As recounted above, the agency made numerous errors when
transmitting the passphrase necessary to decrypt the FAD.
On November 8, Somerville mistakenly sent a passphrase
that did not match Asuncion’s case number. On November
14, Somerville again sent the same incorrect passphrase.
Almost an hour later, Somerville sent a second email—this
time with a passphrase that matched the case number, but
without explaining that he was now sending a different
passphrase. The difference between the two passphrases
was a single digit in a multi-number, multi-letter passphrase.
When Luiz emailed Somerville twice later that day, stating
that he still could not open the attachment, Somerville did
not respond. At oral argument, the government conceded
that it could not say with certainty whether the DLA ever
sent the correct passphrase to Luiz’s client, Asuncion.
Under the circumstances, we hold that Luiz did not have
effective notice of the nature of the agency’s final decision
until December 5, the day he received by email a decrypted
copy of that decision. He filed suit in the district court within
90 days of receiving the accessible FAD. Thus, his
complaint was timely.

18

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

B. Equitable Tolling
Alternatively, we hold that Asuncion is entitled to
equitable tolling. Equitable relief is given “only sparingly”
and does not apply to “garden variety claim[s] of excusable
neglect.” Irwin, 498 U.S. at 96 (considering cases involving
private litigants and noting that “it is evident that no more
favorable tolling doctrine may be employed against the
Government”). Equitable tolling is appropriate where a
claimant “has been induced or tricked by his adversary’s
misconduct into allowing the filing deadline to pass.” Id.
“A statute of limitations is subject to the doctrine of
equitable tolling.” Scholar, 963 F.2d at 267. “[A] litigant is
entitled to equitable tolling of a statute of limitations only if
the litigant establishes two elements: ‘(1) that he has been
pursuing his rights diligently, and (2) that some
extraordinary circumstance stood in his way and prevented
timely filing.’” Menominee Indian Tribe of Wis. v. United
States, 577 U.S. 250, 255 (2016) (quoting Holland v.
Florida, 560 U.S. 631, 649 (2010)). We hold that Asuncion
meets both elements here.
We conclude that Asuncion is entitled to equitable
tolling because Luiz was diligent in trying to gain access to
the agency’s decision and extraordinary circumstances
prevented him from succeeding. He emailed Somerville on
November 11, 14, and 21 to explain that he could not access
the encrypted FAD. He asked Somerville to resend the FAD
“in a different format ” or “via U.S. Mail.” But except for
sending two links on the morning of November 14—the first
of which was incorrect—Somerville ignored Luiz’s
requests. Indeed, he ignored two requests from Luiz later
that very day. It was only when Luiz emailed both Lewis
and Somerville on December 3 that the DLA finally sent a
decrypted FAD two days later.

ASUNCION V. HEGSETH

19

Luiz also made an effort to clarify the date when the
limitations period began. He emailed Lewis to confirm “the
timelines triggered by the FAD starts from . . . December 5,
2022.” Lewis responded: “According to 29 CFR 1614 the
time starts when you as the Attorney received the FAD. We
will not issue a new [certificate of service] since we have
proof you received the FAD via email.” Not unreasonably,
Luiz understood Lewis’s statement to mean that the DLA
would not issue a new certificate of service because it had
proof he received the FAD on December 5, and that the 90day period started on December 5. On this record, Luiz
therefore demonstrated sufficient diligence to qualify for
equitable tolling.
Applying equitable tolling, Asuncion’s statute of
limitations period did not begin to run until he received the
decrypted copy of the FAD on December 5. Because he filed
his complaint 88 days later, the complaint was timely filed.
IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the district court’s
grant of summary judgment. We remand to allow the district
court to address the merits of Asuncion’s Rehabilitation Act
claim.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

