FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JOHN WOOLARD; BREANNA
WOOLARD; HECTOR
GONZALES; DIANA GONZALES;
CARRIE DODSON,

No. 24-4291
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-02305JAM-JDP

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
OPINION
TONY THURMOND; MICHAEL
COLEMAN; KRISTIN BLANCO;
BARRY LINDAMAN; BREANN
MORSE; TED DESTRAMPE;
RENE ADAMO; MELISSA
BASSANELLI; ZIMA CREASON;
PAM COSTA; SAUL
HERNANDEZ; BEN AVEY;
PAULA VILLESCAZ; TANYA
KRAVCHUK; BLUE RIDGE
ACADEMY; SAMANTHA
HAYNES; JESSIE MARON;
VISIONS IN EDUCATION
CHARTER SCHOOL; BRIAN
ALBRIGHT; STEVE OLMOS;
JENNIFER MORRISON; MICAH
STUDER; MARK HOLMAN; LISA
SOPHOS,
Defendants - Appellees.

2

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of California
John A. Mendez, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 4, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 11, 2025
Before: Andrew D. Hurwitz, Eric D. Miller, and Jennifer
Sung, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Hurwitz
SUMMARY*
Free Exercise and Free Speech Clauses of the First
Amendment
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal of a 42
U.S.C. § 1983 action brought by parents and guardians of
students enrolled in independent study programs at two
California charter schools who alleged First Amendment
violations when the schools rejected their requests to
purchase and permit the use of sectarian curricular materials
for instruction in the schools’ programs.
The charter schools rejected the requests because
California laws prohibit the teaching of sectarian or
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

3

denominational doctrine in public schools, including charter
schools. Plaintiffs allege that the rejection of their requests
pursuant to those laws violates the Free Exercise and Free
Speech Clauses of the First Amendment. They contend,
among other things, that the charter schools’ independent
study programs are really in substance homeschooling, not
public education, and that the schools’ provision of
curricular materials should be treated as a generally available
public benefit in aid of homeschooling. Pursuant to recent
Supreme Court authority, access to such public benefits
cannot be denied based on plaintiffs’ religious beliefs.
The panel first rejected plaintiffs’ Free Exercise Clause
claim, holding that even assuming that the funding and
materials California provides to parents for use in
independent study programs are a generally available public
benefit, the independent study programs at issue in this case
are sufficiently public to allow California to condition
participation on parents’ use of secular curricula. The
Supreme Court has confirmed that the Free Exercise Clause
does not prohibit a state from providing a strictly secular
education in its public schools.
The panel next rejected plaintiffs’ claim that requiring
parents to use state-approved materials in independent
study programs that do not reflect their religious views is
compelled speech in violation of the Free Speech Clause.
The panel held that a public school’s curriculum qualifies
as government speech and therefore is not subject to
scrutiny under the Free Speech Clause.

4

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

COUNSEL
Alexander Kazam (argued) and E. Caroline Freeman, King
& Spalding LLP, Washington, D.C.; Nicole Bronnimann,
King & Spalding LLP, Houston, Texas; Ethan P. Davis,
King & Spalding LLP, San Francisco, California; David J.
Hacker and Jeremiah G. Dys, First Liberty Institute, Plano,
Texas; Kayla A. Toney and Camille P. Varone, First Liberty
Institute, Washington, D.C.; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Thomas H. Prouty (argued) and D. Michael Ambrose,
Deputy General Counsels; Paul Gant and Bruce Yonehiro,
Assistant General Counsels; Len Garfinkel, General
Counsel; California Department of Education, Sacramento,
California; Kendra J. Hall (argued), Greta A. Proctor, Yulian
Y. Kolarov, and Sean M. Sullivan, Procopio Cory
Hargreaves & Savitch LLP, San Diego, California; Kevin M.
Troy (argued), Paul C. Minney, and Adam D. Afshar, Young
Minney & Corr LLP, Sacramento, California; Anthony M.
DeMaria, DeMaria Law Firm, Fresno, California; Ross R.
Nott and Tanveer Moundi, Spinelli Donald & Nott,
Sacramento, California; for Defendant-Appellees.
Christopher Schweickert, Seto Wood & Schweickert LLP,
Pleasant Hill, California, for Amici Curiae the Hive Method
LLC and Awaken Church DBA Awaken Academy.
Kathryn M. Capizzi, Maynard Nexsen PC, New York, New
York; Sue G. Stricklett, American Hindu Coalition, Sterling,
Virginia; for Amicus Curiae American Hindu Coalition.
Alexander J. Luchenitser and Luke Anderson, Americans
United for Separation of Church and State, Washington,
D.C., for Amicus Curiae Americans United for Separation
of Church and State.

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

5

Christopher A. Brook, Patterson Harkavy LLP, Chapel Hill,
North Carolina, for Amici Curiae National Alliance for
Public Charter Schools, California Charter Schools
Association, Association of Personalized Learning Schools
& Services, and Charter Schools Development Center.
Ilya Shapiro and Tim Rosenberger, Manhattan Institute,
New York, New York; Nicole S. Garnett, Notre Dame
Education Law Project, Notre Dame, Indiana; for Amici
Curiae Manhattan Institute and Notre Dame Education Law
Project.
Dean McGee and Buck Dougherty, Liberty Justice Center,
Austin Texas, for Amicus Curiae Liberty Justice Center.

OPINION
HURWITZ, Circuit Judge:
California provides free public education through its
common schools. See Cal. Const. art. IX, § 5. It long did so
through brick-and-mortar schools owned and operated by
public school districts. See id.; Cal. Educ. Code § 35160. In
1992, California authorized the establishment of charter
schools, “public schools funded with public money but run
by private individuals or entities rather than traditional
public school districts.” Today’s Fresh Start, Inc. v. L.A.
Cnty. Off. of Educ., 303 P.3d 1140, 1144 (Cal. 2013); Cal.
Educ. Code § 47600 et seq. Like traditional public schools,
charter schools can provide non-classroom-based
instruction, see Cal. Educ. Code § 47612.5(d), (e), including
“independent study” programs, id. § 51747.3, in which
parents provide home-based direct instruction approved by

6

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

the school and coordinated, evaluated, and supervised by
state-certified teachers, id. § 51747.5(a). To participate in
these programs, parents must enter into a contract with the
school specifying the objectives, methods of study, and
methods used for evaluating student work. See id.
§ 51747(g)(2), (g)(9)(A)(i). The school is then required to
provide appropriate materials and services necessary to
achieve
the
agreement’s
objectives.
See id.
§§ 51746, 51747(g)(3); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 5, § 11700(i).
The plaintiffs in this 42 U.S.C. § 1983 action are parents
and guardians of students enrolled in independent study
programs at two California charter schools who requested
that the schools purchase and permit the use of sectarian
curricular materials for instruction in the programs. The
schools rejected those requests because California law
provides that “sectarian or denominational doctrine” shall
not “be taught, or instruction thereon be permitted, directly
or indirectly, in any of the common schools of this State,”
Cal. Const. art. IX, § 8, and that “a charter school shall be
nonsectarian in its programs,” Cal. Educ. Code
§ 47605(e)(1). The plaintiffs claim that the rejection of their
request pursuant to those laws violates the Free Exercise and
Free Speech Clauses of the First Amendment.
The district court dismissed the operative complaint for
failure to state a claim. We affirm.
I.
Factual and Procedural Background
John and Breanna Woolard, Hector and Diana Gonzales,
and Carrie Dodson (collectively, “Plaintiffs”) are parents or
guardians of children who were enrolled at two California
charter schools, Blue Ridge Academy and Visions in

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

7

Education, and participated in the schools’ independent
study programs.1
Plaintiffs each unsuccessfully requested that the charter
schools purchase sectarian curricular materials for use in
those programs. Blue Ridge denied the Woolards’ request to
purchase the Bob Jones University “Focus on Fives”
curriculum, a “[w]orldview shaping” curriculum that teaches
that “God is great, and God is good; God created me and all
things; the Bible is God’s Word, and it is true; and I learn in
order to serve God and others.” Blue Ridge denied the
Gonzaleses’ request to purchase a similar Bob Jones
University curriculum and the Woolards’ request to
purchase “Bede’s History of Me,” a book that provides “[a]
clear way to teach the importance of timelines and how God
works in time.” Visions denied Dodson’s request to purchase
“The Good and the Beautiful,” a “faith-based curriculum”
that emphasizes “family, God, high character, nature, and
wholesome literature.”
Plaintiffs then sued the two charter schools and some of
their officials; officials of the Maricopa Unified School
District, the chartering authority for Blue Ridge; officials of
the San Juan Unified School District, the chartering
authority for Visions; and the State Superintendent of Public
Instruction. In dismissing the operative complaint, the
district court rejected the free exercise claims because
charter schools are public schools “included in California’s
free public school system,” and thus are allowed to provide
a strictly secular education. The court rejected Plaintiffs’
assertion that they were being “categorically excluded” from
a generally available public benefit because of their religious
1

The Woolards’ daughter and the Gonzaleses’ two grandchildren were
enrolled at Blue Ridge; Dodson’s son was enrolled at Visions.

8

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

exercise, noting that (1) “[t]here are no ‘public benefits’ in
the form of grants or otherwise that the state is excluding
Plaintiffs from” and (2) “[t]his case involves California’s
laws and regulations for state funded public schools, not
private schools.” Finally, the court held that because a public
school’s curriculum is government speech, Plaintiffs did not
plausibly allege a Free Speech Clause violation.
Plaintiffs timely appealed. We have jurisdiction under 28
U.S.C. § 1291,2 and “review de novo an order granting a
motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim.” Mudpie, Inc.
v. Travelers Cas. Ins. Co. of Am., 15 F.4th 885, 889 (9th Cir.
2021).
II.
Discussion
The Supreme Court has recently confirmed that the Free
Exercise Clause does not prohibit a state from providing “a
2

The State Superintendent and Blue Ridge Academy (but not its
officials) claim that the Eleventh Amendment deprives an Article III
court of jurisdiction over the action as to them. We disagree. Because
Plaintiffs seek only prospective non-monetary relief, the Ex parte Young
exception applies if the defendant state official has “some connection
with the enforcement of the act.” 209 U.S. 123, 157 (1908). The
Superintendent has the requisite connection. He is charged with
“[s]uperintend[ing] the schools of this state,” Cal. Educ. Code
§ 33112(a), and with executing the State Board of Education’s policies,
id. § 33111, including those governing independent study programs, see
id. § 51749.3. And under the test set forth in Kohn v. State Bar of Cal.,
87 F.4th 1021, 1030 (9th Cir. 2023) (en banc), the claims against Blue
Ridge are also not barred by the Eleventh Amendment. California does
not extend governmental immunity to charter schools, see Wells v.
One2One Learning Found., 141 P.3d 225, 243 (Cal. 2006), and Blue
Ridge is “operated, not by the public school system, but by” a nonprofit
public benefit corporation, a “distinct outside entit[y],” id. (emphasis
omitted).

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

9

strictly secular education in its public schools.” Carson v.
Makin, 596 U.S. 767, 785 (2022). Plaintiffs do not dispute
this foundational principle but argue that the charter schools’
independent study programs are in substance private
homeschooling, not public education. Plaintiffs then assert
that because California could not exclude potential
recipients of state grants for private homeschooling based on
religious belief, it cannot refuse to honor their requests for
funding of sectarian instruction. Plaintiffs also contend that
requiring parents to use state-approved materials in
independent study programs that do not reflect their religious
views is compelled speech in violation of the Free Speech
Clause of the First Amendment. We address these arguments
below.
A.
We begin with an overview of the legal structure of the
California charter school system. As a matter of California
law, “charter schools are part of California’s single,
statewide public school system.” Wilson v. State Bd. of
Educ., 89 Cal. Rptr. 2d 745, 752 (Ct. App. 1999). Although
the defendant charter schools are not operated by public
school districts, they are overseen by public “chartering
authorities” (school district governing boards) that “approve
charters, supervise charter school operations, and revoke
charters in the event particular standards and conditions [a]re
not met.” Today’s Fresh Start, 303 P.3d at 1144; see also
Cal. Educ. Code § 47605 (procedure for establishing a
charter school); id. § 47604.32 (duties of a chartering
authority); id. § 47607(f)(4) (providing for charter
revocation if the charter school “[v]iolated any law”). Like
other California public schools, charter schools cannot
charge tuition; “cannot discriminate against students on the
basis of ethnicity, national origin, gender or disability”;

10

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

“must meet statewide standards and conduct pupil
assessments applicable to pupils in noncharter public
schools”; must provide instruction meeting the same
statewide standards as other California public schools; and
must hire state-certified teachers. Wilson, 89 Cal. Rptr. 2d at
753. And charter schools are “eligible equally with other
public schools for a share of state and local education
funding.” Today’s Fresh Start, 303 P.3d at 1145-46.
Plaintiffs nonetheless argue that the defendant charter
schools’ independent study programs are really
homeschooling and that the schools’ provision of curricular
materials should be treated as a generally available public
benefit in aid of homeschooling, access to which cannot be
denied based on Plaintiffs’ religious beliefs. The argument
is premised on three recent Supreme Court decisions holding
that when a state creates a generally available public benefit,
it cannot exclude a potential recipient from the benefit
because of religious status or religious use. See Carson, 596
U.S. at 789 (holding that a state violated the Free Exercise
Clause in permitting parents whose children did not have
access to a public school to use tuition vouchers at all private
schools except religious ones); Espinoza v. Mont. Dep’t of
Revenue, 591 U.S. 464, 488-89 (2020) (holding that the
exclusion of religious private schools from a state private
school scholarship program violated the Free Exercise
Clause); Trinity Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v.
Comer, 582 U.S. 449, 467 (2017) (holding that a state’s
denial of a grant to a church for use in upgrading a
playground violated the Free Exercise Clause).
At the same time, not all government decisions that
engender religious objections impose burdens on religion
that fall afoul of the Free Exercise Clause. As the Supreme
Court made clear in Carson, a state’s decision to provide a

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

11

“strictly secular” public education does not do so. See 596
U.S. at 785. Secular public education neither “coerce[s]”
parents “into violating their religious beliefs” nor denies
religious parents “an equal share of the rights, benefits, and
privileges enjoyed by other citizens.” Lyng v. Nw. Indian
Cemetery Protective Ass’n, 485 U.S. 439, 449 (1988).
The parties dispute whether the funding and materials
California provides to parents for use in independent study
programs are a generally available public benefit. But even
assuming that they are, the programs at issue in this case are
sufficiently public to allow California to condition
participation on parents’ use of secular curricula. The status
of those programs under California law as part of the state
system of public education is consistent with the critical
features that the Supreme Court found characteristic of
public schools in Carson. There, although Maine argued that
its program was equivalent to funding a secular public
education, the Court identified several important distinctions
between public schools and the private schools for which the
program paid tuition. 596 U.S. at 782. First, Maine public
schools, unlike the state’s private schools, “have to accept
all students.” Id. at 783. Second, public schools, unlike
private schools, are free to attend. Id. Third, public schools
must
follow
extensive
state-imposed
curricular
requirements, while private schools are “subject only to
general standards and indicators governing the
implementation of their own chosen curriculum” and “need
not administer the annual state assessments.” Id. at 783-84
(cleaned up). Fourth, “other distinctions,” like that public
schools must “hire state-certified teachers,” separate the two.
Id. at 784.
The independent study programs at issue here share the
features of public education that the Court emphasized in

12

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

Carson. California charter schools operating independent
study programs must be free to attend and accept all students
for which they have capacity. Cal. Educ. Code
§ 47605(e)(1), (2). The programs must “be of the same rigor,
educational quality, and intellectual challenge substantially
equivalent to” classroom-based instruction and must be
“aligned to all relevant local and state content standards,”
including those adopted by the California Board of
Education. Id. § 51749.5(a)(4)(A); see id. § 47605(d)(1);
Cal. Code Regs. tit. 5, § 11701.5(a). The state standards for
mathematics, for example, are laid out in a 151-page
document that gives detailed descriptions of the skills and
content that students should master at each grade level. See
Cal. State Bd. of Educ., California Common Core State
Standards:
Mathematics
(2014),
www.cde.ca.gov/be/st/ss/documents/ccssmathstandardaug2
013.pdf [https://perma.cc/LV9H-A4R2]. Independent study
students must take state assessments that test their ability to
meet those standards. Cal. Educ. Code § 47605(d)(1).
In addition, independent study programs must be
coordinated and evaluated by, and “under the general
supervision of,” state-certified teachers. Id. § 51747.5(a);
see id. § 51749.5(a)(3). Those teachers must provide
“continuing oversight of the study design, implementation
plan, allocation of resources, and evaluation[s].” Cal. Code
Regs. tit. 5, § 11700(b) (defining “[g]eneral supervision”).
To that end, an independent study student must enter into a
written agreement with the school that includes the
“objectives and methods of study for the pupil’s work, and
the methods used to evaluate that work.” Cal. Educ. Code
§ 51747(g)(2). The study methods must be “selected by
the supervising teacher as the means to reach the educational
objectives,” and the evaluation methods must involve “a

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

13

certificated teacher personally assess[ing] the extent to
which achievement of the pupil . . . meets the objectives of
an assignment.” Cal. Code Regs. tit. 5, § 11700(e), (f)
(defining “[m]ethod utilized to evaluate” and “[m]ethods of
study”).
California
private
schools—including
private
homeschooling programs—are subject to none of those
requirements. Instead, they only need to file regular
registration affidavits, keep attendance, and provide
English-language instruction in broadly framed “areas of
study.” Cal. Educ. Code §§ 33190, 48222, 51210, 51220.
For mathematics in grades 7-12, for example, a curriculum
satisfies private-school content standards if it includes
“instruction
designed
to
develop
mathematical
understandings, operational skills, and insight into problem
solving procedures.” Id. § 51220(f). Beyond teaching those
general principles, private schools do not need to follow any
curricular requirements, and their students do not need to
take any statewide tests. Nor does California require that
private schools be accredited. See Private Schools
Frequently Asked Questions, Cal. Dep’t of Educ. (Sep. 3,
2025), www.cde.ca.gov/sp/ps/psfaq.asp [https://perma.cc/E
Z8K-RUSH]. And private-school teachers do not need to be
certified as long as they are “capable of teaching.” Cal. Educ.
Code § 48222.
Plaintiffs have alleged, and we take as true, that the
defendant charter schools provide parents great flexibility to
choose which pre-existing curricula to use to educate their
children, or to create their own. But with that flexibility
comes substantial legal constraints not applicable to private
schools. Plaintiffs also emphasize that, unlike in Maine’s
(and most) public schools, students in the independent study
programs receive instruction in their homes, and the direct

14

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

educators are their parents. But in contrast to private
homeschooling, parents in independent study programs can
teach only under the supervision of state employees. The
extensive legal requirements applicable to the defendant
charter schools’ independent study programs make the
programs sufficiently public to defeat Plaintiffs’ free
exercise claim.
B.
Plaintiffs’ compelled speech claim fares no better. It is
premised on the argument that “[w]hen parents in the Blue
Ridge and Visions programs select a diverse array of
curricula for their children’s diverse needs,” the parents are
speaking, not the government. However, we have held that a
public school’s curriculum is an “expression of its policy,”
Downs v. L.A. Unified Sch. Dist., 228 F.3d 1003, 1013-15
(9th Cir. 2000), and that “information and speech
. . . present[ed] to school children may be deemed to be part
of the school’s curriculum and thus School District speech,”
Riley’s Am. Heritage Farms v. Elsasser, 32 F.4th 707, 728
(9th Cir. 2022). Government speech is “not subject to
scrutiny under the Free Speech Clause.” Pleasant Grove City
v. Summum, 555 U.S. 460, 464 (2009). Moreover, the state
“is not precluded from relying on the government-speech
doctrine merely because it solicits assistance from
nongovernmental sources.” Johanns v. Livestock Mktg.
Ass’n, 544 U.S. 550, 562 (2005).
Citing Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va.,
515 U.S. 819 (1995), Plaintiffs also argue that a public
school cannot discriminate against religious viewpoints
when it creates a limited public forum. Rosenberger,
however, involved a public university’s refusal to fund an
otherwise-eligible student news organization with a

WOOLARD V. THURMOND

15

religious viewpoint. See id. at 827. More importantly, it
expressly recognized that “[w]hen the University determines
the content of the education it provides, it is the University
speaking.” Id. at 833. Just so here. Blue Ridge and Visions,
in refusing to permit the use of the requested curricular
materials, determined the “content of the education” they
would provide and any resulting speech in instruction was
theirs, not that of Plaintiffs.
III.
We AFFIRM the judgment of the district court.

