FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
ROBERT MANNING,
Defendant-Appellant.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.

No. 22-10309
D.C. No.
3:19-cr-00313WHA-1
OPINION

No. 22-10310
D.C. No.
3:19-cr-00313WHA-2

JAMARE COATS,
Defendant-Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
William Alsup, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted August 19, 2024
San Francisco, California

2

USA V. MANNING

Filed August 20, 2025
Before: Marsha S. Berzon, Daniel A. Bress, and Lawrence
VanDyke, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bress;
Dissent by Judge Berzon
SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed two defendants’ convictions for
murder in aid of racketeering, in violation of the Violent
Crimes in Aid of Racketeering (VICAR) statute, 18 U.S.C.
§ 1959(a), and possession of a firearm by a felon, in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).
Defendants argued that the district court erred in
concluding that it lacked authority to bifurcate the trial on
different elements of VICAR murder. In defendants’ view,
the district court should have first held a trial on whether
defendants were responsible for the murder, and then, if
defendants were found guilty of that murder, proceed to a
second phase on the remaining VICAR murder elements.
The panel held that, as the district court concluded, United
States v. Barker, 1 F.3d 957 (9th Cir. 1993), opinion
amended on denial of reh’g, 20 F.3d 365 (9th Cir. 1994),

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. MANNING

3

precludes bifurcation of the trial on the different elements of
a single VICAR murder charge.
Defendants also argued that the district court erred in
rejecting a challenge under Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79
(1986), to the government’s peremptory strike of a juror,
who was later determined to be Black. Holding that there
was no Batson violation, the panel (1) agreed with the
district court’s determination at Batson step two that the
juror’s views—expressed in her juror questionnaire, that
policing in the United States is “rooted in anti-black racism”
and is “structurally” racist—provided a neutral justification
for the government striking her; and (2) found no error in the
district court’s determination, at Batson step three, that the
government’s reason for striking the juror was not
pretextual.
The panel addressed other issues in an accompanying
memorandum disposition.
Judge Berzon dissented in part and dissented from the
judgment. She wrote that in holding that Barker stands for
the general proposition that trial on different elements of a
single charge can never be bifurcated, the majority
dramatically overstates Barker’s holding. She emphasized
that the VICAR statute is fundamentally different from 18
U.S.C. § 922(g)(1) with regard to a critical aspect of
Barker—that the element of possession of a firearm is
ordinarily a benign act, not a crime. In her view, Barker’s
reasoning does not support expanding its holding to VICAR,
and there were compelling reasons here to bifurcate the trial.
She agreed that the district court correctly rejected
defendants’ Batson challenge, but because the district
court’s erroneous conclusion that it could not bifurcate the

4

USA V. MANNING

trial was not harmless, she would reverse and remand for a
new trial.

COUNSEL
Anne C. Hsieh (argued), Assistant United States Attorney;
Merry J. Chan, Chief, Appellate Section, Criminal Division;
Ismail J. Ramsey, United States Attorney; Office of the
United States Attorney, United States Department of Justice,
San Francisco, California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Karen L. Landau (argued), Law Offices of Karen L. Landau,
Moraga, California; Elizabeth Richardson-Royer (argued),
Law Office of Elizabeth Richardson-Royer, San Francisco,
California; for Defendants-Appellants.

USA V. MANNING

5

OPINION
BRESS, Circuit Judge:
For their roles in a shootout that left a man dead, Robert
Manning and Jamare Coats were each convicted of one
count of murder in aid of racketeering, in violation of the
Violent Crimes in Aid of Racketeering Activity (VICAR)
statute. 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a). Each defendant was also
convicted of possession of a firearm by a convicted felon.
Id. § 922(g)(1). We hold that the district court correctly
concluded that it lacked authority to bifurcate the trial of
different elements of a single VICAR murder charge. The
district court likewise did not err in rejecting defendants’
challenge under Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 79 (1986), to
the government’s striking of a juror. For the reasons set forth
in this opinion and our accompanying memorandum
disposition, we affirm defendants’ convictions.
I
Robert Manning and Jamare Coats were known to be
active members of Mac Block, a gang associated with the
1100 blocks of McAllister and Fillmore Streets in San
Francisco’s Fillmore District. Individuals involved in Mac
Block, also known as the SWISS, would commit crimes in
the area, possess firearms, and oppose other gangs.
On March 23, 2019, Manning attended a funeral
reception in the Fillmore with two of his Mac Block
associates, Sean Harrison and Donte Armstrong. After
leaving the reception and returning with Coats and a few
others, Armstrong had a heated argument with another
attendee, Misterdee Simmons. Simmons eventually pulled
out a gun and threatened Armstrong and Manning. Manning

6

USA V. MANNING

then left the reception with Harrison and Coats, and Manning
and Harrison retrieved two pistols from Manning’s car.
Coats also retrieved a firearm from his own car. The three
then returned to the reception.
After attempts by others to calm the situation, a gunfight
broke out. Simmons fired at Harrison, and Harrison and
Coats both shot at Simmons. Manning did not fire any shots.
Simmons was struck by eleven bullets and killed. Four
bystanders were also shot, one of whom was rendered
paraplegic.
Manning and Coats were each charged with one count of
VICAR murder and one count of being a felon in possession
of a firearm and ammunition. Manning’s VICAR murder
charge was based on the theory that he aided and abetted
Harrison’s murder of Simmons (Harrison pleaded guilty to a
lesser charge). A jury convicted Manning and Coats on all
counts. The district court denied defendants’ motions for a
new trial and for acquittal, sentencing both to life in prison.
Manning and Coats appeal. We have jurisdiction under
28 U.S.C. § 1291.
II
We first address defendants’ argument that the district
court erred in concluding that it lacked the authority to
bifurcate the trial on the different elements of VICAR
murder. In defendants’ view, the district court should have
first held a trial on whether Manning and Coats were
responsible for Simmons’ murder, and then, if defendants
were found guilty of that murder, proceeded to a second
phase on the remaining VICAR murder elements.
We review a district court’s denial of a motion to
bifurcate for abuse of discretion. United States v. Nguyen,

USA V. MANNING

7

88 F.3d 812, 818 (9th Cir. 1996). But “[w]e review de novo
a district court’s ruling that it lacks legal authority to exercise
its discretion.” United States v. Salemo, 81 F.3d 1453, 1460
(9th Cir. 1996). We hold that, as the district court concluded,
defendants’ request to bifurcate the trial on the different
elements of a single VICAR murder charge fails under
United States v. Barker, 1 F.3d 957 (9th Cir. 1993), opinion
amended on denial of reh’g, 20 F.3d 365 (9th Cir. 1994).
A
The VICAR statute punishes murder and other crimes
committed “for the purpose of gaining entrance to or
maintaining or increasing position in an enterprise engaged
in racketeering activity.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a). The elements
of a VICAR offense are “(1) that the criminal organization
exists; (2) that the organization is a racketeering enterprise;
(3) that the defendants committed a violent crime; and
(4) that they acted for the purpose of promoting their
position in the racketeering enterprise.” United States v.
Bracy, 67 F.3d 1421, 1429 (9th Cir. 1995); see also United
States v. Elmore, 118 F.4th 1193, 1199 (9th Cir. 2024);
United States v. Fernandez, 388 F.3d 1199, 1220 (9th Cir.
2004), modified, 425 F.3d 1248 (9th Cir. 2005).
VICAR murder requires the government to first show
that the defendant committed murder “in violation of the
laws of any State or the United States.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a);
see also Elmore, 118 F.4th at 1199 (explaining that the
violent crime element requires “proof that a defendant has
committed one of the enumerated offenses, in violation of
state or federal law”). The government must then show the
requisite connection between the murder and a racketeering
enterprise.

8

USA V. MANNING

This initially requires the government to prove the
existence of “an enterprise engaged in racketeering activity.”
18 U.S.C. § 1959(a). VICAR defines “racketeering activity”
with reference to 18 U.S.C. § 1961, which is the definition
used in the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
Act of 1970 (RICO). See id. § 1959(b)(1). Section 1961
provides a lengthy list of wrongful conduct that qualifies as
“racketeering activity.”
VICAR then defines “enterprise” to include “any union
or group of individuals associated in fact although not a legal
entity.” Id. § 1959(b)(2). “To establish the existence of such
an enterprise, [the government] must provide both ‘evidence
of an ongoing organization, formal or informal,’ and
‘evidence that the various associates function as a continuing
unit.’” Odom v. Microsoft Corp., 486 F.3d 541, 552 (9th Cir.
2007) (en banc) (quoting United States v. Turkette, 452 U.S.
576, 583 (1981)) (construing enterprise in the analogous
RICO context). To prove VICAR purpose—that the murder
was “for the purpose of gaining entrance to or maintaining
or increasing position in an enterprise engaged in
racketeering activity,” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a)—the “gang or
racketeering enterprise purpose does not have to be the only
purpose or the main purpose of the murder or assault. But it
does have to be a substantial purpose.” United States v.
Banks, 514 F.3d 959, 969 (9th Cir. 2008); see also United
States v. Rodriguez, 971 F.3d 1005, 1009–1010 (9th Cir.
2020).
The government’s theory at trial was that Mac Block was
“an association in fact” united by a common purpose of
committing crimes in and around the Fillmore District and
defending Mac Block territory. The government further
maintained that defendants killed Simmons for the purpose
of promoting and maintaining their position in the

USA V. MANNING

9

racketeering enterprise—that is, to burnish their reputations
and standing with other Mac Block members and to
demonstrate that Mac Block would not tolerate someone like
Simmons publicly disrespecting them in the Fillmore.
To prove that Mac Block was “an enterprise engaged in
racketeering activity,” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a), the government
introduced evidence of Mac Block’s organizational structure
and practices through the testimony of accomplice Harrison,
former San Francisco gang member Johnny Brown, and San
Francisco Police Department Sergeant Thomas Moran. This
included, following the district court’s balancing under
Federal Rule of Evidence 403, testimony about specific prior
acts of Mac Block racketeering, among them Manning and
Coats evading police in a high-speed chase, Coats firing
shots in the street, and Mac Block members committing an
armed robbery of a marijuana dispensary. Some of these
past acts involved Manning and Coats, but others involved
different members of Mac Block.
Before trial, and in the course of evaluating which
enterprise acts to allow into evidence consistent with Rule
403, the district court sua sponte raised the possibility of
bifurcating the trial of VICAR’s violent crime element (i.e.,
murder) from the remaining VICAR elements. Under that
procedure, the district court explained, “the jury would first
determine whether or not a murder had occurred, and, if it so
found, would then hear further evidence concerning
racketeering acts and the enterprise and determine whether
the murder was done for ‘the purpose of gaining entry to,
maintaining or increasing position in’ an enterprise.” Taking
up the district court’s idea, defendants moved to bifurcate
the trial in this manner on the theory that evidence about Mac
Block’s other wrongdoing, and defendants’ involvement in

10

USA V. MANNING

it, would prejudice the jury’s consideration of whether
defendants were responsible for Simmons’s murder.
The district court denied the bifurcation motion,
concluding that our decision in United States v. Barker, 1
F.3d 957 (9th Cir. 1993) forbade bifurcated trials of elements
of a single criminal charge. Although the district court
would have preferred to sever the trial but for Barker, the
court viewed Barker as controlling. As the district court
explained, “[t]he government presents [Barker] as an acrossthe-board absolute rule that bifurcation cannot be allowed, at
least as applied to this case. And I’ve read the Barker
decision, and I believe that the government is correctly
reading it.” Although the district court found it “sad that the
Court of Appeals would have such a broad statement,” it
concluded that “the Court of Appeals has spoken in the
Barker case, and I cannot see an honest, intellectually honest
way to get around it.” The district court went on to offer
some criticisms of Barker, opining that Barker was wrongly
decided. In the district court’s view, Barker improperly
prevented trial courts from employing bifurcated
proceedings to conserve resources and alleviate undue
prejudice to defendants, in this case from the evidence of
past racketeering acts.
Because the district court viewed itself as unable to
bifurcate proceedings on the VICAR elements under Barker,
it took other steps to mitigate the perceived prejudice from
the enterprise acts evidence. Most notably, the district court
gave cautionary instructions to the jury throughout the
government’s presentation of prior Mac Block racketeering

USA V. MANNING

11

acts, and then included the following admonition in the jury
instructions:
You have heard evidence regarding acts that
took place before 2019. As I instructed you,
you may consider this evidence only for the
limited purpose of determining whether or
not the government has proven the alleged
racketeering enterprise, its general function,
and the defendant’s association with it.
Therefore, you must consider it only for that
limited purpose and not for any other
purpose. You may not consider those acts
with respect to the homicide of Misterdee
Simmons on March 23, 2019, including
issues of intent and purpose.
The district court also sequenced the presentation of
evidence, so that the “the racketeering acts were presented
back-to-back well after all the evidence concerning the
murder.” The district court observed, in denying defendants’
motions for a new trial, that this staging of the evidence
made it “easier for the jury to compartmentalize and to heed
the cautionary instruction.”
B
We agree with the district court that Barker precludes
bifurcation of the trial on the different elements of a single
VICAR murder charge.
In Barker, Alvin Barker was charged with being a felon
in possession of a firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g).
1 F.3d at 958. That provision criminalizes the possession of
firearms or ammunition by one “who has been convicted in

12

USA V. MANNING

any court of[] a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year.” 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). At trial, Barker
“moved to bifurcate the ‘possession’ element of the crime
from the ‘felon’ element of the crime” based on his concern
that evidence of his prior conviction would prejudice him.
Barker, 1 F.3d at 958. The government agreed to stipulate
to Barker’s prior felony but sought to have the jury instructed
on all elements of the crime. Id.
The district court sided with Barker, ordering a
bifurcated trial in which Barker would stipulate to a prior
felony conviction only if the jury first convicted him of
possession of a firearm, which the jury would have to do
without any knowledge of Barker’s felon status. Id. As part
of this procedure, the court would instruct the jury in the first
trial phase that “the parties have agreed that mere possession
[of the firearm] is criminal in this case and it is not for [the
jury] to decide the wisdom of such a law.” Id. (alteration in
original). But the indictment “would not (and indeed could
not) be read to the jury.” Id.
The government immediately appealed the bifurcation
order. Invoking the “extraordinary remedy” of mandamus,
we “join[ed] several other circuits” to “hold that the district
court may not bifurcate the single offense of being a felon in
possession of a firearm into multiple proceedings.” Id. at
959 (citing United States v. Gilliam, 994 F.2d 97, 101–02
(2d Cir. 1993); United States v. Birdsong, 982 F.2d 481, 482
(11th Cir. 1993) (per curiam); United States v. Collamore,
868 F.2d 24, 28 (1st Cir. 1989), overruled on other grounds
by United States v. Tavares, 21 F.3d 1 (1st Cir. 1994) (en
banc); United States v. Aleman, 609 F.2d 298, 310 (7th Cir.
1979), superseded by statute on other grounds as stated in
Jake v. G.L. Herschberger, 173 F.3d 1059 (7th Cir. 1999);

USA V. MANNING

13

United States v. Brinklow, 560 F.2d 1003, 1006 (10th Cir.
1977)).
We gave several reasons for our decision in Barker.
First, we concluded that “[t]he district court’s order
change[d] the very nature of the charged offense” and
“remove[d] an element of the crime from the jury’s
consideration.” Id. at 959. Indeed, we reasoned, “[a]ny
other holding would lead to an impermissible result” if the
jury did not find that Barker had possessed the firearm, as
this outcome would prevent the government “from proving
an essential element of the charged offense, and the district
court would breach its duty to instruct the jury on all the
essential elements of the crime charged.” Id. Here we
favorably relied on the Second Circuit’s observation in a
similar case rejecting bifurcation that “[t]here is a significant
difference . . . between a rule formulated to limit the
admissibility of potentially prejudicial evidence and a rule
that eliminates an element of a crime legislated by
Congress.” Id. (quoting Gilliam, 994 F.2d at 102).
Second, and related to the first point, we explained that
“[l]imiting the jury’s consideration of required elements of
an indicted offense is contrary to the presumption against
special verdicts in criminal cases.” Id. (citing United States
v. Aguilar, 883 F.2d 662, 690 (9th Cir. 1989), superseded
by statute on other grounds as stated in United States v.
Gonzalez-Torres, 309 F.3d 594, 599 (9th Cir. 2002)).
Although Barker did not elaborate on this point, it cited
Aguilar, which explained that although “there may be cases”
in which special verdicts are “appropriate,” “it has long been
the law that ‘it is not the practice of the Federal Courts in
criminal cases to call for special verdicts.’” Aguilar, 883
F.2d at 690 (quoting United States v. Jones, 425 F.3d 1048,
1057 (9th Cir. 1970)). In the same way that special verdict

14

USA V. MANNING

forms can be too intrusive of the jury’s internal processes in
criminal cases, see, e.g., United States v. Reed, 147 F.3d
1178, 1180 (9th Cir. 1998), bifurcation of the elements of a
single criminal charge into two or more trials could lead to a
framing of the case that unduly restricts the jury’s role. The
First and Second Circuits, whose decisions we favorably
cited in Barker, made a similar point in rejecting an identical
request for bifurcation. See Gilliam, 994 F.2d at 101;
Collamore, 868 F.3d at 28.
Third, Barker justified its rejection of the district court’s
bifurcation order on the ground that it “might unfairly
confuse the jury, prompting it to exercise its power of
nullification on the unwarranted belief that the defendant
was charged for noncriminal conduct.” 1 F.3d at 959.
Because gun ownership is presumptively lawful, Barker
explained that a jury in a bifurcated § 922(g) case, when first
deciding whether the defendant possessed a gun, might
“question whether what the accused did was a crime.” Id.
(quoting Collamore, 868 F.2d at 28).
Manning and Coats argue that Barker “should be limited
to its facts” and, most specifically, to § 922(g) felon-inpossession cases. But Barker gave no indication that it
should be interpreted in such a limited way. Defendants
identify no reasoned decision that has adopted their proposed
bifurcation procedure as to the elements of a single criminal
offense. And although defendants maintain that “it might be
that bifurcation is only appropriate in VICAR cases,” they
identify no VICAR cases that have done this, either.
Like the district court, we believe that a faithful reading
of Barker forecloses defendants’ argument. The reason is
that Barker’s core rationale transcends § 922(g) or any
particular criminal offense. A central animating principle of

USA V. MANNING

15

Barker is that bifurcating the trial on the elements of a single
criminal charge would redefine the offense itself,
“chang[ing] the very nature of the charged offense” and
“‘eliminat[ing] an element of a crime legislated by
Congress.’” 1 F.3d at 959 (quoting Gilliam, 994 F.2d at
102). In the process, it would unduly “[l]imit[] the jury’s
consideration of required elements of an indicted offense,”
analogous to the restraints on jury decision-making that
special verdict forms can impose. Id. And if “a jury did not
return a guilty verdict” in the first part of the bifurcated
proceeding, “[t]he government would be precluded from
proving an essential element of the charged offense.” Id.
These rationales apply just as well to VICAR cases.
Although we appreciate the district court’s studious criticism
of our decision in Barker, as a three-judge panel we must
adhere to Barker, just as the district court itself did. See
Miller v. Gammie, 335 F.3d 889, 893 (9th Cir. 2003) (en
banc). Regardless, we think the rationales in Barker—most
centrally our obligation to treat criminal offenses as
Congress has defined them—must of necessity outweigh the
concerns that the district court raised.
The worry driving Manning and Coats’s request for
bifurcation, as amplified by the district court, is that
evidence of an enterprise’s past racketeering activities
creates prejudice for defendants in VICAR cases. But just
as in Barker, defendants “misunderstand[] the fundamental
nature of ‘prejudicial evidence.’” Id. at 959 n.3. The
defendant in Barker argued that his prior felony conviction
was prejudicial in a § 922(g) case, but we rejected this,
explaining that “[a] prior conviction is not prejudicial when
it is an element of the charged crime.” Id.
That same logic applies to evidence of an enterprise’s
racketeering activities, because the government must prove

16

USA V. MANNING

under VICAR the existence of “an enterprise engaged in
racketeering activity.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a); see also Bracy,
67 F.3d at 1429. Inasmuch as defendants’ prejudice
objection arises from the way Congress defined the VICAR
offense, under Barker this provides no justification for
bifurcating the trial on the elements of a single VICAR
charge. And to the extent defendants’ concern is that jurors
might link the past racketeering activities to the charged
murder, the district court’s instructions specifically told
jurors not to consider that evidence “with respect to the
homicide of Misterdee Simmons on March 23, 2019,
including issues of intent and purpose.” Cf. United States v.
Ovsepian, 113 F.4th 1193, 1201 (9th Cir. 2024) (“We
‘presume that jurors follow the jury instructions.’” (quoting
Doe v. Busby, 661 F.3d 1001, 1017 (9th Cir. 2011))). 1
Finally, Manning and Coats argue that Barker should not
govern because Barker contemplated the possibility that a
jury in the first phase of a bifurcated trial might engage in
nullification after concluding that the defendant’s conduct
(possession of a gun) was not unlawful. Defendants point
out that here there is no question that murder is unlawful.
We again align with the district court in viewing Barker as
controlling.
It is true that Barker’s concern that jurors might acquit
“on the unwarranted belief that the defendant was charged
for noncriminal conduct,” Barker, 1 F.3d at 959, does not
apply in this case. But this was only one of our rationales in
Barker. It was by no means our driving rationale. We
prefaced our discussion of jury nullification with
The government argues that the district court’s limiting instruction was
itself excessive and that it unduly constrained the jury’s consideration of
the VICAR murder charge. We have no occasion to consider that issue.
1

USA V. MANNING

17

“Additionally, . . .,” and devoted one sentence of analysis
and a block quote to the issue. Id. And this discussion
followed our core critique that the district court’s bifurcation
order in Barker “change[d] the very nature of the charged
offense” and would lead the district court to “breach its duty
to instruct the jury on all the essential elements of the crime
charged.” Id.
Indeed, when we later rejected a similar bifurcation
request in Nguyen, we noted that “[t]here are various
legitimate reasons for not allowing bifurcation of the offense
of being in possession of a firearm into separate
proceedings,” listing “[f]irst of all” that the “‘government
would be precluded from proving an essential element of the
charged offense, and the district court would breach its duty
to instruct the jury on all the essential elements of the crime
charged.’” 88 F.3d at 818 (quoting Barker, 1 F.3d at 959)
(emphasis added). Nothing in Barker suggests that the
possibility of jurors doubting the criminal nature of the
conduct is a necessary condition for rejecting bifurcation on
the elements of a single criminal offense. And to the extent
defendants ask us to adopt such a reading of Barker, we
reject that request, which would not be true to the Barker
decision as a whole.
Moreover, our concern in Barker with juror nullification
arose from a broader concern that “the district court’s
bifurcation order might unfairly confuse the jury.” Id. Juror
confusion would be an issue here, too, albeit for a different
reason than in Barker. Requiring jurors to first decide
whether Manning and Coats were responsible for
Simmons’s murder, without any evidence of VICAR
enterprise or purpose, would force jurors to view the facts of
this case in an artificially constrained light, leaving jurors
with little understanding of why Manning and Coats might

18

USA V. MANNING

have killed (or aided or abetted the killing of) Simmons.
This would hamstring the government in its ability to explain
defendants’ intent and motive. And it would impede the
jury’s understanding of what happened and why. See Old
Chief v. United States, 519 U.S. 172, 189 (1997) (“People
who hear a story interrupted by gaps of abstraction may be
puzzled at the missing chapters, and jurors asked to rest a
momentous decision on the story’s truth can feel put upon at
being asked to take responsibility knowing that more could
be said than they have heard.”). Depriving the jury of key
context hardly gives effect to Congress’s articulation of the
offense of VICAR murder.
We therefore hold that under Barker, the district court
lacked the authority to bifurcate the trial on the elements of
a single VICAR murder offense.
C
Our decision today is consistent with the many courts
that have rejected requests to bifurcate the trial of the
elements of a single criminal offense.
Every circuit to address bifurcation in the § 922(g)
context is in accord with Barker. As we noted above, per
Barker, see 1 F.3d at 959, the First, Second, Seventh, Tenth,
and Eleventh Circuits had already ruled consistent with
Barker before our decision in that case (in some cases
concerning the statutory predecessor to § 922(g)). See
Gilliam, 994 F.2d at 101–02; Birdsong, 982 F.2d at 482;
Collamore, 868 F.2d at 28; Aleman, 609 F.2d at 310;
Brinklow, 560 F.2d at 1006; see also United States v.
Amante, 418 F.3d 220, 224 (2d Cir. 2005), abrogated on
other grounds by Rehaif v. United States, 588 U.S. 225
(2019); United States v. Dean, 76 F.3d 329, 332 (10th Cir.

USA V. MANNING

19

1996); Tavares, 21 F.3d at 3 (“[W]e stand by and reaffirm
the proposition central in Collamore . . . .”).
Since Barker, the Third, Fourth, Eighth, and D.C.
Circuits have likewise rejected the bifurcation argument in
the § 922(g) context. See United States v. Jacobs, 44 F.3d
1219, 1222–23 (3d Cir. 1995); United States v. Milton, 52
F.3d 78, 80–81 (4th Cir. 1995), overruled on other grounds
by United States v. Wilks, 647 F.3d 520 (4th Cir. 2011);
United States v. Koskela, 86 F.3d 122, 125–26 (8th Cir.
1996); United States v. Clark, 184 F.3d 858, 867 (D.C. Cir.
1999); United States v. Mangum, 100 F.3d 164, 171 & n.11
(D.C. Cir. 1996). And the Sixth Circuit has concurred in a
reasoned but unpublished disposition. See United States v.
Underwood, 1996 WL 536796, at *6 (6th Cir. Sept. 20,
1996) (“Most other circuits follow the Barker rule.
Although this court has not previously adopted that rule, we
do so today.”) (citations omitted); see also United States v.
Moore, 376 F.3d 570, 573 (6th Cir. 2004) (citing
Underwood).
As the Fourth Circuit summarized, “[n]umerous courts
have held that if a defendant is charged with being a felonin-possession of a firearm, a district court does not have the
power to instruct the jury to consider only the possession
element of the offense.” Milton, 52 F.3d at 80; see also
United States v. Higdon, 638 F.3d 233, 244 n.8 (3d Cir.
2011), abrogated on other grounds by Rehaif v. United
States, 588 U.S. 225 (2019) (“Since our decision in Jacobs,
every appellate court that has addressed whether a single
count indictment under § 922(g)(1) should be entitled to a
bifurcated trial has rejected the idea.”); Mangum, 100 F.3d
at 171 n.11 (“A number of our sister circuits have reached
the same conclusion on this issue.”).

20

USA V. MANNING

Like Barker, these decisions employed reasoning that
goes beyond § 922(g). As the First Circuit explained, “[t]he
parties have not cited, and we have been unable to locate,
. . . a single case allowing, much less mandating, bifurcation
of a trial by dividing it along the lines of the elements of the
crime charged.” Collamore, 868 F.2d at 27. In fact, the First
Circuit noted, “other statutes call for the introduction of
other crimes as an element of a substantive offense, but as
far as we know, there has been no bifurcation in those cases.”
Id. at 28 (citation and footnote omitted). In addition, and as
we did in Barker, many of the cases from other circuits
emphasize the fact that bifurcation along the lines proposed
by Manning and Coats would alter the elements of the
offense as Congress defined it, a concern that is not limited
to § 922(g). See, e.g., Jacobs, 44 F.3d at 1223; Milton, 52
F.3d at 81; Gilliam, 994 F.2d at 102. Indeed, the Second
Circuit has stated without qualification that “in criminal
cases there is no bifurcation, at least as to each count of an
indictment.” United States v. Yakobowicz, 427 F.3d 144,
152 (2d Cir. 2005). 2
The bifurcation-of-elements issue has been raised less
often outside of § 922(g). See Birdsong, 982 F.2d at 482
(noting that such requests are “extremely rare”).
Nevertheless, courts have likewise rejected defendants’
same argument in the context of other criminal laws. The
The Second Circuit has elsewhere stated in dicta, in the § 922(g)
context, that it did “not rule out bifurcation where the facts underlying
the prior felony would be presented to the jury and are so heinous as to
overwhelm the trial of firearm or ammunition possession.” Amante, 418
F.3d at 224. We have never offered this or any similar caveat, nor does
it appear the Second Circuit has found the “extraordinarily unusual” case
to which this possible exception would apply. Id. at 225 (quoting United
States v. Belk, 346 F.3d 305, 311 (2d Cir. 2005)).
2

USA V. MANNING

21

D.C. Circuit considered the issue in United States v. Rezaq,
134 F.3d 1121 (D.C. Cir. 1998), in the case of aircraft piracy
under then-49 U.S.C. § 1472(n) (1994). At the time, the
statute criminalized, “while aboard an aircraft in flight . . .
unlawfully, by force or threat thereof, or by any other form
of intimidation, seiz[ing], or exercis[ing] control of [an]
aircraft.” Id. at 1127 (quoting 49 U.S.C. § 1472(n)(2)(A)).
The statute imposed a minimum sentence of death or life
imprisonment “if the death of another person results.” Id.
(quoting 49 U.S.C. § 1472(n)(1)(B)).
The defendant requested a bifurcated proceeding in
which the jury would “first consider whether he had
committed the offense of air piracy” before deciding
“whether the ‘death results’ provision” applied. Id. at 1134.
In the defendant’s view, the “death results” provision was a
penalty enhancement and not an element of the offense. Id.
After concluding, as a matter of statutory interpretation, that
the “death results” provision “must be classified as an
element of a substantive offense,” the D.C. Circuit
“affirm[ed] the district court’s ruling that [the defendant]
was not entitled to a bifurcated proceeding.” Id. at 1137.
The D.C. Circuit effectively treated as given that once it was
decided that the “death results” provision was an element of
the offense, bifurcating the elements of a single aircraft
piracy charge would have been improper.
District courts have also rejected requests to bifurcate the
trial of elements of the same offense in the contexts of a
variety of different criminal statutes. See United States v.
Andrews, 2013 WL 6230450, at *1–3 (N.D. W. Va. Nov. 26,
2013) (rejecting request to bifurcate trial on different
elements of a single charge for murder by a federal prisoner
serving a life sentence, 18 U.S.C. § 1118, and noting that
“[a]lthough the legal principle that evidence of one element

22

USA V. MANNING

of an offense cannot create prejudice as to another element
of the same offense is contained within felon-in-possession
cases, it is broadly applicable”); United States v. Cassim, 693
F. Supp. 2d 697, 700 (S.D. Tex. 2010) (rejecting request to
bifurcate trial on different elements of single criminal
copyright conspiracy charge); United States v. Lunceford,
2009 WL 2634479, at *2–3 (S.D. Ala. Aug. 21, 2009)
(rejecting request for bifurcated trial on different elements of
a single federal arson charge); United States v. Westry, 2006
WL 538885, at *1–3 (S.D. Ala. Mar. 3, 2006) (rejecting
request for bifurcated trial on different elements of a single
drug conspiracy charge under 21 U.S.C. § 846, and noting
that “dividing a trial to split apart the presentation of
evidence of different elements of the same offense into
different phases” is “rarely, if ever, appropriate”).
In short, our conclusion that the district court could not
bifurcate the trial of elements of a single VICAR murder
charge not only follows inexorably from our decision in
Barker, but is broadly consistent with the body of precedent
on this type of bifurcation question.
D
Defendants point out that bifurcation-type procedures
have been used in other contexts. But those contexts are
readily distinguishable.
Defendants note, for example, that courts have
bifurcated the trial of different criminal offenses, see, e.g.,
Fed. R. Crim. P. 14(a); United States v. Prigge, 830 F.3d
1094, 1098 (9th Cir. 2016); the guilt and penalty phases in
capital cases, see, e.g., United States v. Haymond, 588 U.S.
634, 647 (2019); Brown v. Sanders, 546 U.S. 212, 214
(2006); Adams v. Texas, 448 U.S. 38, 40 (1980); sentencing

USA V. MANNING

23

enhancement proceedings, 3 see, e.g., Spencer v. Texas, 385
U.S. 554, 563, 567–68 (1967); and in cases involving the
insanity defense, see, e.g., Collamore, 868 F.2d at 27. But
none of these situations involves the bifurcation of trial on
the elements of a single criminal offense. They therefore do
not present the same concerns we identified in Barker.
Nothing in Barker or our decision today casts doubt on
longstanding bifurcation practices in situations that do not
involve delimiting the jury’s consideration of the elements
of a single criminal offense, as Congress conceived it.
Defendants also correctly note that bifurcation of issues
at trial can occur in civil cases. But in the civil context, the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure specifically provide that
“[f]or convenience, to avoid prejudice, or to expedite and
economize, the court may order a separate trial of one or
more separate issues, claims, crossclaims, counterclaims, or
third-party claims.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(b). As the First
Circuit observed in rejecting a bifurcated trial on the
elements of a single § 922(g) offense, it is “significant that
the civil rules expressly allow separate trials of separate
issues, i.e., bifurcation, Fed. R. Civ. P. 42(b), while the
criminal rules are silent on the subject.” Collamore, 868
F.2d at 28.
Defendants also point to two cases allegedly approving
of bifurcation in the criminal and civil RICO contexts. See
United States v. Coonan, 839 F.2d 886 (2d Cir. 1988);
3
The Supreme Court recently referenced bifurcation of proceedings in
Armed Career Criminal Act (ACCA) cases in Erlinger v. United States,
602 U.S. 821, 847 (2024). But that was in the context of a sentencing
enhancement. See id. (citing Spencer, 385 U.S. at 567); United States v.
Bonat, 106 F.3d 1472, 1478 (9th Cir. 1997). Thus, Erlinger does not
support defendants’ position.

24

USA V. MANNING

Conkling v. Turner, 18 F.3d 1285 (5th Cir. 1994). But
neither of these cases endorsed bifurcating the trial of
separate elements of a single criminal offense. Coonan
involved the district court’s limited use of a special verdict
and special interrogatories in a manner that did “not remove
any actual factfinding from the province of the jury.” 839
F.2d at 888–90, 889 n.3. Conkling, meanwhile, was a civil
case involving the application of Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 42(b). See 18 F.3d at 1293–94.
Nor is it true that bifurcation is the only means of
avoiding undue prejudice to defendants in VICAR murder
cases. As this case demonstrates, district courts have other
means at their disposal to address undue prejudice associated
with the presentation of past racketeering acts, including
limiting instructions and the sequencing of the government’s
case. What district courts cannot do under Barker, as the
district court here rightly recognized, is bifurcate the trial on
the elements of a single VICAR murder charge. We reaffirm
Barker and reject defendants’ position on bifurcation. And
even if Barker did not strictly govern (it does), we would still
find that the reasoning of Barker and the other supportive
authorities we have cited is correct as a matter of law and
leads to the same result.
E
The dissent would hold that Barker does not control and
that the district court should have bifurcated the murder
element from the remaining VICAR elements. The dissent
gravely misreads Barker, offers reasoning that directly
conflicts with Barker, and would usher in a revolutionary
change in federal criminal procedure that no court has seen
fit to enact. Barker has been on the books for over thirty
years, and there is no indication that anyone has understood

USA V. MANNING

25

it differently than we have (or the district court did). In fact,
the dissent identifies no precedent from any court that
supports its position. And for all the dissent’s reliance on
supposedly pragmatic concerns, its proposed regime would
be entirely unworkable.
The dissent is simply wrong that “Barker’s guiding
rationales . . . were specific to the felon-in-possession
charge and the proposed bifurcation plan there at issue.”
Dissent 49. Barker concluded that “[t]he district court’s
order change[d] the very nature of the charged offense” and
“remove[d] an element of the crime from the jury’s
consideration,” with the district court “breach[ing] its duty
to instruct the jury on all the essential elements of the crime
charged.” Id. at 959. These rationales were by no means
limited to § 922(g)(1) or to particular kinds of crimes. The
dissent repeatedly feigns a lack of comprehension of our
reasoning. E.g., Dissent 57 (“To the extent I can understand
these arguments . . . .”). But we have merely quoted what
Barker said. And Barker’s reasoning has not been lost on
the many courts that have followed it, including the district
court below.
Nor is the dissent correct that “the nullification concern
was the cornerstone of Barker’s conclusion.” Dissent 51.
Barker discussed nullification only after explaining that the
district court’s order “change[d] the very nature of the
charged offense.” 1 F.3d at 959. And as we recounted
above, Barker discussed jury nullification in a single
sentence (prefaced with “Additionally, . . .”) and a quote of
another case, before returning to its core reasoning: “The
bifurcation order removes an element of the crime from the
jury’s consideration, prevents the government from having
its case decided by the jury, and changes the very nature of
the charged crime.” Id.

26

USA V. MANNING

As we later explained in Nguyen, “[t]here are various
legitimate reasons for not allowing bifurcation,” including,
“[f]irst of all,” the concern that bifurcation would prevent
the government “‘from proving an essential element of the
charged offense’” and would breach the district court’s
“‘duty to instruct the jury on all the essential elements of the
crime.’” Nguyen, 88 F.3d at 818 (emphasis added) (quoting
Barker, 1 F.3d at 959). The dissent claims that jury
nullification is “[t]he strongest justification for Barker’s
holding” and its “most convincing” rationale. Dissent 50,
52. We do not agree, but the broader point is that it is not up
to us to decide which rationales in a prior decision are
strongest and most convincing, or to read an opinion in an
unduly narrow way based on our own conclusions about
which part of the opinion is more persuasive.
Indeed, much of the dissent devolves into what is
transparently a disagreement with Barker itself. For
example, Barker explained that “[l]imiting the jury’s
consideration of required elements of an indicted offense is
contrary to the presumption against special verdicts in
criminal cases.” 1 F.3d at 959. The dissent concedes that
bifurcation “would be functionally similar to a two-question
special interrogatory” on a special verdict form. Dissent 54.
But it then claims that “[s]pecial verdicts are avoided in
order to protect defendants,” and complains that neither we
“nor Barker” explain how a special verdict-like bifurcation
procedure “would sway the jury toward a guilty verdict or
otherwise infringe a defendant’s jury trial rights.” Dissent
53–54.
Regardless of how the dissent understands the
presumption against special verdicts, Barker invoked the
presumption in ruling for the government and in rejecting
bifurcation, which would have favored the defendant.

USA V. MANNING

27

Barker plainly invoked the presumption not because special
verdicts harm defendants, but because special verdicts
unduly restrict a jury’s role, as would be the case if the
elements of a single criminal charge were bifurcated. See
Barker, 1 F.3d at 959 (explaining, immediately after its
reference to special verdicts, that “[t]he bifurcation order
removes an element of the crime from the jury’s
consideration, prevents the government from having its case
decided by the jury, and changes the very nature of the
charged crime”); see also Gilliam, 994 F.2d at 101 (“The
jury must know why it is convicting or acquitting the
defendant, because that is simply how our judicial system is
designed to work. Removing an element of a crime from a
jury’s deliberation would be similar to allowing the jury to
render a special verdict.”). The dissent says we “ignore[] the
permissibility and utility of special verdicts,” Dissent 56, but
we merely rely on Barker, which invoked a non-crimespecific “presumption against special verdicts.” 1 F.3d at
959. The dissent therefore errs in discerning an “obvious
tension between Barker’s jury nullification rationale and its
no-special verdicts rationale.” Dissent 55 n.10. There is no
such tension given the way in which Barker invoked special
verdicts. It is the dissent that manufactures the tension
through its misreading of Barker.
Another example of the dissent’s refusal to follow
Barker lies in its contention that if jurors in a bifurcated trial
concluded that Manning and Coats did not commit a murder,
there would be no improper redefinition of the VICAR crime
or elimination of its enterprise element because a defendant
who has not committed a predicate crime is innocent of the
VICAR charge. Dissent 59. A § 922(g)(1) felon-inpossession defendant similarly cannot be guilty if the
possession element is not met, but Barker held that

28

USA V. MANNING

bifurcation redefines the crime all the same. As Barker
made clear, “if a jury did not return a guilty verdict on the
possession portion of the crime,” “[t]he government would
be precluded from proving an essential element of the
offense, and the district court would breach its duty to
instruct the jury on the essential elements of the crime
charged.” 1 F.3d at 959 (emphasis added). The dissent
simply attempts to re-litigate Barker. 4
In the process, the dissent does exactly what Barker tells
us not to do: redefine the offense as Congress has conceived
it. The dissent says that a rule against bifurcation is
inconsistent with Congress’s intent because the VICAR
statute incorporates state law predicate offenses, and
consideration of elements beyond those of a state law
offense “expands the definition” of the underlying offense.
The dissent is also incorrect that Barker’s rationale turned on the fact
that the defendant there intended to stipulate to the fact of his prior felony
conviction if the jury found he possessed a gun. Dissent 57–58 & n.13,
65. It was not the stipulation that “eliminate[d] an element” of the felonin-possession charge. Barker, 1 F.3d at 959 (quoting Gilliam, 994 F.2d
at 102). Our concern in Barker was that the government would “be
precluded from proving an essential element of the charged offense,”
whether that took the form of “proof through stipulation or contested
evidence.” Id. at 959 & n.3. In other words, the problem in Barker was
not the stipulation itself—it was that the stipulation, which was evidence
of an essential element, would be kept from the jury in the first phase of
the trial. This was why the “impermissible result” occurred “if a jury did
not return a guilty verdict.” Id. at 959 (emphasis added). Thus, the fact
that Barker involved “proof through stipulation” rather than by
“contested evidence” is irrelevant. See id. at 959 n.3. In either case,
bifurcation impermissibly withholds an element of the offense from the
jury, preventing the jury from rendering a verdict with full knowledge of
the nature of the offense. Id. at 959. It is therefore beside the point, as
the dissent claims, that Manning and Coats did not propose to stipulate
to any of the elements of the VICAR offense. Dissent 65.
4

USA V. MANNING

29

Dissent at 60–61. But the offense at issue is not the state law
offense. It is the federal VICAR offense, as Congress has
defined it, with its predicate offense, enterprise element, and
all. Indeed, § 922(g)’s prior felony element likewise
incorporates state law violations, see 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1),
despite which it is still treated as “an element of a crime
legislated by Congress.” Barker, 1 F.3d at 959 (quoting
Gilliam, 994 F.2d at 102).
Nor is the statute “a sentencing enhancement” for certain
predicate crimes. Dissent 47. The offense is the commission
of certain crimes “for the purpose of gaining entrance to or
maintaining or increasing position in an enterprise engaged
in racketeering activity.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a).
In
analogizing the entire offense to a sentence enhancement,
the dissent would again redefine the statute. The dissent’s
related insistence that bifurcation is a merely procedural
matter that does “not alter Congress’s substantive definition
of a criminal offense,” Dissent at 61, is also flatly
contradicted by Barker. See Barker, 1 F.3d at 959 (“The
bifurcation order . . . changes the very nature of the charged
crime.”). Jurors in the first phase of the dissent’s envisioned
trial would be asked to decide matters without even knowing
the nature of the charged federal offense.
We see substantially the same error in the dissent’s
frequently reiterated assertion that bifurcation should be
allowed because VICAR enterprise acts evidence could be
prejudicial to the defense. Dissent 40, 54, 56, 61–62, 64–66.
The existence of a racketeering enterprise is an element of
the charged offense in this case. 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a); Bracy,
67 F.3d at 1429. So too was the prior felony conviction in
Barker. Yet Barker was crystal clear that “[a] prior
conviction is not prejudicial when it is an element of the
charged crime.” Barker, 1 F.3d at 959 n.3. Like the

30

USA V. MANNING

defendant in Barker, the dissent “misunderstands the
fundamental nature of ‘prejudicial evidence.’” Id.
For all its improper efforts to avoid Barker’s binding
force, the dissent falters on another important front as well:
the complete lack of precedent favoring its position. Barker
was decided over three decades ago. The dissent identifies
no case, and we are aware of none, that reads Barker as the
dissent does, or even suggests it could be read that way. The
defendants themselves did not think to raise the bifurcation
issue until the district court prompted them. And that court,
once it had studied the issue, readily concluded—despite
plainly wishing to go the other way—that Barker advanced
“an across-the-board absolute rule that bifurcation cannot be
allowed,” to the point that it perceived no “intellectually
honest way to get around it.”
But even beyond the dissent’s Barker problem, the
dissent cites no authority whatsoever, from any jurisdiction,
endorsing its position. Back in 1989, the First Circuit was
unable to identify “a single case allowing, much less
mandating, bifurcation of a trial by dividing it along the lines
of the elements of the crime charged.” Collamore, 868 F.2d
at 27. Thirty-five years later, the dissent can muster no such
case either. And the dissent, if adopted, would dramatically
change federal criminal trials. It would break with longestablished precedent and tradition, fundamentally altering
both the criminal adjudicatory process and the nature of
criminal offenses as Congress has defined them.
And it would leave matters hopelessly muddled, as well,
for the dissent’s proposed regime is entirely uncertain. In
this case, the enterprise acts evidence establishes the
existence of the enterprise, its purpose, and its tactics; the
evidence is central to the government’s explanation of who

USA V. MANNING

31

defendants are and why they killed Simmons. From the
perspective of the elements of the VICAR charge as a whole,
the dissent would have the government try its murder case
on an artificially sanitized record, with an incomplete
understanding of the players and their roles. The dissent
says that in its proposed first-phase murder trial, the
government “would be free to present any and all evidence
(including enterprise evidence) relevant to the murder
element and not unfairly prejudicial.” Dissent 62. But how
would we know which enterprise acts evidence should go in
phase one vs. phase two? The dissent’s vision is unclear.
This problem would ripple across virtually the entire
criminal docket. When might evidence relating to one
element be prejudicial to the jury’s consideration of another
element? One might think all the time, given that evidence
of criminal wrongdoing is nearly always prejudicial. If the
dissent’s position were the law, district courts would be
confronted with bifurcation requests as a matter of course,
with no clarity on when such requests may or must be
granted. And when granted, the result would be “separate
proceedings [that] would put a strain on judicial economy
and require additional resources for duplicative
proceedings.” Nguyen, 88 F.3d at 818. We doubt that the
dissent could logically limit its proposal to statutes with a
supposedly “unusual crime-within-a-crime structure,”
Dissent 50, and it is not clear the dissent would do so. Even
so, “other statutes call for the introduction of other crimes as
an element of a substantive offense, but as far as we know,
there has been no bifurcation in those cases.” Collamore,
868 F.2d at 28 (citations omitted).
Barker wisely avoided the many questions the dissent’s
approach would prompt. And even if we were to question
Barker, as the district court did, we would be bound to

32

USA V. MANNING

follow it. The dissent’s contrary position violates circuit
precedent, is effectively unknown in federal criminal law,
and would plunge courts into a bottomless pit of further
inquiries. We follow Barker and affirm the district court’s
denial of defendants’ bifurcation request.
III
We now switch gears to Batson. Defendants argue that
the district court erred in rejecting a Batson challenge to the
government’s peremptory strike of a juror. “We generally
review a district court’s Batson determination for clear error
because of the intrinsically factual nature of the claim.”
United States v. Collins, 551 F.3d 914, 919 (9th Cir. 2009)
(citing Tolbert v. Page, 182 F.3d 677, 681–82 (9th Cir. 1999)
(en banc)). “However, where the district court applies the
wrong legal standard, we review the claim de novo.” Id.
A
The alleged Batson violation in this case is based on the
government’s peremptory strike of prospective juror K.A.,
who was later determined to be Black.
In her juror
questionnaire, and in response to a question about believing
or disbelieving the testimony of law enforcement officers,
K.A. wrote: “The history and present nature of U.S. policing
which is rooted in anti-black racism and the legal system’s
reliance on the existence of persons ineligible to
personhood . . . makes me critical of the opinions and
perceptions of law enforcement officers.”
During voir dire, the government asked K.A. about this
response. K.A. explained that “I was interpreting the
question as if, like, a law enforcement officer gave their
testimony, that I might, um, like I would believe that they
believe they’re telling the truth potentially, but I’m aware

USA V. MANNING

33

that that is likely biased in its own way.” In response to
further questioning by the government, K.A. agreed that she
had “described U.S. policing as rooted in racism.” When the
government asked K.A. if she was “going to assume that the
work” of law enforcement officers “is rooted in racism,”
K.A. responded: “Um, I mean, structurally, yes.” But K.A.
also stated that she did not think her beliefs “affect[ed] [her]
ability to . . . assess the facts,” and that she could serve as a
fair and impartial juror.
After the government used a peremptory strike on K.A.,
the defense raised a Batson objection. The district court then
heard argument from the parties. Noting its uncertainty over
K.A.’s race and whether she was Black, the district court
found that the government’s striking of K.A. based on the
answer in her questionnaire was race-neutral and not
pretextual. After denying defendants’ Batson motion, the
court confirmed with K.A., for clarity on appeal, that she is
Black.
B
Under Batson v. Kentucky, “the Equal Protection Clause
forbids the prosecutor to challenge potential jurors solely on
account of their race.” 476 U.S. at 89. Batson established a
three-part burden-shifting framework for determining if the
government used a peremptory strike in a racially
discriminatory manner. Foster v. Chatman, 578 U.S. 488,
499 (2016); United States v. Hernandez-Garcia, 44 F.4th
1157, 1166 (9th Cir. 2022). First, “the defendant must make
a prima facie showing that the challenge was based on an
impermissible ground, such as race.” Collins, 551 F.3d at
919. Second, if a prima facie case is established, “the burden
then shifts to the prosecution to offer a race-neutral reason
for the challenge.” Id. (quoting Green v. Lamarque, 532

34

USA V. MANNING

F.3d 1028, 1030 (9th Cir. 2008)). “At this [second] step of
the inquiry, the issue is the facial validity of the prosecutor’s
explanation.” Purkett v. Elem, 514 U.S. 765, 768 (1995) (per
curiam) (alteration in original) (quoting Hernandez v. New
York, 500 U.S. 352, 360 (1991) (plurality opinion)). This
“does not demand an explanation that is persuasive, or even
plausible.” Id. Finally, “if the prosecutor offers a raceneutral explanation, the trial court must decide whether the
defendant has proved the prosecutor’s motive for the strike
was purposeful racial discrimination.” Collins, 551 F.3d at
919 (quoting Green, 532 F.3d at 1030). “It is not until the
third step that the persuasiveness of the justification
becomes relevant—the step in which the trial court
determines whether the opponent of the strike has carried his
burden of proving purposeful discrimination.” Purkett, 514
U.S. at 768.
In this case, and in light of the initial uncertainty over
K.A.’s race, the district court ruled for the government under
Batson’s second and third prongs. Under any standard of
review, we agree with the district court that at Batson step
two, K.A’s views that policing in the United States is “rooted
in anti-black racism” and is “structurally” racist provided a
neutral justification for the government striking her. The
import of K.A.’s answers, both in her questionnaire and in
response to follow-up questioning, was that K.A. would be
“critical of the opinions and perceptions” of law enforcement
officers based on her belief that policing was affected by
racial bias. Although K.A.’s views had a racial orientation
and were focused through a racial lens, striking her for these
views, without more, did not amount to a strike based on
K.A.’s own race. K.A.’s views, which are held by persons
across different races, reflected an attitude toward the
criminal justice system that the government could

USA V. MANNING

35

reasonably regard as impeding her ability to assess the facts
impartially. The racial overtones of K.A.’s answers did not
mean the government’s peremptory strike was itself racebased. The case law firmly bears out our conclusion.
Our decisions in Tolbert v. Gomez, 190 F.3d 985 (9th
Cir. 1999), and United States v. Steele, 298 F.3d 906 (9th
Cir. 2002), reject the proposition that striking a prospective
juror based on her views about racial prejudice in the judicial
system amounts to a Batson violation. The first case,
Tolbert, was a habeas action challenging the prosecutor’s
use of a peremptory strike against a prospective Black juror,
Edward Robertson. 190 F.3d at 986–87. During voir dire,
Robertson asked to speak with the judge, and, after
approaching the bench, stated:
Oh boy. It is something that I feel strongly
about. And in listening to all the questioning
that you did of all the jurors and so forth you
asked about, you know, how they felt about
police and so forth like that, but as I sat there
I was curious as to why we did not ask
anything about their race. And to me this is a
highly charged issue nowadays and it just
concerns me whether or not an individual can
look at an individual and not have
predetermined views as to whether or not a
defendant is guilty based on their race or how
they personally feel . . . .
Id. at 987. Although Robertson stated that he could set aside
this “personal opinion,” he also told the judge “I am dealing
with it every day” and “I think you need to bring that out.”
Id. The next day, the prosecutor exercised a peremptory

36

USA V. MANNING

challenge against Robertson, and the defense brought the
California state-law equivalent of a Batson challenge. Id.
The state trial court denied the challenge, finding the
defendant had failed to establish a prima facie case of
discrimination. Id.
We affirmed the denial of habeas relief. Id. at 988–89.
We held that “[c]hallenging a prospective juror on the basis
of his expressed opinions about the judicial system does not
violate Batson.” Id. Applying this principle, we rejected the
contention “that striking Robertson on the basis of his
opinions on race was equivalent to striking him on the basis
of his race,” because the defendant failed to show “that
Robertson’s concern regarding the potential of racist
attitudes of juries is ‘a characteristic that is peculiar to any
race.’” Id. (quoting Purkett, 514 U.S. at 769); see also id.
(“Robertson’s views about racial attitudes are shared by
many not of his race or belonging to any racial minority.
Thus, having failed to establish that Robertson’s opinions
about the importance of race was peculiar to his race, or that
the opinions stood as a proxy for it, defense counsel did not
raise even an inference that the prosecutor’s challenge was
based on Robertson’s race, thereby violating the Equal
Protection Clause.”). Indeed, we held, “[t]he assumption
that race and an opinion on race are inseparable is
antithetical to the very type of racial stereotyping that Batson
forbids.” Id. Although Tolbert was a habeas case in which
our review was deferential, id. at 988, our application of
Batson did not depend on the deferential standard.
Regardless, Tolbert’s reasoning is substantially the same
reasoning we give here for rejecting defendants’ challenge
to the government’s striking of K.A.
Another supportive decision is United States v. Steele.
In Steele, a direct appeal of a criminal conviction, a

USA V. MANNING

37

prospective Black juror, Jackson, stated during voir dire that
“I have strong opinions about police and the system and how
it works.” Id. at 913. When questioned, Jackson elaborated
“that she believed that sometimes people were treated
unfairly by the police because of their race.” Id. At the
prosecution’s request, the court then “conduct[ed] voir dire
on the issue whether the jurors, in general, perceived that
minorities are treated unfairly by the police.” Id. During
this process, another prospective juror, Baham, stated that
she “believed that minorities are discriminated against by the
criminal justice system” but “could put aside these views
during trial.” Id. The prosecution later used a peremptory
challenge to remove Baham. Id.
On appeal, we held that the government had offered a
legitimate race-neutral explanation—“that it struck Baham
because of her view that racial discrimination may taint the
criminal justice system.” Id. at 914. Citing Tolbert, we
explained that this justification was race-neutral because it
was “not based on the race of the prospective juror” and “not
linked to any racial group.” Id.; see also Cummings v.
Martel, 796 F.3d 1135, 1147 (9th Cir. 2015) (rejecting
Batson challenge on habeas review under Tolbert where
prospective juror stated he had been “victimized by racial
prejudice” which “has had an impact on me in terms of the
criminal justice system,” because “[a]lthough these reasons
touch on race, the record does not show that the strike was
‘based on’ race or stereotyping” (quoting Hernandez, 500
U.S. at 375 (O’Connor, J., concurring))).
Decisions in other circuits are in line with Tolbert and
Steele. In United States v. Fike, 82 F.3d 1315 (5th Cir.
1996), overruled on other grounds by United States v.
Brown, 161 F.3d 256 (5th Cir. 1998), which we cited in
Tolbert, the Fifth Circuit explained that “Batson does not

38

USA V. MANNING

forbid striking a juror who holds a particular opinion about
the U.S. justice system. Rather, it forbids striking jurors
based on their race.” Id. at 1320. In Fike, the prosecutor
struck Williams, a Black prospective juror, who indicated
that he would “‘have a concern’ if an all white jury was
selected . . . ‘based on the practice of the U.S. Justice
System.’” Id. at 1319. Despite the juror’s views on issues
of racial justice, the Fifth Circuit rejected the Batson
challenge. Id. at 1319–20.
Other circuits have ruled similarly. In United States v.
Jacobs, 21 F.4th 106 (3d Cir. 2021), for example, the Third
Circuit rejected a Batson challenge after a prosecutor struck
a prospective juror due to his “issues with the criminal
justice system because of statistics and studies that he read,”
which were “based . . . in part on his own experiences as a
Latino person.” Id. at 115. Relying on our decision in
Tolbert, the Third Circuit held that “[c]hallenging a
prospective juror on the basis of his expressed opinions
about the judicial system does not violate Batson.” Id.
(alteration in original) (quoting Tolbert, 82 F.3d at 1320);
see also United States v. Gooch, 665 F.3d 1318, 1330 (D.C.
Cir. 2012) (“The Government’s strike cannot be seen to have
been discriminatory, merely because the Juror referenced
race in expressing concerns about blacks’ being pulled over
by the police. We have no good reason to disagree with the
District Court’s finding that the Government may have been
reasonably concerned about the Juror’s apparent distrust of
the police.”); Akins v. Easterling, 648 F.3d 380, 388–89 (6th
Cir. 2011) (noting that the Fifth and Ninth Circuits had
rejected “arguments that striking a juror because of the
juror’s expressed views on race in the criminal justice
system is the same as striking the juror because of the juror’s

USA V. MANNING

39

race,” and “find[ing] their reasoning persuasive” for
purposes of a habeas petition under 28 U.S.C. § 2254).
Defendants nonetheless argue that K.A.’s views on
policing in the United States were a proxy for race. But the
record does not support that inference, and we rejected
substantially the same argument in Tolbert. See 190 F.3d at
989 (“Robertson’s views about racial attitudes are shared by
many not of his race or belonging to any racial minority.”).
We have no basis to reach a different conclusion here. This
case is thus a far cry from United States v. Bishop, 959 F.2d
820 (9th Cir. 1992), overruled on other grounds by United
States v. Nevils, 598 F.3d 1158 (9th Cir. 2010), on which
defendants principally rely. There, we held that striking a
juror because she lived in Compton—which was roughly
75% Black—was an impermissible proxy for race, where the
prosecutor’s stated reasons for the strike “amounted to little
more than the assumption that one who lives in an area
heavily populated by poor black people could not fairly try
a black defendant.” Id. at 822, 825. When the prosecutor’s
“invocation of residence both reflected and conveyed deeply
ingrained and pernicious stereotypes,” we could not regard
it as race-neutral. Id. at 825. Suffice it to say, the record in
this case reflects no such pernicious stereotyping.
Finally, turning to Batson’s third step, we find no error
in the district court’s determination that the government’s
reason for striking K.A. was not pretextual. Contrary to
defendants’ insistence that the district court failed to
evaluate sufficiently the government’s justification for
striking K.A., see United States v. Alanis, 335 F.3d 965, 969
(9th Cir. 2003) (a court must “evaluate meaningfully the
persuasiveness of the prosecutor’s” explanations), the
district court engaged in a thorough discussion of the Batson
challenge with counsel, including by asking how it should

40

USA V. MANNING

determine pretext, re-reviewing K.A.’s questionnaire
response, and comparing the prosecution’s strike of K.A.
with its for-cause motion to strike the other Black juror (a
motion that the district court had denied). The district court
amply satisfied the requirement that the court “make a
deliberate decision whether purposeful discrimination
occurred.” Id. Our conclusion is further buttressed by
record evidence indicating that the government was not sure
of K.A.’s race, and that it had moved to strike another
potential juror who had expressed negative views of law
enforcement. There was thus no Batson violation.
*

*

*

For the reasons set forth in this opinion and our
accompanying memorandum disposition, we affirm
defendants’ convictions.
AFFIRMED.
BERZON, Circuit Judge, dissenting in part and dissenting
from the judgment:
I disagree that bifurcation in this case is barred under
United States v. Barker, 1 F.3d 957 (9th Cir. 1993), 1 and
therefore dissent.
According to the majority, Barker stands for the general
proposition that trial on different elements of a single crime
can never be bifurcated, no matter the offense at issue or the
prejudice from trying all elements together. That reading
dramatically overstates Barker’s actual holding. Barker’s
All Barker citations are to the version as amended on denial of
rehearing. See 20 F.3d 365 (9th Cir. 1994).
1

USA V. MANNING

41

reasoning, and so its bifurcation holding, focused squarely
on the crime there at issue: possession of a firearm by a
convicted felon, 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). The element sought
to be tried first in Barker, possession of a firearm, is
ordinarily a benign act, not a crime. That characteristic of
§ 922(g)(1) was central to the analysis and outcome in
Barker.
The federal Violent Crimes in Aid of Racketeering
Activity (VICAR) statute, 18 U.S.C. § 1959, is
fundamentally different from § 922(g)(1) with regard to the
critical aspect of Barker. The VICAR element sought to be
tried first in this case is having committed (but not
necessarily having been convicted of) a separate, standalone
violent crime—here, murder. Expanding Barker’s
§ 922(g)(1) holding to VICAR despite the sharp divergence
between the two statutes has no basis in precedent or logic.
Barker’s reasoning does not support this extension. And
there were compelling reasons here to separate the trial on
VICAR’s violent crime element from the trial on its
additional requirements, as the district court recognized. So
while I agree that the district court correctly rejected the jury
composition challenge under Batson v. Kentucky, 476 U.S.
79 (1986), I would reverse and remand for a new trial.
I.
A.
Barker is foundational to the majority’s misguided
bifurcation analysis. I first review the facts and statute there
at issue before turning to the case before us.
The defendant in Barker was charged with being in a
felon in possession under 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). That statute
makes it “unlawful for any person . . . who has been

42

USA V. MANNING

convicted . . . of[] a crime punishable by imprisonment for a
term exceeding one year . . . to . . . possess in or affecting
commerce, any firearm or ammunition; or to receive any
firearm or ammunition which has been shipped or
transported in interstate or foreign commerce.” 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(g)(1). The crime has three elements: (1) possession of
a firearm, (2) transportation or receipt of the firearm in
interstate commerce, and (3) a prior felony conviction.
Barker had previously been convicted of felony burglary,
a fact he did not dispute. But he was concerned that
informing the jury of the details of his burglary conviction—
or even referencing the fact that he had been convicted of
any felony at all—would unfairly prejudice the jury’s
consideration of the possession and interstate commerce
elements. 1 F.3d at 958. So he proposed to bifurcate the trial.
1 F.3d at 958.
The district court granted Barker’s motion to bifurcate
and planned to put in place the following procedure: In the
first phase, the jury would consider only the possession and
interstate commerce elements. The district court would
instruct the jury that “the parties have agreed that mere
possession [of the firearm] is criminal in this case,” and that
it was “not for [the jury] to decide the wisdom of such a law.”
1 F.3d at 958 (alterations in original). The district court
would “charge the jury that it must find the defendant guilty
. . . if it finds that he possessed the weapon and the weapon
moved in interstate commerce.” In phase one, the jury would
not be presented with any evidence of Barker’s conviction,
nor would it be informed that a felony conviction was an
element of the crime charged.
If the jury found Barker guilty on the possession and
interstate commerce elements, a second phase could address

USA V. MANNING

43

whether Barker had been convicted of a felony. The plan,
however, was that if the jury found Barker guilty as to
possession and commerce in phase one, Barker would then
stipulate to his prior conviction. 1 F.3d at 958. Under this
plan, there was no way the prior conviction as a factual
element would ever reach the jury. If the jury acquitted in
phase one, the trial would end; if not, the stipulation to the
prior conviction would necessarily result in a guilty verdict.
Either way, the outcome would be fixed after phase one.
Before trial, the government appealed the district court’s
bifurcation decision and sought mandamus relief. Id. This
court issued a writ of mandamus reversing the district court’s
bifurcation decision, holding that “the district court may not
bifurcate the single offense of being a felon in possession of
a firearm into multiple proceedings.” Barker, 1 F.3d at 959.
The majority opinion in this case explains Barker as
providing three rationales for its holding:
First, “Barker justified its rejection of the district court’s
bifurcation order on the ground that it ‘might unfairly
confuse the jury, prompting it to exercise its power of
nullification on the unwarranted belief that the defendant
was charged for noncriminal conduct.’” Maj. Op. at 14
(quoting Barker, 1 F.3d at 959). In support of this point,
Barker quoted the First Circuit’s explanation in United
States v. Collamore, 868 F.2d 24, 28 (1989), which similarly
held that trial on the elements of a § 922(g)(1) charge may
not be bifurcated. Here is the portion Barker quoted:
[W]hen a jury is neither read the statute
setting forth the crime nor told of all the
elements of the crime, it may, justifiably,
question whether what the accused did was a
crime . . . Possession of a firearm by most

44

USA V. MANNING

people is nota crime. A juror who owns or
who has friends and relatives who own
firearms may wonder why [the defendant’s]
possession was illegal. Doubt as to the
criminality of [the defendant’s] conduct may
influence the jury when it considers the
possession element.
Barker, 1 F.3d at 959 (alterations in original) (quoting
Collamore, 868 F.2d at 28).
Second, Barker stated that “[l]imiting the jury’s
consideration of required elements of an indicted offense is
contrary to the presumption against special verdicts in
criminal cases.” 1 F.3d at 959. Unlike a general verdict,
which simply requires the jury to say whether the defendant
is guilty or not, a special verdict asks the jury to make
findings on specific issues of fact. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 49. In
support of its special verdict point, Barker cited United
States v. Aguilar, 883 F.2d 662, 690 (9th Cir. 1989), but did
not otherwise elaborate.
Third, Barker maintained that the district court’s
bifurcation plan risked redefining the § 922(g)(1) charge
there at issue. Bifurcation would “change[] the very nature
of the charged crime” and “remove[] an element of the crime
from the jury’s consideration.” 1 F.3d at 959; see Maj. Op.
at 13. If the jury found Barker not guilty in the first phase,
“[t]he government would be precluded from proving an
essential element of the charged offense, and the district
court would breach its duty to instruct the jury on all the
essential elements of the crime charged”—“an
impermissible result.” 1 F.3d at 959; see Maj. Op. at 13.
Barker also likened the district court’s bifurcation plan to a
rule that would “eliminate[] an element of a crime legislated

USA V. MANNING

45

by Congress.” 1 F.3d at 959 (quoting United States v.
Gilliam, 994 F.2d 97, 102 (2d Cir. 1993)).
B.
This case has nothing to do with the felon-in-possession
charge at issue in Barker. It involves murder in aid of
racketeering under the federal VICAR statute, 19 U.S.C.
§ 1959. VICAR makes it a federal crime to commit any state
or federal crime of violence against a person, including
murder, “for the purpose of gaining entrance to or
maintaining or increasing position in an enterprise engaged
in racketeering activity.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a). 2 An
“enterprise” includes “any union or group of individuals
associated in fact although not a legal entity, which is
engaged in, or the activities of which affect, interstate or
foreign commerce.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(b)(2). 3 “Racketeering
activity” is defined to include a sweeping set of criminal
2

Subsection (a) provides in full:
Whoever, as consideration for the receipt of, or as
consideration for a promise or agreement to pay,
anything of pecuniary value from an enterprise
engaged in racketeering activity, or for the purpose of
gaining entrance to or maintaining or increasing
position in an enterprise engaged in racketeering
activity, murders, kidnaps, maims, assaults with a
dangerous weapon, commits assault resulting in
serious bodily injury upon, or threatens to commit a
crime of violence against any individual in violation
of the laws of any State or the United States, or
attempts or conspires so to do, shall be punished
[according to the crime committed as specified by the
statute].

A “partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity . . . which
is engaged in, or the activities of which affect, interstate or foreign
commerce” also qualifies as an “enterprise.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(b)(2).

3

46

USA V. MANNING

conduct, including murder, kidnapping, robbery, gambling,
bribery, embezzlement, fraud, or dealing in a controlled
substance. See 18 U.S.C. § 1961(1). 4
A VICAR charge has four elements: First, the defendant
must have “committed one of the enumerated offenses, in
violation of state or federal law.” United States v. Elmore,
118 F.4th 1193, 1199 (9th Cir. 2024). This initial element
“incorporates the elements of the relevant predicate
violation.” Id. The remaining three elements involve the
racketeering enterprise. They are: (1) “that the criminal
organization exists”; (2) “that the organization is a
racketeering enterprise”; and (3) “that the defendant acted
for the purpose of promoting his position in a racketeering
enterprise” in committing the predicate crime. United States
v. Banks, 514 F.3d 959, 964 (9th Cir. 2008) (alterations
omitted) (quoting United States v. Bracy, 67 F.3d 1421, 1429
(9th Cir. 1995)).
VICAR is atypical in that it incorporates, as one element,
having committed (but not necessarily having been
convicted of) an entirely separate state or federal crime. 5 In
The VICAR statute incorporates the definition of “racketeering
activity” from the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations
(RICO) Act. See 18 U.S.C. § 1959(b)(1).

4

The criminal provision of the RICO statute is somewhat similar,
although it requires committing “at least two acts of racketeering
activity.” See 18 U.S.C. §§ 1961(5) & 1963. Crucially—the majority
misses this important distinction, see Maj. Op. at 29—§ 922(g)(1) is not
similar. VICAR incorporates the legal elements of a state law crime, and
a jury must then, to find VICAR’s predicate crime element satisfied,
make factual findings that those incorporated elements are met. Section
922(g)(1) does not operate this way. Instead, the prior-conviction
element of § 922(g)(1) simply asks whether the defendant had been
convicted of a crime by another court.
5

USA V. MANNING

47

a sense, the statute thus operates like a sentencing
enhancement, applicable if the underlying state or federal
violent crime is carried out for a racketeering enterprise
purpose within the meaning of the statute. It can also confer
federal jurisdiction, if the predicate crime is a state crime.
(This case illustrates the practical consequence of the
conferral of federal jurisdiction, as the state prosecutor
declined to bring murder charges.
Here, the indictment charged that defendants Robert
Manning and Jamare Coats, “for the purpose of gaining
entrance to and maintaining and increasing position in Mac
Block, an enterprise engaged in racketeering activity,
unlawfully and knowingly murdered Victim One, . . . in
violation of California Penal Code Sections 187, 188, 189,
and 31.” The alleged enterprise was “Mac Block,” a
“criminal street gang.” The government’s evidence that this
enterprise existed and that Manning and Coats were
affiliated with it included testimony about six prior
incidents:
•

In 2013, police tried to pull over a vehicle
Manning was driving, but Manning drove
away and was lost in a high-speed chase.
After the car was abandoned, police
found Manning and Coats walking near
it.

•

In 2013, police encountered Coats on the
street and, suspecting that he had a gun,
ordered him to stop. Coats fled and was
seen discarding a gun under a parked car.
Police recovered the gun but lost Coats in
a crowd and did not apprehend him.

48

USA V. MANNING

•

In 2013, three people, at least one of
whom was assertedly affiliated with Mac
Block, robbed a marijuana dispensary at
gunpoint. Neither Manning nor Coats
was involved in this incident.

•

In 2015, after a report of shots being fired
on a street, Coats admitted to having fired
a gun; nobody was hit or injured in the
shooting.

•

In 2016, someone fired multiple shots at
a victim who was injured. Several Mac
Block members, but not Manning or
Coats, were assertedly involved in the
incident.

•

In 2018, Manning’s brother, allegedly a
Mac Block member, fired shots into the
air from a parking lot.

Only three of the six incidents involved Manning or Coats,
and all of them took place several years before the 2019
murder for which defendants were charged.
Defendants proposed to bifurcate trial, with the predicate
California murder element to be considered in the first phase
and the racketeering enterprise elements in the second.
Notably, unlike the bifurcation plan in Barker, both phases
of trial under defendants’ proposal in this case would involve
complex, disputed factual questions. Defendants argued that
there was a “great risk . . . that the jury will convict even if
the jurors have reasonable doubt whether a murder occurred
because of the prejudicial spillover effect of the enterprise
evidence,” including evidence about the six prior acts
involving defendants and others. The defendants noted that

USA V. MANNING

49

“there may be some evidence introduced of enterprise
membership” in the predicate-charge phase, but argued that
“the vast majority of the enterprise evidence” would be
relevant only to the second, enterprise phase.
The district court denied the motion to bifurcate. It
recognized that there was “some possibility” that the
enterprise evidence could be prejudicial as to the murder
element and explained that “on a clean slate,” bifurcation
would be warranted. But it concluded that bifurcation of the
VICAR murder charges was foreclosed by Barker, a
decision it stated was “wrong as a matter of justice.” The
district court told the defendants they had “a decent point for
appeal” and expressed “hope” that this court would “adjust”
Barker.
II.
With this background on Barker and VICAR in mind, I
turn to the majority’s misguided extension of Barker’s
context-specific holding that a “district court may not
bifurcate the single offense of being a felon in possession of
a firearm” to the VICAR statute. 1 F.3d at 959. In the
majority’s view, “Barker’s core rationale transcends
§ 922(g) or any particular criminal offense,” and a “faithful
reading of Barker forecloses defendants’ argument” that
Barker should be limited to § 922(g)(1) felon-in-possession
cases. Maj. Op. at 14. I strongly disagree.
By its own terms, Barker applies only to § 922(g)(1).
Barker’s guiding rationales, which the majority relies on
almost exclusively to reach its conclusion, were specific to
the felon-in-possession charge and the proposed bifurcation
plan there at issue. Most fundamentally—variations on this
theme will reappear throughout this dissent—VICAR is
foundationally different from § 922(g)(1) because of its

50

USA V. MANNING

unusual crime-within-a-crime structure. For that reason (and
variants of it), none of the rationales identified by the
majority support the conclusion that bifurcation should be
prohibited in VICAR trials, either as an application or
extension of Barker, or as a matter of first principles.
A.
The strongest justification for Barker’s holding was its
concern over unwarranted jury nullification. As the majority
acknowledges, this concern is entirely absent in this VICAR
case.
In Barker, the proposed first phase would address only
conduct that is most often benign and legal: possessing a
firearm that had been transported or received in interstate
commerce. Barker recognized that a jury informed in the
first phase about only these elements might nullify the
charge before reaching phase two—even if possession been
proven beyond a reasonable doubt—because of reluctance to
declare a defendant who engaged in only the first-phase
conduct a criminal, subject to imprisonment and fines. This
concern has resonance in the § 922(g)(1) context—enough
alone to justify Barker’s holding that trial of a § 922(g)(1)
charge cannot be bifurcated. 6
But Barker’s jury nullification concern “does not apply
in this case,” as the majority concedes. Maj. Op. at 16. The
first element of the VICAR statute is a separate state or
federal violent crime. See 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a). Unlike in
Barker, the criminal conduct to be considered in the first
phase is illegal in itself, as well as violent and so dangerous
Although the issue is not before us, I assume here that Barker was
correctly decided, as it may well have been in the context of § 922(g)(1).
Barker is in any event binding precedent.

6

USA V. MANNING

51

by definition. There is not the slightest risk that a jury would
“doubt . . . the criminality” of murder, as it well might the
simple possession of a firearm. Cf. 1 F.3d at 959 (quoting
Collamore, 868 F.2d at 28).
The majority accepts that risk of jury nullification at play
in Barker is entirely absent in this case, but it fails to grapple
with how fundamental that risk was to Barker’s reasoning
and outcome. In reality, the nullification concern was the
cornerstone of Barker’s conclusion; without it, the logic of
the holding crumbles.
The felon element of § 922(g)(1) is “wholly
independent[]” from the factual question of whether the
defendant later possessed a firearm. Old Chief v. United
States, 519 U.S. 172, 190 (1997). If it could somehow be
guaranteed that a jury would fairly and accurately evaluate
the possession and commerce elements in the first phase of
a bifurcated § 922(g)(1) proceeding with no risk of
unwarranted nullification, the remainder of Barker’s
reasoning would ring hollow. Here is why: If the jury were
to acquit in phase one—not because it decided to nullify but
because it concluded that the defendant had not in fact
possessed a firearm—the defendant would be innocent,
regardless of whether he or she was a felon. Without a risk
of jury nullification, any limitation that bifurcation might
impose on the prosecutor’s prerogative to decide how to
present the case, the legislature’s definition of the crime, or
the defendant’s jury trial rights would be essentially
harmless, and would not support Barker’s holding. And, as
a countervailing consideration, bifurcation would eliminate
a separate risk—the risk that the jury would convict the
defendant because he was a felon, even if he did not in fact
possess the firearm as charged.

52

USA V. MANNING

Not surprisingly, Barker relied on the risk of jury
nullification, incorporating the First Circuit’s jury
nullification reasoning from Collamore, 868 F.2d at 28. Jury
nullification was a primary reason offered by both
Collamore and the other bifurcation cases Barker cited in
support of its holding. See Collamore, 868 F.2d at 28; United
States v. Brinklow, 560 F.2d 1003, 1006 (10th Cir. 1977).
The risk of nullification was also identified as a central
rationale in nearly every post-Barker opinion cited by the
majority that held that a § 922(g)(1) trial cannot be
bifurcated. See Maj. Op. at 18–19 (collecting cases). 7
No jury is going to acquit a guilty defendant of murder
because it regards that charge as encompassing only benign
conduct. As there is no risk of unwarranted jury nullification
here, Barker’s most convincing and foundational rationale

United States v. Jacobs, 44 F.3d 1219, 1222 (3d Cir. 1995), quoted in
full the same jury nullification discussion from Collamore that Barker
did. So did United States v. Milton, 52 F.3d 78, 81 (4th Cir. 1995); United
States v. Dean, 76 F.3d 329, 332 (10th Cir. 1996); and United States v.
Mangum, 100 F.3d 164, 171 & n.11 (D.C. Cir. 1996). Milton also
characterized Barker as “predicated on the notion that removing the prior
felony element from the jury’s consideration would be confusing to a
jury inasmuch as simple possession of a firearm, without more, is not a
crime.” 52 F.3d at 81. In United States v. Clark, 184 F.3d 858, 867 (D.C.
Cir. 1999), the D.C. Circuit cited Mangum’s discussion of the risk of jury
nullification and rejected defendant’s bifurcation argument “[f]or the
same reason.” United States v. Koskela, 86 F.3d 122, 125 (8th Cir. 1996),
provided no reasoning, but cited Collamore, Birdsong, Barker, Milton,
and Jacobs. Finally, United States v. Amante, 418 F.3d 220, 224 (2d Cir.
2005) held that “bifurcation of the elements of a single-count felon-inpossession trial, absent the government’s consent, is generally error” but
declined to “rule out bifurcation where the facts underlying the prior
felony would be presented to the jury and are so heinous as to overwhelm
the trial of firearm or ammunition possession.”
7

USA V. MANNING

53

provides no support for the majority’s misguided
conclusion.
B.
The second Barker rationale relied on by the majority is
that “[l]imiting the jury’s consideration of required elements
of an indicted offense is contrary to the presumption against
special verdicts in criminal cases.” Maj. Op. at 13 (quoting
Barker, 1 F.3d at 959). Bifurcating trial on the elements of a
single criminal charge, the majority continues, could “be too
intrusive of the jury’s internal processes” and might “lead to
a framing of the case that unduly restricts the jury’s role.”
Maj. Op. at 14. This reasoning is both quite vague and,
insofar as it can be pinned down, entirely unconvincing.
Most fundamentally, the reasons why courts typically
disfavor special verdicts in criminal cases undercut rather
than support the majority’s conclusion. Special verdicts are
avoided in order to protect defendants. The worry behind the
disfavor of special verdicts is that requiring the jury to
answer additional questions beyond the guilty-or-not binary
might unfairly nudge the jury toward a guilty verdict. As the
First Circuit has explained, a step-by-step questionnaire can
“catechize” a juror into reaching a conviction: “By a
progression of questions each of which seems to require an
answer unfavorable to the defendant, a reluctant juror may
be led to vote for a conviction which, in the large, he would
have resisted.” United States v. Spock, 416 F.2d 165, 182
(1969). 8
Some have questioned whether favoring general verdicts actually
benefits defendants. For complicated charges, breaking down the
elements of a charge might minimize confusion. See generally Avani

8

54

USA V. MANNING

True, bifurcation here would be functionally similar to a
two-question special interrogatory. 9 But neither the majority
nor Barker explains how this simple structure would sway
the jury toward a guilty verdict or otherwise infringe a
defendant’s jury trial rights. In most cases involving VICAR
charges, the potential prejudice from allowing the jury to
consider enterprise evidence in deciding whether the
predicate crime was committed would likely outweigh the
risk—if any—that a two-step verdict would tilt the jury
toward a conviction. So the rationale behind courts’ usual
aversion to special verdicts does not support solidifying an
absolute rule against bifurcation, at least in VICAR cases.
And in any event, where bifurcation is sought by a
defendant, there is no reason why the defendant could not
waive any impairment of their jury rights that might ensue.
Moreover, to the extent avoiding special verdicts serves
to protect the integrity of “the jury’s internal processes” and
ensure that the “jury’s role” is not “unduly restrict[ed],” see
Maj. Op. at 14, the reason is again to protect defendants, by
preserving the “doctrine of ‘jury nullification’” and ensuring
that the jury retains full ability to exercise its “power of
Mehta Sood, Reaching A Verdict: Empirical Evidence of the Crumbling
Conventional Wisdom on Criminal Verdict Format, 98 N.Y.U. L. Rev.
1265 (Oct. 2023). In this case, the question is not whether avoiding
special verdicts is warranted as a general rule, but whether the rationale
behind the avoidance supports the majority’s rigid anti-bifurcation rule,
in this case or more broadly.
Under the proposal here, the jury (not the judge) would make the
ultimate determination of guilt. A true “special verdict,” however, is one
in which “the jury makes findings only on factual issues submitted to
them by the judge, who then decides the legal effect of the verdict.” See
Verdict, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). The ultimate verdict
under the plan proposed here would be more closely analogous to a
general verdict with interrogatories. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 49.

9

USA V. MANNING

55

lenity.” United States v. Desmond, 670 F.2d 414, 416–17 (3d
Cir. 1982); see also United States v. Gonzales, 841 F.3d 339,
347 (5th Cir. 2016) (“Much of [courts’] hostility [to special
interrogatories] stems from a desire not to undermine jury
nullification.”). 10 Here, too, the majority does not explain
how the simple bifurcation plan proposed in this case would
inhibit the jury’s ability to exercise this power, especially
since the jury’s ultimate verdict as to the VICAR charge in
the second phase would still be issued in the form of a
general verdict.
Finally, and at a more basic level, the majority fails to
justify its rigid rule against bifurcation given that special
verdicts, while disfavored, are both permissible and used
increasingly frequently in criminal cases. There is “no per se
prohibition” against special verdicts. United States v. Reed,
147 F.3d 1178, 1180 (9th Cir. 1998). “Exceptions to the
general rule disfavoring special verdicts in criminal cases
have been expanded and approved in an increasing number
of circumstances,” including the use of special
interrogatories “to issue findings as to each element of an
offense.” Id. at 1180–81. The majority attempts to support
its conclusion by quoting Aguilar’s statement that “it is not
the practice of the Federal Courts in criminal cases to call for
special verdicts.” Maj. Op. at 13 (cleaned up) (quoting 883
I note that there is obvious tension between Barker’s jury nullification
rationale and its no-special-verdicts rationale, at least in the § 922(g)
context where bifurcation presents a risk of unwarranted jury
nullification. The first is a concern that bifurcation will lead the jury to
be suspicious of an element of the crime considered separately, which it
would not be were the crime considered holistically, and so to acquit
when it would otherwise convict. The second is a concern that separate
consideration of each element will lead a jury to convict on each discrete
element, when it would acquit were the crime considered holistically.
10

56

USA V. MANNING

F.2d at 690). But Aguilar also made clear that, “[w]hile a
special verdict is the exception and not the rule, there may
be cases in which it is appropriate.” 883 F.2d at 690–91.
“Whether or not it is appropriate to use ‘a special verdict
should be determined according to the particular
circumstances of each case.’” United States v. Ramirez, 537
F.3d 1075, 1083 (9th Cir. 2008) (alteration omitted) (quoting
Reed, 147 F.3d at 1180). Given the particular circumstances
of this case, a bifurcation proceeding, somewhat analogous
to a two-part special interrogatory, is appropriate to avoid
unfair prejudice to the defendants, as the district court
explained. Indeed, district courts have used special
interrogatories in VICAR murder cases without issue. 11 The
majority’s approach ignores the permissibility and utility of
special verdicts in particularly complex criminal cases and
the flexibility afforded to district courts, instead requiring
courts to ignore the circumstances of each case and rigidly
reject bifurcation regardless of the tradeoffs.
There is no absolute principle precluding special verdicts
or interrogatories in criminal cases, and the tendency to
disfavor their use arises from a desire to protect defendants.
These considerations suggest that bifurcating trial on the
elements of a VICAR charge can be appropriate, in this case
and as a general rule, if the district judge so determines.
In short, neither of the first two Barker rationales relied
on by the majority—the jury nullification point and the
See, e.g., Special Verdict Interrogatory Form, ECF No. 1413, United
States v. Cyrus, No. 05-cr-324 (N.D. Cal. May 13, 2009) (VICAR
murder charge), aff’d 526 Fed. Appx. 794 (9th Cir. 2013); United States
v. Howard, No. 22-3079, 2024 WL 2795744, at *2 (2d Cir. May 31,
2024) (“The jury specifically found that the VICAR predicate offense
was assault with a dangerous weapon. See Special Verdict Tr.”).
11

USA V. MANNING

57

special verdicts point—supports expanding Barker’s
§ 922(g)-specific holding to the VICAR charges here at
issue. The majority’s conclusion must be justified, if at all,
on other grounds.
C.
The remainder of the majority’s reasoning involves a
series of points related to what the majority calls “[a] central
animating principle of Barker”: that “bifurcating the trial on
the elements of a single criminal charge would redefine the
offense itself” by “‘chang[ing] the very nature of the charged
offense’ and ‘eliminat[ing] an element of a crime.’” Maj. Op.
at 15 (quoting Barker, 1 F.3d at 959). I am not at all sure that
this “animating principle” has content beyond the two
rationales already discussed, which both involve
maintaining the jury’s role in determining whether the
defendant committed the offense as defined by Congress.
Nonetheless, in this section, I try to give content to the
majority’s overlapping arguments. To the extent I can
understand these arguments, I conclude that none support the
majority’s conclusion. First, though, I highlight a critical
distinction between the bifurcation plan in Barker and the
one proposed in this case.
1.
Barker’s concern with removing an element of an
offense was arguably applicable in that case, but does not
apply here. As I’ve explained, Barker’s proposed bifurcation
procedure would have entirely removed one element from
the jury’s consideration, thereby effectively redefining the
offense. Barker intended to stipulate to the only fact relevant
to the second phase of the bifurcated proceeding: his
undisputed prior conviction. See supra pp. 42–43. But he
planned to stipulate to this fact only if the jury found him

58

USA V. MANNING

guilty in phase one. As a result, the jury would never
consider the key criminalizing element of the § 922(g)(1)
charge there at issue: the felony conviction. If the jury found
Barker not guilty in phase one, the trial would end via
acquittal; if it found him guilty, the trial would end via
stipulation. The reason this sequence was problematic in
Barker was that the conduct to be addressed in phase one,
the only conduct the jury would ever have an opportunity to
consider, was entirely benign and lawful. 12 That concern is
absent here.
To reach its holding, Barker relied on other § 922(g)(1)
cases in which the entire prior conviction element of a
§ 922(g)(1) charge would similarly have been removed
entirely from the jury’s consideration. See 1 F.3d at 959
(citing Brinklow, 560 F.2d at 1006; Gilliam, 994 F.2d at
101–02). 13 Barker’s reliance on these cases makes clear that
Barker’s reasoning depended on the fact that the bifurcation
plan there did in effect “redefine the offense” by
“eliminat[ing] an element of a crime.” See Maj. Op. at 15
(quoting Barker, 1 F.3d at 959).
The bifurcation proposed in this case was entirely
different than the procedures contemplated in Barker and the
other § 922(g)(1) cases on which it relied. Both phases of the
proceeding proposed here would involve hotly disputed
Here is one example of why this “central animating principle” has little
force independent of the other Barker rationales already discussed.

12

Brinklow and Gilliam involved proposals to stipulate to the entire
conviction element of § 922(g)(1), thereby removing the element entirely
from the jury’s consideration. See Brinklow, 560 F.2d at 1006; Gilliam,
994 F.2d at 101–02. The effect of these stipulations would be essentially
the same as the bifurcation procedure proposed in Barker, which
involved Barker stipulating to the fact of the conviction.
13

USA V. MANNING

59

factual questions that would go to the jury. So the jury would
consider all elements of the crime before a guilty verdict
could be reached. Moreover, the conduct to be considered in
the first phase—here, California murder—is by definition
criminal on its own, so there is no risk that unwarranted
nullification would short-circuit the proceeding and prevent
the jury from reaching the enterprise elements.
There is of course one scenario under this plan in which
some of the elements of a VICAR charge would never go to
the jury: If the jury was presented with all of the admissible
evidence with respect to the incorporated California murder
element (including any enterprise evidence admissible with
regard to the murder offense under ordinary evidence
principles) and concluded that a defendant had not
committed murder, then the jury would not consider the
remaining enterprise elements. But this prospect does not
mean that the bifurcation procedure somehow “redefined”
the crime or “eliminated” the enterprise elements. Rather, if
the defendant did not in fact commit the required predicate
violent crime (as elsewhere defined by state or federal law),
the defendant could not be guilty of a VICAR violation, so
considering the remaining elements would be pointless. And
that would be true if the case was not bifurcated: the jury in
its deliberations would have no occasion to reach the
enterprise elements if it concluded that the defendants were
not guilty of murder under California law.
If the jury found a defendant guilty of a predicate
violation in the first phase, however, the jury would consider
all elements of the VICAR charge as defined by Congress.
The enterprise elements would not be “eliminated,” as the
majority asserts; their consideration would simply be
deferred. The key point is that before a conviction could be
reached, the jury would consider all the evidence and all the

60

USA V. MANNING

elements of the VICAR charge. By glossing over this reality,
the majority misses a key distinction between this case and
Barker.
2.
The majority also asserts that our “obligation to treat
criminal offenses as Congress has defined them” suggests
that we should not allow bifurcation. See Maj. Op. at 15. The
majority states that bifurcation “hardly gives effect to
Congress’s articulation of the offense of VICAR murder.”
Maj. Op. at 18. But the majority’s concern with legislative
intent in defining crimes actually cuts against its ultimate
conclusion, at least in the context of the VICAR statute.
Congress did not actually itself “articulat[e] the offense
of VICAR murder,” contrary to the majority’s assertion. See
Maj. Op. at 18. Instead, Congress opted to incorporate into
the statute’s predicate-crime requirement a slew of violent
offenses, as defined by “the laws of any State or the United
States.” 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a). Where, as here, the predicate
violation is a state crime, these elements (and the evidence
relevant to prove them), are specified by the state’s
legislature and courts. Allowing a jury deciding whether a
state crime was committed to consider evidence and
elements in addition to those a state jury would consider
expands the definition of the predicate crime as adopted by
the relevant state legislature and incorporated by Congress.
Congress could have chosen to articulate the prohibited
conduct itself, but it instead elected to incorporate state law.
So, contrary to the majority’s conclusion, limiting the
evidence that can be considered in evaluating the predicate
crime to evidence that would be admissible for a
corresponding standalone state charge is a more faithful way
to implement Congress’s incorporation of state law than

USA V. MANNING

61

infecting the trial of the state charge with potentially
prejudicial evidence not admissible as to the murder offense
standing alone.
The majority’s legislative intent reasoning also ignores
the common use of bifurcation in the civil context. See Fed.
R. Civ. P. 42(b). The majority does not explain how
bifurcating trial on the elements of a criminal offense
undermines Congressional intent any more than does
bifurcating trial on a civil claim. Ultimately, whether trial on
different issues or elements of a civil claim or criminal
offense is bifurcated is a matter more of procedure than of
substance. Procedural decisions regarding when evidence
will be presented and how the jury will structure its verdict
do not alter Congress’s substantive definition of a criminal
offense.
3.
Next, the majority asserts that Barker’s reasoning
reflected “a broader concern” that bifurcation “‘might
unfairly confuse the jury.’” Maj. Op. at 17 (quoting Barker,
1 F.3d at 959). The majority asserts that “confusion would
be an issue here, too, albeit for a different reason” than the
risk of nullification, because bifurcation would “force jurors
to view the facts of this case in an artificially constrained
light” and “hamstring the government in its ability to explain
the defendants’ intent and motive.” Maj. Op. at 18.
This reasoning is wrongheaded on several levels. To
start, bifurcating a VICAR charge would not create
“confusion” in the way that splitting a felon-in-possession
charge does. Again, in Barker, the two-element version of
§ 922(g)(1) contrived for the case, which excluded the
felony element, might have mystified the jury. The
artificially constrained law as presented would clash with

62

USA V. MANNING

common sense and with jurors’ own experience. Even
setting aside the potential for nullification, the law as
presented might itself be perplexing, thus impeding the
jury’s ability to reach a verdict.
There is no corollary here. Under defendants’ bifurcation
proposal, the legal question to be considered in the first stage
would be murder as defined by the California Penal Code.
Unlike the contrived phase-one framework in Barker,
nothing about the legal structure of murder under California
law would be inherently confusing, any more than in any
other murder trial.
The majority’s real point is not that a jury might be
confused about the law, as in Barker. Instead, the majority is
concerned that, if the case were bifurcated, the jury would
not have before it during the murder phase all the enterprise
evidence that would be relevant during the second phase.
And the majority is also concerned that it would be hard to
determine which enterprise acts could be presented in the
first phase versus the second. See Maj. Op. at 31. These
concerns are baseless. In a bifurcated first phase where only
the state-law murder element was at issue, the government,
as in any murder trial, would be free to present any and all
evidence (including enterprise evidence) relevant to the
murder element and not unfairly prejudicial. See Fed. R.
Evid. 401, 403, 404(b). As defendants recognize, some of
the enterprise evidence relevant to phase two could meet
these standards and thus could be presented in phase one.
But some of the enterprise evidence probably would not
meet these standards, which is why defendants are seeking
bifurcation. The enterprise evidence presented included, for
example, criminal activity of individuals other than the
defendants, as well as prior acts by the two defendants that,

USA V. MANNING

63

defendants argued, would not meet the requirements of
Federal Rule of Evidence 404(b). 14
The majority is correct, in a sense, that the jury’s
consideration in phase one would be “constrained.” Maj. Op.
at 17. But the constraints would not be “artificial[].” See
Maj. Op. at 17. Nor would the trial record be “artificially
sanitized” or “incomplete.” See Maj. Op. at 31. Instead, the
constraints would be those supplied by the Federal Rules of
Evidence and the Due Process Clause, and the trial record
would include whatever evidence could satisfy generally
governing, routinely applied evidentiary principles. This
standard is hardly “unclear” or “muddled.” Nor would these
longstanding evidentiary principles “hamstring the
government in its ability to explain the defendants’ intent
and motive,” as the majority asserts. See Maj. Op. at 18, 30–
31. They instead hold the government to an appropriately
high standard for fairly proving a defendant’s guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt before securing a criminal conviction.
Limiting the evidence presented in the murder phase, as
required by longstanding principles and rules, would clarify
the issues to the jury, not confuse them. Indeed, “[c]ourts
that follow the common-law tradition almost unanimously
have come to disallow resort by the prosecution to any kind
of evidence of a defendant’s evil character to establish a
probability of his guilt”—including “defendant’s prior
trouble with the law, specific criminal acts, or ill name
Rule 404(b) provides that “[e]vidence of any other crime, wrong, or
act is not admissible to prove a person’s character in order to show that
on a particular occasion the person acted in accordance with the
character.” Fed. R. Evid. 404(b)(1). But it also provides that “[t]his
evidence may be admissible for another purpose, such as proving motive,
opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge, identity, absence of
mistake, or lack of accident.” Fed. R. Evid. 404(b)(2).
14

64

USA V. MANNING

among his neighbors.” Michelson v. United States, 335 U.S.
469, 475 (1948). The reason is that “excluding such
evidence”—even when it may have some “probative
value”—“tends to prevent confusion of issues,” in addition
to avoiding “undue prejudice.” Id. (emphasis added). Federal
Rule of Evidence 404(b) is based on this longstanding and
widespread practice. See generally Fed. R. Evid. 404(b)
committee notes to 2006 amendment (citing Michelson, 355
U.S. at 476).
In short, bifurcation would indeed constrain the evidence
that the jury could consider in the murder phase. But the only
constraints would be those settled on through longstanding
practice and embodied in the Federal Rules of Evidence and
the Due Process Clause. These generally applicable
constraints serve both to minimize prejudice and to prevent,
not foster, confusion.
4.
Finally, the majority asserts that bifurcation could
“prevent the government ‘from proving an essential element
of the charged offense.’” Maj. Op. at 13 (quoting Barker, 1
F.3d at 959). 15
The quoted passage from Barker cited United States v. Campbell, 774
F.2d 354, 356 (9th Cir. 1985), for the proposition that “the government
is ‘entitled to prove the[] elements of the charged offenses by
introduction of probative evidence.” But Campbell’s holding that the
government has a right to present evidentiary proof for every element of
an offense has been overruled. See Old Chief, 519 U.S. 172. Old Chief
held that a district court abused its discretion by admitting evidence of
the defendant’s prior crime when the defendant had offered to concede
the fact. 519 U.S. at 174. In reaching this conclusion, the Supreme Court
necessarily held, contrary to Campbell, that the government is not always
entitled to prove every element of an offense by introducing probative
evidence.
15

USA V. MANNING

65

Again, this case is different from Barker because the
defendants did not propose to stipulate to any of the elements
to be tried in either phase. So, as long as the jury found either
defendant guilty of murder, the government would not be
prevented from proving every element of the VICAR
charge—indeed, it would be required to. The only way the
government would not have an occasion to prove the
enterprise elements is if the jury concluded, based on all
evidence that would be admissible in a murder trial
(including any enterprise evidence admissible under the
Federal Rules of Evidence) that the defendant was not guilty
of murder. The majority does not explain why the
government has any interest in proving the VICAR
enterprise elements if the defendant did not commit
California murder and therefore cannot be guilty of VICAR
murder.
*

*

*

In sum, the bifurcation proposed here would not
“redefine” the charged VICAR offense, nor would it
eliminate any of its elements. Unlike in Barker, the jury here
would be required to consider every element of the VICAR
charge before convicting. Limiting the evidence presented in
the initial state-law murder phase would prevent undue
prejudice, minimize jury confusion of the issues, and honor
Congress’s decision to incorporate state-law definitions of
crimes into the VICAR statute.
Barker’s no-bifurcation principle makes sense for
§ 922(g)(1) charges. But I would not extend the rule to
VICAR offenses. The rationales that support Barker’s
conclusion simply do not apply to the VICAR statute. As
I’ve said, the VICAR statute is atypical in its incorporation
of the elements of a state-law crime. This case does not

66

USA V. MANNING

present the question whether there are other statutes
sufficiently similar to VICAR that bifurcation could be
available, although surely there are few, if any.
Nonetheless, the majority frets that this limited holding
would “dramatically change federal criminal trials as we
have known them” and would “fundamentally alter[] both
the criminal adjudicatory process and the nature of criminal
offenses.” Maj. Op. at 30. The majority’s “sky is falling”
concerns are wildly overblown. And whatever (likely
marginal) changes my proposed holding might lead to in
very limited circumstances would be warranted to avoid
unfair prejudice. See supra pp. 41–69. I would hold only that
in the atypical context of the VICAR statute, bifurcation is
permissible.
III.
The district judge made clear that the government’s
enterprise evidence posed a risk of “unwarranted prejudice,”
and that absent Barker (as he interpreted it), he would have
granted the motion to bifurcate. The government nonetheless
argues, briefly and unconvincingly, that any error in not
bifurcating was harmless.
To start, the government begins its harmlessness
discussion by invoking two incorrect legal standards. First,
the government wrongly suggests that defendants, rather
than the government, bear the burden of showing that any
error was not harmless. But it is “[t]he government [that]
bears the burden of proving that the error was harmless
beyond a reasonable doubt.” United States v. Esparza, 791
F.3d 1067, 1074 (9th Cir. 2015). The government “cannot
expect us to shoulder that burden for it.” United States v.
Gonzalez-Flores, 418 F.3d 1093, 1100 (9th Cir. 2005).

USA V. MANNING

67

Compounding that mistake, the government also
maintains that any error in not bifurcating was harmless
unless the jury would have acquitted absent the error. But the
harmless-error “inquiry cannot be merely whether there was
enough to support the result, apart from the phase affected
by the error”; the question is instead “whether the error itself
had substantial influence” on the jury. Kotteakos v. United
States, 328 U.S. 750, 765 (1946). So the government’s
assertion that the murder evidence was “powerful” does
nothing to illuminate the harmlessness issue. The question is
not whether the jury could have convicted the defendants for
murder without the enterprise evidence, but whether there
was prejudice from otherwise inadmissible enterprise
evidence that the jury considered alongside the murder
evidence. See id. The government makes no attempt to show
that jury’s consideration of the enterprise evidence alongside
the murder evidence in deciding the murder element did not
have a “substantial influence” on the jury. See id.
Even putting aside these fundamental legal errors, the
government’s harmless-error arguments do not hold water.
The government argues that the district court ultimately
denied bifurcation as an exercise of discretion, because the
district judge stated in its order denying defendants’ motion
for acquittal after the trial that the limiting instructions given
were the “best solution” to limit prejudice. Alternatively, it
also argues that the record suggests that the district court
would have denied bifurcation if he had been given
discretion to do so. These arguments misread the record.
Both the trial record and the post-trial order make clear that
the district judge did not think that he had discretion to
bifurcate, because of Barker. So the denial was not an
exercise of discretion, and the district court’s statement that
the limiting instructions were the “best solution” given “the

68

USA V. MANNING

circumstances in this case” does not suggest that the district
court would still have opted for limiting instructions if he
thought bifurcation was permitted under Barker.
The government also contends that because trial here
proceeded in the same sequence as it would have if it had
been bifurcated, with the murder element addressed before
the enterprise evidence, there could have been no prejudice.
This argument misapprehends the nature of prejudicial
evidence. “A drop of ink cannot be removed from a glass of
milk.” Gov’t of Virgin Islands v. Toto, 529 F.2d 278, 283 (3d
Cir. 1976). The question is not whether the jury was
prejudiced at the moment it heard the murder evidence. The
question is whether the jury was prejudiced by the time it
had to decide whether to reach a murder conviction. Because
the proceeding was not bifurcated, the jury had been
presented with the potentially prejudicial enterprise
evidence by the time it deliberated and reached its verdict.
The government again fails to show that this evidence did
not have a “substantial influence” on the jury. See Kotteakos,
328 U.S. at 765 (1946).
In short, the government here has entirely failed to
establish that the failure to bifurcate this trial was harmless.
Conclusion
In my view, the district court erred in concluding that it
was barred under Barker from bifurcating the trial. The
rationales that supported Barker’s conclusion simply do not
apply to the VICAR statute. I would hold instead that a
district court considering a VICAR charge predicated on a
state crime can—but need not—bifurcate the trial on the
predicate crime element from the trial on the remaining
enterprise elements. I would hold that the district court was
permitted to bifurcate the trial on the murder element from

USA V. MANNING

69

the trial on the remaining enterprise elements. The district
court’s erroneous conclusion that it could not bifurcate the
trial was not harmless. Accordingly, although I agree that the
district court was not wrong to reject the Batson challenge, I
would reverse and remand for a new trial.

