FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
REED DAY; ALBERT JACOBS,

No. 23-16148

Plaintiffs - Appellants,

D.C. No. 2:21-cv01332-GMS

v.
BEN HENRY, in his official capacity
as Director of the Arizona Department
of Liquor Licenses and Control;
TROY CAMPBELL, Chair, Arizona
State Liquor Board, in their official
capacities; KRIS MAYES, in her
official capacity as Arizona Attorney
General,
Defendants - Appellees,
and
WINE AND SPIRITS
WHOLESALERS ASSOCIATION
OF ARIZONA,
Intervenor - Defendant Appellee.

ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

2

DAY V. HENRY

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
G. Murray Snow, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 22, 2024
Phoenix, Arizona
Filed March 4, 2025
Amended September 5, 2025
Before: MILAN D. SMITH, JR., BRIDGET S. BADE, and
DANIELLE J. FORREST, Circuit Judges.
Order;
Amended Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.;
Partial Concurrence and Partial Dissent by Judge Danielle
J. Forrest
SUMMARY *
Commerce Clause
The panel (1) withdrew its opinion filed March 4, 2025;
and (2) replaced the opinion with an amended opinion
affirming the district court’s summary judgment for state
officials and an intervenor-defendant in a 42 U.S.C. § 1983
action brought by Arizona residents alleging that the State’s
statutory scheme preventing retailers without in-state
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

DAY V. HENRY

3

premises from shipping wine directly to Arizona consumers
violates the Commerce Clause.
Arizona utilizes a “three-tier” system to regulate the sale
and distribution of alcohol. This system allocates the sale
and distribution of alcohol among producers, wholesalers,
and retailers. Licensed wholesalers must buy from
producers (sometimes called suppliers) and then sell to
licensed retailers, who then sell to consumers. Retailers
must hold their license through an Arizona resident (or
qualifying corporation) and must have a physical premise
managed by an Arizona resident.
The panel first held that plaintiffs met the requirements
for Article III standing. The redressability requirement of
standing had been met because the district court was capable
of granting at least some relief, regardless of whether that
relief—or any other possible relief—might ultimately prove
appropriate on the merits.
The panel explained that plaintiffs’ suit focused on the
tension between the Commerce Clause and section 2 of the
Twenty-first Amendment, which allows states to determine
for themselves how best to regulate alcohol within their
borders. Applying the two-part test outlined in Tenn. Wine
& Spirits Retailers Ass’n v. Thomas, 588 U.S. 504 (2019),
for assessing the constitutionality of Arizona’s alcohol
regulations the panel concluded that it need not decide
whether Arizona’s scheme is discriminatory at step one
because even if Arizona’s physical presence requirement is
discriminatory, the requirement is an “essential feature” of
Arizona’s three-tier system and is supported by legitimate,
nonprotectionist state interests that the Twenty-first
Amendment was intended to promote.

4

DAY V. HENRY

Concurring in part and dissenting in part, Judge Forrest
agreed that plaintiffs have standing to challenge Arizona’s
restrictions that allow only in-state retailers to ship wine to
Arizona consumers, and therefore she joined Section I of the
majority’s analysis. But because Arizona’s law is
discriminatory and because the district court failed to
properly analyze whether Arizona has a legitimate nonprotectionist basis for its residency-based shipping
restrictions, she respectfully dissented from the majority’s
merits analysis under Tennessee Wine in Section II. She
would remand for the district court to conduct the required
evidentiary inquiry into whether Arizona’s discriminatory
regulations may be justified on legitimate public health or
safety grounds.

COUNSEL
James A. Tanford (argued), Robert D. Epstein, and James E.
Porter II, Epstein Seif Porter & Beutel LLP, Indianapolis,
Indiana; Christopher J. Zachar, Zachar Law Firm PC,
Phoenix, Arizona; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Luci D. Davis (argued) and Nathan T. Arrowsmith,
Attorneys; Dena R. Benjamin and Linda Bergevin, Assistant
Attorneys General; Kristen K. Mayes, Arizona Attorney
General; Arizona Attorney General’s Office, Phoenix,
Arizona; for Defendants-Appellees.
Hannah H. Porter (argued) and Kevin E. O’Malley,
Gallagher & Kennedy PA, Phoenix, Arizona, for IntervenorDefendant-Appellee.

DAY V. HENRY

5

Frederick R. Yarger and William Sowers Jr., Wheeler Trigg
O’Donnell LLP, Denver, Colorado; Jacob Hegeman, Wine
& Spirits Wholesalers of America Inc., Washington, D.C.;
for Amici Curiae Wine & Spirits Wholesalers of America
Inc. and American Beverage Licensees.
John C. Neiman Jr. and Mollie G. Hughes, Maynard Nexsen
PC, Birmingham, Alabama, for Amicus Curiae National
Beer Wholesalers Association.

ORDER
The Opinion filed March 4, 2025 and appearing at 129
F.4th 1197 (9th Cir. 2025), is withdrawn. It may not be cited
as precedent by or to this court or any district court of the
Ninth Circuit. The withdrawal of the Opinion moots the
pending petition for panel rehearing and rehearing en banc.
That Opinion is replaced by the amended Opinion filed
simultaneously with this Order. The parties may file new
petitions for panel rehearing or rehearing en banc regarding
the amended Opinion.

6

DAY V. HENRY

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiff-Appellants Reed Day and Albert Jacobs are
Arizona residents who desire to ship wine directly to
themselves from retailers who do not maintain in-state
premises in Arizona. Arizona’s statutory scheme, however,
prevents such shipments. As a result, Plaintiffs brought a
civil rights action against various Arizona state officials
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, challenging this statutory
scheme, which they claim violates the Commerce Clause.
Plaintiffs now appeal the district court’s order granting
summary judgment to the state officials and an intervenordefendant. For the reasons explained below, we affirm.
BACKGROUND
Like many states, Arizona utilizes a “three-tier” system
to regulate the sale and distribution of alcohol. This system
allocates the sale and distribution of alcohol among
producers, wholesalers, and retailers. Licensed wholesalers
must buy from producers (sometimes called suppliers) and
then sell to licensed retailers, who then sell to consumers.
The three-tier framework arose because of “tied-house”
saloons in the pre-Prohibition era, in which alcohol
producers set up saloonkeepers who promised to sell only
their products and to meet minimum sales goals. Lebamoff
Enters. Inc. v. Whitmer, 956 F.3d 863, 867 (6th Cir. 2020).
The tied-house system led to excessive alcohol
consumption, and after the Eighteenth Amendment was
repealed, states used the significant authority given to them
by § 2 of the Twenty-first Amendment to create strict
boundaries between producers and consumers of alcohol. Id.
at 867–68.

DAY V. HENRY

7

Arizona’s current statutory scheme subjects all three
tiers of alcohol sales and distribution to a series of
complex—and overlapping—statutes and regulations. For
example, all liquor shipped into Arizona must be invoiced to
the wholesaler by the supplier and must be held by the
wholesaler for at least twenty-four hours. Ariz. Rev. Stat.
§ 4-243.01(B). Meanwhile, retailers may only buy from
wholesalers, registered retail agents, or a handful of other
clearly defined sources. Id. § 4-243.01(A)(3). Retailers
must hold their license through an Arizona resident (or
qualifying corporation) and must have a physical premise
managed by an Arizona resident. Id. § 4-202(A), (C). Only
licensed retailers may take orders off-site (e.g., by phone or
internet) and ship directly to consumers within the state. Id.
§ 4-203(J). Knowingly shipping wine directly to a purchaser
in Arizona without the proper retail license is a class 2
misdemeanor. Id. § 4-203.04(H)(1).
As a result of these—and other—provisions, retailers
who do not maintain premises in Arizona cannot ship
directly to consumers within the state, but licensed retailers
with in-state premises may do so. A limited exception exists
for out-of-state wineries, which may receive a license to ship
small quantities of their product directly to consumers. Id.
§ 4-203.04(F). The “physical-premise” or “presence”
requirement, as this restriction is sometimes called, has been
the subject of increasing litigation in recent years, with
plaintiffs across a variety of states challenging similar
requirements as a violation of the dormant Commerce
Clause that cannot be otherwise justified by § 2 of the
Twenty-first Amendment.

8

DAY V. HENRY

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiffs are Arizona residents and self-described “avid
wine drinker[s]” who want to have wine shipped directly to
them from retailers who do not have in-state premises.
Following in the footsteps of litigants in other states,
Plaintiffs sued Defendants—the Director of the Arizona
Department of Liquor Licenses and Control, the Chair of the
Arizona State Liquor Board, and the Attorney General of
Arizona—in their official capacities pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
§ 1983. Plaintiffs sought a declaratory judgment that the ban
on direct shipping from retailers without in-state premises is
unconstitutional and an injunction barring Defendants from
enforcing the laws that prohibit retailers without in-state
premises from shipping wine to Arizona consumers. The
Wine and Spirits Wholesalers Association of Arizona later
joined as Intervenor-Defendant.
On August 12, 2022, Plaintiffs and Defendants filed
cross-motions for summary judgment. Plaintiffs argued that
because no license exists that would give a retailer without
in-state premises shipping privileges, Arizona’s laws
discriminate against out-of-state interests in violation of the
Commerce Clause. Plaintiffs then argued that these
discriminatory laws could not be otherwise upheld as serving
the state’s legitimate interests in public health and safety
because Arizona did not prove that it could not serve those
interests through nondiscriminatory alternatives.
In
contrast, Defendants argued that the relevant laws are not
discriminatory because they treat in-state and out-of-state
prospective licensees the same and that, regardless, the
interests served by the regulatory scheme are “more than
sufficient” to sustain the laws. Intervenor-Defendant filed
its own motion for summary judgment on September 9,
2022, echoing Defendants’ arguments and explaining the

DAY V. HENRY

9

importance of Arizona’s presence requirement to the
functioning of the state’s three-tier scheme.
On August 9, 2023, the district court granted
Defendants’ and Intervenor-Defendant’s motions for
summary judgment and denied Plaintiffs’ motion. Day v.
Henry, 686 F. Supp. 3d 887, 890 (D. Ariz. 2023). The
district court reasoned that it was unlikely that Plaintiffs had
standing and that, even if they did, their claims still failed on
the merits. Id. at 892, 894. The district court agreed with
Defendants and Intervenor-Defendant that the physicalpremise requirement is not discriminatory and that,
regardless, this requirement is essential to Arizona’s threetier system and is supported by legitimate nonprotectionist
state interests. Id. at 895–99. On August 28, 2023, Plaintiffs
timely appealed.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We
review the standing issue de novo. Hall v. Norton, 266 F.3d
969, 975 (9th Cir. 2001). We also review de novo the district
court’s summary judgment order. 2-Bar Ranch Ltd. P’ship
v. U.S. Forest Serv., 996 F.3d 984, 990 (9th Cir. 2021).
ANALYSIS
I. Plaintiffs have met the requirements for Article
III standing
As a threshold matter, Plaintiffs have met the
requirements for Article III standing. These requirements
are threefold: a plaintiff must have (1) suffered an injury-infact that is (2) traceable to the defendant’s challenged
conduct, and (3) it must be likely, as opposed to merely
speculative, that the injury will be redressed by a favorable
decision. See Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560–

10

DAY V. HENRY

61 (1992). If “a favorable judicial decision would not
require the defendant to redress the plaintiff’s claimed
injury, the plaintiff cannot demonstrate redressability unless
she adduces facts to show that the defendant or a third party
are nonetheless likely to provide redress as a result of the
decision.” M.S. v. Brown, 902 F.3d 1076, 1083 (9th Cir.
2018) (citations omitted). Plaintiffs must also show that the
relief they seek is “within the district court’s power to
award.” Juliana v. United States, 947 F.3d 1159, 1170 (9th
Cir. 2020).
The district court found that it was “doubtful” that
Plaintiffs could show standing because of two distinct
problems with the element of redressability. Day, 686 F.
Supp. 3d at 892. First, because it was “unclear which
provisions Plaintiffs actually challenge,” it was likely that
unchallenged provisions would still block their desired
relief. Id. A plaintiff cannot meet redressability if he or she
challenges only part of a regulatory scheme and other
uncontested laws would still prevent relief. See Nuclear
Info. & Res. Serv. v. Nuclear Regul. Comm’n, 457 F.3d 941,
955 (9th Cir. 2006). Second, the district court found that it
was not clear “that the [c]ourt could, or in any event, would
grant the relief that Plaintiffs request,” which included
enjoining unidentified statutes, rewriting the regulations, or
commanding the legislature to redo the licensing scheme.
Day, 686 F. Supp. 3d at 892, 894. The district court rejected
the idea of “leveling down,” in which it could cure the
constitutional issue by enjoining retailers with in-state
premises from shipping to Arizona consumers (as opposed
to “leveling up” by extending shipping rights to all retailers),
because doing so would “not . . . provide these Plaintiffs
with the relief that they request.” Id. at 893.

DAY V. HENRY

11

We disagree with the district court and find that Plaintiffs
have met the requirements for standing. Standing is a
threshold consideration that must be determined before
considering the merits. See Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better
Env’t, 523 U.S. 83, 94–95 (1998). Notably, a plaintiff
satisfies redressability “when he shows that a favorable
decision will relieve a discrete injury to himself,” not that “a
favorable decision will relieve his every injury.” Larson v.
Valente, 456 U.S. 228, 243 n.15 (1982) (emphasis in
original). Moreover, a district court is not limited to a
plaintiff’s proposal and instead “may enter any injunction it
deems appropriate, so long as the injunction is no more
burdensome to the defendant than necessary to provide
complete relief to the plaintiffs.” Kirola v. City & Cnty. of
San Francisco, 860 F.3d 1164, 1176 (9th Cir. 2017) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
As a preliminary matter, Plaintiffs did challenge the
relevant laws, routinely listing in their complaint and
briefing the specific statutes they were challenging.
Therefore, Plaintiffs’ claims do not possess the fatal flaw of
failing to identify independent provisions that would still
block relief should the court enjoin only the challenged
statutes. See Nuclear Info. & Res. Serv., 457 F.3d at 955.
Instead, what Plaintiffs inconsistently identified was their
requested relief: They routinely changed which particular
statutes they wanted enjoined and later agreed with the
district court that they wanted the court to direct the
legislature to “fix” the unconstitutional laws generally. But,
as noted above, the district court was not limited to
Plaintiffs’ suggestions and had the authority to create its own
remedy. See Sharp v. Weston, 233 F.3d 1166, 1173 (9th Cir.
2000) (“Once a constitutional violation has been found, a
district court has broad powers to fashion a remedy.”).

12

DAY V. HENRY

Redressability is meant only to be “a constitutional
minimum, depending on the relief that federal courts are
capable of granting.” Kirola, 860 F.3d at 1176 (emphasis in
original).
Here, the district court was capable of granting at least
some relief. For example, the district court could have
enjoined the enforcement of the statutory scheme as applied
to all liquor retailers and wholesalers inside and outside of
Arizona. This solution would negate the Commerce Clause
issue by eliminating enforcement of the allegedly
Although such an
discriminatory laws altogether. 1
injunction might be broad, it is not the kind of relief that is
outside the power of Article III courts under Juliana. See
Johnson v. City of Grants Pass, 72 F.4th 868, 882 (9th Cir.
2023) (explaining that enjoining the enforcement of a few
municipal ordinances “cannot credibly be compared to an
injunction seeking to require the federal government to
‘phase out fossil fuel emissions and draw down excess
atmospheric CO2’” (quoting Juliana, 947 F.3d at 1164–65)),
rev’d on other grounds, City of Grants Pass v. Johnson, 603
U.S. 520 (2024). Therefore, because the district court was
capable of granting at least some relief, and regardless of
whether that relief—or any other possible relief—might
ultimately prove appropriate on the merits, the redressability
requirement of standing has been met. See Seattle Pac.

Intervenor-Defendant protests that such a “leveling up” would
contravene the Arizona Legislature’s intent to “retain the current threetier” system. 2006 Ariz. Sess. Laws 1098. Any such restraint would be
a merits determination about the appropriate remedy, not an Article III
constraint on the district court’s power. To hold otherwise would allow
states to litigation-proof any regulatory scheme by including “leveldown” provisions to defeat standing.

1

DAY V. HENRY

13

Univ. v. Ferguson, 104 F.4th 50, 63 (9th Cir. 2024) (stating
that “redressability should not be conflated with the merits”).
II. Legal Background
Amendment

on

the

Twenty-first

Plaintiffs’ suit focuses on the tension between two
constitutional provisions: § 2 of the Twenty-first
Amendment and the Commerce Clause. In 1920, the
Eighteenth Amendment became effective, ushering in
Prohibition by banning the manufacture, sale, or
transportation of liquor. U.S. Const. amend. XVIII § 1.
Thirteen years later, the country changed course and ratified
the Twenty-first Amendment, repealing the Eighteenth
Amendment. U.S. Const. amend. XXI § 1. But the Twentyfirst Amendment “did not return the Constitution to its pre1919 form.” Bridenbaugh v. Freeman-Wilson, 227 F.3d
848, 853 (7th Cir. 2000). Rather, while § 1 repealed the
Eighteenth Amendment, § 2 added new language clarifying
that “[t]he transportation or importation into any State,
Territory, or possession of the United States for delivery or
use therein of intoxicating liquors, in violation of the laws
thereof, is hereby prohibited.” U.S. Const. amend. XXI § 2.
This addition was modeled on pre-Prohibition legislation
that was intended to “give each State a measure of regulatory
authority over the importation of alcohol.” Tenn. Wine &
Spirits Retailers Ass’n v. Thomas, 588 U.S. 504, 525, 528
(2019).
The wording used in this pre-Prohibition
legislation—and later in § 2—was framed “not as a measure
conferring power on the States but as one prohibiting
conduct that violated state law.” Id. at 526.
Over time, the broad language of § 2 has come into
conflict with other parts of the Constitution, most notably the
Commerce Clause, which reserves for Congress the power

14

DAY V. HENRY

“[t]o regulate Commerce . . . among the several States.”
U.S. Const. art. 1, § 8, cl. 3. The “negative” reading of this
clause—known as the “dormant Commerce Clause”—
prevents states from adopting protectionist measures that
unduly restrict interstate commerce. See Nat’l Pork
Producers Council v. Ross, 598 U.S. 356, 368–69 (2023).
Although the Supreme Court initially treated § 2 as
functionally overriding other constitutional provisions,
including the Commerce Clause, it eventually walked back
that interpretation, and the Court now considers the Dormant
Commerce Clause to limit a state’s ability to discriminate
against interstate commerce under the Twenty-first
Amendment. See Tenn. Wine, 588 U.S. at 529–31
(discussing the evolution of the Supreme Court’s
understanding of § 2).
Two recent cases, Granholm and Tennessee Wine,
navigate this tension between the Dormant Commerce
Clause and the Twenty-first Amendment and form the
foundation of the dispute between the parties in this case.
First, in Granholm, the Court considered whether Michigan
and New York laws that allowed in-state, but not out-ofstate, wineries to sell directly to consumers violated the
Dormant Commerce Clause, and if so, whether that
discrimination was authorized by the Twenty-first
Amendment. Granholm v. Heald, 544 U.S. 460, 465–66
(2005). The Court held that the answer to the first question
was yes, because the underlying cases “involve[d]
straightforward attempts to discriminate in favor of local
producers,” and that the answer to the second question was
no, because the states had provided “little concrete
evidence” that could otherwise justify such discriminatory
schemes. Id. at 489, 492. The Supreme Court concluded

DAY V. HENRY

15

that “[i]f a State chooses to allow direct shipment of wine, it
must do so on evenhanded terms.” Id. at 493.
Second, in Tennessee Wine, the Supreme Court
expanded Granholm’s logic beyond the producer tier,
concluding that Tennessee’s “onerous” durational residency
requirement for retailers—to obtain an alcohol retail license,
an individual had to be a resident of the state for two years,
and a corporation could not get a retail license until all of its
officers, directors, and capital stock owners satisfied that
same requirement—was a discriminatory scheme that
violated the Dormant Commerce Clause. 588 U.S. at 511,
518. The Court then concluded that this discriminatory
scheme could not otherwise be justified as advancing the
goals of the Twenty-first Amendment because the provision
at issue had “at best a highly attenuated relationship to public
health or safety” and because the overall nature of the
scheme made it “hard to avoid the conclusion that [the laws’]
purpose and effect is protectionist.” Id. at 539–40. The
Court therefore struck down the scheme as unconstitutional.
Id. at 543.
In the years since, courts have implicitly and explicitly
interpreted Tennessee Wine as creating a two-part test for
assessing the constitutionality of state alcohol regulations. 2
Courts that have explicitly adopted a two-part test based on Tennessee
Wine include the First, Third, and Fourth Circuits. See Anvar v. Dwyer,
82 F.4th 1, 8 (1st Cir. 2023); Jean-Paul Weg LLC v. Dir. of N.J. Div. of
Alcoholic Beverage Control, 133 F.4th 227, 234 (3d Cir. 2025); B-21
Wines, Inc. v. Bauer, 36 F.4th 214, 222 (4th Cir. 2022). Meanwhile, the
Sixth and Eighth Circuits have conducted somewhat similar analyses,
but under less clear formulations of the Tennessee Wine test. See
Lebamoff Enters. Inc. v. Whitmer, 956 F.3d 863, 871 (6th Cir. 2020);
Block v. Canepa, 74 F.4th 400, 412–13 (6th Cir. 2023); Sarasota Wine
Mkt., LLC v. Schmitt, 987 F.3d 1171, 1181, 1184 (8th Cir. 2021).
2

16

DAY V. HENRY

At step one of the test, the court must address whether the
challenged statutory scheme discriminates against
nonresidents. Id. at 539. If not, then the scheme is
constitutional, and the court need not proceed to step two.
However, if the laws are discriminatory, the court then asks
“whether the challenged requirement can be justified as a
public health or safety measure or on some other legitimate
nonprotectionist ground.” Id. If so, the scheme is
constitutional despite its discriminatory nature. See id.
Since Tennessee Wine, our sister circuits have split as to
how to handle both parts of this test. As detailed below, we
conclude that we need not decide whether Arizona’s scheme
is discriminatory at step one of the Tennessee Wine test
because Arizona’s physical-presence requirement may
otherwise be upheld at step two as an essential feature of
Arizona’s three-tier system.
III. We need not decide whether Arizona’s laws are
discriminatory
At step one of the Tennessee Wine test, we ask whether
a particular liquor regulation is discriminatory. There are
three ways that a statutory scheme can discriminate against
out-of-state interests: facially, purposefully, or in practical
effect. See Nat’l Ass’n of Optometrists & Opticians
LensCrafters, Inc. v. Brown, 567 F.3d 521, 525 (9th Cir.
2009). The first step in analyzing any law under the dormant
Commerce Clause is “to determine whether it ‘regulates
evenhandedly with only “incidental” effects on interstate
commerce, or discriminates against interstate commerce.’”
Or. Waste Sys., Inc. v. Dep’t of Env’t Quality of Or., 511
U.S. 93, 99 (1994) (quoting Hughes v. Oklahoma, 441 U.S.
322, 336 (1979)). Discrimination means “differential
treatment of in-state and out-of-state economic interests that

DAY V. HENRY

17

benefits the former and burdens the latter.” Id. This
differential treatment must be “as between persons or entities
who are similarly situated.” See Black Star Farms LLC v.
Oliver, 600 F.3d 1225, 1230 (9th Cir. 2010). The party
challenging the scheme “bears the burden of showing
discrimination.” Id.
Plaintiffs urge us to find at the first step of the Tennessee
Wine test that Arizona’s laws improperly discriminate
against interstate commerce. Plaintiffs argue that Granholm
and Tennessee Wine, in which the Supreme Court found
various state wine laws to be discriminatory, necessarily
dictate a similar outcome here; that Arizona is giving its
wine retailers “exclusive access” to the e-commerce market,
which is improper economic protectionism; and that because
Arizona does not carry most old, foreign, and rare wines,
Arizona is also depriving its citizens of the right “to have
access to the markets of other States on equal terms.” In
response, Defendants argue that Arizona’s laws are not
discriminatory because retailers from any state are free to
obtain licenses, and that, unlike the kind of durational
residency requirement at issue in Tennessee Wine, a
physical-premise requirement is not a “per se burden” on
out-of-state companies. The district court agreed with
Defendants, finding that there was no discrimination because
Arizona’s
physical-premise
requirement
“applies
evenhandedly to in-state and out-of-state retailers.” Day,
686 F. Supp. 3d at 896.
Whether this kind of requirement is discriminatory has
split the circuits. In the pre-Granholm era, the Seventh
Circuit easily found that such requirements were not
discriminatory, commenting that “[e]very use of § 2 could
be called ‘discriminatory’ in the sense that plaintiffs use that
term, because every statute limiting importation leaves

18

DAY V. HENRY

intrastate commerce unaffected.” Bridenbaugh, 227 F.3d at
853 (emphasis omitted). Meanwhile, between Granholm
and Tennessee Wine, the Second Circuit determined that
New York’s physical-premise requirement was not
discriminatory because it “evenhandedly regulate[d] the
importation and distribution of liquor within the state.”
Arnold’s Wines, Inc. v. Boyle, 571 F.3d 185, 192 (2d Cir.
2009). The Fifth Circuit came to a similar conclusion. See
Wine Country Gift Baskets.com v. Steen, 612 F.3d 809, 821
(5th Cir. 2010) (concluding that Texas could require its
authorized retailers to sell from locations physically located
in Texas).
In the immediate aftermath of Tennessee Wine, our sister
circuits seemed reluctant to deviate from prior caselaw. In
Lebamoff Enterprises, Inc. v. Whitmer, the first postTennessee Wine case, the Sixth Circuit expressed doubt that
Michigan’s
physical-premise
requirement
was
discriminatory, although it ultimately determined that it did
not need to decide the case on that basis because Michigan’s
law could otherwise be justified at what is now known as
step two of the Tennessee Wine test. See 956 F.3d at 870–
71. Then, in Sarasota Wine Market, LLC v. Schmitt, the
Eighth Circuit held that Missouri’s physical-premise
requirement might be “economically and socially
anachronistic” but that the scheme did not discriminate
against out-of-state interests because it applied the same
licensing requirements to all retailers and the rules governing
direct shipment applied “evenhandedly” to all those who
qualified for the relevant license. 987 F.3d 1171, 1184 (8th
Cir. 2021).
Following Sarasota Wine Market, however, circuits
have uniformly found that such requirements are
discriminatory, albeit on inconsistent grounds. First, in B-

DAY V. HENRY

19

21 Wines, Inc. v. Bauer, the Fourth Circuit concluded that
because in-state retailers had privileges that out-of-state
retailers did not, North Carolina’s laws were facially
discriminatory. 36 F.4th 214, 223 (4th Cir. 2022). Then, the
Sixth Circuit seemed to contradict its prior tentative
reasoning in Lebamoff, apparently assuming (without further
explanation) in Block v. Canepa that Ohio’s direct-shipment
restriction was discriminatory. See 74 F.4th 400, 413 (6th
Cir. 2023). Shortly after Block, the First Circuit found that
Rhode Island’s laws “facially discriminate[d]” against outof-state retailers by forcing licensees to maintain a physical
premise in the state, which meant that out-of-state retailers
could not deliver alcohol to Rhode Island residents as instate retailers could. Anvar v. Dwyer, 82 F.4th 1, 9 (1st Cir.
2023). Finally, and most recently, the Third Circuit held that
such requirements were discriminatory in effect (rather than
simply on their face) because they imposed heightened
financial burdens on out-of-state retailers. Jean-Paul Weg
LLC v. Dir. of N.J. Div. of Alcoholic Beverage Control, 133
F.4th 227, 236 (3d Cir. 2025).
Ultimately, like the Sixth Circuit in Lebamoff, we
conclude that we need not wade into this particular part of
the “quagmire” that constitutes our Dormant Commerce
Clause jurisprudence. Nw. States Portland Cement Co. v.
Minnesota, 358 U.S. 450, 458 (1959). As explained below,
we hold that even if Arizona’s physical-premise requirement
is discriminatory, it can nonetheless be upheld at step two of
the Tennessee Wine test. Accordingly, we assume without
deciding that Arizona’s laws are discriminatory and proceed
to step two.

20

DAY V. HENRY

IV. Arizona’s physical-premise requirement may
be upheld as an essential part of the state’s
three-tier scheme
At step two of the Tennessee Wine test, courts ask
“whether the challenged [regime] can be justified as a public
health or safety measure or on some other legitimate
nonprotectionist ground.” B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th at 222
(alteration in original) (quoting Tenn. Wine, 588 U.S. at
539). If a court answers in the affirmative, the regulatory
scheme is “shielded by § 2.” See Tenn. Wine, 588 U.S. at
539–40.
A circuit split has developed regarding step two of this
test as well, although the break here is somewhat cleaner
than the compound fracture that characterizes the variety of
approaches to the application of step one. Specifically, in
the post-Tennessee Wine era, the Third, Fourth, and Eighth
Circuits have held that physical-premise requirements may
be upheld simply because they are an essential feature of a
state’s three-tier scheme. 3 See B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th at 228;
Sarasota Wine Mkt., 987 F.3d at 1184; Jean-Paul Weg, 133
F.4th at 239 (alternatively holding that New Jersey’s
regulations were “independently justified as essential
features of” a three-tier scheme). The justification is that the
three-tier scheme is inherently tied to the public health and
safety measures the Twenty-first Amendment was intended
to promote. See B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th at 226–28. In contrast,
the First Circuit has held that “a discriminatory aspect of a
state’s version of the three-tier system cannot be given a
judicial seal of approval premised . . . on the virtues of threeBefore Tennessee Wine, several circuits came to similar conclusions.
See, e.g., Arnold’s Wines, 571 F.3d at 191–92; Wine Country, 612 F.3d
at 818–19.
3

DAY V. HENRY

21

tier systems generally” and that “concrete evidence” must
demonstrate that the “predominant effect” of the challenged
regulatory scheme is to advance goals like public health and
safety. Anvar, 82 F.4th at 10–11 (citation omitted). The
Sixth Circuit’s current approach is largely similar to that of
the First Circuit. 4 See Block, 74 F.4th at 414 (remanding to
the district court to analyze competing evidence as to
whether Ohio’s physical-premise requirement primarily
promoted public health or protectionism).
The district court adopted the current majority approach
as an alternative holding. That is, the district court
concluded that even if Arizona’s laws were discriminatory,
the physical-premise requirement is “such an essential
feature” of Arizona’s three-tier system that “it is supported
by legitimate, nonprotectionist state interests.” Day, 686 F.
Supp. 3d at 897. The district court reasoned that opening the
state to direct deliveries from retailers without in-state
premises would “effectively eliminate the role” of Arizona’s
wholesalers and “create a sizable hole in the three-tier
system.” Id. at 898 (quoting Lebamoff, 956 F.3d at 872).
The district court rejected—among other arguments—
Plaintiffs’ contention that the state’s interests were not
legitimate because other states allow out-of-state shipping,
Lebamoff had held that Michigan’s presence requirement could be
justified in part because “there is no other way it could preserve the
regulatory control provided by the three-tier system.” 956 F.3d at 874.
However, although Block purported not to overrule Lebamoff, its
conclusion that Ohio needed to provide evidence supporting the public
health benefits of its direct shipment ban is largely at odds with the broad
language of the Lebamoff majority opinion regarding the necessity of
these laws to the functioning of a three-tier scheme. Block, 74 F.4th at
413–14. Instead, Block functionally follows the Lebamoff concurring
opinion. See id; see also Lebamoff, 956 F.3d at 877–79 (McKeague, J.,
concurring).

4

22

DAY V. HENRY

pointing out that the Twenty-first Amendment allows states
to determine for themselves how best to regulate alcohol
within their borders. Id. at 898–99. The district court also
rejected Plaintiffs’ argument that Arizona has abandoned the
three-tier system for wine by allowing certain wineries to
ship directly to customers, noting that “[c]reating an
exception is not abandoning the entire system.” Id. at 899.
We agree with the district court. As an initial matter, in
Granholm, the Supreme Court reiterated that the “three-tier
system itself is ‘unquestionably legitimate.’” 544 U.S. at
489 (quoting North Dakota v. United States, 495 U.S. 423,
432 (1990)). Although Plaintiffs claim this language is
merely dictum, the Granholm Court made this statement in
the context of finding that the challenged regulations were a
discriminatory exception to the three-tier scheme, rather
than—as the defendants there argued—an integral part of it.
Id. at 488–89. As the Second Circuit pointed out when
rejecting an identical argument, “[h]ad the three-tier system
itself been unsustainable under the Twenty-first
Amendment, the Granholm Court would have had no need
to distinguish it from the impermissible regulations at issue.”
Arnold’s Wines, 571 F.3d at 191. Moreover, the Tennessee
Wine Court subsequently spoke approvingly of the three-tier
system, distinguishing the unnecessary durational residency
requirement at issue from elements that were “essential” to
the functioning of that system. See 588 U.S. at 535.
As several of our sister circuits have recognized since
Tennessee Wine, the physical-premise requirement is—
unlike the durational residency requirement at issue in
Tennessee Wine—an essential piece of the “unquestionably
legitimate” three-tier system. See B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th at
228 (holding that North Carolina’s requirement was an
“integral part” of the state’s three-tier system because it

DAY V. HENRY

23

“directly relate[d] to North Carolina’s ability to separate
producers, wholesalers, and retailers”); Jean-Paul Weg, 133
F.4th at 239 (concluding that “permitting out-of-state
retailers to sell alcohol from outside of a state’s three-tier
system creates a regulatory hole large enough to shake the
foundations of the three-tier model”); Sarasota Wine Mkt.,
987 F.3d at 1183 (“Sarasota without question attacks core
provisions of Missouri’s three-tiered system . . . .’”).
By removing the physical-premise requirement, we
would effectively be hacking off two of the three legs that
constitute Arizona’s three-tiered system. As a practical
matter, in-state retailers (i.e., licensed retailers with physical
premises in Arizona) are the third tier of the state’s three-tier
system. See Arnold’s Wines, 571 F.3d at 190 (“[B]ecause
in-state retailers make up the third tier in New York’s threetier regulatory system, Appellants’ challenge to the
[statutory] provisions requiring all wholesalers and retailers
be present in and licensed by the state is a frontal attack on
the constitutionality of the three-tier system itself.” (citation
omitted)). As traditionally understood, the three-tier system
“has an opening at the top available to all,” and once the
product is inside that system, it must remain within the
system. Wine County, 612 F.3d at 815. Relatedly,
because—as a legal and practical matter—out-of-state
retailers could not be subject to Arizona’s wholesaler
requirements, 5 and because different states treat wholesalers
As other circuits have recognized—and as Plaintiffs do not
meaningfully refute—there are myriad practical and legal issues that
would crop up if Arizona tried to regulate out-of-state wholesalers or if
out-of-state retailers had to comply with Arizona’s wholesaler purchase
requirement. See Lebamoff, 956 F.3d at 872–73 (discussing the
extraterritoriality doctrine); Arnold’s Wines, 571 F.3d at 192 n.3
(discussing the “absurd operational result” that would occur if the
5

24

DAY V. HENRY

differently, allowing direct shipment from retailers without
in-state premises functionally eliminates Arizona’s control
over the wholesaler tier. See also Lebamoff, 956 F.3d at 872
(“Opening up the State to direct deliveries from out-of-state
retailers necessarily means opening it up to alcohol that
passes through out-of-state wholesalers or for that matter no
wholesaler at all.”).
Simply put, allowing direct shipment of wine to Arizona
consumers from out-of-state retailers would cut so many
holes in the state’s “unquestionably legitimate” three-tier
system that the system would functionally cease to exist. 6
And because the physical-premise requirement is therefore
an “essential feature” of Arizona’s three-tier system, we may
uphold it without further determinations as to whether its
predominant effect is to support public health and safety.
See B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th at 227 n.8. Nonetheless, we
acknowledge that the physical-presence requirement does
bear on a state’s ability to support public health and safety.
For example, Arizona conducted thousands of on-site
inspections of licensees’ establishments between 2016 and
2021, in addition to running covert underage buyer
programs. Arizona also inspects the records of wholesalers
Indiana-based Arnold’s Wines were required to purchase its inventory
from New York wholesalers only to ship the wine back to New York
consumers).
Although the First Circuit concluded that “there is nothing inherent in
the three-tier system—which aims at preventing vertical integration
between alcohol producers, wholesalers, and retailers—that necessarily
demands an in-state-presence requirement for retailers,” Anvar, 82 F.4th
at 10–11, that reasoning overlooks the basic framework of § 2. The
three-tier system might be premised on separating the tiers, but the
Twenty-first Amendment explicitly gave each state the power to regulate
alcohol importation for itself. U.S. Const. amend. XXI § 2.
6

DAY V. HENRY

25

to determine whether a retailer is complying with Arizona
liquor laws.
Notably, the Tennessee Wine Court
acknowledged the importance of in-state physical premises
for such reasons, commenting that “on-site inspections”
could serve as one way to maintain oversight over liquor
stores. Tenn. Wine, 588 U.S. at 541; see also Jean-Paul
Weg, 133 F.4th at 239 (concluding that “New Jersey’s
physical presence requirement [was] key to enforcing its
[three-tier] system by keeping retailers within its
investigators’ jurisdiction”). Without a physical-premise
requirement, the three-tier scheme falls apart, and so do
some of the benefits that come with it.
Like the district court, we reject Plaintiffs’ assertion that
Arizona does not have a three-tier system for wine anymore
because wineries can now sell directly to consumers (and so,
the logic goes, Arizona cannot justify the physical-premise
requirement on the grounds that it is essential to a system
that no longer exists). Day, 686 F. Supp. at 899. A limited
exception does not swallow the whole. There are only about
11,000 wineries in the United States, as opposed to
approximately 400,000 wine retailers. As of June 30, 2021,
Arizona had only granted 1,030 direct shipment licenses.
Allowing deliveries from such a small number of wineries is
a minor exception that does not negate the existence of
Arizona’s much larger three-tier system, and it is within
Arizona’s discretion to create this kind of limited exception.
See B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th at 226 (rejecting the argument that
North Carolina had “abandoned” its three-tier systems by
permitting direct shipments from wineries).
We also reject the argument that Arizona must prove that
nondiscriminatory alternatives would be insufficient to
further the state’s interest in public health and safety. As
other circuits to consider this issue have noted, such a

26

DAY V. HENRY

requirement “conflates the proper Twenty-first Amendment
inquiry with a traditional analysis under the dormant
Commerce Clause.” Anvar, 82 F.4th at 11; see B-21 Wines,
36 F.4th at 224–25 (concluding that such a requirement was
not central to the Tennessee Wine analysis); see also JeanPaul Weg, 133 F.4th at 238. In Tennessee Wine, the
Supreme Court did discuss the existence (or lack thereof) of
nondiscriminatory alternatives, but only after determining
that the law at issue was a discriminatory regime that was
not otherwise authorized by the Twenty-first Amendment.
See 588 U.S. at 540–43. Here, Arizona’s physical-premise
requirement is authorized by the Twenty-first Amendment
as an essential feature of the state’s three-tier scheme, so no
further consideration of nondiscriminatory alternatives was
necessary. Regardless, the existence of such alternatives is
merely a relevant factor that a district court may consider
when assessing whether the challenged laws promote public
health and safety; on its own, it “does not, for purposes of a
Twenty-first Amendment inquiry, necessarily invalidate a
challenged law.” Anvar, 82 F.4th at 11.
Over the last century, the Supreme Court has slowly but
steadily limited the outer reaches of the Twenty-first
Amendment, rejecting the view that § 2 shields all state
alcohol regulations from the Dormant Commerce Clause and
instead applying an increasingly stricter framework through
which we analyze the constitutionality of these laws. See
Arnold’s Wines, 571 F.3d at 192–201 (Calabresi, J.,
concurring) (discussing the history of Twenty-first
Amendment jurisprudence). But until and unless the
Supreme Court decides to withdraw its wholesale support for
this long-standing model, we agree that “we should be no
more invasive of the ‘unquestionably legitimate’ three-tiered
system than the Supreme Court has mandated.” Sarasota

DAY V. HENRY

27

Wine Mkt., 987 F.3d at 1184; see also Arnold’s Wines, 571
F.3d at 201 (Calabresi, J., concurring) (“[W]hile the general
direction of Supreme Court jurisprudence has been toward
prohibiting any discriminatory state regulation, it is not for
our court to say how far or how fast we should move along
that vector.”). The Supreme Court has not yet struck such a
blow to § 2, and neither do we.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the judgment of the district
court is AFFIRMED.
FORREST, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and dissenting
in part.
I agree that Plaintiffs have standing to challenge
Arizona’s restrictions that allow only in-state retailers to ship
wine to Arizona consumers, and therefore I join Section I of
the majority’s analysis. But because Arizona’s law is
discriminatory and because the district court failed to
properly analyze whether Arizona has a legitimate nonprotectionist basis for its residency-based shipping
restrictions, I respectfully dissent from the majority’s merits
analysis under Tennessee Wine & Spirits Retailers
Association v. Thomas, 588 U.S. 504 (2019), in Section II. I
would remand for the district court to conduct the required
evidentiary inquiry into whether Arizona’s discriminatory
regulations may be justified on legitimate public health or
safety grounds.
Tennessee Wine Analysis
As the majority explains, the Supreme Court has
developed a two-step framework to reconcile the apparent

28

DAY V. HENRY

tension between § 2 of the Twenty-first Amendment and the
dormant Commerce Clause. See Maj. Op. 13–15. We apply
normal Commerce Clause principles at the first step, finding
suspect any state regulation that discriminates against
interstate commerce. See Tennessee Wine, 588 U.S. at 533,
539. A finding of discrimination is typically fatal. Id. at 539.
But the Twenty-first Amendment gives states some leeway
when regulating alcohol. Id. If the state provides concrete
evidence that its discriminatory regime advances public
health, safety, or another legitimate non-protectionist
interest that could not be served by nondiscriminatory
measures, it may continue to enforce its discriminatory
regulations. Id. at 539–40.
I. Step One: Discrimination
The majority does not decide whether Arizona’s
shipping restriction discriminates against interstate
commerce at Tennessee Wine’s first step because it
concludes that, regardless, plaintiffs’ claim fails at step two.
I would reach this first issue and conclude that Arizona’s law
is discriminatory.
Arizona argues its shipping restriction is not
discriminatory because it distinguishes only between
licensed and unlicensed retailers, not between residents and
nonresidents. There is no guarantee, the argument goes, that
an in-state retailer will have a brick-and-mortar presence and
an Arizona manager, and thus be eligible for a license. And
out-of-state retailers can obtain the proper license. All they
have to do is open a storefront in Arizona and hire an
Arizonan to manage the store and hold the license. That view
of interstate commercial discrimination defies both
precedent and common sense.

DAY V. HENRY

29

If I said I would only hire clerks who had studied in my
alma mater’s law library, I could not maintain that I have no
hiring preference for University of Idaho students. Sure, a
Harvard student could fly to Spokane, drive to Moscow, read
a few cases in the library, and then apply. Likewise, there is
no guarantee that any given University of Idaho student has
studied in the law library. But that is not the point. I have
plainly adopted a preference for University of Idaho students
and discriminated against all others.
The Supreme Court has never allowed such easy
workarounds to the Commerce Clause’s antidiscrimination
command. Take Dean Milk Co. v. City of Madison, 340 U.S.
349 (1951). Madison allowed the sale of pasteurized milk
only if it was bottled within five miles of city limits, and all
other milk only if it was sourced from within twenty-five
miles. Id. at 350–51. An Illinois distributor had no difficulty
convincing the Court that the ordinance “plainly
discriminate[d] against interstate commerce.” Id. at 354.
And that is because the state had “erect[ed] an economic
barrier” foreclosing “competition from without the State.”
Id. There is no indication that the Court would have reached
a different decision had it considered that the Illinois
corporation could have purchased a Madison dairy and hired
some industrious Madisonian milkers to gain access to that
market.
More to the point, the Supreme Court has rejected
precisely the argument that Arizona makes. In Granholm v.
Heald, the Court reviewed a licensing scheme that allowed
out-of-state wineries to ship wine directly to consumers only
if they opened an in-state branch office and warehouse. 544
U.S. 460, 474–75 (2005). The Court concluded that the “instate presence requirement runs contrary to our admonition
that States cannot require an out-of-state firm ‘to become a

30

DAY V. HENRY

resident in order to compete on equal terms.’” Id. at 475
(quoting Halliburton Oil Well Cementing Co. v. Reily, 373
U.S. 64, 72 (1963)).
It draws too fine a line to look only to a retailer’s state of
incorporation. Granholm did not define residency based on
legal formalities. Rather, it concluded that New York would
require an out-of-state firm to “become a resident” if the firm
were forced to establish an in-state presence to obtain equal
access to the New York market. Id. At bottom, Arizona
allows only those retailers willing to set up shop in-state to
ship wine to Arizonans. That type of “economic
isolationism” is “facially discriminatory, in part because it
tend[s] ‘to discourage domestic corporations from plying
their trades in interstate commerce.’” Camps
Newfound/Owatonna Inc. v. Town of Harrison, 520 U.S.
564, 579 (1997) (quoting Fulton Corp. v. Faulkner, 516 U.S.
323, 333 (1996)). Defining regulations as neutral by looking
only to where a retailer is headquartered or based would
allow precisely the “economic Balkanization” that the
dormant Commerce Clause seeks to avoid. See Granholm,
544 U.S. at 472 (quoting Hughes v. Oklahoma, 441 U.S. 322,
325 (1979)).
Arizona’s attempt to distinguish Granholm is unavailing,
at least at this stage in the analysis. It argues that Granholm
applies only to exceptions to a state’s three-tier scheme, and
that Plaintiffs’ challenge is to an integral part of its three-tier
scheme. A law’s relationship to the three-tier system,
though, is at most relevant at the second step of the
Tennessee Wine analysis. See 588 U.S. at 535. It has no
bearing on whether a law is discriminatory. See id.;
Granholm, 544 U.S. at 476; see also B-21 Wines, Inc. v.
Bauer, 36 F.4th 214, 222–23, 227–28 (4th Cir. 2022)

DAY V. HENRY

31

(considering the law’s centrality to the three-tier system at
step two after finding it discriminatory at step one).
As to Tennessee Wine, it is true that Tennessee
implemented a more egregious two-year waiting period
before new state residents could obtain a retail license, 588
U.S. at 504. But nowhere did the Supreme Court purport to
establish that scheme as the floor of unconstitutionality. A
regulatory regime like Arizona’s may be slightly less
problematic but discriminatory all the same.
Ultimately, we are faced with much the same licensing
scheme and arguments that the Fourth Circuit confronted in
B-21 Wines. That court acknowledged
that out-of-state wine retailers can obtain a
permit to ship their product to North Carolina
residents, provided, inter alia, that those
retailers are managed or owned by a North
Carolina resident, have in-state premises, and
buy their product from an in-state wholesaler.
But that prospect does not eliminate the
statutorily mandated differential treatment.
Id. at 223 n. 5 (citing Granholm, 544 U.S. at 474–75).
Whatever complexities and disagreements there may have
been at step two of the Tennessee Wine framework, compare
id. at 227–29, with id. at 232–38 (Wilkinson, J., dissenting),
the Fourth Circuit had no difficulty finding North Carolina’s
scheme discriminatory at step one. 1 Neither should we.

See also Anvar v. Dwyer, 82 F.4th 1, 9 (1st Cir. 2023); Block v. Canepa,
74 F.4th 400, 413–14 (6th Cir. 2023); Jean-Paul Weg v. Dir. of N.J. Div.
of Alcoholic Beverage Control, 133 F.4th 227, 235–36 (3d Cir. 2025);

1

32

DAY V. HENRY

II. Step Two: Legitimate Regulatory Basis
Because Arizona’s licensing scheme is discriminatory, it
would be invalid if applied to any product other than alcohol.
See Granholm, 544 U.S. at 476; Tennessee Wine, 588 U.S.
at 539. But § 2 of the Twenty-first Amendment may yet
come to Arizona’s rescue. Beyond repealing Prohibition,
that Amendment preserved states’ authority to regulate
alcohol by prohibiting “[t]he transportation or importation
into any State . . . for delivery or use therein of intoxicating
liquors, in violation of the laws thereof.” U.S. Const. amend.
XXI § 2. Thus, notwithstanding the dormant Commerce
Clause, a discriminatory regulation on alcohol is permissible
if it is “justified as a public health or safety measure or on
some other legitimate nonprotectionist ground.” Tennessee
Wine, 588 U.S. at 539.
However, “[w]here the predominant effect of a law is
protectionism, not the protection of public health or safety,
it is not shielded by § 2.” Id. at 539–40. Not only must the
ends be legitimate, but a State cannot employ discriminatory
means unless “nondiscriminatory alternatives would be
insufficient to further [its] interests.” Id. at 540. Arizona
must bring “concrete evidence” to the means-ends inquiry at
Tennessee Wine’s second step; “mere speculation” and
“unsupported assertions” will not do. Id. at 539–40 (quoting
Granholm, 544 U.S. at 490, 492).
Some of our sister circuits sidestep imposing this
evidentiary burden and hold that regulations essential to a
state’s three-tier system, including physical presence
requirements, are per se legitimate. See B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th
Chicago Wine Co. v. Braun, -- F.4th --, 2025 WL 2218630, at *5–7 (7th
Cir. Aug. 5, 2025) (Scudder, J., concurring in the judgment).

DAY V. HENRY

33

at 227–29; Sarasota Wine Mkt., LLC v. Schmitt, 987 F.3d
1171, 1180–84 (8th Cir. 2021); Jean-Paul Weg, LLC v. Dir.
of N.J. Div. of Alcoholic Beverage Control, 133 F.4th 227,
239 (3d Cir. 2025). The majority joins them. I would not.
Our sister circuits that have adopted the per se validity
rule for essential components of three-tier systems have
grabbed at language in Granholm and Tennessee Wine
calling that system “unquestionably legitimate.” See, e.g., B21, 36 F.4th at 227 (quoting Granholm, 544 U.S. at 489)
(citing Tennessee Wine, 588 U.S. at 534). As the Third
Circuit recently reasoned, “if the system itself if
constitutional, then the core features that define the system
are also constitutional.” Jean-Paul Weg, LLC, 133 F.4th at
239. The majority mimics this pattern. Maj. Op. 22 (quoting
Granholm, 544 U.S. at 489).
If Tennessee Wine meant to create a carveout to its usual
rule that states must produce concrete evidence that
discriminatory regulations serve legitimate interests, it
picked an exceedingly odd way to do so. In that case, the
Court chastised the plaintiffs for “read[ing] far too much into
Granholm’s discussion of the three-tiered model,”
particularly where Granholm did not concern “an essential
feature of a three-tiered scheme.” 588 U.S. at 535. Fresh off
the Court’s warning against overreading its discussions of
the three-tier model, the majority and some of our sister
circuits read Tennessee Wine’s discussion of this model to
covertly create a new step two in the analysis by negative
inference. See B-21 Wines, 36 F.4th at 234 (Wilkinson, J.,
dissenting) (criticizing this practice); Chicago Wine Co. v.
Braun, -- F.4th --, 2025 WL 2218630, at *7–8 (7th Cir. Aug.
5, 2025) (Scudder, J., concurring in the judgment) (same).
Under their reasoning, first we decide if the challenged law
is discriminatory. Then we decide if it is essential to the

34

DAY V. HENRY

three-tier system. Only if we answer “yes” to the former and
“no” to the latter would we reach the second (now third) part
of the Tennessee Wine inquiry and examine whether
concrete evidence shows that the regulation advances
legitimate health or safety interests. See, e.g., Sarasota Wine,
987 F.3d at 1183–84 (skipping “evidentiary weighing” for
physical premise requirements that are essential to the threetier system). As the majority states, “because the physicalpremise requirement is [] an ‘essential feature’ of Arizona’s
three-tier system, we may uphold it without further
determinations as to whether its predominant effect is to
support public health and safety.” Maj. Op. 24.
Rather than read that middle question into the Supreme
Court’s test, I would conduct the typical step-two analysis.
Given the Supreme Court’s flattering descriptions of the
three-tier scheme, e.g. Tennessee Wine, 588 U.S. at 534–35,
a regulation’s central place in such a scheme may be
powerful evidence of its legitimacy. But the three-tier
system is ultimately a means to promote the public welfare,
not an end in itself. The inquiry remains whether, based on
“concrete evidence” rather than “speculation,” a regulation
promotes public health, safety, or another non-protectionist
goal in a way that a nondiscriminatory regulation could not.
Id. at 539–40; accord Anvar v. Dwyer, 82 F.4th 1, 9–11 (1st
Cir. 2023); Block v. Canepa, 74 F.4th 400, 412–14 (6th Cir.
2023).
Of course, the majority is correct that the Twenty-first
Amendment gives states power to regulate alcohol
importation, Maj. Op. 24 n.6, but that power is not
limitless—it must be exercised within the bounds of our
constitutional order. And as Judge Wilkinson has noted,
“some of what the Twenty-first Amendment appears to give,
the Commerce Clause takes away.” B-21 Wines, Inc., 36

DAY V. HENRY

35

F.4th at 230 (Wilkinson, J., dissenting). Granting per se
validity to the essential features of any three-tiered system a
state chooses to adopt cedes more power to the states than
they rightly have. See id. at 235 (explaining that beyond
“vertical quarantine” of producers, wholesalers, and
retailers, “there is no one archetypal three-tier system” and
“each variation must be judged based on its own features”)
(citations omitted).
I also disagree with the majority that Arizona’s
residency-based shipping requirement is an essential feature
of its three-tier system. The majority suggests that “allowing
direct shipment from retailers without in-state premises
functionally eliminates Arizona’s control over the wholesale
tier.” Maj. Op. 24. That is plainly false. Again, as Judge
Wilkinson explained:
Prohibiting wine shipments to consumers
from out-of-state retailers is no more
essential to a three-tiered model than
residency requirements. One can easily
imagine a state maintaining a strict licensing
regime to ensure that the tiers remain
distinctly owned, while treating in-state and
out-of-state retailers alike. . . .
In no way is the three-tiered system
jeopardized
by
a
requirement
of
evenhandedness. Allowing imported wine
does not necessitate allowing unregulated
wine. Nothing stops [the state] from requiring
out-of-state retailers to obtain a state shipping

36

DAY V. HENRY

license and comply with the same conditions
as in-state retailers.
Id. (citations omitted).
Moreover, in thinking about what is an essential feature
of a three-tiered system, we must keep in mind that the
dormant Commerce Clause only prohibits discriminatory
regulations. How can we decide whether a regulation is
essential without considering both sides of the coin—the
favoritism for in-state retailers, coupled with the
discrimination against out-of-state retailers? Even if I
accepted that allowing out-of-state shipments would
undercut Arizona’s three-tier system, I would widen the
aperture to consider whether Arizona’s scheme that allows
direct shipments from in-state but not out-of-state retailers is
an essential part of its three-tier system. After all, it is the
allowance of in-state shipments as much as the disallowance
of out-of-state shipments that creates a dormant Commerce
Clause problem. If Arizona’s allowance for in-state
shipments is not essential to its three-tier system, then its
discrimination is not essential to its three-tier system. It
could eliminate the in-state shipping allowance to cure its
dormant Commerce Clause problem while doing no harm to
its three-tier system.
For all these reasons, the majority errs in joining the
Third, Fourth, and Eighth Circuits in applying a per se
validity rule at step two of the Tennessee Wine analysis.
Taking a hands-off approach to any “essential” feature of a
three-tiered system adopted by a state abdicates our duty to
uphold the Constitution.
Despite adopting a per se validity rule, the majority
proceeds to explain that Arizona’s residency-based shipping

DAY V. HENRY

37

requirement serves public health and safety, Maj. Op. 24–
25, and that the availability of nondiscriminatory alternatives
should be given limited weight in the public-health-andsafety analysis, id. 26. The discussion of these issues is
superfluous to the court’s holding and, therefore, is dicta.
And I decline to address these issues even though they are
not superfluous to my view of the case because the district
court bypassed the requisite evidentiary weighing and relied
on the residency-based shipping regulations’ perceived
centrality to Arizona’s three-tier system. Accordingly, rather
than wading into these fact-intensive issues on an incomplete
record, I would remand for the district court to determine
whether concrete evidence supports Arizona’s contentions
that limiting direct shipment privileges to retailers with instate storefronts and Arizona managers advances the state’s
legitimate health and safety goals, and that
nondiscriminatory regulations would be an inadequate
substitute. See Anvar, 82 F.4th at 11 (remanding for the
district court to conduct the appropriate evidentiary
analysis); Block, 74 F.4th at 414 (same).
For these reasons, I respectfully dissent from Section II
of the majority’s analysis.

