FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
GILA RIVER INDIAN
COMMUNITY, a federally
recognized Indian tribe,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
SAN CARLOS APACHE TRIBE,
Intervenor-Plaintiff Appellee,

No. 23-2743
D.C. No.
4:19-cv-00407SHR

OPINION

v.
DAVID SCHOUBROEK; EVA
SCHOUBROEK; DONNA
SEXTON; MARVIN
SEXTON; PATRICK SEXTON,
Defendants - Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
Scott H. Rash, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted February 5, 2025
Phoenix, Arizona

2

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

Filed July 24, 2025
Before: Richard R. Clifton, Jay S. Bybee, and Bridget S.
Bade, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bybee
SUMMARY *
Water Rights
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s summary judgment in favor of the Gila River
Indian Community (GRIC), and remanded for further
proceedings, in GRIC’s action against two landowners
regarding water rights in the Gila River.
GRIC alleged that defendants’ farms were pumping
groundwater that originated in the Gila River, in derogation
of GRIC’s rights. The panel affirmed the district court’s
finding that jurisdiction was proper in federal court but
reversed its finding that the District of Arizona had prior
exclusive jurisdiction. The panel concluded that the district
court’s 1935 “Globe Equity Decree” among parties with
claims to the Gila River mainstem did not give the district
court prior exclusive jurisdiction over GRIC’s claims against
defendants because the res in the Decree was not the
mainstem water, but rather was the water rights of the parties
to the Decree. The panel further held that the “Gila River
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

3

Adjudication” did not give the Arizona Supreme Court prior
exclusive jurisdiction. Accordingly, the district court had
non-exclusive original jurisdiction to hear this case under 28
U.S.C. § 1362.
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of
defendants’ motion for summary judgment on claim
preclusion, based on GRIC’s 2007 district court complaint
that was dismissed with prejudice. The panel concluded that
the parties were identical in this suit and the prior suit, and
the claims were likely identical, but the 2007 dismissal did
not constitute a final judgment that had preclusive effect
because GRIC only dismissed the 2007 complaint with
prejudice because of a 2005 Agreement that required “Hot
Lands” owners such as defendants to comply with the Upper
Valley Forbearance Agreement, which addressed wells that
allegedly pumped Gila River subflow without Decree rights.
The panel reversed the district court’s grant of GRIC’s
motion for summary judgment and remanded for further
proceedings. The panel held that under Arizona’s complex
water scheme, surface water, such as the flow of the Gila
River, is subject to the doctrines of prior appropriation and
beneficial use, but groundwater is not appropriable and may
be pumped by the landowner. Surface water, however, also
has subflow, which is governed by the same law that governs
the flow of a river. The panel concluded that, under the
burden-shifting framework for proving subflow, GRIC had
shown at most that defendants could be drawing some water
that originated in the Gila River, but it could turn out that
such water did not meet the legal definition of subflow or
that the amount was de minimis. Because the entry of
summary judgment was inappropriate, the panel vacated the
remedy ordered by the district court.

4

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

COUNSEL
Pratik A. Shah (argued), Z.W. Julius Chen, and Merrill C.
Godfrey, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Michael J. Weisbuch, Akin Gump
Strauss Hauer & Feld LLP, San Francisco, California; Javier
G. Ramos, Senior Counsel, Gila River Indian Community
Pima Maricopa Tribe Law Office, Sacaton, Arizona; for
Plaintiff-Appellee.
Joe P. Sparks (argued), The Sparks Law Firm PC,
Scottsdale, Arizona; Laurel A. Herrmann, Jana L. Sutton,
and Alexander B. Ritchie, Attorneys; Bernardo M. Velasco,
Assistant Attorney General; Office of the Attorney General,
San Carlos Apache Tribe, San Carlos, Arizona; for
Intervenor-Plaintiff-Appellee.
Timothy J. Berg (argued), Kevin J. Bonner, Lauren J. Caster,
and Mario C. Vasta, Fennemore Craig PC, Phoenix,
Arizona; for Defendants-Appellants.
Mark A. McGinnis and John B. Weldon Jr., Salmon Lewis
& Weldon PLC, Phoenix, Arizona, for Amicus Curiae Salt
River Project.
Paul F. Eckstein, Shane R. Swindle, Thomas D. Ryerson,
and Janet M. Howe, Perkins Coie LLP, Phoenix, Arizona;
David A. Brown, J. Albert Brown, Garrett Perkins, and Brian
Heiserman, Brown & Brown Law Offices PC, St. Johns,
Arizona; L. William Staudenmaier, Snell & Wilmer LLP,
Phoenix, Arizona; for Amici Curiae Gila Valley Irrigation
District and Arizona Public Service.

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

5

OPINION
BYBEE, Circuit Judge:
The Gila River Indian Community (GRIC) sued two
landowners—the Schoubroek and Sexton families
(collectively, Defendants)—alleging that their farms were
pumping groundwater that originated in the Gila River, in
derogation of GRIC’s rights. The parties, both below and on
appeal, litigated this case at the poles. With respect to
jurisdiction, GRIC argued that the district court has the
exclusive power to hear this case; Defendants claimed that a
special ongoing state court proceeding in Arizona is the
exclusive forum. The parties vigorously contested the
merits, engaging in a protracted battle of experts over
whether Defendants have drawn any water to which GRIC
is entitled. And, as to the remedy, GRIC asked that the wells
at issue be shut down, even if they pump only small amounts
of Gila River water. The district court held that it had
exclusive jurisdiction over this case, granted summary
judgment for GRIC, and ordered the wells capped.
In the end, neither party has it quite right. The district
court has jurisdiction, but it is not exclusive. We conclude
that under Arizona’s complex water scheme, GRIC has
shown at most that Defendants may be drawing some water
that originated in the Gila River, but it may turn out that such
water does not meet the legal definition of subflow or that
the amount is de minimis. As for the remedy, we remand for
further proceedings. For the reasons that follow, we affirm
in part as to jurisdiction, reverse the grant of summary
judgment, and remand for further proceedings.

6

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

I. BACKGROUND
We begin with a brief history of the Gila River and the
tribal rights to its water, then we discuss relevant Arizona
water law and proceedings, and finally we summarize this
case and its procedural history.
A. The Gila River, the Indian Tribes, and the Globe Equity
Decree
Congress established the Gila River Reservation (the
Reservation) in 1859. In re Gen. Adjudication of All Rights
to Use Water in Gila River Sys. and Source (Gila VI), 127
P.3d 882, 885 (Ariz. 2006) (en banc). Between 1876 and
1915, various Executive Orders expanded the borders of the
Reservation to its current size of more than 370,000 acres.
GRIC is a sovereign Indian nation organized and federally
recognized under § 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of
1934, 25 U.S.C. § 5123, and composed of members of the
Pima and Maricopa tribes. Gila River Indian Cmty. v.
Henningson, Durham & Richardson, 626 F.2d 708, 709 (9th
Cir. 1980). GRIC’s constitution and bylaws were approved
by the Secretary of the Interior in 1936, and the United States
holds the Reservation’s land in trust for GRIC. Id.
The Reservation borders the Gila River, which originates
in New Mexico and flows westward across Arizona, fed by
a number of tributaries—the Salt, Verde, Agua Fria, Santa
Cruz, and San Pedro Rivers—which drain much of central
and southern Arizona. The Reservation is located near the
confluence of the Salt and Gila rivers, downstream of
landowners who settled near the Gila River after Congress
established the Reservation.
In 1924, Congress appropriated funds for the San Carlos
Irrigation Project (the Project) which involved the

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

7

construction of a dam on the Gila River and the creation of
the San Carlos Reservoir. Gila VI, 127 P.3d at 885. As part
of the Project, the United States entered into agreements with
landowners along the Gila River. Id. Landowners conveyed
water rights to the United States in exchange for waters from
the Reservoir. Id.
In 1925, the United States filed suit in the District of
Arizona on behalf of itself, GRIC, the San Carlos Apache
Tribe, and other landowners, and named as defendants
individuals, irrigation districts, canal companies, and
corporations. Id. This action, known as the “Globe Equity
Litigation,” sought a comprehensive determination of Gila
River water rights. In it, plaintiffs alleged that they were
“entitled to certain quantities of water from the Gila River
and its tributaries and that the defendants’ claims were ‘in
conflict with or adverse to’ the rights of the tribes and the
projects.” Id. (quoting the 1925 complaint).
The Globe Equity Litigation progressed over the next ten
years as the district court dismissed without prejudice all
defendants with claims exclusively to water from Gila River
tributaries. This left only those parties with claims to the
Gila River mainstem. In 1935, those parties stipulated to the
entry of the “Globe Equity Decree” (the Decree) which
stated that the parties “have concluded and settled all issues
in this cause as between plaintiff and said parties defendant.”
The Decree both defined and settled the claims and rights as
to the parties to the Decree by listing dates of priority, the
amount of water each party is entitled to, and the places
where the parties may divert water. Id. (quoting the Decree).
The District of Arizona has maintained continuing
jurisdiction over the Decree since 1935. Id. at 885 & n.2;
United States v. Gila Valley Irrigation Dist., 117 F.3d 425,

8

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

426 (9th Cir. 1997) (“We have jurisdiction under the
Decree . . . .”).
B. The Gila River Adjudication and Basic Principles of
Arizona Water Law
In 1981, the Arizona Supreme Court consolidated a
“series” of petitions seeking determination of water rights
into a single proceeding—the Gila River Adjudication (the
Adjudication). Gila VI, 127 P.3d at 886; see also United
States v. Sup. Ct. In and For Maricopa Cnty., 697 P.2d 658,
662–665 (Ariz. 1985) (en banc) (discussing the history
leading up to the Adjudication). The Adjudication’s goal is
to determine water use rights in the Gila River Basin. See
Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 45-257 (Arizona statute describing the
Adjudication process). The Adjudication’s orders are
enforced by the director of the Arizona Department of Water
Resources, but the director lacks power over “existing
judgments or decrees.” Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 45-103(B). As of
2016, thirty-five years after it was established, the
Adjudication involves over 82,000 claims and over 38,000
parties.
Defendants’ predecessors-in-interest filed
“Statements of Claimant” with the Arizona Department of
Water Resources in the Adjudication for the wells at issue
here. Those claims have not yet been adjudicated.
Arizona has a “bifurcated system of allocating water
rights” that “differentiates groundwater users from surface
water users.” In re Gen. Adjudication of All Rights to Use
Water in the Gila River Sys. and Source (Gila IV), 9 P.3d
1069, 1073 (Ariz. 2000). “By statute, surface water is
subject to the doctrines of prior appropriation and beneficial
use.” Id. (citing Ariz. Rev. Stat. §§ 45-141(A); 45-251(7)).
“Percolating groundwater, on the other hand, is not
appropriable and may be pumped by the overlying

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

9

landowner, subject to the doctrine of reasonable use . . . .”
Id. (citations omitted).
Although most surface streams flow above ground,
“[t]he boundary between surface water and groundwater is
not at all clear.” Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1073. Surface streams
also have “subflow,” which Arizona treats like surface water
and is subject to prior appropriation. Id. Subflow “is not a
scientific, hydrological term.” Id. In 1931, the Arizona
Supreme Court defined it as “those waters which slowly find
their way through the sand and gravel constituting the bed of
the stream, or the lands under or immediately adjacent to the
stream, and are themselves a part of the surface stream.”
Maricopa Cnty. Mun. Water Conservation Dist. No. 1. v. Sw.
Cotton Co., 4 P.2d 369, 380 (Ariz. 1931) (citation omitted).
“The notion of ‘subflow’ is significant in Arizona law, for it
serves to mark a zone where water pumped from a well so
appreciably diminishes the surface flow of a stream that it
should be governed by the same law that governs the
stream.” In re Gen. Adjudication of All Rights to Use Water
in the Gila River Sys. and Source (Gila III), 989 P.2d 739,
743 (Ariz. 1999) (en banc) (citing Sw. Cotton, 4 P.2d at 380–
81). Subflow matters because it is “probably much greater
in volume in some cases than the water upon the surface,”
given that rivers, including the Gila, may be dry on the
surface. Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1073 (quoting 2 Clesson S.
Kinney, A Treatise on the Law of Irrigation and Water Rights
§ 1161, at 2107 (2d ed. 1912)). “[T]he concept of subflow
serves to protect appropriable surface water rights against
interference caused by the pumping of groundwater.” Id. at
1073–74.
The Arizona Supreme Court acknowledged in Gila II
that most states have abandoned a “bifurcated” water law
system. In re Gen. Adjudication of All Rights to Use Water

10

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

in the Gila River Sys. and Source (Gila II), 857 P.2d 1236,
1240 (Ariz. 1993) (en banc). Arizona, however, has retained
it even though it “rests on a hydrological misconception”
because groundwater and surface water are connected and
pumping groundwater even “distantly within an aquifer”
may diminish surface water, just as pumping subflow itself
would. Gila III, 989 P.2d at 743 (citing Gila II, 857 P.2d at
1243). Nonetheless, in Gila II the Arizona Supreme Court
“reaffirm[ed] Southwest Cotton’s narrow concept of
subflow.” 857 P.2d at 1247. In Gila IV, the Arizona
Supreme Court further defined subflow and created a test for
determining whether a well is pumping subflow. 9 P.3d at
1081–82. This test will be discussed in greater detail in Part
III.C, below.
C. Procedural History
GRIC filed suit in the District of Arizona in 2019 to stop
allegedly unlawful pumping by Defendants. Four wells are
at issue here—three Sexton wells (Sexton 1, 2, and 3) and
one Schoubroek well. GRIC sought an order declaring that
Defendants’ four wells are pumping Gila River subflow
without a Decree right; an order directing the Gila Water
Commissioner to cut off and seal the wells; and an order that
Defendants cease pumping. 1
Initially, Defendants moved to dismiss under Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) and argued that jurisdiction
was proper only in the Adjudication in state court or,
alternatively, that the Court must abstain in deference to the
Adjudication. The district court held that it had jurisdiction
under 28 U.S.C. § 1362, which confers original jurisdiction
The district court deemed this third ground for relief unnecessary. This
is not contested on appeal.
1

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

11

when a matter “arises under the Constitution, laws or treaties
of the United States” and is brought by an Indian Tribe.
“Additionally and alternatively,” the court found jurisdiction
proper under 28 U.S.C. § 1331, the federal question statute.
Importantly, the district court rejected Defendants’ argument
that the Adjudication had exclusive jurisdiction over this
case and instead held that it had exclusive jurisdiction
because “this case involves Defendants’ alleged use of
mainstem water.” The district court concluded that no
abstention doctrine applied.
The parties then moved for summary judgment. GRIC 2
moved for summary judgment on the merits. Defendants
moved for summary judgment on the applicability of the
prior exclusive jurisdiction doctrine, the validity and
enforceability of a forum selection clause, 3 and claim
preclusion grounds.
The district court made four decisions on summary
judgment that are relevant on appeal. First, the district court 4
held that it had prior exclusive jurisdiction to hear this case
and denied Defendants’ first motion. Second, it held that
GRIC’s claims were not precluded and denied Defendants’
second motion. Third, applying Arizona law, it granted
summary judgment to GRIC on the merits, concluding that
Before summary judgment, the San Carlos Apache Tribe (Intervenor or
the Tribe) moved to intervene. The district court granted the Tribe
permissive intervention. The district court noted that the Tribe’s claims
in its Complaint-In-Intervention are identical to GRIC’s complaint and
that the Tribe joined GRIC’s pending motions and pleadings.
3
The district court denied summary judgment as to the forum selection
clause. This is not contested on appeal.
4
District Judge Susan R. Bolton ruled on the 12(b)(1) motion. The case
was transferred to District Judge Scott H. Rash shortly after. Case No.
4:19-cv-407 (D. Ariz.), dkt. 28.
2

12

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

the undisputed facts showed that Defendants’ wells were
pumping subflow from the Gila River. 5 Last, it ordered
GRIC’s requested remedy—that Defendants’ four wells be
shut down in their entirety.
The district court then denied Defendants’ Rule 60 and
reconsideration motions. The district court entered final
judgment in September 2023 and declared that “from at least
2016 to 2021, . . . waters of the Gila River mainstem,
consisting of or including the subflow of the Gila River”
irrigated the Sexton and Schoubroek land “without any
Globe Equity Decree right to such waters.” It ordered the
Gila Water Commissioner to direct Defendants to seal all
four wells.
II. JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
We have appellate jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
“A district court’s determination of subject matter
jurisdiction, including its application of the prior exclusive
jurisdiction rule, is reviewed de novo.”
Applied
Underwriters, Inc. v. Lara, 37 F.4th 579, 587 (9th Cir. 2022)
(citation omitted). We review questions relating to res
judicata and summary judgment de novo. Clark v. Bear
Stearns & Co., Inc., 966 F.2d 1318, 1320 (9th Cir. 1992)
(citations omitted). Last, we review the “grant or denial of
an injunction, as well as the scope of that injunction, for
abuse of discretion.” Internet Specialties W., Inc. v. MilonDiGiorgio Enters., Inc., 559 F.3d 985, 993 (9th Cir. 2009)
(citations omitted).

The district court granted this motion in part. The part denied by the
court is not relevant on appeal.

5

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

III.

13

ANALYSIS

Defendants raise four issues on appeal: whether (1) the
Adjudication court, and not the district court, has exclusive
jurisdiction over GRIC’s claims; (2) GRIC’s claims are
precluded because the same claims were dismissed with
prejudice in a 2007 case; (3) the district court erred in
granting summary judgment for GRIC because there are
disputes of material fact as to whether Defendants’ wells
pump subflow; and (4) the relief ordered by the district
court—shutting off the wells entirely—is overbroad. We
discuss each issue in turn.
A. The District Court’s Jurisdiction
On appeal, the parties disagree over whether a state or
federal forum has exclusive jurisdiction over this case.
GRIC claims that the district court has exclusive jurisdiction;
Defendants claim the Adjudication court has exclusive
jurisdiction. At oral argument, both parties agreed that if
neither forum has exclusive jurisdiction, then this case has
been properly brought in federal court.
Under Article III, the “judicial Power” of the federal
courts “shall extend to all Cases, in Law and Equity, arising
under this Constitution, the Laws of the United States, and
Treaties made . . . under their Authority.” U.S. Const. art.
III, § 2, cl. 1. The significance of this provision is that
“[f]ederal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction. They
possess only that power authorized by Constitution and
statute, which is not to be expanded by judicial decree.”
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of Am., 511 U.S. 375,
377 (1994) (citations omitted). Unlike state courts, which
we presume to be courts of general jurisdiction until proven
otherwise, in federal court “[i]t is to be presumed that a cause
lies outside this limited jurisdiction [in Article III], and the

14

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

burden of establishing the contrary rests upon the party
asserting jurisdiction.” Id. (citations omitted).
GRIC claimed, and the district court agreed, that
exclusive jurisdiction rested in the district court because this
was an action “arising under” the 1935 Globe Equity Decree
that established GRIC’s right to the mainstem water of the
Gila River. They asserted that the district court had original
jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1362 because the action
was “brought by any Indian tribe . . . recognized by the
Secretary of the Interior, wherein the matter in controversy
arises under the Constitution, laws, or treaties of the United
States.”
Defendants answered that they (or their
predecessors-in-interest) were not parties to the Decree and
were not bound by it. Accordingly, the case did not arise
under the laws of the United States. Rather, Defendants said,
water rights are determined by state law, and Arizona had
vested exclusive jurisdiction over determination of water
rights to the Gila River in the Adjudication court.
The clash between the putative exclusive jurisdiction of
a federal court and state court with respect to water rights
invokes the prior exclusive jurisdiction doctrine. That
“doctrine holds that ‘when one court is exercising in rem
jurisdiction over a res, a second court will not assume in rem
jurisdiction over the same res.’” Chapman v. Deutsche Bank
Nat’l Tr. Co., 651 F.3d 1039, 1043 (9th Cir. 2011) (quoting
Marshall v. Marshall, 547 U.S. 293, 311 (2006) (additional
citation omitted)). “The purpose of the rule is the
maintenance of comity between courts; such harmony is
especially compromised by state and federal judicial systems
attempting to assert concurrent control over the res upon
which jurisdiction of each depends.” United States v. One
1985 Cadillac Seville, 866 F.2d 1142, 1145 (9th Cir. 1989)
(citation omitted). The prior jurisdiction doctrine is a

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

15

mandatory rule of judicial abstention: if two suits are in rem
or quasi in rem, “requiring that the court or its officer have
possession or control of the property which is the subject of
the suit in order to proceed with the cause and to grant the
relief sought, the jurisdiction of one court must of necessity
yield to that of the other.” Penn Gen. Cas. Co. v.
Pennsylvania ex rel. Schnader, 294 U.S. 189, 195 (1935);
see also Sexton v. NDEX W., LLC, 713 F.3d 533, 536 n.5
(9th Cir. 2013) (describing the doctrine as “best understood
as a prudential (although mandatory) common law rule of
judicial abstention”).
The parties agree that this doctrine applies to water rights
adjudications, which we have characterized as quasi in rem
or in rem proceedings. State Eng’r of State of Nev. v. S. Fork
Band of Te-Moak Tribe of W. Shoshone Indians of Nev., 339
F.3d 804, 811 (9th Cir. 2003); United States v. Alpine Land
& Reservoir Co., 174 F.3d 1007, 1013 (9th Cir. 1999). In an
ordinary case where federal and state courts each claim
jurisdiction over a res, the general rule is that the court that
first resolves the merits has jurisdiction. See Penn. Gen.
Cas. Co., 294 U.S. at 195 (“[T]he principle, applicable to
both federal and state courts, is established that the court first
assuming jurisdiction over the property may maintain and
exercise that jurisdiction to the exclusion of the other.”
(citation omitted)). What is unusual about this case is that
the parties each claim that a federal or state court has
exclusive jurisdiction not as a matter of first-in-time
jurisdiction over the res—a form of in personam
jurisdiction—but as a matter of exclusive subject matter
jurisdiction. GRIC claims that this is an action under the
Decree, over which the U.S. District Court for the District of
Arizona has exercised jurisdiction since 1935. Defendants
argue that the Arizona Adjudication court has had

16

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

comprehensive jurisdiction to decide Gila River water rights
since 1981. We disagree with both parties.
1. The district court does not have prior exclusive
jurisdiction over GRIC’s claims
The district court, construing the Decree broadly, held
that it “was a final, comprehensive adjudication of the entire
mainstem,” over which the District of Arizona had prior
exclusive jurisdiction. The district court framed this
jurisdictional dispute as hinging on the source of water
involved—claims to mainstem Gila River water must be in
federal court and claims to tributary water must be in the
state court Adjudication. Defendants argue that jurisdiction
instead depends on the parties involved. Although
Defendants do not dispute that GRIC’s claims concern
mainstem water, 6 they contend that the Decree cannot vest
the district court with exclusive jurisdiction over mainstem
Gila River claims because the Decree does not purport to
enjoin or define the rights of non-parties. GRIC responds
that the Decree is enforceable against parties and non-parties
alike.
In Gila VI, the Arizona Supreme Court discussed the
Decree and its relationship to the Adjudication. 127 P.3d

GRIC’s complaint alleges that Defendants are pumping “subflow,”
which is mainstem water. Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1073 (“Because subflow is
considered part of the surface stream it is appropriable as such . . . .”).
Because Defendants present a facial attack on the court’s jurisdiction, we
take these allegations as true. Safe Air for Everyone v. Meyer, 373 F.3d
1035, 1039 (9th Cir. 2004) (“In a facial attack, the challenger asserts that
the allegations contained in a complaint are insufficient on their face to
invoke federal jurisdiction.”). At summary judgment, Defendants
contested whether their wells in fact pump mainstem water.

6

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

17

882. 7 It said, as an initial matter, that “all of [GRIC’s] water
rights, under all theories, to the Gila River mainstem were
placed at issue and resolved in the [Decree]. The Decree
precludes all further claims to the mainstem of the Gila River
by the parties to the Decree.” Id. at 895 (emphasis added).
The Court went on to say:
[T]he Decree was intended to resolve all
claims to the Gila River mainstem. The
United States included as defendants in the
Globe Equity litigation all those with claims
to the mainstem of the Gila River, and the
Decree includes all water rights theories that
the parties could have asserted. Thus, as to
the mainstem of the Gila River, the Decree is
comprehensive.
Id. at 902. Nowhere in Gila VI, however, did the Arizona
Supreme Court interpret the Decree as binding non-parties.
Instead, the Gila VI court held that “non-parties to the
Decree [may] assert its preclusive effect, but only as to
waters in the Gila River mainstem.” Id. at 903.
This holding is consistent with the history leading up to
the Decree, the text of the Decree, and its function. Before
A 2016 law review article provides a helpful summary of the various
interlocutory appeals concerning the Gila River Adjudication (Gila I
through Gila VI). See Rhett Larson & Kelly Kennedy, Bankrupt Rivers,
49
U.C.
Davis
L.
Rev.
1335,
1352–55
(2016),
https://lawreview.law.ucdavis.edu/sites/g/files/dgvnsk15026/files/media
/documents/49-4_Larson_Kennedy.docx.pdf [https://perma.cc/MP3D5Y46]. A 2007 article discusses the Decree and Adjudication in even
greater detail. See generally Joseph M. Feller, The Adjudication That
Ate Arizona Water Law, 49 Ariz. L. Rev. 405 (2007),
https://arizonalawreview.org/feller/ [https://perma.cc/8UWQ-JUKZ].
7

18

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

formalizing the Decree, the United States “entered into
stipulations dismissing without prejudice all defendants who
maintained claims only to waters of the Gila River
tributaries.” Gila VI, 127 P.3d at 885. The remaining parties
stipulated to the Decree, which settled claims to the
mainstem. Id.; see Gila Valley Irrigation Dist. v. United
States (GVID), 118 F.2d 507, 508 (9th Cir. 1941) (noting that
the Decree “determines and regulates the rights of the water
users on the Gila River in New Mexico and Arizona”).
The Decree recites that “the plaintiff and the parties
defendant . . . have concluded and settled all issues in this
cause as between plaintiff and said parties defendant . . . .”
GRIC admits that the Decree is a “consent decree,” and the
Decree refers to itself as a “settlement.” A consent decree is
“essentially a settlement agreement subject to continued
judicial policing.” United States v. Oregon, 913 F.2d 576,
580 (9th Cir. 1990) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). “Without question courts treat consent decrees as
contracts . . . .” Rouser v. White, 825 F.3d 1076, 1081 (9th
Cir. 2016) (quotation marks and citation omitted).
The district court understood the res in the Decree to be
the mainstem water. According to the district court, because
the Decree meted out the entirety of the mainstem, it
functioned as an in rem proceeding that settled Decree rights
against the world. We think this overreads the Decree. The
Decree does not mince words—it binds “the parties
defendant whose claims and rights have been presented by
answer or stipulation.” The res here is not the entire
mainstem; it is the water rights of the parties to the Decree.
That makes the Decree proceedings an action against a finite
number of participants and settles water rights between those
parties only. Such a proceeding is better described as a quasi
in rem proceeding. See Hanson v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235,

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

19

246 n.12 (1958) (“A judgment in rem affects the interests of
all persons in designated property. A judgment quasi in rem
affects the interests of particular persons in designated
property.”); see also S. Fork Band of Te-Moak Tribe, 339
F.3d at 811 (concluding an action was quasi in rem because
“it is the parties’ interests in the property that serve as the
basis for the jurisdiction” (alterations omitted)). Although
the Decree may have settled the most important claims to
water from the Gila River mainstem, it did not settle all
claims once and for all.
GRIC relies on two of our cases to support its argument
that prior exclusive jurisdiction rests in the district court.
First, it analogizes this case to Alpine Land & Reservoir Co.,
174 F.3d 1007. In Alpine, a Nevada county filed suit in state
court to challenge the Nevada State Engineer’s grant of a
water rights transfer application. Id. at 1009. The District
of Nevada enjoined the state court proceeding because it
“interfered” with its exclusive jurisdiction to hear water
rights disputes based on two decrees entered years earlier in
the district court. Id. at 1009–10. We held that the district
court had exclusive jurisdiction over actions arising under
those decrees. Id. at 1012–13.
GRIC overreads Alpine.
We found exclusive
jurisdiction in the district court in that case because we
understood the Alpine Decree as “expressly reserv[ing]
appellate jurisdiction over decisions of the [Nevada] State
Engineer” in federal court. Id. at 1013. We “inferred”
exclusivity because “it would make no sense for the district
court to retain jurisdiction and apply its own judgment to
future conduct contemplated by the judgment, yet have a
state court construing what the federal court meant in the
judgment.” Id. (quoting Flanagan v. Arnaiz, 143 F.3d 540,
545 (9th Cir. 1998)). But we also recognized “the possibility

20

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

that in some circumstances, the words, context, or
subsequent order of the federal court might show that
retention of jurisdiction was not intended to be exclusive.”
Id. (quoting Flanagan, 143 F.3d at 545). This is one such
case. The difference between Alpine and this suit is that the
Decree did not “contemplate[]” non-parties, and in the
underlying litigation, the district court only exercised
jurisdiction over the mainstem water rights of parties. See
id. at 1013–14. In other words, as we have explained, the
proceedings here were quasi in rem. In contrast, the
underlying proceedings in Alpine were in rem, thus granting
“the first court to gain jurisdiction over [the]
res . . . exclusive jurisdiction over an action involving that
res.” Id. at 1013 (citations omitted).
Second, GRIC cites Sandpiper Village Condominium
Association, Inc. v. Louisiana-Pacific Corp., 428 F.3d 831
(9th Cir. 2005), and argues that the district court has power,
under the All Writs Act, to “protect its judgment” from
threats by parties and non-parties alike. Id. at 841 & n.14.
We do not think Sandpiper goes so far. The Sandpiper
settlement included a provision that “retain[ed] jurisdiction
in the district court for the purpose of overseeing and
enforcing the prior judgment.” Id. at 841. But the settlement
conferred “exclusive and continuing jurisdiction over the
Actions and Parties, including all members of the Class, the
administration and enforcement of the settlement, and the
benefits to the Class . . . .” Id. at 835 (quoting the settlement
agreement and order). It is true that the U.S. Supreme Court
has said, in dicta, that the All Writs Act “extends, under
appropriate circumstances, to persons who, though not
parties to the original action or engaged in wrongdoing, are
in a position to frustrate the implementation of a court order
or the proper administration of justice.” United States v. N.Y.

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

21

Tel. Co., 434 U.S. 159, 174 (1977) (citations omitted). But
we do not discern anything in this action that would frustrate
the Decree. Defendants do not claim a superior right to
water from the Gila River; they simply claim that they are
not pumping any water from the Gila River. This is a
straightforward, although factually complex, case over water
rights under Arizona’s bifurcated system.
Whatever
“appropriate circumstances” might justify a district court
protecting its prior order through an injunction, we will not
convert the Decree into an in rem proceeding for the
purposes of establishing the district court’s jurisdiction.
GRIC’s remaining arguments for exclusivity largely
track two additional points made by the district court. The
district court concluded that the scarcity of water in Arizona
requires certainty when determining water rights and
allowing “non-parties to the Decree to assert new mainstem
claims would threaten the certainty on which thousands of
Gila River water users have relied for nearly 90 years.” It
also observed that, after many years, the Adjudication court
has not resolved these claims and is proceeding slowly.
Neither argument persuades us that the district court has
exclusive jurisdiction in this case. The scarcity of water and
slow pace of the Adjudication court may be reasons to vest
jurisdiction in some court, but neither provides a basis for
declaring that exclusive jurisdiction exists in federal court.
Finally, the Intervenor argues that because Defendants
(through their predecessors-in-interest) were not using water
at the time of the Decree, the United States had no reason to
name them as a party to the Decree. Without exclusive
federal jurisdiction, Intervenor argues, this omission would
allow post-Decree pumpers like Defendants to evade the
Decree’s determinations as to mainstem water. We disagree.
We acknowledge that the Decree is not irrelevant here. In

22

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

fact, the findings made in that proceeding with respect to
GRIC’s prior appropriation of Gila River water are not
challenged here. But the Decree itself is not at the heart of
this case because Defendants are not claiming that they have
a prior right to water from the Gila River; their claim is based
on groundwater pumped from under their lands. That is not
a Decree-based claim. Thus, the district court cannot purport
to establish prior exclusive jurisdiction over Defendants
when the Decree binds “parties defendant,” which cannot
possibly include someone who was not even pumping
groundwater when the Decree came into effect. If
Defendants are pumping water in derogation of GRIC’s
Decree rights, then GRIC’s recourse is to file a suit to
enforce its priority, not to try to enforce a judgment that did
not include Defendants.
The Decree’s limited scope does not confer exclusive
jurisdiction in federal court over non-party defendants like
the Sextons and Schoubroeks.
2. The Adjudication court does not have prior exclusive
jurisdiction over GRIC’s claims
Defendants argue that the Adjudication court has
exclusive jurisdiction over their claims because it was the
“first proceeding to encompass Defendants’ water uses.”
Defendants point to a 2007 judgment from the Arizona
Superior Court that states that disputes “involving nonparties
to the Globe Equity Decree regarding its enforcement shall
be subject to the jurisdiction of the Gila River Adjudication
Court.” This single paragraph from a 2007 judgment
approving a 2005 settlement agreement in an Arizona trial
court is not enough to confer exclusive jurisdiction in the
Adjudication court. As the district court noted, that
judgment is not binding here.

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

23

Even if the Adjudication court is an acceptable forum,
Defendants cannot point to anything that confers exclusive
jurisdiction there. Importantly, there is no evidence that the
Adjudication court has ever exercised jurisdiction over
Defendants’ claims. Although Defendants filed Statements
of Claimants in the Adjudication in 1985, in the ensuing
forty years the Adjudication court has made no progress in
adjudicating those claims. The bare filing of a claim in that
proceeding is no guarantee that the Adjudication court will
exercise jurisdiction over it. Until that court actually asserts
jurisdiction over Defendants’ claims, we will not consider
whether such jurisdiction is exclusive of the federal courts.
Defendants’ actions so far are akin to taking a number at the
DMV. Until that number is called, you have not been served,
and at best are in line potentially to be served, so long as you
are present when your number finally comes up. The same
is true here. Defendants took a number when they filed a
Statement of Claimant, but the Adjudication has not yet
called their number and has not indicated it will do so
anytime soon. 8
The question of the Adjudication’s jurisdiction over the Gila River itself
(apart from its tributaries) seems to be an open one in the Adjudication.
A Special Master Report in the Adjudication recently said that
stakeholders disagree about whether the Adjudication court is bound by
the Decree and the extent to which the Adjudication court has jurisdiction
in certain parts of the Gila River watershed. Report of the Special Master
on Amendments to the Watershed Boundary Map and Sequencing of
Future Hydrographic Survey Report Development, Maricopa County
Superior Court, Cases Nos. W-1 through W-4, and Apache County
Superior Court, Case No. CV 6417, at 14 (March 25, 2024) (Zendri,
S.M.)
(“Special
Master
Report”),
https://www.superiorcourt.maricopa.gov/SuperiorCourt/GeneralStream
Adjudication/docs/W-1-W-2-W-3-W-4-CV6417-Rep-of-SM-3-2524.pdf [https://perma.cc/CJ32-QRN2].
8

24

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

Defendants have not shown that the Adjudication has
exclusive jurisdiction over their claims.
3. The district court has non-exclusive jurisdiction to
hear this case
Before concluding it had exclusive jurisdiction over this
dispute, the district court otherwise assured itself of its
jurisdiction. At oral argument on appeal, both parties agreed
that if we held that neither forum had prior exclusive
jurisdiction, jurisdiction would be proper in federal court.
We agree.
GRIC’s complaint asserted five bases for jurisdiction:
(1) 28 U.S.C. § 1362; (2) 28 U.S.C. § 1331; (3) “continuing
jurisdiction over the interpretation, administration and
enforcement of the Decree”; (4) inherent “jurisdiction to
manage its proceedings, vindicate its authority, and
effectuate its decrees, including the Decree”; and
(5) “continuing jurisdiction over all uses of the waters of the
mainstem of the Gila River.”
For the reasons we discussed above in Part III.A.1, the
alleged non-statutory grounds for jurisdiction are unavailing
because the Decree, on its face, does not confer jurisdiction
over Defendants. The statutory grounds for jurisdiction
merit further discussion, much of which was covered by the
district court’s 2020 jurisdictional order.
Section 1362 provides that “[t]he district courts shall
have original jurisdiction of all civil actions, brought by any
Indian tribe or band with a governing body duly recognized
by the Secretary of the Interior, wherein the matter in
controversy arises under the Constitution, laws, or treaties of
the United States.” When Congress enacted § 1362 in 1966,
one “primary purpose” was to “give tribes the right to sue on

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

25

their own behalf in any controversy involving tribal property
or matters of tribal sovereignty where the United States
declines to do so on a tribe’s behalf as trustee.” Hous. Auth.
of City of Seattle v. Wash., Dep’t of Revenue, 629 F.2d 1307,
1312 (9th Cir. 1980) (citing Henningson, 626 F.2d 708)
(internal quotation marks and additional citations omitted).
Before § 1362 existed, tribes had to rely on the United States
to sue on their behalf under 25 U.S.C. § 175. Otherwise,
they were relegated to state court. See Arizona v. San Carlos
Apache Tribe of Ariz., 463 U.S. 545, 559 n.10 (1983). Thus,
§ 1362 served “to open the federal courts to the kind of
claims that could have been brought by the United States as
trustee, but for whatever reason were not so brought.” Moe
v. Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of Flathead
Rsrv., 425 U.S. 463, 472 (1976).
While the United States can sue on behalf of tribes in “all
suits at law and in equity” under § 175, § 1362 (as well as
§ 1331, the statute conferring “federal question”
jurisdiction) is limited to cases “aris[ing] under” federal law.
In Henningson, we commented that cases interpreting
§ 1362 had been “less than clear as to how far its
jurisdictional reach extends.” 9 626 F.2d at 712. After
surveying the relevant caselaw and considering
congressional intent, we determined that Congress did not
intend § 1362 to allow tribes to bring actions “in every
instance” where the United States could do so under § 175.
Id. at 714. That is because the language of § 1362 is
“identical” to § 1331, and “Congress could easily have
9
The Supreme Court has only helped us so much, explaining that “it
would appear that Congress contemplated that a tribe’s access to federal
court to litigate a matter arising ‘under the Constitution, laws, or treaties’
would be at least in some respects as broad as that of the United States
suing as the tribe’s trustee.” Moe, 425 U.S. at 473.

26

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

provided that Indian tribes could bring under section 1362
any action which the United States could bring under section
175, but Congress did not do so.” Id. We said that the
“common thread running through” cases properly brought
under § 1362 “is that they all involved possessory rights of
the tribes to tribal lands.” Id. at 714; see Fort Mojave Tribe
v. Lafollette, 478 F.2d 1016, 1018 (9th Cir. 1973) (“Congress
intended by § 1362 to authorize an Indian tribe to bring suit
in federal court to protect its federally derived property
rights in those situations where the United States declines to
act.” (citations omitted)).
For this reason, jurisdiction in this case is proper in
federal court under § 1362. As Defendants acknowledge, the
United States owns the reserved land (and appurtenant water
rights) on behalf of GRIC. Henningson, 626 F.2d at 709
(“Fee title to the land on the Gila River Indian Reservation
is held by the United States in trust for the Tribe.”). That
means that the United States could have (and has in the past)
sued to protect these water rights in federal court under 25
U.S.C. § 175. See Moe, 425 U.S. at 472; In re Gen.
Adjudication of All Rights to Use Water in Gila River Sys.
and Source (Gila V), 35 P.3d 68, 72 (Ariz. 2001) (en banc)
(noting that when the government establishes an Indian
reservation it “acquires a reserved right in unappropriated
water which vests on the date of the reservation and is
superior to the rights of future appropriators”) (quoting
Cappaert v. United States, 426 U.S. 128, 138 (1976)). 10 This
10
Indeed, the United States has brought such suits before in the District
of Arizona, suing a landowner “on its own behalf and on behalf of Indian
tribes [that] have rights to the natural flow of the river.” See United
States v. Smith, 625 F.2d 278, 279 (9th Cir. 1980). Smith mirrors this
case in key respects—it concerned a defendant-landowner who bought
land after the Decree went into effect “but obtained no Gila River water

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

27

case concerns possessory rights to water, which Henningson
placed well within the ambit of § 1362. 11
***
We therefore reverse the district court’s determination
that it had prior exclusive jurisdiction over this suit but
affirm its determination that it otherwise had original
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1362, and that the
Adjudication court does not have prior exclusive jurisdiction
here.
B. Claim Preclusion
Defendants argue that a 2007 complaint that was
dismissed with prejudice precludes GRIC from suing here.
GRIC responds that its claims should not be precluded, and
even if they are, the Intervenor is not precluded from
bringing this suit.
1. Relevant history
Like the rest of this case, the history is convoluted. In
1982, GRIC filed a complaint in the District of Arizona
alleging that thousands of landowners, including
Defendants’ predecessors-in-interest, were unlawfully
pumping Gila River subflow in derogation of GRIC’s
Decree rights. In 1990, the district court stayed all claims,
and then, following the Arizona Supreme Court’s 2000
decision in Gila IV, lifted the stay and directed GRIC to file
a new complaint. In 2001, GRIC did so and brought the
same allegations as it did in 1982.
rights” and then began to pump water from an underground well near the
Gila River. Id.
11
Because jurisdiction is proper in federal court under § 1362, we need
not consider whether § 1331 also confers jurisdiction.

28

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

In 2005, the parties agreed to a settlement (the 2005
Agreement), which included the Upper Valley Forbearance
Agreement (UVFA). The UVFA addressed wells that
allegedly pumped Gila River subflow without Decree rights
(known as “Hot Lands”). The UVFA gave Hot Lands
holders six months to attempt to obtain Decree rights
through a “sever-and-transfer” process (the details of which
are not important here). If they applied to do so and
succeeded, the problem was resolved. If they were
unsuccessful, the Hot Lands would be deemed “Special Hot
Lands,” and those landholders would not face further legal
action by parties to the UVFA so long as they pumped no
more than four acre-feet of water per year. For those Hot
Lands holders that did not try to obtain Decree rights and
continued to pump water, the UVFA allowed GRIC to sue to
stop pumping. As the district court explained, GRIC “agreed
it would not sue to stop pumping when landowners at least
tried to obtain Decree rights, and thus acquired Special Hot
Lands status, but it made no such promise with respect to
Hot Lands owners who did not at least try to obtain Decree
rights.”
The 2005 Agreement stated that GRIC would refile an
identical complaint to the one filed in 2001 (and 1982),
including Defendants’ predecessors-in-interest, who did not
obtain Special Hot Lands status. In 2007, the District of
Arizona dismissed the 2001 complaint without prejudice.
GRIC then filed an identical complaint and then moved to
dismiss that complaint with prejudice. The district court
granted this dismissal with prejudice. 12
The parties do not dispute that the Intervenor was not a plaintiff in this
action and that its status as an intervenor in this case is not affected by
Defendants’ claim preclusion argument.

12

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

29

2. Preclusion analysis
Claim preclusion “bars litigation in a subsequent action
of any claims that were raised or could have been raised in
the prior action.” Owens v. Kaiser Found. Health Plan, Inc.,
244 F.3d 708, 713 (9th Cir. 2001) (quoting W. Radio Servs.
Co. v. Glickman, 123 F.3d 1189, 1192 (9th Cir. 1997)). “The
doctrine is applicable whenever there is (1) an identity of
claims, (2) a final judgment on the merits, and (3) identity or
privity between parties.” Id. (quotation marks and citation
omitted).
Defendants argue that the 2007 dismissal with prejudice
precludes GRIC’s suit. GRIC responds that this suit is not
precluded because the parties to the settlement “clearly
intended to preserve [GRIC’s] ability to enforce Decree
rights against actors like Defendants.” Further, GRIC points
out that even if its claims are precluded, the Intervenor’s
claims are not.
Two of the three claim preclusion criteria are likely
satisfied. The parties here are identical, and the claims are
likely identical. 13 The real issue then is the second

GRIC argues that the claims cannot be identical because the lawsuit
here concerns pumping that occurred after 2016, and a 2007 dismissal
cannot preclude later conduct. See Frank v. United Airlines, Inc., 216
F.3d 845, 851 (9th Cir. 2000) (“A claim arising after the date of an earlier
judgment is not barred, even if it arises out of a continuing course of
conduct that provided the basis for the earlier claim.”). GRIC does not
expand on this argument and relegates it to a footnote. Even if we were
to consider this argument despite it being mentioned “only in passing,”
United States ex rel. Kelly v. Serco, Inc., 846 F.3d 325, 335 (9th Cir.
2017), the conduct GRIC complains of in this suit is not new; GRIC
became aware of this pumping as early as 1982 and it was the subject of
its 1982, 2001, and 2005 complaints in the prior action.
13

30

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

element—whether the 2007 dismissal constituted a final
judgment that has preclusive effect here.
The district court acknowledged that under different
circumstances, the 2007 dismissal could have proven the
second element. But the district court was not satisfied; it
insisted that the 2007 dismissal must “be read in context.”
GRIC only dismissed the 2007 Complaint with prejudice
because of the 2005 Agreement. 14 That agreement required
that Hot Lands owners comply with the UVFA. Defendants
failed to do so—they did not attempt to obtain Decree rights
and instead continued pumping water—so they never
acquired Special Hot Lands status. The district court
observed that granting Defendants’ claim preclusion
argument would allow them to now use the 2007 dismissal
to insulate themselves from this litigation as if they had
Special Hot Lands status. Although GRIC may be precluded
from filing this suit against a Special Hot Lands owner (those
who did comply with the terms of the UVFA), it is not clear
that it is precluded from suing Hot Lands owners who failed
to comply with the UVFA. The district court thus held that
GRIC’s suit was not barred because precluding it would be
“contrary to the text and purpose of the UVFA.” See
Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 28 (1982)
(recognizing an exception to issue preclusion “because of the
potential adverse impact of the determination on the public
interest”).
We agree with the district court’s conclusion that GRIC
should not be precluded from bringing suit here. We do not
GRIC moved to dismiss pursuant to the Arizona Water Settlements
Act, Pub. L. No. 108-451 § 207(c)(1)(G), 118 Stat. 3478 (Dec. 10, 2004),
which approved and implemented the 2005 Agreement, including the
UVFA.
14

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

31

understand why Defendants should receive the preclusive
benefits of the UVFA without subjecting themselves to the
Hot Lands requirements. See Wojciechowski v. Kohlberg
Ventures, LLC, 923 F.3d 685, 689 (9th Cir. 2019) (“We look
to the intent of the settling parties to determine the preclusive
effect of a dismissal with prejudice entered in accordance
with a settlement agreement, rather than to general principles
of claim preclusion.”). The district court had good reason to
conclude that this is a “special circumstance[]” where “the
potential adverse impact of the determination on the public
interest” counsels against precluding GRIC’s suit. See
Restatement (Second) of Judgments § 28(5)(a); id.
§ 26(1)(e) (stating that claim preclusion need not extinguish
a second claim “[f]or reasons of substantive policy . . .
involving a continuing or recurrent wrong”); id. § 26(1)(f)
(acknowledging claim preclusion may not apply when “[i]t
is clearly and convincingly shown that the policies favoring
preclusion of a second action are overcome for an
extraordinary reason”).
Because of the unique procedural history here, we
believe this case qualifies for a prudential exception to claim
preclusion. This holding is necessarily limited to these facts
and these parties. We affirm the district court’s denial of
Defendants’ motion for summary judgment on claim
preclusion grounds.
C. Summary Judgment
We proceed to the merits. On summary judgment we
“view the evidence in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party, determine whether there are any issues of
material fact, and decide whether the district court correctly
applied the relevant substantive law.” Animal Legal Def.

32

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

Fund v. FDA, 836 F.3d 987, 989 (9th Cir. 2016) (citation
omitted).
Before evaluating the parties’ arguments and discussing
the evidence, we briefly review the relevant principles of
Arizona water law, including its burden-shifting rubric.
1. Arizona water law
We summarized Arizona water law in Part I.B. We
repeat here those basic principles and then provide additional
information relevant to the summary judgment
determination.
Surface water, such as the flow of the Gila River, is
subject to the doctrines of prior appropriation and beneficial
use. Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1073 (citing Ariz. Rev. Stat. §§ 45–
141(A), 45–251(7)). “[O]n the other hand, [groundwater] is
not appropriable and may be pumped by the overlying
landowner.” Id. (citations omitted). While the categories of
“surface water” and percolating “groundwater” are easy
enough to define in theory, “[t]he boundary between surface
water and groundwater is not at all clear.” Id. Most surface
water “not only flow[s] above the ground but also ha[s]
‘subflow,’” and where pumping groundwater “appreciably
diminishes the surface flow of a stream . . . it should be
governed by the same law that governs the stream.” Id.
(internal quotation marks and citations omitted). 15 Arizona
courts have candidly conceded that subflow is “a purely
Courts have “struggled” with Arizona’s bifurcated system and most
states have “revised their water laws to provide for unitary management
of hydraulically connected underground and surface water.” United
States v. Gila Valley Irrigation Dist., No. CV31-59, 2005 WL 8161178,
at *2–3 (D. Ariz. Mar. 29, 2005) (quoting Gila II, 857 P.2d at 1240)
(Bolton, J.) (providing helpful history and background on subflow and
Arizona water law).
15

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

33

legal, not scientific, term” and “defining its boundaries is not
only difficult at best but also turns ultimately on resolution
of factual questions.” Id. at 1076.
Arizona uses two different methods for determining
whether water pumped from a below-ground well is
appropriable subflow or non-appropriable groundwater. A
plaintiff can prove that a well is pumping “subflow”—a
hydraulic connection that means that water, when drawn off,
“tend[s] to diminish appreciably and directly the flow of the
surface stream.” Sw. Cotton, 4 P.2d at 380; see Gila II, 857
P.2d at 1247 (reaffirming Southwest Cotton’s understanding
of subflow). Subflow cannot be determined “based solely
on its geographic reach or on some arbitrary distance from a
streambed” but “depends on whether the well is pumping
water that is more closely associated with the stream than
with the surrounding alluvium, and whether drawing off the
subsurface water tends to diminish appreciably and directly
the flow of the surface stream.” Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1080
(internal quotation marks, alterations, emphasis, and
citations omitted). To determine as much, courts compare
“such characteristics as elevation, gradient, and perhaps
chemical makeup,” and “[f]low direction.” Gila II, 857 P.2d
at 1246.
In Gila IV, the Arizona Supreme Court set out the
parameters of a second option—instead of proving that the
well pumps subflow, a plaintiff could instead prove that the
well was “located within the lateral limits of the subflow
zone.” 9 P.3d at 1083. This “subflow zone” is defined as
the “saturated floodplain Holocene alluvium.” Id. at 1081. 16
Gila III mentioned the word “zone” for the first time—it described
subflow as “significant in Arizona law, for it serves to mark a zone where
water pumped from a well so appreciably diminishes the surface flow of
16

34

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

The subflow zone refers to an indirect connection—an area
“beneath and adjacent to” the river that is connected to the
stream, and separated by a layer (the floodplain alluvium)
which, when saturated by water from the river, eventually
feeds the aquifer which is being pumped. Id. at 1076–83.
Gila IV went on to endorse a set of criteria for determining
the subflow zone:
1. A subflow zone is adjacent to and beneath
a perennial or intermittent stream and not an
ephemeral stream.
2. There must be a hydraulic connection to
the stream from the saturated subflow zone.
3. Even though there may be a hydraulic
connection between the stream and its
floodplain alluvium to an adjacent tributary
aquifer or basin-fill aquifer, neither of the
latter two or any part of them may be part of
the subflow zone.
4. That part of the floodplain alluvium which
qualifies as a subflow, beneath and adjacent
to the stream, must be that part of the
geologic unit where the flow direction, the
water level elevations, the gradations of the
water level elevations and the chemical
composition of the water in that particular
reach of the stream are substantially the same
as the water level, elevation and gradient of
the stream.
a stream that it should be governed by the same law that governs the
stream.” 989 P.2d at 743 (citing Sw. Cotton, 4 P.2d at 380–81).

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

35

5. That part of the floodplain alluvium which
qualifies as a subflow zone must also be
where the pressure of side recharge from
adjacent tributary aquifers or basin fill is so
reduced that it has no significant effect on the
flow direction of the floodplain alluvium.
6. Riparian vegetation may be useful in
marking the lateral limits of the subflow
zone, particularly where there is observable
seasonal and/or diurnal variations in stream
flow caused by transpiration. However,
riparian vegetation on alluvium of a tributary
aquifer or basin fill cannot extend the limits
of the subflow zone outside of the lateral
limits of the saturated floodplain Holocene
alluvium.
Id. at 1077 (cleaned up); see id. at 1081. As technical as
these guidelines appear, they are not “hard and fast” rules.
Id. at 1080.
2. Proving subflow: The burden-shifting framework
“[A] well pumping underground water is presumed
initially to be pumping percolating groundwater, not
appropriable subflow.” Id. at 1082. The initial burden—
step one—is on the plaintiff to show by clear and convincing
evidence that the well is in the subflow zone or otherwise
pumps subflow. Id. If a plaintiff does so, at step two, “[t]he
burden then shifts to the well owner to show that a well is
either outside the subflow zone or is not pumping subflow.”
Id.
Defendants quibble with this burden-shifting framework
and argue that only the Arizona Department of Water

36

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

Resources (DWR)—and not a plaintiff, like GRIC—can
marshal evidence to meet the initial “clear and convincing”
burden. They point to a statement in Gila IV that says the
burden only shifts to the landowner once “DWR determines
and establishes that a well is in the subflow zone . . . or that
it is pumping subflow . . . .” Id. at 1082. But the Arizona
Supreme Court decided Gila IV in the context of the
Adjudication, in which the rules delegate the initial subflow
determination to DWR. Id. at 1072 (explaining that the Gila
IV court “granted interlocutory review in the Gila River
general stream adjudication”).
Contrary to Defendants’ suggestion, nothing in Gila IV
says that DWR is the only party capable of making this initial
showing. Indeed, in Southwest Cotton, the seminal 1931
subflow case, the Arizona Supreme Court said: “In the first
place, the presumption is that underground waters are
percolating in their nature. He who asserts that they are not
must prove his assertion affirmatively by clear and
convincing evidence.” 4 P.2d at 376 (emphasis added)
(citations omitted). The “he” here is GRIC. Requiring DWR
to make the initial subflow showing would force GRIC to
wait for a state agency to perform a subflow analysis that
could take years or decades to arrive. Because neither this
court nor the district court can order that analysis, we agree
with the district court that GRIC has the burden to show by
clear and convincing evidence that the wells at issue are in
the subflow zone or pump subflow. That evidence may, but
need not, include a determination by DWR.
3. GRIC’s initial burden
GRIC has both the burden of proceeding and the burden
of proof. To establish its prima facie case, GRIC must prove
by clear and convincing evidence that the wells at issue—

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

37

Sexton 1, 2, and 3, and the Schoubroek Well—are either
pumping subflow or are within the subflow zone. Gila IV, 9
P.3d at 1082.
The parties each secured experts to survey the four wells
and assess whether any well was in the subflow zone or was
pumping subflow from the Gila River. Defendants hired
Clear Creek Associates (CCA) which “concluded that some
of the water pumped from” three of the four wells (not
Sexton 3) originated in the Gila River. 17
For the district court, CCA’s bottom-line conclusion was
sufficient to show that there was no dispute of material fact
whether three of the wells pumped some water from the Gila
River, water the district court understood to be subflow. We
will begin by discussing the evidence concerning whether
these wells—Sexton 1, Sexton 2, and the Schoubroek
Well—pump subflow. We will then consider whether all
four wells are within the subflow zone.
Sexton 1, Sexton 2, and Schoubroek. As we noted above,
Defendants’ expert, CCA, concluded that these “wells
pumped low percentages of Gila River water.” CCA
estimated that, of the water pumped by Defendants’ wells,
Sexton 1 and 2 pumped between 0.8 and 3.5% “water
derived from the Gila River” and the Schoubroek Well
pumped between 0.3 and 0.8% “Gila River water.” To arrive
at this conclusion, CCA created a “model” to “simulate
subsurface water flow” that it ran for “100 simulated years.”
It sought to “predict” the mix of three sources of subsurface
GRIC’s expert, Dr. Peter Mock, receives little attention on appeal.
Defendants mention him in only one paragraph of their opening brief;
GRIC does not mention him at all. Defendants’ experts reviewed Dr.
Mock’s reports and specifically disagreed with certain assumptions and
conclusions he made.

17

38

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

water in the area of these wells—water entering the aquifer
directly from the Gila River, water entering as tributary
groundwater, and agricultural recharge. As CCA explained,
the model included two layers. Layer 1 was the younger
alluvium, “a 40[-] to 100-foot-thick alluvial unit which
parallels the Gila River and also fills the larger tributary
washes which join the Gila River.” Layer 2 was the
“groundwater below the younger alluvium.” Each layer
consisted of thousands of “cells” which were then assigned
a value of “1” for “water originating from the Gila River” or
“underground water in the shallow alluvium,” and a “0” for
“all water from other sources.” Those other sources included
“[g]roundwater derived from leakage of water from
agricultural irrigation” and “groundwater below the younger
alluvium.” The model then simulated how these “1s” and
“0s” mixed together over time, resulting “in estimations of
the percentage of water pumped from the four wells in
question that originated from the Gila River.”
Three of the wells were found to pump low percentages
of “water derived from the Gila River”—Sexton 1 (2.64%),
Sexton 2 (2.10%), and the Schoubroek Well (0.56%). 18 CCA
qualified this finding, explaining that these percentages “do
not demonstrate that the wells directly deplete the river
because the ‘river water’ that is tracked by the CCA model
was water that had already infiltrated the subsurface around
the wells, not necessarily as a result of pumping.” CCA did
not “specifically analyze” subflow because it is a legal term,
not a hydrogeologic one. Based on the model’s assumptions,
These percentages are the “average[s]” reported by CCA. Although
the report also refers to this water as “river water,” CCA’s model and its
expert’s declaration make clear that these percentages represent water
“derived” from the Gila River. Therefore, we will refer to this water as
Gila River-derived water.

18

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

39

CCA concluded that the highest “potential percentage of
river water that may be pumped by the wells” was no more
than 3.5% for Sexton 1 and 2, and 0.8% for the Schoubroek
Well.
For the district court, “[b]ecause Defendants’ own expert
reports determined [these three wells] are pumping
subflow,” GRIC had satisfied its burden to prove subflow
pumping (as to these three wells) by clear and convincing
evidence at step one. Defendants disagree. They argue that
because CCA did not identify subflow these percentages
cannot provide clear and convincing evidence that the wells
are pumping subflow from the Gila River. GRIC responds
that because CCA concluded that Defendants’ wells pump
water “directly” from the Gila River, these wells must be
pumping subflow in derogation of their Decree rights.
For water to qualify as subflow, it must “diminish
appreciably and directly the flow of the surface stream.” Sw.
Cotton, 4 P.2d at 380 (emphasis added). If it does, it is
subflow, but “if it does not, then, although it may originally
come from the waters of such stream, it is not, strictly
speaking, a part thereof, but is subject to the rules applying
to percolating waters.” Id. at 381. In Gila IV, the Arizona
Supreme Court cautioned that subflow is a “narrow
concept.” 9 P.3d 1079 (quoting Gila II, 857 P.2d at 1245).
In Gila II, it recommended a fact-specific comparison of
characteristics such as elevation, gradient, chemical makeup,
and flow direction to determine whether a well pumps
subflow. 857 P.2d at 1246.
CCA’s model did not attempt to conduct the inquiry that
Gila IV requires, nor did its findings show that these wells
meet the baseline requirement that Southwest Cotton sets
out: that the wells are “appreciably” and “directly”

40

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

diminishing the flow of the Gila River. For starters, it is a
model that used “computer code” to “simulate[] the mixing”
of various water sources. At best, it was a “prediction[]” of
what water is being pumped by the wells. While CCA
concluded that three of the wells pumped “Gila Riverderived water,” CCA did not conclude, and likely could not
conclude based on its model, that the water pumped by these
wells “diminishes” the Gila River, let alone appreciably so.
Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1073. Nothing in Gila IV tells us that water
that at some point came from Gila River is automatically
subflow. Further, a 100-year simulation run that relied on
hydrological predictions about how water mixed over time
is not clear and convincing evidence that a well is pumping
water that directly diminishes the River. See Sw. Cotton, 4
P.2d at 380.
The model contained a bevy of assumptions. As CCA’s
expert Doug Bartlett explained:
[T]he CCA model d[id] not demonstrate that
the wells directly deplete the river because
the ‘river water’ that is tracked by the CCA
model was water that had already infiltrated
the subsurface around the wells, not
necessarily as a result of pumping. In other
words, the model assumes at the beginning of
its 100-year conditioning run that all water in
the shallow model layer (Layer 1) originally
infiltrated from the Gila River. Therefore,
although the model only “tagged” water that
at some point in the past was in the surface
flow of the Gila River . . . it also tagged all
underground water in Layer 1 . . . at the

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

41

beginning of the conditioning run of the
model due to this assumption.
This bears repeating— the model assumed that “all
subsurface water present in the younger alluvium”—its
Layer 1—“originated from the Gila River.” It also assumed
that there was some “hydraulic conductivity” between the
River and the aquifer. With these assumptions in hand,
CCA’s model could only conclude that the wells pumped low
percentages (between 0 and 3.5%) of “Gila River-derived
water.”
Even if we accepted the assumptions as fact, and equated
“Gila River-derived water” with “subflow,” the evidence is
still well short of proving that the wells “appreciably”
diminish the flow of the River. See Sw. Cotton, 4 P.2d at 380.
CCA could only conclude that three of the wells pumped at
most 3.5% “Gila-River derived water,” a figure that,
according to Bartlett, “represents the highest potential
percentage of river water that may be pumped by the wells
based on the model’s assumptions.” GRIC has failed to
point to any evidence, let alone clear and convincing
evidence, that the water pumped by Sexton 1, Sexton 2, and
the Schoubroek Well appreciably diminishes the flow of the
Gila River. See Gila II, 857 P.2d at 1246 (“Whether a well
is pumping subflow does not turn on whether it depletes a
stream by some particular amount in a given period of
time. . . . [I]t turns on whether the well is pumping water that
is more closely associated with the stream than with the
surrounding alluvium.”); Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1080 (same).
The Arizona Supreme Court has indicated that the word
“appreciably” has real teeth here. In Gila II, the United
States sought to include in the Adjudication “all water
hydrologically connected to the Gila River system,” and

42

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

argued that the “trial court in [the Adjudication] cannot
exclude [privately-owned] wells having only a de minimis
effect on the river system.” 857 P.2d at 1247. The Arizona
Supreme Court rejected that argument:
We believe that the trial court may adopt a
rationally based exclusion for wells having a
de minimis effect on the river system. Such a
de minimis exclusion effectively allocates to
those well owners whatever amount of water
is determined to be de minimis. It is, in effect,
a summary adjudication of their rights. A
properly crafted de minimis exclusion will
not cause piecemeal adjudication of water
rights . . . . [I]t could simplify and accelerate
the adjudication by reducing the work
involved in preparing the hydrographic
survey reports and by reducing the number of
contested cases before the special master.
Id. at 1248. In Gila IV, the Arizona Supreme Court
“continue[d] to endorse” a de minimis exclusion, and said
that “wells that, though pumping subflow, have a de minimis
effect on the river system may be excluded from the
adjudication based on rational guidelines . . . .” 9 P.3d at
1081, 1083. Although these comments are necessarily dicta,
they represent important and repeated points. Nothing
suggests that Arizona is ready to adopt a “one-drop rule” that
shuts down wells found to pump small amounts of subflow.
For the district court, CCA’s bottom-line conclusion was
enough to find GRIC had shown by clear and convincing
evidence that these three wells pump subflow. In a section
of its order labeled “Undisputed Facts,” the district court

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

43

read the CCA report as concluding that three wells
“draw[] . . . Gila River water.” Because Defendants could
not disprove that these three wells pumped water that
“originated, at some point in the past, from the Gila River,”
the district court found it “undisputed” that these three wells
“are pumping Gila River subflow.” But it is no surprise that
Defendants failed to dispute the origination point; they did
not need to. What matters, at bottom, is whether the wells’
pumping “diminishes” the Gila River. In reaching its
conclusion, the district court failed to grapple with the
model’s assumptions and the low percentages the model
reported. 19 Nor did it explain why the CCA model, standing
alone, constituted clear and convincing evidence that these
wells pump subflow.
CCA’s model is not enough to show, by clear and
convincing evidence, that these three wells pump subflow.
After making a series of assumptions, it could only conclude
that water “derived” from the Gila River is being pumped in
small amounts by these wells. This is far cry from what
Arizona requires—that the well pump water “that is more
closely associated with the stream [here, the Gila River],
than the surrounding alluvium.” Gila II, 857 P.2d at 1246.
GRIC fails to marshal any undisputed evidence of its own
that these wells pump subflow. Accordingly, the district
court erred in finding that GRIC carried their burden to prove
by clear and convincing evidence that Sexton 1, Sexton 2,
and the Schoubroek Well pump subflow.
This is not the end of the road for GRIC. Rather, it means
that the case could not be resolved in GRIC’s favor on
Later, in the portion of the order discussing GRIC’s requested
injunctive relief—that the wells be capped—the district court explicitly
chose not to consider whether a de minimis exception should apply.
19

44

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

summary judgment on the basis of CCA’s finding that three
of the wells likely pumped small percentages of Gila Riverderived water. Having failed to prove by clear and
convincing evidence that Defendants’ wells pump subflow,
GRIC still can prove, again by clear and convincing
evidence, that Defendants’ wells are within the subflow
zone. Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1082.
Subflow Zone. Because the district court concluded that
GRIC had proven that Sexton 1, Sexton 2, and the
Schoubroek Well pumped subflow, it did not consider
separately whether those wells were also in the subflow
zone. The district court only considered whether Sexton 3
was within the subflow zone and concluded that it was.
We will proceed differently. Because we conclude that
the district court erred in determining that any of the wells
pumped subflow, we will analyze whether any of the four
wells are within the subflow zone, while acknowledging that
the district court only made its findings as to Sexton 3. 20
As we discussed above, in Part III.C.1, Gila IV adopted
an alternative approach based on a well’s location, which the
Arizona Supreme Court refers to as the “subflow zone.” So
long as a well is situated within the saturated FHA
(floodplain Holocene alluvium), it will be subject to the
doctrine of prior appropriation and treated as if it pumps
subflow. See id. at 1077. Because GRIC failed to prove that
any of the four wells pumped subflow, it must prove that
each well is within the subflow zone—the saturated FHA.
See Gila IV, 9 P.2d at 1082. The parties agree that to prove
We feel comfortable discussing all these wells because GRIC argued
to us, in its response brief, that all three Sexton wells are within the
subflow zone. For efficiency’s sake, we will also consider whether
GRIC has proven that the Schoubroek Well is within the subflow zone.
20

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

45

that these wells are in the subflow zone they must show that
(1) the well sits in the FHA; and (2) the FHA is saturated.
First, the district court concluded that there was no
material dispute of fact as to whether the Sexton wells are in
the FHA based on a single question and answer in CCA
expert Doug Bartlett’s deposition. 21 The exchange in the
deposition was as follows:
Q: So the---the three Sexton wells are located
in the Gila River Holocene---the [FHA], but
the Schoubroek well was not located in the
[FHA] of the Gila River. That’s your
conclusion, right?
A: That’s our interpretation.
This response is too thin a reed on which to base summary
judgment as to any of the wells. It is a compound question
covering four wells located on two properties. More
importantly, this answer is inconsistent with both the
detailed report filed by CCA and Bartlett’s declaration
summarizing CCA’s findings. That report and declaration
make clear that CCA did not believe that all the Sexton wells
were within the FHA. Bartlett declared that “CCA did not
delineate a subflow zone, nor did [it] delineate the extent” of
Defendants question whether the district court could even make an
FHA finding at all. Rather, they argue that the district court must wait
for DWR to delineate a subflow zone. See Part III.C.2 (rejecting this
argument in the context of the burden-shifting framework). This
argument is unavailing for the reasons we have already explained
above—requiring DWR to conduct the subflow analysis would be akin
to finding prior exclusive jurisdiction in state court, and would allow
landowners to pump Gila River water indefinitely as they wait for DWR
or the Adjudication court to deal with their claims.
21

46

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

the FHA when analyzing these four wells. As to Sexton 3 in
particular, CCA stated that it “is not drawing water from the
FHA,” and “if there is any FHA in the area of Sexton Well
3, it is likely to be unsaturated.” 22 Any ambiguity in
Bartlett’s three-word answer to a compound question was
more than clarified in the written materials before the district
court, and his answer should not have been accepted as a
concession, at least not without further inquiry.
Defendants’ other expert, Dr. David Lipson, came to a
similar conclusion. He found that Sexton 3 is “outside the
Gila River Subflow Zone” and “is not screened in FHA.”
Although he concluded FHA “may be present” at Sexton 3,
it “is dry and has a maximum thickness of 30 feet.” Sexton
1 and 2 fared only slightly better. Dr. Lipson concluded that
these wells “are probably not screened in FHA” and that
“FHA may be present . . . but the FHA there is probably dry
and has a maximum thickness of approximately 20 feet.” As
for the Schoubroek Well, Dr. Lipson said much of the
same—it is not screened in FHA, is outside the Gila River
Subflow Zone, and there is no FHA at that location.
In the face of this evidence, GRIC relies on the
deposition answer from Bartlett. GRIC only alludes to its
own expert’s (Dr. Peter Mock) conclusion that these wells
are located in the FHA. It has not supplied us with Dr.
Mock’s report or raised any argument as to Dr. Mock’s
determination of the subflow zone. Even assuming Dr.
Mock concluded that the wells were within the subflow
zone, we would be faced with a battle of the experts, and
CCA did not find Sexton 3 pumps subflow. Although the Schoubroek
Well is approximately 1,500 feet from the Gila River, and Sexton 1 and
2 are just over 2,000 feet from the River, Sexton 3 is over 4,000 feet
away.
22

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

47

therefore unable to conclude at the summary judgment stage
that GRIC has proven by clear and convincing evidence that
Defendants’ wells are within the FHA. For this reason alone,
the district court erred in granting summary judgment to
GRIC.
Even if we thought that CCA had conceded that any of
the wells were within the FHA, and that such a concession
provided clear and convincing evidence that the wells were
in the FHA, GRIC would still have to show that the FHA
was “saturated.” The district court could not, and did not,
find that the experts agreed on saturation in any FHA.
Instead, the district court relied on what it called a
“saturation assumption” employed by the Adjudication
court. In a 2005 order by the Adjudication court, Judge
Ballinger adopted such an assumption to ensure that the
Adjudication could “be completed ‘within the lifetime[s] of
some of those presently working on the case’ (or at least their
children’s).” Order Re: Report of the Special Master on the
Arizona Department of Water Resources’ Subflow
Technical Report, San Pedro River Watershed and Motion
for Approval of Report at 17, In re the General Adjudication
of All Rights to Use Water in the Gila River System and
Source, No. W1-103 (Sup. Ct. of Ariz. Maricopa Cnty., Sept.
28, 2005) [hereinafter Ballinger Order] (quoting Gila II, 857
P.2d at 1248). DWR proposed this assumption in the
Adjudication in part because the impracticality of
determining saturation in the FHA—owing to the difficulties
of determining its thickness and the dynamic nature of its
aquifer system—was ill-suited for a case-by-case evaluation
at the jurisdictional stage.
Defendants argue that Judge Ballinger’s assumption
should not be applied here because it was only meant to be

48

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

used for “jurisdictional” purposes, not as evidence of
saturation. Judge Ballinger explained:
It is important to note that determination of
the subflow zone does not adversely affect
substantive rights of surface or groundwater
users. It merely sets parameters with respect
to the Court’s water use inquiry. . . . Should
the dynamic nature of a river or stream
exclude water users from this Court’s
jurisdiction who would have been subject to
having their rights declared when the
proceeding was initiated?
Ballinger Order at 16. We agree with Defendants that Judge
Ballinger only intended the “saturation assumption” to bring
a well under the purview of the Adjudication and did not
intend for it to be used to make the substantive determination
that a well is saturated.
The district court recognized that the saturation
assumption was jurisdictional, but found that “irrelevant”
because after the presumption is applied Defendants will still
have the “ability to rebut that presumption” once the burden
shifts to them. But the district court erred here because this
flips the burden-shifting framework on its head. Gila IV tells
us that we should start from a presumption that wells pump
groundwater, and then require the plaintiff (GRIC) to rebut
that presumption by clear and convincing evidence. Gila IV,
9 P.3d at 1082. GRIC has not marshaled evidence, much
less clear and convincing evidence, of saturation as to the
wells. By adopting the saturation assumption, the district
court shifted the burden of proof to Defendants to show by a
preponderance of the evidence that the FHA was not

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

49

saturated, when in fact, they only need to defeat the clear and
convincing standard. Burden shifting is not “irrelevant”
here; it is an integral part of the process. GRIC does not get
to cut corners by relying on a jurisdictional assumption when
doing so impacts Defendants’ substantive water rights.
Determining the subflow zone is a complex, imprecise
process. See id. at 1081. Given the difficulty of proving
saturation, it is perhaps not surprising that GRIC leaned
heavily into the saturation presumption instead of
marshaling the requisite fact-intensive evidence. But the
presumption does not satisfy GRIC’s burden of proof at step
one. If GRIC cannot prove by clear and convincing evidence
that any of the wells are within the subflow zone—defined
as the saturated FHA—then it cannot prove its case. GRIC
failed to meet that burden on summary judgment. We
therefore reverse the district court’s grant of summary
judgment as to all four wells.
D. The Remedy
After entering summary judgment, the district court
granted GRIC’s proposed remedy—shutting off the four
wells in their entirety. The parties agree that we review this
determination for abuse of discretion. Internet Specialties,
559 F.3d at 993. “A trial court abuses its discretion by
fashioning an injunction which is overly broad.” Nat’l
Wildlife Fed’n v. Nat’l Marine Fisheries Serv., 886 F.3d 803,
823 (9th Cir. 2018) (internal quotation marks and citations
omitted). Although we have already concluded that
summary judgment was not appropriate and the case must be
remanded for further proceedings, in the interest of judicial
efficiency, we will discuss the remedy the district court
ordered. We do this for two reasons. First, the matter has
been fully briefed and argued to us. Second, the question of

50

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

remedy is very closely related to any proof that Defendants
are “appreciably and directly” diminishing the flow of the
Gila River. See Sw. Cotton, 4 P.2d at 380.
Even assuming that GRIC is able to prove at trial that
Defendants’ wells pump subflow or are in the subflow zone,
it seems likely that the wells will be found to be “mixedwater” wells—they will be shown to pump some subflow
and some groundwater. Both sides admit that Arizona courts
have not determined how “mixed-water” wells should be
regulated. 23 GRIC argues that the percentage of mainstem
water Defendants pump is irrelevant—if the wells pump Gila
River water without a Decree right, the wells should be shut
off. Defendants reply that they have a right to continue
pumping groundwater and that less drastic remedies, like
reducing their overall pumping, would be appropriate.
In support of its order that the wells be capped, the
district court relied on two cases. The first was a 2018 order
from the District of Arizona (Judge Bolton) that stated, “[i]f
unauthorized diversions are indeed taking place, the
prescribed remedy is to shut them down.” See United States
v. Gila Valley Irrigation District (GVID), No. CV 31-59,
2018 WL 4361867, at *3 (Aug. 10, 2018). The other was
United States v. Orr Water Ditch Co., 600 F.3d 1152 (9th
Cir. 2010), a Nevada case where we said that “[s]urface
water contributes to groundwater, and groundwater
contributes to surface water. The reciprocal hydraulic
Defendants argue that they have a “constitutionally-protected property
right to groundwater.” This is incorrect. In Gila IV, the Arizona Supreme
Court said that “a well owner does not own underground
water and . . . landowners have no legally recognized property right in
potential, future groundwater use.” 9 P.3d at 1083 (internal quotation
marks and citations omitted).

23

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

51

connection between groundwater and surface water has been
known to both the legal and professional communities for
many years.” Id. at 1158. The district court found Orr Ditch
“instructive” and concluded that GRIC’s rights “protect [it]
from diminution of the flow of the Gila River resulting from
groundwater being drawn by other users, including
Defendants.”
We do not consider the cases cited by the district court
persuasive. Orr Ditch explains why Defendants’ pumping
of subflow (even in small percentages) should be remedied.
But it tells us nothing about what that remedy should be. We
have no reason to disagree with the hydraulic principle stated
in Orr Ditch that “[s]urface water contributes to
groundwater, and groundwater contributes to surface water.”
Id. at 1158. Orr Ditch concerned decrees entered in Nevada,
where the tribe was entitled to water, from whatever source.
See id. at 1154. Arizona, by contrast, has a complicated,
bifurcated water rights framework that distinguishes
between groundwater and subflow, and the appropriability
of each.
Judge Bolton’s opinion in GVID concerned GRIC and a
party with Decree rights and did not address mixed-water
wells like the ones at issue here. See GVID, 2018 WL
4361867, at *3. In GVID, the district court had before it a
proposal to sever Gila River water rights from various
parcels and transfer them to other lands. As we explained
when reviewing the decision on appeal, GRIC objected on
the grounds that the transfer of water would affect the flow
and salinity of the water it received. See United States v.
Gila Valley Irrigation Dist., 859 F.3d 789, 801–03 (9th Cir.
2017). Judge Bolton’s statement was an off-hand comment
in a case involving diversion of the surface waters of the Gila
River itself. It appeared in a section dealing with standing,

52

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

not remedy. See GVID, 2018 WL 4361867, at *2–3. We
decline to give the statement any weight in this proceeding.
The district court is not without guidance. As we
discussed above, Arizona courts have indicated an openness
to allowing wells pumping de minimis amounts of subflow
to continue operating. See Gila II, 857 P.2d at 1248 (“We
believe that the trial court may adopt a rationally based
exclusion for wells having a de minimis effect on the river
system. Such a de minimis exclusion effectively allocates to
those well owners whatever amount of water is determined
to be de minimis. It is, in effect, a summary adjudication of
their rights.”); Gila IV, 9 P.3d at 1081 (“[T]the trial court's
order does not preclude, but rather contemplates, future
adoption of ‘a rationally based exclusion for wells having a
de minimus [sic] effect on the river system,’ an approach we
continue to endorse.” (quoting Gila II, 857 P.2d at 1248)).
Again, we are not convinced that the Arizona Supreme Court
is prepared to adopt a “one drop rule,” and has indicated the
opposite—that there is such a thing as a de minimis
diversion. 24 Our sense of the Arizona Supreme Court’s
instincts is confirmed in the final sentence of Gila IV:
“Finally, wells that, though pumping subflow, have a de
minimis effect on the river system may be excluded from the
adjudication based on rational guidelines for such an

We note that, although CCA concluded that, at worst, very small
percentages of the groundwater pumped from Sexton 1 and 2 and the
Schoubroek Well originated in the Gila River, the percentages
themselves tell us nothing about how much water in absolute terms is
being diverted from GRIC’s entitlement or how much of GRIC’s water,
by percentage, it constitutes. These figures might all be relevant to a
determination whether the amount of subflow being pumped is de
minimis.

24

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

53

exclusion, as proposed by DWR and adopted by the trial
court.” Id. at 1083.
The Arizona Supreme Court has never defined de
minimis, and the figures matter. The district court
approached the case (as did the parties) as an all-or-nothing
proposition. There may, however, be modest solutions when
small amounts of water are involved—solutions that will not
force courts to choose between providing no remedy at all or
shutting down wells entirely: mitigation. The CCA report
addressed the possibility of mitigation:
Mitigation for the small percent of pumped
water derived from the Gila River could
include a variety of operational changes
including:
For the Sexton wells, offset the amount of
Gila River water pumped from the two
large wells . . . by pumping the equivalent
amount from [another well] which is not
predicted to pump any Gila River water[;]
For the Schoubroek well . . ., reduce the
volume of water pumped equivalent to
the volume of Gila River water predicted
from the well[;]
Divert the Gila River portion of pumped
water back to the river via a pipeline from
each well[;]
Fallow a portion of farmed acreage with
a demand equivalent to the percent of
Gila River water pumped[;] or
A combination of these options.

54

GILA RIVER INDIAN COMMUNITY V. SCHOUBROEK

Mitigation received little attention in this appeal, but the
principle is too important to ignore. If the district court finds
itself fashioning a remedy, mitigation may be an effective
alternative to capping the wells and may provide an
acceptable middle ground for a case that has otherwise been
litigated at the extremes.
IV.

CONCLUSION

We AFFIRM the district court’s finding that jurisdiction
is proper in federal court but REVERSE its finding that the
District of Arizona has prior exclusive jurisdiction. The
Decree does not provide prior exclusive jurisdiction in the
District of Arizona for claims brought by a Decree party
against a non-party to the Decree. We agree with the district
court that the Adjudication does not have prior exclusive
jurisdiction over these claims.
We AFFIRM the district court’s denial of Defendants’
motion for summary judgment on claim preclusion.
We REVERSE the district court’s grant of Plaintiffs’
motion for summary judgment and REMAND for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion.
Because the entry of summary judgment was
inappropriate, we VACATE the remedy ordered by the
district court.
The parties shall each bear their own costs on appeal.
AFFIRMED IN PART; REVERSED IN PART;
REMANDED FOR FURTHER PROCEEDINGS.

