FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 23-991
D.C. No.
3:21-cr-00024RCJ-CLB-1

GREGORY W. PHEASANT,

ORDER

Defendant - Appellee.
Filed October 31, 2025
Before: Carlos T. Bea, Mark J. Bennett, and Eric D. Miller,
Circuit Judges.
Order;
Dissent by Judge Bumatay;
Dissent by Judge VanDyke

2

USA V. PHEASANT

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel denied a petition for panel rehearing and a
petition for rehearing en banc in a case in which the panel
reversed the district court’s dismissal of a count charging the
defendant with driving an off-road vehicle on public lands at
night without a taillight, in violation of 43 C.F.R.
§ 8341.1(f)(5), which was adopted by the Secretary of the
Interior under authority vested in him by section 303(a) of
the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Bumatay wrote that the Ninth Circuit should have demanded
more before letting the Executive branch—rather than
Congress—define the conduct made criminal under the
Federal Land Policy and Management Act. Given the text
and history of the Constitution’s Article I Vesting Clause,
Congress cannot delegate authority to define the actus reus
of a crime to the Executive branch. While some discretion
may be left in the hands of executive officials, Congress
must establish the conduct that subjects the people to a core
deprivation of personal liberty—imprisonment.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
VanDyke, joined in part by Judge Bumatay, wrote that the
court should have reheard this case en banc to resolve the
question whether criminal delegations are held to the same
exceedingly low standard that applies to civil delegations
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. PHEASANT

3

and to correct the panel’s erroneous conclusion that criminal
delegations are not held to a higher standard.

ORDER
The panel has voted to deny the petition for panel
rehearing. Judge Bennett and Judge Miller have voted to
deny the petition for rehearing en banc, and Judge Bea has
so recommended.
The full court was advised of the petition for rehearing
en banc. A judge requested a vote on whether to rehear the
matter en banc. The matter failed to receive a majority of the
votes of the nonrecused active judges in favor of en banc
consideration. Fed. R. App. P. 40.
The petition for panel rehearing and rehearing en banc is
DENIED. Dkt. No. 75.
BUMATAY, Circuit Judge, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
As Judge VanDyke thoughtfully explains, we should
have heard this case en banc. The Ninth Circuit should have
demanded more before letting the Executive branch—rather
than Congress—define the conduct made criminal under the
Federal Land Policy and Management Act. See 43 U.S.C.
§ 1733(a).
Of course, the Supreme Court has endorsed some level
of congressional delegation to the Executive branch. See
FCC v. Consumers’ Rsch., 145 S.Ct. 2482, 2491 (2025). But

4

USA V. PHEASANT

history—and precedent for that matter—make clear that the
non-delegation doctrine is context specific. See id. at 2503
(looking to “broader statutory contexts” to identify
intelligible principles). And what’s permissible “varies
according to the scope of the power congressionally
conferred.” Id. at 2397 (simplified). So it’s “not [a] one size
fits all” test. Id. at 2525 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting). While a
more lenient non-delegation doctrine may suffice in some
areas of the law, other areas require a more demanding
approach.
Criminal law is in the more demanding bucket. Given
the deprivation of liberty at stake, Congress cannot simply
leave it to the Executive branch to unilaterally declare what
acts can subject the people to criminal confinement. In this
context, the Constitution requires more than the standard,
opaque version of an “intelligible principle.” Instead, to
satisfy the non-delegation doctrine that our separation of
powers demands, Congress must—at a minimum—define
both the actus reus and the penalty for any criminal offense.
Our court was thus wrong to simply gesture at a toothless
“intelligible principle” and call it a day. See United States v.
Pheasant, 129 F.4th 576, 583 (9th Cir. 2025).
Because the separation-of-powers demands more before
throwing people in prison, I respectfully dissent from the
denial of rehearing en banc.
I.
The Non-Delegation Doctrine
A.
The non-delegation doctrine “bars Congress from
transferring its legislative power to another branch of
Government.” Gundy v. United States, 588 U.S. 128, 132

USA V. PHEASANT

5

(2019) (plurality). It’s a function of the Constitution’s
Article I Vesting Clause, which requires that “[a]ll
Legislative powers herein granted shall be vested in a
Congress of the United States.” U.S. Const., Art. I, § 1. And
it is “rooted in the principle of separation of powers.”
Mistretta v. United States, 488 U.S. 361, 371 (1989). It
preserves the tripartite system of government established by
the Constitution’s first three articles: three branches—each
with distinct and “exclusive” authority. Dep’t of Transp. v.
Ass’n of Am. Railroads, 575 U.S. 43, 67 (2015) (Thomas, J.,
concurring in the judgment).
The Legislative Power is the exclusive power to make
laws that are binding on citizens. See The Federalist No. 78
(Alexander Hamilton) (George W. Cary & James McClellan
ed., 2001) (“[T]he legislature not only commands the purse,
but prescribes the rules by which the duties and rights of
every citizen are to be regulated.”). As one early English
treatise put it, “[b]y the Legislative Power, we understand
the Power of making, altering, or repealing Laws, which in
all well-ordered Governments, hath ever been lodged in a
succession of the supreme Councels of Assemblies of a
Nation.” Marchamont Nedham, The Excellencie of a FreeState (1656), in 1 The Founders’ Constitution 314 (1986).
Another publication closer to the Founding Era said the
power included “consulting, debating, enacting laws, and
forming regulations, according to which all are to conduct
themselves.” 1 James Burgh, Political Disquisitions 5
(London 1774).

6

USA V. PHEASANT

A key limit on the legislative power is that it cannot be
delegated. As John Locke said, the legislature could only
make new laws—not new legislators:
The power of the legislative being derived
from the people by a positive voluntary grant
and institution, can be no other, than what
that positive grant conveyed, which being
only to make laws, and not to make
legislators, the legislative can have no power
to transfer their authority of making laws, and
place it in other hands.
John Locke, Second Treatise of Government: An Essay
Concerning the True Original, Extent and End of Civil
Government § 141 (1764 ed.); see also Ilan Wurman,
Nondelegation at the Founding, 130 Yale L.J. 1490, 1518
n.146 (2021) (collecting sources showing Locke’s influence
on the Founding generation).
Founding-era debates over the Constitution reflected
Locke’s ideas. At the Pennsylvania Ratifying Convention,
James Wilson—the only Founder to have signed the
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution—
favorably contrasted the limits on delegation imposed by the
Constitution with the lack of limits on Parliament to do the
same. James Wilson, Speech at the Pennsylvania Ratifying
Convention (Nov. 24, 1787). While the British constitution
allowed “the Parliament [to] transfer[] legislative authority
to Henry VIII,” Wilson observed that the “control [over] the
power and conduct of the legislature by an overruling
constitution was an improvement in the science and practice
of government reserved to the American states.” Id.; see
also The Federalist No. 53, at 277–78 (James Madison)

USA V. PHEASANT

7

(George W. Cary & James McClellan ed., 2001) (comparing
“the transcendent and uncontrollable” authority of
Parliament with the “constitutional security . . . established
in the United States” because of its “constitution paramount
to the government”). Or as an anonymous Virginia essayist
put it, legislative power could not be “transferred,” because
it would “surpass the power of legislation and require the
assent of the people at large.” Philip Hamburger, Is
Administrative Law Unlawful? 599 n.16 (2014) (citing
Observations upon the Seven Articles, Reported by the
Grand Committee . . . and Now Lying on the Table of
Congress, Virginia Independent Chronicle (Feb. 21, 1787)).
The Founding generation understood that one way to
violate the prohibition on legislative delegation was if
Congress authorized another branch of government to
address too many details left unresolved by statute. This is
because, at the time of the Founding, providing sufficient
statutory detail was inherent in the nature of the Legislative
power. If Congress promulgated a statute that delegated to
the Executive branch the ability to provide necessary
legislative details, it would exceed the legislative authority.
As James Madison wrote in a widely read post-Ratification
circular:
Details to a certain degree, are essential to the
nature and character of a law . . . . If nothing
more were required . . . than a general
conveyance of authority—without laying
down any precise rules by which the
authority conveyed should be carried into
effect—it would follow that the whole power
of legislation might be transferred by the

8

USA V. PHEASANT

legislature from itself, and proclamations
might become substitutes for law.
James Madison, The Report of 1800 (Jan. 7, 1800). 1 Chief
Justice Marshall echoed these views: “[i]t will not be
contended that Congress can delegate to the Courts, or to any
other tribunals, powers which are strictly and exclusively
legislative.” Wayman v. Southard, 23 U.S. 1, 42 (1825).
The non-delegation doctrine addressed two Foundingera concerns—preventing tyranny and maintaining
accountability. Centuries of English common law taught
that maintaining a strict separation of powers was crucial to
preserving liberty. Blackstone, for example, “defined a
tyrannical government as one in which ‘the right both of
making and of enforcing the laws, is vested in one and the
same man, and the same body of men,’ for ‘whenever these
two powers are united together, there can be no public
liberty.’” Ass’n of Am. Railroads, 575 U.S. at 73 (Thomas,
J., concurring in the judgment) (quoting Blackstone, 1
Commentaries *142). Countless other writings from the
common law accord with his view. See id. at 70–74 (citing
writings of de Bracton, Coke, Hale, Locke, Hume, and
Blackstone). And the English experience in resisting
delegations to the Crown made this principle concrete. Id.
at 71–72 (citing the Case of Proclamations, 12 Co. Rep. 74,
75, 77 Eng. Rep. 1352, 1353 (K.B. 1611) (Coke, C.J.)
(holding the King could not “change any part of the common
law, nor create any offence by his proclamation, which was
not an offence before, without Parliament.”)).
So the idea that the “separate and distinct exercise of the
different powers of government [was] essential to the
1

https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Madison/01-17-02-0202.

USA V. PHEASANT

9

preservation of liberty” was embraced at the time of the
Founding. The Federalist No. 51, at 268 (James Madison)
(George W. Cary & James McClellan ed., 2001). As said by
Montesquieu, “[t]here can be no liberty where the legislative
and executive powers are united in the same person . . . lest
the same monarch . . . should enact tyrannical laws to
execute them in a tyrannical manner.”
Baron de
Montesquieu, The Spirit of the Laws 151 (Thomas Nugent,
trans., Hafner Pub. Co. 1949) (1748). And Madison wrote
that it would be “absurd” for the Executive’s orders to have
the force of law “like all other laws,” because that would presuppose that the “executive department naturally includes a
legislative power.” Helvidius No. 1 (James Madison), Aug.
24, 1793. 2 In fact, to Madison, it was more than “an
absurdity”—it was “tyranny.” Id.
The Founders also understood that the non-delegation
principle secured democratic accountability.
Simply,
permitting delegation of legislative powers to unelected
Executive branch officials undermines representative
democracy—the bedrock of legitimacy for creating binding
laws. Cf. Resolutions of the Boston Town Meeting on Sept.
13, 1768, in A Report of the Record Commissioners of the
City of Boston, Containing the Boston Town Records, 1758–
1769, at 261, 262–63 (Boston, Rockwell & Churchill 1886)
(protesting efforts to levy taxes or maintain a standing army
in the colonies as “illegal” unless prescribed by
“Representatives of [citizens’] own free Election”). The
Founders knew that “[r]estricting the task of legislating to
one branch characterized by difficult and deliberative
processes . . . promote[d] fair notice and the rule of law,
ensuring the people would be subject to a relatively stable
2

https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Madison/01-15-02-0056.

10

USA V. PHEASANT

and predictable set of rules,” and guaranteed “that the lines
of accountability would be clear.” Gundy, 588 U.S. at 155
(Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (citing The Federalist No. 50
(James Madison)). And that way, “the adoption of new laws
restricting liberty” would remain “a hard business, the
product of an open and public debate among a large and
diverse number of elected representatives”—rather than
“hand[ed] off” to another branch where “unelected judges
and prosecutors [are] free to ‘condemn all that they
personally disapprove and for no better reason than they
disapprove it.” Sessions v. Dimaya, 584 U.S. 148, 182
(2018) (Gorsuch, J., concurring) (simplified).
B.
To be sure, Congress was not categorically precluded
from leaving some discretion in the hands of the Executive
in implementing laws. But early examples of what some
have labeled “delegations” were nothing like today’s grants
of nearly unlimited administrative rulemaking authority to
executive officers. And importantly, as a historical matter,
any delegations took place in specific, limited contexts.
Simply, some—but only some—legislative matters allowed
greater discretion to the Executive.
Understanding why the Founders delegated some details
helps explain why today’s broadest criminal delegations are
impermissible. Experience had shown that a deliberative
legislative body was ill-suited to exhausting future
contingencies in legislation, quickly responding to
emergencies, or nimbly dealing with sensitive matters of
foreign affairs.
See Akhil Reed Amar, America’s
Constitution: A Biography 132–33 (2005) (“Under the old
Articles, various recesses and quorum failures of the
Confederation Congress had compromised America’s ability

USA V. PHEASANT

11

to conduct foreign affairs.”). As then-Ambassador Thomas
Jefferson complained in a letter to a fellow Virginian, the
Articles of Confederation Congress obsessed over the
“smallest trifle” rather than the “most important act[s] of
legislation,” because it had to exercise both executive and
legislative power. Thomas Jefferson to Edward Carrington
(Aug. 4, 1787). 3 According to Jefferson, this was “the
source of more evil than we have ever experienced from any
other cause.” Id. Jefferson’s solution was “to separate in the
hands of Congress[,] the Executive and Legislative powers.”
Id. Similarly, Jefferson wrote to Madison that an executive
committee be appointed to “receive and dispatch all
executive business, so that Congress itself should meddle
only with what should be legislative.” Thomas Jefferson to
James Madison (Dec. 16, 1786). 4
So Founding-era laws didn’t always specify every detail
in their legislative acts. See Julian Davis Mortenson &
Nicholas Bagley, Delegation at the Founding, 121 Colum.
L. Rev. 277, 302–05 (2021) (giving examples of grants of
legislative authority in Founding-era statutes); Wurman, 130
Yale L.J. at 1540–53 (same). Nor could they—almost every
statute requires at least some discretion in execution.
Instead, it was understood that some legislative areas—
to respect the separation of powers and to adhere to
democratic accountability—required Congress to make all
the essential decisions. In the words of Chief Justice
Marshall, “important subjects . . . must be entirely regulated
by the legislature itself.” Wayman v. Southard, 23 U.S. 1,
43 (1825). Otherwise, in areas of “less interest,” Congress
3

https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Jefferson/01-11-02-0588.

4

https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Jefferson/01-10-02-0461.

12

USA V. PHEASANT

may identify the “general provision” and give power “to
those who are to act under such general provisions to fill up
the details.” Id.
As a historical matter, Congress granted the Executive
greater discretion in implementing laws requiring ministerial
administration or in areas involving executive prerogatives.
Take the Founding-era example of veteran pensions. The
law allowed the President to regulate the distribution of
pension payments to veterans—a mere act of bureaucratic
process. Act of Sept. 29, 1789, ch. 24, 1 Stat. 95. Another
allowed the Secretary of State, the Secretary of War, and the
Attorney General to issue exclusive patents if they
determined an invention or discovery was “sufficiently
useful and important”—a highly individualized, factspecific inquiry difficult to treat broadly via legislation
alone. Act of Apr. 10, 1790, ch. 7, § 1, 1 Stat. 109, 109–110.
And another authorized the President to determine whether
a foreign nation sufficiently interfered with American trade
to trigger a preexisting embargo statute—a decision already
within the Executive’s foreign-policy wheelhouse. Act of
Mar. 1, 1809, ch. 24, § 11, 528, 530; Act of May 1, 1810, ch.
39, § 4, 2 Stat. 605, 606; see also Cargo of the Brig Aurora
v. United States, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch) 382, 382 (1813).
Likewise, whether the delegation implicated public or
private rights served as a fault line for permissible
delegation. “The idea that the Executive may not formulate
generally applicable rules of private conduct” has “ancient
roots.” Ass’n of Am. Railroads, 575 U.S. at 70 (Thomas, J.,
concurring in the judgment). Indeed, according to some
scholars, while delegations in the areas of public rights, such
as foreign and military affairs, spending, and management of
government property, were permissible, for other areas, such
as “rules that regulate citizens as to their private rights in the

USA V. PHEASANT

13

domestic sphere,” “the Constitution imposes a strict
prohibition on such delegation.” Michael Rappaport, A Two
Tiered and Categorical Approach to the Nondelegation
Doctrine, 2 San Diego Legal Stud. Paper No. 20-471
(2020); 5 see also Hamburger, Is Administrative Law
Unlawful? 388–95 (noting delegations with a historical
pedigree from states to municipalities, the federal
government to territories, municipalities to local
administrative bodies, to courts for matters of procedure, and
to the military for martial orders).
Non-delegation was thus understood at the Founding to
be a real limitation on Congress’s “Legislative powers.”
History shows that non-delegation’s mandate varied based
on subject matter, allowing significant discretion to the
Executive in foreign, territorial, and military affairs. But
outside these historical exceptions, and especially in subjects
of great “importan[ce],” the non-delegation doctrine is
violated when a statute is insufficiently detailed and vests
authority in an agency to write the rules necessary to make
the law enforceable.
II.
Non-Delegation and Criminal Law
If the non-delegation doctrine has teeth in any area, it
must in the criminal law context. The power to make
criminal law raises heightened concerns for liberty and
arbitrary government power. After all, what else could
encroach more on personal liberty than the threat of
imprisonment? The drafting of criminal law thus requires a
more stringent non-delegation doctrine because it
“implicate[s] potentially two core private rights: the right to
5

https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=3710048.

14

USA V. PHEASANT

life and personal liberty.” Nicolas Elliott-Smith, Crimes
Without Law: Administrative Crimes and the Nondelegation
Doctrine, 115 J. Crim. L. & Criminology 429, 450 (2025).
So when enacting criminal statutes, the Constitution requires
far more legislative detail and prohibits broad delegations.
Founding-era criminal statutes reflected these concerns
by specifying an actus reus and punishment. Indeed, it was
recognized long ago that “[t]he legislative authority of the
Union must first make an act a crime” and “affix a
punishment to it.” United States v. Hudson & Goodwin, 11
U.S. (7 Cranch) 32, 34 (1812) (emphasis added). Thus, the
textual and historical evidence shows that, to comply with
Article I’s exclusive grant of “Legislative powers,” Congress
must at a minimum define the actus reus within the four
corners of the statute.
A.
So great was the concern for the deprivation of liberty in
the criminal context that our Founding generation
understood that Congress needed to provide more specificity
in enacting criminal statutes. In 1800, Madison warned of
this need when “personal liberty” was invaded:
[O]n criminal subjects, it is proper, that
details should leave as little as possible to the
discretion of those who are to apply and to
execute the law. . . . To determine then,
whether the appropriate powers of the
distinct departments are united by [the act], it
must be enquired whether it contains such
details, definitions, and rules, as appertain to
the true character of a law; especially, a law
by which personal liberty is invaded,

USA V. PHEASANT

15

property deprived of its value to the owner,
and life itself indirectly exposed to danger.
James Madison, The Report of 1800 (Jan. 7, 1800). 6 Thus,
shortly after ratification, it was acknowledged that only
Congress could set the “details, definitions, and rules” of
criminal violations. Id. See also Wurman, 130 Yale L.J. at
1555 (arguing that only permissible delegations at the
Founding were those involving a “narrow” “category of
conduct”).
At a minimum, this means that Congress must define the
actus reus by statute. After all, the criminal act is at the heart
of criminal offense. See 4 Blackstone Commentaries *5
(defining a “crime or misdemeanor” as “an act committed or
omitted, in violation of a public law either forbidding or
commanding it”); Samuel Johnson, A Dictionary of the
English Language (4th folio ed.,1773) (defining “crime” as
“[a]n act contrary to right; an offence; a great fault; an act of
wickedness”); see also City of Grants Pass v. Johnson, 603
U.S. 520, 545 (2024) (“[H]istorically, crimes in England and
this country have usually required proof of some act (or
actus reus) undertaken with some measure of volition (mens
rea).”). Indeed, one would search in vain through the
Founding-era criminal law treatises of Hawkins and Hale for
mention of a penal statute that did not include an actus reus.
See generally William Hawkins, 1 A Treatise of the Pleas of
the Crown (1716); Matthew Hale, 1 Historia Placitorum
Coronæ: The History of the Pleas of the Crown (1736); see
also 4 Blackstone Commentaries (Of Public Wrongs).
The Marshall Court also twice held the power to define
and enact criminal statutes, including the actus reus, belongs
6

https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Madison/01-17-02-0202.

16

USA V. PHEASANT

to Congress alone. In deciding whether federal courts could
exercise common-law jurisdiction in criminal cases, the
Court emphatically said no. See Hudson & Goodwin, 11
U.S. at 34. While the Court recognized some “implied
powers” for the courts, the “jurisdiction of crimes against the
state is not among those powers.” Id. Instead, the Court
understood that criminal rulemaking was part of the
“legislative authority.” Id. And chief among Congress’s
responsibilities was to “first make an act a crime.” Id.
(emphasis added). Thus, the Court required Congress to set
the actus reus for any criminal statute.
This was no anomaly. A few years later, Chief Justice
Marshall reiterated that “[i]t is the legislature . . . which is to
define a crime, and ordain its punishment.” United States v.
Wiltberger, 18 U.S. (5 Wheat.) 76, 95 (1820). Simply, to the
Chief, it was “a plain principle that the power of punishment
is vested in the legislative . . . department.” Id.; see also
United States v. Bailey, 34 U.S. 238, 257 (1835) (McLean,
J., dissenting) (objecting to a perjury statute’s potential
delegation to the Treasury Department to prescribe who
could administer oaths, because it involved “the construction
of a highly penal law of the union” and was thus an
“important” matter). But see id. at 253–54 (maj. op. of Story,
J.) (upholding the conviction without relying on a delegation
because the statute’s plain language empowered a state
justice of the peace to administer oaths).
Several reasons support this differential treatment of
criminal law for purposes of the non-delegation doctrine.
First, the Constitution’s text supports treating criminal
law differently. Indeed, the Constitution reflects unique
“concern with the danger to liberty associated with the
criminal process.” Rachel E. Barkow, Separation of Powers

USA V. PHEASANT

17

and the Criminal Law, 58 Stan. L. Rev. 989, 1015 (2006).
Consider a few of the Constitution’s criminal safeguards. It
prohibits the passage of ex post facto laws and bills of
attainder, but only as to criminal law. U.S. Const., Art. I,
§ 9. It requires that all criminal trials be conducted by a jury
of peers and held within the State where the offense was
committed. Id. Art. III § 2. And a conviction for treason
requires two independent witnesses. Id. § 3. The Fifth
Amendment’s due process guarantee requires a higher
standard of proof in criminal cases. In re Winship, 397 U.S.
358, 364 (1970). And the Sixth Amendment guarantees a
speedy and public trial, notice of charges, confrontation,
assistance of counsel, and juries in criminal proceedings.
U.S. Const. Amend. VI. Thus, the Constitution’s overriding
concern for limiting government power in the criminal
sphere should be reflected in the non-delegation doctrine.
Second, some of the Founding Era’s most influential
legal philosophers wrote on the need for more specificity in
criminal law. Discussing the nature of criminal laws,
Blackstone wrote that “[in] proportion to the importance of
the criminal law, ought also to be the care of the legislature
in properly forming and enforcing it.” 4 Blackstone
Commentaries **2–3. This, he explained, was because “to
know with precision what the laws of our country have
forbidden, and the deplorable consequences to which a
willful disobedience may expose us, is a matter of universal
concern.” Id. Illustrating his point, Blackstone discussed an
old English statute that had made stealing sheep “or other
cattle” a felony.
1 Blackstone Commentaries *88.
According to Blackstone, these “general words, ‘or other
cattle,’ [were] looked upon as much too loose to create a
capital offence,” leading a court to strike the general phrase.
Id. In response, Parliament passed another theft statute

18

USA V. PHEASANT

specifically listing “bulls, cows, oxen, steers, bullocks,
heifers, calves, and lambs, by name.” Id.
Blackstone’s views accorded with those of the criminallaw reformist Cesare Beccaria, one of the most influential
writers of the era. Beccaria’s treatise On Crimes and
Punishments advocated for codifying the criminal law rather
than maintaining judge-made crimes. Cesare Beccaria, On
Crimes and Punishments 13 (David Young, trans., Hackett
Publ. Co. 1986) (1764). He argued that “without written
texts, society will never assume a fixed form of government
in which power derives from the whole rather than the parts
and in which the laws, which cannot be altered save by the
general will, are not corrupted as they move through the
crush of private interests.” Id.; see generally John Bessler,
The Italian Enlightenment and the American Revolution:
Cesare Beccaria’s Forgotten Influence on American Law,
37 Mitchell Hamline L.J. Pol’y & Prac. 1 (2017)
(demonstrating Beccaria’s literary popularity in the United
States during the Founding). The writings of Blackstone,
Beccaria, and others make clear that the principle that the
legislature must define the act forbidden and its penalty was
within the Framers’ consciousness.
Third, age-old criminal-law doctrines support greater
specificity in criminal legislation. Take the rule of lenity. It
teaches “that ambiguities about the breadth of a criminal
statute should be resolved in the defendant’s favor.” United
States v. Davis, 588 U.S. 445, 464 (2019). Lenity reinforces
the separation of powers by “strik[ing] the appropriate
balance between the legislature, the prosecutor, and the court
in defining criminal liability.” Liparota v. United States, 471
U.S. 419, 427 (1985).

USA V. PHEASANT

19

Or take the void-for-vagueness doctrine. It applies with
greatest force to “criminal penalties because the
consequences of imprecision are qualitatively less severe [in
the civil context].” Vill. of Hoffman Estates v. Flipside,
Hoffman Estates, Inc., 455 U.S. 489, 498–99 (1982). Many
of the concerns that drive vagueness doctrine may apply
equally to non-delegation doctrine. See Sessions, 584 U.S.
at 216 (Thomas, J., dissenting) (suggesting that “the
vagueness doctrine is really a way to enforce the separation
of powers—specifically, the doctrine of nondelegation”).
Indeed, “[v]ague statutes have the effect of delegating
lawmaking authority to the executive.” Nathan S. Chapman
& Michael W. McConnell, Due Process As Separation of
Powers, 121 Yale L.J. 1672, 1806 (2012). Vague statutes
simply make it “more likely that any individual enforcement
decision will be based on a construction of the statute that
accords with the executive’s unstated policy goals, filling the
gaps of the legislature’s policy goals.” Id.
Thus, as an original matter, for federal “crimes” to be
consistent with the “Legislative power,” Congress—and no
other branch—must specify the actus reus of the criminal
offense. See Elliott-Smith, 115 J. Crim. L. & Criminology
at 483–84 (“When Congress delegates rulemaking authority
to an agency to unilaterally determine the actus reus of a
criminal offense, it has impermissibly delegated the
authority to regulate a citizen’s core [personal] right to
liberty.”).
B.
Founding-Era Criminal Statutes
The need for specificity in criminal enactments was
reflected in early congressional practice. Although the
“number of federal crimes at the Founding was low,” an

20

USA V. PHEASANT

examination of those laws suggests that “the blanket
authorization for an executive body to create regulations
punishable by criminal penalties directly contravenes the
Founding-era conceptualization of the separation of
powers.”
Michael C. McCue, Modern Times, Hidden
Crimes: Criminal Lawmaking Delegations from the
Founding to Today, 20 Dartmouth L.J. 12, 13, 28 (2022)
(simplified). One lone exception exists—the Northwest
Ordinance—but that law dealt with the unique enclave of
federal territories. Criminal statutes approaching the
criminal administrative laws we see today—statutes
delegating to an executive official the power to define the
actus reus—did not appear until the late 19th century. This
historical evidence supports that Article I’s Vesting Clause,
as originally understood, required that Congress define, at a
minimum, a crime’s actus reus and penalty.
1.
Early Criminal Laws
With a single exception, federal criminal statutes at the
Founding never delegated to other branches the authority to
define an actus reus or affix a penalty.
Consider the first criminal law enacted by Congress. See
An Act for the Punishment of Certain Crimes Against the
United States, ch. 9, 1 Stat. 112 (1790). It specified many
crimes, including treason, piracy, murder and manslaughter
within federal enclaves and at sea, and more. Id. These were
well known criminal offenses—even if they were defined
with respect to the common law or the law of nations. So in
each case, Congress had specified an actus reus and a
penalty.

USA V. PHEASANT

21

Of course, sometimes discretion was involved. The Act,
for example, provided that a person who “violate[s] any safeconduct . . . under the authority of the United States, or shall
. . . offer[] violence to the person of an ambassador or other
public minister” would be imprisoned for up to three years
and fined. 1 Stat. 112, 118 § 28. So the statute did not
specify who counted as an “ambassador or other public
minister” (a determination strictly within the President’s
foreign-policy authority). But Congress specified the actus
reus—violating the official’s safe-conduct. The Act thus
only represents “an extraordinarily narrow amount of
executive discretion.” McCue, 20 Dartmouth L.J. at 14
(emphasis added).
Consider next a law enacted a few years later—one
outlawing unregulated trade with Indians. See An Act to
Regulate Trade and Intercourse with the Indian Tribes, ch.
19, 1 Stat. 329 (1793). While granting the Executive branch
some discretion over licensing, the law sufficiently specified
the conduct it made unlawful. Id. The law prohibited “any
trade or intercourse” with Indian Tribes “without a license
under the hand and seal of the superintendent of the
department, or of such other person, as the President of the
United States shall authorize to grant licenses for that
purpose.” Id. at 329 § 1. So unlike some modern
delegations, the law didn’t authorize an executive
administrator to set a course of conduct for punishment.
Rather, it let the Executive grant exceptions to a
congressionally mandated, general prohibition, which fit
within the Executive’s traditional purview anyway. See
Reynolds v. United States, 565 U.S. 432, 450 (2012) (Scalia,
J., dissenting) (“[T]he power to reduce congressionally
imposed requirements . . . is little more than a formalized

22

USA V. PHEASANT

version of the time-honored practice of prosecutorial
discretion.”).
In the years following, Congress clearly specified in
several early criminal laws the conduct prohibited even if it
left to the Executive the discretion to determine the precise
objects of the conduct made criminal. The Stamp Act, for
example, prohibited “counterfeit[ing] or forg[ing] any stamp
or mark, directed or allowed to be used by this act.” See An
Act Laying Duties on Stamped Vellum, Parchment, and
Paper, ch. 11, § 13, 1 Stat. 527, 531 (1797). But that statute
allowed “the Secretary of the Treasury . . . [to] provide[ the]
many marks and stamps” subject to the criminal offense. Id.
at 529. Likewise, another law punished those who “falsely
make, alter, forge or counterfeit . . . any bill or note issued
by order of the president, directors and company of the Bank
of the United States” with a term of imprisonment. An Act
to Punish Frauds Committed on the Bank of the United
States, ch. 61, 1 Stat. 573, 573–74 (1798). Yet another law
subjected persons who “cut any timber on the lands
reserved” by the Navy Secretary to fine and imprisonment,
with the Secretary authorized to select “such tracts or
portions . . . as in his judgment may be necessary to furnish
for the navy a sufficient supply” of wood. An Act Making
Reservation of Certain Public Lands to Supply Timber for
Naval Purposes, 3 Stat. 347 (1817). In all these statutes,
Congress itself unambiguously specified the actus reus:
counterfeiting, forging, or altering of governmental
instruments or chopping down protected trees—even if
Congress left to the Executive branch or others the task of
specifying the precise object of the conduct proscribed.
Amid this backdrop, a constitutional controversy was
sparked by an extraordinarily broad criminal statute, the
Alien Friends Act of 1798. See An Act Concerning Aliens,

USA V. PHEASANT

23

ch. 58, 1 Stat. 570 (1798). While the criminal portion of the
Act provided a well-defined actus reus—illegal re-entry of
previously deported aliens—it controversially gave
unlimited discretion to the President to “order [the
deportation of] all such aliens as he shall judge dangerous to
the peace and safety of the United States.” Id. at 571. The
Act punished the return of “alien[s]” previously “ordered to
depart” with imprisonment and disqualification from ever
becoming a United States citizen. Id. Thus, the Act sparked
concerns over too much delegation to the President to
determine who could be subject to criminal punishment.
Debates over this delegation spurred Madison to
passionately criticize the Act’s blurring of legislative
lawmaking and executive enforcement, particularly in the
criminal context. See James Madison, The Report of 1800
(Jan. 7, 1800) (“[T]he alien act . . . unites legislative, judicial
and executive powers in the hands of the President . . . .
[A]ll will agree, that the powers referred to [the Executive
and Judiciary] may be so general and undefined, as to be of
a legislative, not of an executive or judicial nature; and may
for that reason be unconstitutional.”). 7 And Madison was
not alone in his opposition. See Wurman, 130 Yale L.J. at
1514–15 (discussing the opposition to the bill by
Representatives Gallatin, Williams, and Livingston).
Agreeing with Madison, for instance, Rep. Gallatin said in
the House of Representatives that unless crimes and
punishments were “accurately defined,” “States and the
State Judiciary would, indeed they must, consider the law as
a mere nullity, they must declare it to be unconstitutional.”
8 Annals of Cong. 1982 (1798). Even Representative Otis,
a supporter of the Bill, thought that such fundamental liberty
7

https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Madison/01-17-02-0202.

24

USA V. PHEASANT

could not “depend[] upon the will of one man.” 8 Annals of
Cong. 2021 (1798). In the shadow of this constitutional
controversy, the Alien Friends Act was never enforced and
not renewed upon its expiration in 1800. See McCue, 20
Dartmouth L.J. at 26. Thus, the Act’s attempt at excessive
delegation was thwarted before such delegation could
become a trend.
Finally, Congress was often specific as to all aspects of
the crime when it wrote a statute. For example, a statute
regulating imports forbade “defac[ing], alter[ing] or
forg[ing] any certificate, granted for the protection of
merchandise transported as aforesaid[,]” subjecting violators
to imprisonment and fines. An Act to Regulate the
Collection of Duties on Imports and Tonnage, ch. 22, § 109,
1 Stat. 703, 703 (1799). This provision didn’t just specify
an actus reus and penalty. Congress set the object of the
guilty act, too: it drafted and specified the text of the
certificate one could be charged for forging. Id.; see McCue,
20 Dartmouth L.J. at 19. So while Congress sometimes gave
the Executive the leeway to set the specific objects of an
actus reus, it more commonly handled even those details
itself.
2.
The Northwest Ordinance
Of course, some countervailing history exists. The
Northwest Ordinance is sometimes cited as proof that the
Founders had no issue with broadly delegating the power to
define criminal laws. See Mortenson & Bagley, 121 Colum.
L. Rev. at 335. The Ordinance provided that territorial
governors and judges could temporarily adopt criminal and
civil laws of existing states until an assembly could be
formed, at which point the “[territorial] Legislature shall

USA V. PHEASANT

25

have authority to alter them as they shall think fit.” See An
Ordinance for the Government of the Territory of the United
States Northwest of the River Ohio §§ 5, 9 (1787)
(“Northwest Ordinance”); 8 Act of Aug. 7, 1789, ch. 8, 1 Stat.
50, 50–51 (1789) (expressly re-adopting the Northwest
Ordinance as previously enacted by the Continental
Congress). And similar laws were passed to regulate
other pre-statehood territories. 9 Thus, Congress perhaps
authorized criminal lawmaking in the Ordinance without
specifying the actus reus of the offenses.
But the Ordinance is fundamentally different from
general criminal delegations that would have been
understood to exceed Congress’s “Legislative powers.” So
the Ordinance is best viewed as the exception that proves the
rule that criminal legislation required specificity, including
establishing an actus reus. First, the Ordinance limited the
forms of criminal conduct. The territorial governors and
judges still couldn’t define a criminal law’s actus reus from
scratch—rather, they could only temporarily adopt laws that
had already been written and enacted by other states’
legislatures. Northwest Ordinance § 5. And they could only
do so until a territorial legislature was formed to enact laws
blessed by local voters. Id.
Second, and more important, the Northwest Ordinance
involved the administration of territorial lands—an area
subject to a less stringent non-delegation doctrine.
Hamburger, Is Administrative Law Unlawful? 389–90.
8

https://www.archives.gov/milestone-documents/northwest-ordinance.

Act of May 26, 1790, ch. 14, § 1, 1 Stat. 123, 123 (Southwest
Territory); Act of Apr. 7, 1798, ch. 28, § 3, 1 Stat. 549, 550 (Mississippi
Territory); Act of May 7, 1800, ch. 41, § 2, 2 Stat. 58, 59; Act of May 8,
1792 (Indiana Territory).

9

26

USA V. PHEASANT

When debates about non-delegation regained prominence in
the early twentieth century, the chief justice of the Florida
Supreme Court wrote that history and necessity justified
delegations to territories:
Immemorial usage and the necessities of
local government justify the delegation of
some minor legislative power of a police
nature within definite limitations to
municipalities where express organic
provisions do not forbid. Congress may
[thus] confer limited and defined legislative
powers upon the territories.
J.B. Whitfield, Legislative Powers That May Not Be
Delegated, 20 Yale L.J. 87, 88 (1910) (emphasis added); see
also Territory ex rel. Cty. of Oahu v. William L. Whitney, 17
Haw. 174, 180–81 (Haw. 1905) (upholding a criminal
delegation to a territory’s county government); id. at 188
(Hartwell, J., concurring) (“Delegating certain legislative
powers to municipal organizations, such as towns and cities,
has been found so essential to public welfare, and its
delegation has been so often sustained by judicial decisions,
as to be established beyond question.”) (simplified). So
congressional delegations to temporary territorial
governments are a different playing field.
It’s also worth noting that no local legislatures existed in
the territories before the Ordinance. See Elliott-Smith, 115
J. Crim. L & Criminology at 462. So the Ordinance’s
protection of local inhabitants—then without a local
representative government—justified expansive delegation.
After all, whenever local government had been denied to
colonial Americans, they experienced logistical nightmares

USA V. PHEASANT

27

in petitioning Parliament and awaiting legislation from an
ocean away. See Akhil Amar, The Words That Made Us:
America’s Constitutional Conversation 1760-1820, at 4–7
(2021). So the Northwest Ordinance (and later delegations
to territorial governors) allowed for the quick adoption of
laws most suitable for local conditions. Thus, Congress’s
broad delegations to temporary territorial governments
fulfilled rather than undermined the fundamental principle
of democratic accountability underlying the non-delegation
doctrine.
3.
Broad Delegations Long Postdated the Founding
The earliest federal statute to broadly delegate to an
executive official the power to proscribe criminal conduct
was enacted over a hundred years after the Founding. See
McCue, 20 Dartmouth L.J. at 35–36 (explaining that the
Organic Administration Act of 1897 marked the beginning
of modern administrative crimes).
The Organic
Administration Act of 1897 granted the Secretary of the
Interior authority to “make provisions for the protection” of
“public forests” and “make such rules and regulations . . . to
preserve the forests . . . from destruction.” See Act of June
4th, 1897, ch. 2, 30 Stat. 11, 35 (1897). And “any violation”
of these “rules and regulations” was punishable “by a fine of
not more than $500 or imprisonment for not more than
twelve months, or both.” Id. (cross-referencing punishment
provided by the Act of June 4th, 1888, ch. 340, 25 Stat. 166)
So this was the start of broad delegations at the turn of the
20th century. Some—the Court blessed. See, e.g., United
States v. Grimaud, 220 U.S. 506, 515–23 (1911). Others—
the Court struck down on non-delegation grounds. See, e.g.,

28

USA V. PHEASANT

A.L.A. Schechter Poultry Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S.
495, 537–42 (1935).
That we don’t see the first broad delegation of criminal
lawmaking authority until the late 19th century suggests that
our Founding generation would have considered such power
contrary to the original meaning of “the Legislative power.”
See Espinoza v. Montana Dep’t of Revenue, 591 U.S. 464,
482 (2020) (explaining that a tradition that “arose in the
second half of the 19th century . . . cannot by itself establish
an early American tradition”); see also New York State Rifle
& Pistol Ass’n, Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 36 (2022) (“[T]o
the extent later history contradicts what the text says, the text
controls.”).
***
A pattern emerges from this history. For over a century,
Congress understood that it must establish the conduct
proscribed as criminal. Excluding the Northwest Ordinance
(which is in a different context), no Founding-era federal law
broadly delegated authority to the Executive to set the range
of criminal conduct without significant constitutional
controversy. That doesn’t mean that Congress could not
leave any discretion to the Executive. So long as Congress
“identifie[d] an actus reus, the Executive Branch may retain
broad discretion to prohibit particular types of conduct
[within the actus reus] without running afoul of any
originalist constraints on the delegation of criminal
lawmaking authority.” Elliott-Smith, 115 J. Crim. L. &
Criminology at 483. So Congress could specify the range of
conduct proscribed (the actus reus) and the Executive could
determine which precise objects would be included within
that narrow range of conduct—like choosing which lands
were to be protected or what stamps and marks could not be

USA V. PHEASANT

29

counterfeited. Yet, at a minimum, the non-delegation
principle has always required that Congress specify the actus
reus and the penalty within the text of the statute to meet
constitutional muster.
III.
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act’s
criminal provision violates the non-delegation doctrine
because it empowers an executive agency to define the actus
reus of its criminal offense. It provides that “[t]he Secretary
[of Interior] shall issue regulations necessary to implement
the provisions of this Act with respect to the management,
use, and protection of the public lands, including the
property located thereon” and “[a]ny person who knowingly
and willfully violates any such regulation which is lawfully
issued pursuant to this Act shall be fined no more than
$1,000 or imprisoned no more than twelve months, or both.”
43 U.S.C. § 1733(a). The Act’s text defines no prohibited
activity and provides no notice of what conduct would
constitute a criminal offense.
This statutory prohibition is as indefinite as it gets. The
Act says nothing about where or when motorists can drive
off-road vehicles on public lands. It doesn’t specify what
conduct could land you in jail. Instead, the public would
need to plumb the depths of the Federal Register to know
what’s off-limits. See 43 C.F.R. § 8341.1(f)(5). This is no
simple task. See Neil Gorsuch & Janie Nitze, Overruled:
The Human Toll of Too Much Law 17 (2024) (explaining
that the Federal Register has expanded from 16 pages in
1936 to over 188,000 pages as of 2021). And it was likely
unelected bureaucrats—and not politically accountable
actors—who wrote those regulations. See id. at 77 (“If laws
governing major facets of our society were once largely the

30

USA V. PHEASANT

work of elected representatives and the product of
democratic compromises, nowadays they often represent
only the current thinking of relatively insulated agency
officials in a distant city.”). So in effect, Congress has said,
“do as the minions of the Secretary of the Interior tell you—
or go to jail.” Such a statute fails to provide the necessary
legislative detail contemplated by the Constitution’s
“Legislative powers.” Because Congress has not exercised
its “strictly and exclusively legislative” authority to define
the offense’s criminal conduct, see Gundy, 588 U.S. at 135
(simplified), Gregory Pheasant’s conviction under the Act is
constitutionally invalid.
Our precedent shows why. Recently, we upheld a
criminal delegation because the statute’s four corners
“penalized a particular type of conduct[.]” United States v.
Melgar-Diaz, 2 F.4th 1263, 1267 (9th Cir. 2021). Congress
made it a crime “to enter the United States unless an alien
presents himself for inspection at an approved time and
place.” Id. Thus, the statute did “not give immigration
officials the power to create crimes,” but allowed discretion
in determining the object of prohibited criminal activity (i.e.,
the location and time of entry). Id. This distinction between
the criminal act (which cannot be delegated) and the
criminal act’s precise object (which can) is reflected in our
Nation’s history and criminal non-delegation precedents.
See, e.g., Yakus v. United States, 321 U.S. 414, 423 (1944)
(upholding a statutory prohibition on selling commodities
above maximum prices, when the type of commodity and
maximum prices were set by wartime administrators).
The Court has expressly left open what “‘intelligible
principle’ is required when Congress authorizes another
Branch to promulgate regulations that contemplate criminal
sanctions.” See Touby v. United States, 500 U.S. 160, 165–

USA V. PHEASANT

31

66 (1991). Based on the text of the Constitution and its
historical understanding, the answer is clear. We should
read the “intelligible principle” requirement in the direction
of our constitutional history and demand that Congress
decide the actus reus before criminalizing conduct. The
Constitution demands no less.
IV.
Given the text and history of the Vesting Clause,
Congress cannot delegate authority to define the actus reus
of a crime to the Executive branch. While some discretion
may be left in the hands of executive officials, Congress
must establish the conduct that subjects the people to a core
deprivation of personal liberty—imprisonment. Because
today we bless a conviction where some unaccountable
bureaucrat rather than the People’s Congress established the
conduct made criminal, I respectfully dissent.
VANDYKE, Circuit Judge, joined by BUMATAY, Circuit
Judge, except as to Part II.C, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
Section 303 of the Federal Land Policy and Management
Act (“FLPMA”) grants to the Secretary of the Interior broad
authority to issue regulations “with respect to the
management, use, and protection of the public lands.” 43
U.S.C. § 1733(a). The Secretary can back up those
regulations with hefty criminal penalties—up to one year in
prison and a $1,000 fine. The Secretary used this authority
to create a broad array of regulatory crimes across the
Bureau of Land Management. Gregory Pheasant violated
one such regulation by driving his motorcycle with a broken

32

USA V. PHEASANT

taillight on BLM land. He was indicted for violating that
taillight regulation, and then he successfully moved to
dismiss that indictment. The district court concluded that the
regulations violated the nondelegation doctrine and
dismissed them. The panel reversed, holding that the BLM
regulations did not violate the nondelegation doctrine.
The panel held that congressional delegations of criminal
lawmaking power are to be reviewed under the same
standard as civil delegations. “Even in the criminal context,”
the panel held, “the ‘intelligible principle’ test provides the
controlling legal standard for evaluating non-delegation
challenges.” United States v. Pheasant, 129 F.4th 576, 583
(9th Cir. 2025). The panel was our court’s first to reach that
conclusion. And although the Supreme Court has explicitly
declined to conclude one way or the other whether the
deferential intelligible-principle test applies in the criminal
context, Supreme Court precedent and first principles
suggest that it does not. Given the heightened concerns that
criminal delegations create with respect to the separation of
powers and individual liberty, courts should scrutinize
criminal delegations more closely than they review civil
delegations. By denying rehearing en banc, our court missed
an auspicious opportunity to correct the panel’s erroneous
conclusion otherwise. I respectfully dissent from the denial
of rehearing en banc.
I.
The Bureau of Land Management manages some 245
million acres of land—roughly 10% of all the land in
the United States. See U.S. Dep’t of the Interior,
Bureau of Land Mgmt., What We Manage,
https://www.blm.gov/about/what-we-manage (last visited
Oct. 7, 2025). Most of that land falls within this circuit. Id.

USA V. PHEASANT

33

Roughly two-thirds of Nevada (where this case originated)
falls under BLM’s authority. U.S. Dep’t of the Interior,
Bureau
of
Land
Mgmt.,
BLM
Nevada,
https://www.blm.gov/nevada (last visited Oct. 7, 2025).
Across this wide swath, Congress has granted the
Secretary of the Interior, acting through BLM, broad
authority to issue any “regulations necessary to implement
the provisions of [FLPMA] with respect to the management,
use, and protection of the public lands.” 43 U.S.C.
§ 1733(a). The Secretary can back up those regulations with
criminal penalties: “any person who knowingly and willfully
violates any such regulation … shall be fined no more than
$1,000 or imprisoned no more than twelve months, or both.”
Id. Under this authority, the BLM has constructed a vast
criminal code regulating the conduct of anyone present on
BLM land with respect to, inter alia, housing policies, traffic
laws, firearms regulations, mining rules, and agricultural
policies.
Over the Memorial Day weekend of 2021, Pheasant rode
his dirt bike on a portion of BLM land known as Moon
Rocks, a few miles north of Reno, Nevada. Because offroaders use Moon Rocks frequently, it is regularly patrolled
by BLM rangers. Pheasant’s dirt bike did not have an
operating rear taillight. By operating his dirt bike without
the traffic light, Pheasant violated BLM’s traffic regulation
in 43 C.F.R. § 8341.1(f)(5), which bans the operation of an
off-road vehicle on BLM land without a taillight. Once
apprehended he was cited (then indicted) for violating
§ 8341.1(f)(5)’s taillight regulation and indicted for assault
on a federal officer and resisting issuance of citation or
arrest.

34

USA V. PHEASANT

Pheasant moved to dismiss the indictment, and the
district court granted his motion. As relevant to this appeal
and the panel’s opinion, the district court found that the two
counts premised on Pheasant’s violation of BLM’s
regulatory crimes were invalid because they relied on an
unconstitutional delegation of authority.
The court
determined that § 1733(a), which delegated the authority to
create the regulations under which Pheasant was charged,
lacked an intelligible principle, rendering it unconstitutional.
The government appealed, challenging the dismissal of
the taillight count on nondelegation grounds. A panel of our
court reversed in a published opinion, holding that § 1733(a)
satisfies the “intelligible principle” test and is therefore a
constitutional delegation of power. The panel noted that the
intelligible-principle test is “an exceedingly modest
limitation.” Pheasant, 129 F.4th at 579 (quoting United
States v. Melgar-Diaz, 2 F.4th 1263, 1266 (9th Cir. 2021)).
The panel therefore determined that it would uphold the
statute so long as it contained “some standard constraining
discretion.” Id. at 580. The panel found such a standard in
the statute’s requirement that any regulations issued be
“necessary to implement the provisions of [FLPMA] with
respect to the management, use, and protection of the public
lands.” Id. (alteration in original) (quoting 43 U.S.C.
§ 1733(a)). Coupled with FLPMA’s instruction to “manage
the public lands under principles of multiple use and
sustained yield,” id. (quoting 43 U.S.C. § 1732(a)), the court
found a “clear principle: The Secretary must develop a
long-term management strategy to realize the land’s value in
a sustainable way,” id.
The panel concluded its opinion by addressing
Pheasant’s argument that the statute requires greater scrutiny
“because it empowers the Secretary to promulgate

USA V. PHEASANT

35

regulations whose violation may be punished by criminal
sanctions.” Id. at 582. Citing various Supreme Court cases,
the panel asserted that the Court has previously upheld such
delegations under the “intelligible principle” test. Id. at 583.
Though it acknowledged the Supreme Court’s statement that
perhaps “something more than an ‘intelligible principle’ is
required when Congress authorizes another Branch to
promulgate regulations that contemplate criminal
sanctions,” id. (quoting Touby v. United States, 500 U.S.
160, 165–66 (1991)), the panel concluded that “[e]ven in the
criminal context, the ‘intelligible principle’ test provides the
controlling legal standard for evaluating non-delegation
challenges,” id.
II.
The Constitution vests “[a]ll legislative Powers [t]herein
granted … in a Congress of the United States.” U.S. Const.
art. I, § 1. “Accompanying that assignment of power to
Congress is a bar on its further delegation.” Gundy v. United
States, 588 U.S. 128, 135 (2019) (plurality opinion).
Moreover, “the principle of separation of powers that
underlies our tripartite system of Government”
independently compels the conclusion that Congress, not
agencies, must make legislative decisions. Mistretta v.
United States, 488 U.S. 361, 371 (1989); see also Gundy,
588 U.S. at 153 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (“[I]t would
frustrate the system of government ordained by the
Constitution if Congress could merely announce vague
aspirations and then assign others the responsibility of
adopting legislation to realize its goals.” (internal quotation
marks and footnote omitted)). So there is no doubt that “the
lawmaking function belongs to Congress.” Loving v. United
States, 517 U.S. 748, 758 (1996). No matter the context,
Congress “may not constitutionally delegate its legislative

36

USA V. PHEASANT

power to another” constitutional actor. Touby, 500 U.S. at
165.
Still, “[t]he Constitution has never been regarded as
denying to the Congress the necessary resources of
flexibility and practicality, which will enable it to perform
its function.” Panama Refin. Co. v. Ryan, 293 U.S. 388, 421
(1935). So the Supreme Court has made clear that
delegations are constitutional so long as Congress “lay[s]
down by legislative act an intelligible principle to which the
person or body authorized to exercise the delegated authority
is directed to conform.” Mistretta, 488 U.S. at 372
(alteration marks omitted) (quoting J.W. Hampton, Jr., &
Co. v. United States, 276 U.S. 394, 409 (1928)).
Here, the panel misread Supreme Court and circuit
precedent to support its conclusion that criminal delegations
are subject only to the “intelligible principle” test for
reviewing nondelegation challenges. Far from supporting
the panel’s conclusion, precedent in fact cuts the other
way—confirming that courts must apply a stricter test when
assessing criminal delegations. And FLPMA’s criminal
delegation to the Secretary runs afoul of this stricter test.
A.
The panel held, for the first time in this circuit, that the
intelligible-principle test—and only that test—applies to
congressional delegations of criminal lawmaking authority.
See Pheasant, 129 F.4th at 583. The panel found support for
this conclusion in both Supreme Court and circuit precedent.
See id. Neither offers the support that the panel claimed to
find.
At best, precedent has simply left open the
criminal-delegation question.

USA V. PHEASANT

37

Supreme Court precedent first. The panel described
United States v. Grimaud, 220 U.S. 506 (1911), as an
example of the Supreme Court’s “routine[] appli[cation of]
the ‘intelligible principle’ test even” to statutes that
“authorize[] regulations backed by criminal penalties.”
Pheasant, 129 F.4th at 583. That can’t be. Grimaud was
decided in 1911, a decade and a half before the
intelligible-principle test came to the fore in J.W. Hampton,
276 U.S. at 409. So that case is certainly not an example of
the Supreme Court’s applying the intelligible-principle test
to a criminal delegation.
If anything, Grimaud is an example in which the
Supreme Court applied a standard higher than the
intelligible-principle test to evaluate the legality of a
delegation enforced by a criminal penalty. There, the statute
authorized the Secretary of Agriculture to “regulat[e] the use
and occupancy of the public forest reservations and
preserv[e] the forests thereon from destruction,” and to
enforce those regulations with criminal penalties. Grimaud,
220 U.S. at 509. The Court reasoned that this delegation was
permissible because it only included the “power to fill up the
details”—that is, the power to “administer the law and carry
the statute into effect.” Id. at 517–18. 1 Given this focus, the
Grimaud Court effectively applied a higher standard for
assessing congressional delegation. See, e.g., Gundy, 588
U.S. at 157–58 & n.38 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (describing
Grimaud as consistent with a higher nondelegation
standard).
The Court has similarly upheld criminal delegations in other instances
providing adequate limitations on the executive’s actions pursuant to the
delegation. See, e.g., Loving, 517 U.S. at 771–72; Yakus v. United States,
321 U.S. 414, 424–25 (1944).
1

38

USA V. PHEASANT

But you needn’t take my word for it that Grimaud
doesn’t settle the criminal-delegation question. Even when
upholding delegations backed by criminal penalties after
Grimaud, the Supreme Court itself has acknowledged that
“whether more specific guidance is in fact required” when
Congress “authorizes another Branch to promulgate
regulations that contemplate criminal sanctions” remains an
open question. Touby, 500 U.S. at 165–66. 2 Thus, the
Supreme Court itself has said it hasn’t provided any
definitive conclusion as to whether criminal delegations
require greater congressional guidance, but rather that it has
explicitly left this question open for resolution in later cases.
Grimaud neither compels nor supports the panel majority’s
conclusion in this case.
Nor have the circuit courts, including ours (until now),
definitively decided this question. For a half century, when
our court has been presented with the criminal-delegation
question, we have declined to conclusively resolve it. See
United States v. Gurrola-Garcia, 547 F.2d 1075, 1079 & n.6
(9th Cir. 1976) (concluding that “Congress may
constitutionally provide a criminal sanction for the violation
of regulations which it has empowered the President or an
agency to promulgate,” but also explaining that “if we were
to apply Justice Brennan’s [heightened standard] we would
reach the same result” (citing United States v. Robel, 389
U.S. 258, 272 (1967) (Brennan, J., concurring in the
result))); United States v. Motamedi, No. 20-10364, 2022
Contrast the Court’s treatment of the criminal-delegation question
(which it has explicitly avoided answering) with its treatment of
delegations concerning the taxation power. In the context of tax
delegations, the Court has made explicit that the intelligible-principle
standard applies. See Skinner v. Mid.-Am. Pipeline Co., 490 U.S. 212,
223 (1989).

2

USA V. PHEASANT

39

WL 101951, at *2 (9th Cir. Jan. 11, 2022). Recently, in
Melgar-Diaz, our court considered a nondelegation
challenge to a statute that made it a crime to “enter[] or
attempt[] to enter the United States at any time or place other
than as designated by immigration officers.” 2 F.4th at 1266
(quoting 8 U.S.C. § 1325(a)(1)). That statute passed muster
because it did “not give immigration officials the power to
create crimes.” Id. at 1267. Rather, Congress “penalized a
particular type of conduct”—unlawfully entering the United
States—and provided the executive no more than a
“ministerial authority” of “determining [approved] times
and places.” Id. So our court concluded that the delegation
at issue did “provide[] an intelligible principle.” Id. at 1269.
And we further reasoned that the criminal delegation in
Melgar-Diaz “present[ed] even fewer nondelegation
concerns than [the criminal delegation in] Touby.” Id. at
1268. Thus, like Touby, Melgar-Diaz simply assumed that
a higher standard may apply to criminal delegations and
declined to resolve that question. Id. So until the panel’s
opinion in this case, our court has consistently applied both
the “intelligible principle” test and a heightened standard to
nondelegation challenges to criminal delegations.
Other circuits have taken a similar approach. They have
frequently evaluated delegations of criminal lawmaking
power under both the intelligible-principle test and a stricter
test without endorsing one or the other. See, e.g., Cargill v.
Garland, 57 F.4th 447, 472 (5th Cir. 2023) (en banc)
(plurality opinion), aff’d, 602 U.S. 406 (2024); United States
v. Cooper, 750 F.3d 263, 271 (3d Cir. 2014); United States
v. Amirnazmi, 645 F.3d 564, 576–77 (3d Cir. 2011); United
States v. Dhafir, 461 F.3d 211, 216–17 (2d Cir. 2006);
United States v. Arch Trading Co., 987 F.2d 1087, 1093–94
(4th Cir. 1993). In rare cases, circuit courts have applied

40

USA V. PHEASANT

only the intelligible-principle test—but even then, they have
declined to conclusively state that it is the controlling legal
standard, recognizing that the Supreme Court has suggested
that a higher standard may be appropriate. See Cooper, 750
F.3d at 271 (“In Amirnazmi, we did not resolve ‘the unsettled
question of whether something more demanding than an
“intelligible principle” is necessitated within the context of
delegating authority to define criminal conduct.’ We
likewise decline to do so here.” (citation omitted)); United
States v. Nichols, 775 F.3d 1225, 1232 (10th Cir. 2014)
(“[T]he Supreme Court left open the question whether a
heightened ‘meaningfully constrains’ standard applies to
Congress’s delegation of authority involving statutes with
criminal implications.”), rev’d on other grounds, 578 U.S.
104 (2016).
Whether congressional delegations backed by criminal
penalties are reviewed under the same standard as those
backed by civil enforcement is an important question. And
I concede that it is not an easy question. As scholars have
noted, “the Court’s decisions on criminal delegations are
confused and conflicting.” F. Andrew Hessick & Carissa
Byrne Hessick, Nondelegation and Criminal Law, 107 Va.
L. Rev. 281, 295 (2021). Yet even while the courts have
refrained from answering this question conclusively, there is
no shortage of judges who have described the serious
constitutional concerns that arise from Congress’s
delegations to the executive in the context of criminal
statutes. See, e.g., Cargill, 57 F.4th at 472; Aposhian v.
Wilkinson, 989 F.3d 890, 900 (10th Cir. 2021) (Tymkovich,
C.J., dissenting); United States v. Nichols, 784 F.3d 666,
672–73 (10th Cir. 2015) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting from the
denial of rehearing en banc); Carter v. Welles-Bowen Realty,
Inc., 736 F.3d 722, 734 (6th Cir. 2013) (Sutton, J.,

USA V. PHEASANT

41

concurring). Nor have individual Justices been silent on this
issue. See Robel, 389 U.S. at 272–73 (Brennan, J.,
concurring in the result); Barenblatt v. United States, 360
U.S. 109, 140 n.7 (1959) (Black, J., dissenting).
The Supreme Court has found occasion to avoid
answering this question, as have the other circuit courts. But
this case makes the question unavoidable because the
criminal delegation at issue here does not survive the more
exacting scrutiny due criminal delegations. And given the
important separation-of-powers and individual-liberty
interests at stake, our court should have taken the
opportunity to correct the panel’s decision en banc. Criminal
delegations require a heightened standard.
B.
Our en banc court should have considered the question
left open by longstanding Supreme Court precedent. The
panel’s conclusion that criminal delegations are not held to
a higher standard undermines the principles underlying the
nondelegation doctrine—separation of powers and
protection of individual liberty. Moreover, it contradicts the
Supreme Court’s commonsense idea that the degree of
congressional guidance must be commensurate with the
scope of the delegation. Holding criminal delegations to a
higher standard than civil delegations is also consistent with
the way courts treat other constitutional and
quasi-constitutional doctrines regarding criminal-law
impositions upon individual freedom. So courts should
scrutinize criminal delegations to a greater degree than civil
delegations.
The basis for scrutinizing criminal delegations more
rigorously than civil delegations is simple: laws defining
criminal conduct “represent the ultimate intrusions on

42

USA V. PHEASANT

personal liberty and carry with them the stigma of the
community’s collective condemnation.” Nichols, 784 F.3d
at 672–73 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc). It was for that reason that the Founders
exercised caution to separate the criminal enforcement
power from the lawmaking power. See Rachel E. Barkow,
Separation of Powers and the Criminal Law, 58 Stan. L.
Rev. 989, 1017, 1031 (2006); see also The Federalist No. 47
(Madison) (“The accumulation of all powers … in the same
hands … may justly be pronounced the very definition of
tyranny.”). Thus, as the Supreme Court has explained since
its earliest days, “[t]he legislative authority of the Union
must first make an act a crime,” and “affix a punishment to
it.” United States v. Hudson & Goodwin, 11 U.S. (7 Cranch)
32, 34 (1812). Congress must “define a crime, and ordain
its punishment.” United States v. Wiltberger, 18 U.S. (5
Wheat.) 76, 95 (1820). When Congress simply sets a
punishment, as it did in 43 U.S.C. § 1733(a), without
defining the specific conduct that warrants that punishment,
Congress fails to comply with that central ideal of the
separation of powers. See James Madison, Report on the
Virginia Resolution, in 4 The Debates in the Several State
Conventions on the Adoption of the Federal Constitution
546, 560 (Jonathan Elliot ed., 2d ed. 1836) (“Details, to a
certain degree, are essential to the nature and character of a
law; and on criminal subjects, it is proper that details should
leave as little as possible to the discretion of those who are
to apply and execute the law.”).
Congress may not transfer to others “powers which are
strictly and exclusively legislative”—such as the power to
write criminal laws. Wayman v. Southard, 23 U.S. (10
Wheat.) 1, 42 (1825); see also A.L.A. Schechter Poultry
Corp. v. United States, 295 U.S. 495, 529 (1935) (“Congress

USA V. PHEASANT

43

is not permitted to abdicate or to transfer to others the
essential legislative functions with which it is thus vested.”).
“[E]nacting criminal statutes is a core congressional
function, because the alternative (delegating legislative
power to the executive branch) has an untenable result—
placing the lawmaking and the law-enforcing in a single
branch of government.” Mark Chenoweth & Richard Samp,
Reinvigorating Nondelegation with Core Legislative Power,
in The Administrative State Before the Supreme Court 97
(Peter J. Wallison & John Yoo eds., 2022).
The panel incorrectly concluded otherwise. It reasoned
that “a power does not become more legislative simply
because its exerciser can issue rules backed by criminal
penalties.” Pheasant, 129 F.4th at 583. Not true.
“[B]ecause of the seriousness of criminal penalties, and
because criminal punishment usually represents the moral
condemnation of the community, legislatures … should
define criminal activity.” United States v. Bass, 404 U.S.
336, 348 (1971); see also Gundy, 588 U.S. at 154 (Gorsuch,
J., dissenting); Hessick & Hessick, supra at 300. That is why
“[t]he definition of the elements of a criminal offense is
entrusted to the legislature, particularly in the case of federal
crimes, which are solely creatures of statute.” Liparota v.
United States, 471 U.S. 419, 424 (1985). Contrary to the
panel’s conclusion otherwise, criminal lawmaking is an
especially legislative matter.
Requiring a higher standard for delegations in the
criminal context is also not a novel idea. Rather, it is the
logical extension of the general idea that “the degree of
agency discretion that is acceptable varies according to the
scope of the power congressionally conferred.”
Melgar-Diaz, 2 F.4th at 1267 (quoting Whitman v. Am.
Trucking Ass’ns, 531 U.S. 457, 475 (2001)). That is, “[l]aws

44

USA V. PHEASANT

that vest more power require more constraints.” Allstates
Refractory Contractors, LLC v. Su, 79 F.4th 755, 776 (6th
Cir. 2023) (Nalbandian, J., dissenting). There is no greater
power than the power to punish criminally. See Brenner M.
Fissell, When Agencies Make Criminal Law, 10 U.C. Irvine
L. Rev. 855, 880 (2020) (“[T]he uniquely harsh sanctions
that result from criminal law violations makes delegation of
criminalization a matter of special concern ….”);
Chenoweth & Samp, supra at 102. Because the power to
impose harsh criminal sanctions is so great, Congress must
provide a comparably greater degree of guidance.
It is particularly noteworthy that the only two cases in
which the Supreme Court has ever found an impermissible
delegation were in cases that presented criminal delegations.
In Fahey v. Mallonee, the Court reasoned that the statutes at
issue in Schechter Poultry and Panama Refining were found
to have violated the nondelegation doctrine because each
“dealt with delegation of a power to make federal crimes of
acts that never had been such before.” 332 U.S. 245, 249
(1947). And even when the Court has upheld other criminal
delegations it has nonetheless “suggested that ‘greater
congressional specificity [may be] required in the criminal
context.’” Carter, 736 F.3d at 734 (Sutton, J., concurring)
(quoting Touby, 500 U.S. at 166); see also Nichols, 784 F.3d
at 672 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting from the denial of rehearing
en banc) (collecting cases). The Court has suggested that
these delegations might require more “meaningful[]”
guidance than a mere “intelligible principle.” Touby, 500
U.S. at 166; Fahey, 332 U.S. at 249–50; see also, e.g., Robel,
389 U.S. at 272–73 (Brennan, J., concurring); Barenblatt,
360 U.S. at 140 n.7 (Black, J., dissenting). Thus, while the
nondelegation doctrine has only ever had “one good year” at
the Supreme Court, Cass R. Sunstein, Nondelegation

USA V. PHEASANT

45

Canons, 67 U. Chi. L. Rev. 315, 322 (2000), that was the
year in which the Court was presented with rampant
delegations backed by criminal penalties.
Requiring greater specificity with respect to criminal
delegations is also consistent with other doctrines that
require greater clarity in the criminal context. See Hessick
& Hessick, supra at 301–05.
For example, the
void-for-vagueness doctrine demands greater specificity in
criminal laws. See Sessions v. Dimaya, 584 U.S. 148, 156
(2018). The Court has “expressed greater tolerance of
enactments with civil rather than criminal penalties because
the consequences of imprecision are qualitatively less
severe.” Vill. of Hoffman Estates v. Flipside, Hoffman
Estates, Inc., 455 U.S. 489, 498–99 (1982). So too with the
centuries-old prohibition on federal common-law crimes,
even while federal common law remains commonplace in
the civil context. See Hudson & Goodwin, 11 U.S. (7
Cranch) at 34. The quasi-constitutional doctrine of lenity
also lends support with its standard conception that
“ambiguity concerning the ambit of criminal statutes should
be resolved in favor of lenity.” Skilling v. United States, 561
U.S. 358, 410 (2010) (quoting Cleveland v. United States,
531 U.S. 12, 25 (2000)). Criminal delegations should not be
the glaring exception amidst these constitutional and
quasi-constitutional doctrines properly limiting Congress’s
ability to impose criminal penalties based upon open-ended
statutes.
In sum, Supreme Court precedent, the principles
underlying the nondelegation doctrine, and the Supreme
Court’s treatment of corollary criminal-law doctrines all
suggest a higher standard when reviewing criminal
delegations.

46

USA V. PHEASANT

C.
So criminal delegations should be subject to a stricter test
than non-criminal delegations. But what might this stricter
test require? Touby lays out one option. See 500 U.S. at 166.
There, the Court noted three factors that justified the
Controlled Substances Act’s delegation of the power to
schedule a drug as a controlled substance. Id. at 166–67.
First, Congress required that before scheduling a drug as a
controlled substance, the executive must first determine it to
be an “imminent hazard” to public safety. Id. at 166.
Second, the executive was required to weigh the history,
current state, scope, duration, and significance of the drug’s
abuse to determine what risk it presents to the public health.
Id. And finally, the executive, after making a factual finding
that the drug “has a high potential for abuse,” has no medical
use, and is not safe under medical supervision, could list the
drug as a controlled substance. Id. at 167.
From the Court’s analysis flows a three-pronged
“meaningful constraint” test. See Nichols, 784 F.3d at 673–
74 (Gorsuch, J., dissenting from the denial of rehearing en
banc). First, Congress must draw a clear and generally
applicable rule—in the case of the Controlled Substances
Act, the statutory requirement that no unauthorized person
may possess a controlled substance. Touby, 500 U.S. at 166–
67. Second, that rule must hinge on a factual determination
by the executive. Id. at 167. And third, the statute must
provide criteria constraining the executive as it makes its
finding. Id.; see also Mistretta, 488 U.S. at 372–73
(Congress must “clearly delineate[] the general
policy … and the boundaries of this delegated authority.”
(citation omitted)). Circuit courts, including ours, have used
essentially this analysis drawn from Touby when evaluating
criminal delegations in other statutes. See United States v.

USA V. PHEASANT

47

Shih, 73 F.4th 1077, 1092 (9th Cir. 2023); Amirnazmi, 645
F.3d at 576–77; Dhafir, 461 F.3d at 216–17; United States v.
Garfinkel, 29 F.3d 451, 457–59 (8th Cir. 1994); Arch
Trading Co., 987 F.2d at 1093–94.
Applying the appropriate standard for criminal
delegations—a test akin to Touby’s meaningful-constraint
test—FLPMA’s unbounded delegation to determine, by
regulatory fiat, the actions to which criminal penalties attach
fails to pass constitutional muster. Even if § 1733(a) draws
a clear and generally applicable rule, it does not require the
Secretary to make a specific factual finding (with or without
any criteria) when determining what actions to criminalize.
And Congress did not provide any criteria to constrain
the Secretary’s exercise of policy judgment in determining
what actions to criminalize. When issuing regulations
necessary for “the management, use, and protection of the
public lands,” § 1733(a), the Secretary must consider the
“principles of multiple use and sustained yield,” § 1732(a).
“Multiple use” means treating the competing uses for BLM
land to “best meet the present and future needs of the
American people.” § 1702(c). “Sustained yield” entails “the
achievement and maintenance in perpetuity of a high-level
annual or regular periodic output of the various renewable
resources of the public lands consistent with multiple use.”
§ 1702(h). These principles—though they purport to live in
harmony—can be used to justify almost any of the potential
uses of land that a Secretary might pursue. Decisions about
land use always involve tradeoffs, and uses of land are often
mutually exclusive. For just one example, devoting land to
recreational use will inevitably inhibit resource extraction
and commercial use. But does that recreational use (which
may yield a sizable intangible benefit) “best meet the present
and future needs of the American people,” considering the

48

USA V. PHEASANT

tangible economic opportunity cost? And if so, would
commercial use not be “consistent with multiple use”?
Reasonable minds may differ. The Supreme Court has
explained, “‘[m]ultiple use management’ is a deceptively
simple term that describes the enormously complicated task
of striking a balance among the many competing uses to
which land can be put.” Norton v. S. Utah Wilderness All.,
542 U.S. 55, 58 (2004) (quoting 43 U.S.C. § 1702(c)).
From this inherently contradictory statutory guidance,
the panel concluded that Congress “set out a clear principle:
The Secretary must develop a long-term management
strategy to realize the land’s value in a sustainable way.”
Pheasant, 129 F.4th at 580. But that principle does nothing
to meaningfully limit the Secretary’s ability to decide what
conduct can, or should, be criminalized.
Sometimes, less is more. This is one such time. In
FLPMA, the Secretary must balance many contradictory
objectives—present and future uses, recreational and
commercial uses, and short-term and long-term extraction—
to name just a few. And because of these inherently
contradictory objectives, the statute “does nothing to cabin
the Secretary of the Interior’s ability to choose what is a
crime.” This arrangement gives the Secretary effectively
carte blanche “power to write a criminal code rife with his
own policy choices.” Gundy, 588 U.S. at 171 (Gorsuch, J.,
dissenting).
Because there is no Congressional guidance for
balancing these competing objectives, and unfettered
discretion when balancing them, other cases where the
Supreme Court upheld exceedingly broad civil or criminal
delegations are inapposite here. For example, in Yakus, the
Court upheld a statute that allowed an administrator “to

USA V. PHEASANT

49

stabilize commodity prices so as to prevent war-time
inflation” and stymie “enumerated disruptive causes and
effects” of inflation. 321 U.S. at 423. But unlike the statute
here, the delegating statute in Yakus represented a
congressional policy judgment that came with a
“stated … legislative objective,” a “prescribed … method of
achieving that objective,” and “standards to guide the
administrative determination.” Id. So too in Grimaud,
where the Court rejected a nondelegation challenge to a
statute that delegated authority to the Secretary of
Agriculture to regulate the occupancy and use of public
forest reservations to preserve them from destruction. 220
U.S. at 515, 522. But the Grimaud Court understood that
this rulemaking authority was limited to “regulating the use
and occupancy of the public forest reservations” so as to
“preserv[e]” them and keep them from “destruction.” Id. at
509; see also Gundy, 588 U.S. at 158 & n.37 (Gorsuch, J.,
dissenting). Here, in contrast, the Secretary can freely
exercise his own policy judgment when picking among the
competing objectives—without any guidance from Congress
on how he must weigh each particular objective of BLM’s
“multiple use and sustained yield” mandate. And unlike the
limitation in Touby, which required the agency to conclude
that a drug posed “an imminent hazard to the public safety,”
500 U.S. at 166 (citation omitted), here the Secretary is not
bound to achieve a direct policy objective that Congress has
first set in the statute. Instead, the Secretary has unfettered
discretion to balance a host of competing directives as the
Secretary sees fit.
Further, when looking at the delegation here we should
also consider the extent and scope of the delegation’s impact.
BLM manages not only 10% of the United States’s
landmass but is also the largest landholder in

50

USA V. PHEASANT

the United States and manages roughly 30 percent of the
Nation’s mineral resources. See U.S. Dep’t of the
Interior, Bureau of Land Mgmt., What We Manage,
https://www.blm.gov/about/what-we-manage (last visited
Oct. 7, 2025). Practically, this delegation lets the agency
“promulgate a plethora of rules from housing policies, to
traffic laws, to firearms regulations, to mining rules, to
agriculture certifications,” thereby granting it “unfettered
legislative authority to promulgate rules for over 48 million
acres of land [in Nevada], which is 68% of the state.” See
Norton, 542 U.S. at 58.
The geographic size and substantive scope of BLM’s
criminal lawmaking authority is already astounding. But it
gets even more monstrous given the plenary authority that
the federal government has over its land. As the panel
acknowledged, “[t]he Constitution expressly vests in
Congress, the authority to manage ‘Property belonging to
the United States.’” Pheasant, 129 F.4th at 582 (emphasis
added) (quoting U.S. Const. art. IV, § 3, cl. 2). “That
authority is plenary—the Supreme Court has described it as
‘without limitations,’ and analogous ‘to the police power of
the several states.’” Id. (citation omitted) (first quoting
United States v. City & Cnty. of San Francisco, 310 U.S. 16,
29 (1940); and then quoting Camfield v. United States, 167
U.S. 518, 525 (1897)); see also Kleppe v. New Mexico, 426
U.S. 529, 540 (1976). Far from lessening the dangers of
delegations, complete delegations of a plenary power
necessitate greater scrutiny. See Pheasant, 129 F.4th at 582.
The settled principle that the scope of Congressional
guidance must be commensurate with the scope of the
delegated authority demands as much. See Melgar-Diaz, 2
F.4th at 1267; Whitman, 531 U.S. at 475. And here, where
Congress has provided no limiting principles on what crimes

USA V. PHEASANT

51

the Secretary may fashion pursuant to Congress’s plenary
power, the effectively unbounded delegation runs afoul of
the Constitution’s demands.
III.
This case squarely presents an issue at the core of
separation of powers and individual liberty. The panel
opinion in this case broke new ground as the first circuit
court to conclusively resolve that criminal delegations are
held to the same exceedingly low standard that applies to
civil delegations. That conclusion does not follow from
Supreme Court precedent, prior Ninth Circuit precedent, or
out-of-circuit precedent, which have all declined to resolve
this question. Our court should have reheard this case en
banc to resolve that question and to correct the panel’s
erroneous conclusion that criminal delegations are not held
to a higher standard. I respectfully dissent from the denial
of rehearing en banc.

