FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CLAUDIA ALVARADO,
individually, and on behalf of others
similarly situated,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 23-3927
D.C. No.
2:20-cv-01926AB-kk

v.
OPINION
WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC., a
Delaware corporation; SAM'S WEST
INC., an Arkansas corporation,
Defendants - Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
André Birotte, Jr., District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted February 4, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 30, 2025
Before: Eric D. Miller, Kenneth K. Lee, and Roopali H.
Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Desai

2

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

SUMMARY*
Attorneys’ Fees
The panel vacated the district court’s order granting
Claudia Alvarado $312,429 in attorneys’ fees and costs on
her individual, putative class, and Private Attorneys General
Act (“PAGA”) claims against Walmart for violations of
California’s Labor Code, and remanded.
After an unsuccessful motion for class certification,
Alvarado settled her individual claims under California
Code of Civil Procedure section 998 for $22,000, and
dismissed, without prejudice, her PAGA claims. The district
court awarded Alvarado $297,799 in fees and $14,630 in
costs. Walmart argued on appeal that the parties’ section
998 agreement, by its terms, allowed Alvarado to seek fees
only for work performed exclusively on her individual
claims.
The panel held that the parties’ section 998 agreement
allowed Alvarado to seek fees under Hensley v. Eckhart, 461
U.S. 424 (1983), which allows a plaintiff who experiences
limited success to recover fees for work performed on
related items. However, the district court abused its
discretion when it failed to provide a “concise but clear”
explanation for its fee award. Accordingly, the panel
vacated the fee award and remanded to the district court for
further proceedings.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

3

COUNSEL
Scott Tillett (argued), Pine Tillett Pine LLP, Sherman Oaks,
California; Mikael H. Stahle, Matthew J. Matern, and Debra
J. Tauger, Matern Law Group PC, El Segundo, California;
for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Jack S. Sholkoff (argued), Carmen Aguado, Catherine L.
Brackett, and Paloma P. Peracchio, Ogletree Deakins Nash
Smoak & Stewart PC, Los Angeles, California; Mitchell A.
Wrosch, Ogletree Deakins Nash Smoak & Stewart PC, Costa
Mesa,
California;
Alejandro
D.
Szwarcsztejn,
McGuireWoods LLP, Los Angeles, California; for
Defendants-Appellants.

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
Wal-Mart Associates, Inc. and Sam’s Club (collectively,
“Walmart”) appeal the district court’s order granting Claudia
Alvarado $312,429 in attorneys’ fees and costs. Alvarado
brought individual, putative class, and Private Attorneys
General Act (“PAGA”) claims against Walmart for
violations of California’s Labor Code. After an unsuccessful
motion for class certification, Alvarado settled her individual
claims under California Code of Civil Procedure section 998
for $22,000, and dismissed, without prejudice, her PAGA
claims. On appeal, Walmart argues that Alvarado’s fee
award violates the parties’ section 998 agreement because it
includes fees under Hensley v. Eckerhart, 461 U.S. 424
(1983), which allows a plaintiff who experiences limited

4

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

success to recover fees for work performed on related
claims.
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We hold
that the parties’ section 998 agreement allowed Alvarado to
seek Hensley fees. But the district court failed to provide an
adequate explanation for its award, so we vacate the award
and remand to the district court for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
BACKGROUND
Claudia Alvarado began working for Sam’s Club, a
chain grocery store operated by Walmart, in 2008. In 2019,
Alvarado worked at the Sam’s Club in Glendora, California,
for six weeks. During that time, Alvarado alleges that she
was denied meal and rest breaks, was not paid for overtime
hours, did not receive itemized wage statements, and was
required to use her personal cell phone for work purposes
without reimbursement.
Alvarado retained Matern Law Group, PC (“MLG”), and
filed a complaint against Walmart in Los Angeles Superior
Court for violations of California’s Labor Code. Alvarado
brought the action in her individual capacity, as a member of
a putative class, and in a representative capacity under
PAGA. Walmart removed the action to the Central District
of California.
Walmart moved to dismiss Alvarado’s Complaint,
asserting that she failed to allege sufficient facts to support a
class action lawsuit. Alvarado amended her Complaint four
times. The district court dismissed Alvarado’s class-wide
claims for meal break, rest break, and overtime violations, as
well as her unfair business practices claim. She was left with
her class-wide claim for business expense reimbursement,

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

5

her individual claims, and her claim for civil penalties under
PAGA.
After discovery, Alvarado moved to certify a class for
the business expense reimbursement claim. The district court
denied certification because Alvarado failed to meet the
commonality and predominance requirements pursuant to
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23.
Alvarado proceeded to litigate her individual and PAGA
claims, and Walmart defended the claims. The parties
eventually held settlement discussions but were unable to
reach an agreement. Roughly one month before trial,
Walmart served an offer of settlement to Alvarado under
California Code of Civil Procedure section 998, “in full and
complete settlement of the claims asserted by [Alvarado] in
her individual capacity.” The terms of the offer were as
follows:
1. Defendants offer to pay to Plaintiff the
amount of $22,000, exclusive of all
attorneys’ fees and costs incurred up to
the date of this offer.
2. Plaintiff’s counsel may seek an award of
reasonable fees and costs actually
incurred as of the date of this Offer in
pursuit of Plaintiff’s individual claims in
this action and recoverable by law. The
amount of fees to be awarded to
Plaintiff’s counsel, if unable to be agreed
upon by the parties, will be determined by
the Court consistent with the terms of this
Offer . . . . Defendants’ counsel reserves
the right to challenge or otherwise oppose

6

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

any motion or application for fees
brought by Plaintiff’s counsel, including
without limitation, the right to oppose any
request for fees and costs not incurred in
the prosecution of Plaintiff’s remaining
individual claims.
3. In exchange for the offer in Paragraph 1
above, Plaintiff releases all of her
individual claims in this action and will
file a dismissal of those claims with
prejudice . . . Plaintiff releases her
representative claim for civil penalties
under the Private Attorneys General Act,
and will file a dismissal of that claim
without prejudice.
Alvarado accepted Walmart’s offer, and the district court
entered judgment in accordance with its terms, retaining
jurisdiction to decide any motion for attorneys’ fees and
costs. Because the parties could not agree on the fee amount,
Alvarado filed a motion for attorneys’ fees and costs in the
amount of $591,044.25 in fees and $44,879.34 in costs. In
her motion, Alvarado argued that she was entitled to recover
fees and costs arising from her class and PAGA claims
because they were “inextricably intertwined” with her
individual claims, making an apportionment of fees
unnecessary under Hensley v. Eckerhart.
Walmart objected to Alvarado’s fee request. Citing
Hensley, it argued that because of Alvarado’s limited
success, she was not entitled to any fees or, in the alternative,
should be awarded at most $22,000. Notably, Walmart did
not argue that section 998, or the parties’ agreement
thereunder, completely barred the recovery or

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

7

apportionment of fees under Hensley. Rather, Walmart
assumed a Hensley analysis was proper but argued for
apportionment of fees. Specifically, Walmart asserted that,
under Hensley, Alvarado’s individual claims were unrelated
to her class and PAGA claims, and that the district court was
thus required to apportion Alvarado’s fee request to exclude
any fees associated with her class and PAGA claims.
In her reply, Alvarado maintained that her class claims
were so intertwined with her individual claims that
apportionment was unnecessary. But “in the spirit of
compromise” she reduced her fee request by attorney time
spent on class certification proceedings and all legal
assistants’ time. 1 This resulted in a revised request of
$297,799—a near 50 percent reduction.
The district court granted Alvarado’s motion. After
noting that “an analysis of whether [Alvarado] is the
prevailing party . . . is unnecessary” because “the parties do
not dispute that an attorney award is due,” the court turned
to apportionment:
[W]hile the initial motion and its opposition
called on the Court to determine whether
attorney fees for any labor related to the class
action were warranted, Plaintiff has since
filed a reply with an offer to deduct attorney
time spent on the class certification
proceedings, including work on any potential
appeal, and to forego the entirety of the legal
assistants’ time. Thus, an analysis regarding
apportionment is moot. Now the question
1

Alvarado did not deduct fees for work associated with her PAGA
claims.

8

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

before the Court is whether the new lodestar
figure, $297,799, is reasonable. This Court
concludes that it is.
The court then determined that the hourly rates requested for
Alvarado’s “attorneys and legal assistants are within the
prevailing rate for attorneys and legal assistants of similar
background, skill and experience conducting noncontingent
litigation of the same type.”
Turing to Alvarado’s requested costs, the district court
noted that although Alvarado “significantly reduced her
initial lodestar request in her Reply, her request for costs
remained unchanged.” The court then summarized the
parties’ dispute over costs, and concluded that “[w]hatever
the entitlement, this Court believes it unreasonable to award
Plaintiff full costs for items she’s explicitly labeled [as]
PAGA-related only, where we have already endorsed her
deduction of attorney time for PAGA-related claims.”
Accordingly, the district court deducted $3,137.59 for
PAGA administration service fees and $27,111.75 for expert
witness fees “necessary to prove [Alvarado’s] PAGA
claims.” Ultimately, the district court awarded Alvarado
$297,799 in fees and $14,630 in costs.
On appeal, Walmart now argues that the parties’ section
998 agreement, by its terms, allows Alvarado to seek fees
only for work performed exclusively on her individual
claims.2
2

Walmart forfeited this argument by not raising it before the district
court. But forfeiture can be waived, see Norwood v. Vance, 591 F.3d
1062, 1068 (9th Cir. 2010), and, at oral argument, Alvarado urged us to
consider Walmart’s argument in full. Although we normally do not

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

9

STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review the award of attorneys’ fees pursuant to state
law for an abuse of discretion. Kona Enters., Inc. v. Est. of
Bishop, 229 F.3d 877, 883 (9th Cir. 2000). “Contract
interpretation is a question of law that we review de novo.”
Doe I v. Wal-Mart Stores, Inc., 572 F.3d 677, 681 (9th Cir.
2009); Golden v. Cal. Emergency Physicians Med. Grp., 896
F.3d 1018, 1021 (9th Cir. 2018). California substantive law
governs the interpretation of the section 998 agreement and
the availability and amount of attorneys’ fees. See Mangold
v. Cal. Pub. Utils. Comm’n, 67 F.3d 1470, 1478 (9th Cir.
1995).
DISCUSSION
Section 998 of the California Code of Civil Procedure
encourages parties to settle their disputes before trial by
shifting the costs of litigation to a party that declines a pretrial offer of settlement but does not ultimately obtain a more
favorable result at trial. When parties settle under section
998, they may limit or expand recoverable costs and fees by
the express terms of their agreement. See Cal Code Civ. P.
§ 998(b); Doran v. N. State Grocery, Inc., 39 Cal. Rptr. 3d
922, 927 (Ct. App. 2006). But when “a section 998 offer is
silent on costs and fees, the prevailing party is entitled to
costs and, if authorized by statute or contract, fees.” Engle v.
Copenbarger & Copenbarger, LLP, 68 Cal. Rptr. 3d 461,
463 (Ct. App. 2007). Section 998 itself does not “expressly
authorize an award of attorney fees.” Riverside Mining Ltd.
v. Quality Aggregates, 324 Cal. Rptr. 3d 567, 573 (Ct. App.
consider arguments raised for the first time on appeal, because
Walmart’s argument involves a pure question of law, and the parties
have fully briefed the issue, our review is appropriate. In re Am. W.
Airlines, Inc., 217 F.3d 1161, 1165 (9th Cir. 2000).

10

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

2024). Instead, “[a]ttorney fees are recoverable as costs only
if there is some other statutory or contractual right to such
fees.” Id.; see also LNSU #1, LLC v. Alta Del Mar Coastal
Collection Cmty. Ass’n, 312 Cal. Rptr. 3d 707, 733 n.4 (Ct.
App. 2023) (“Because the relevant statute . . . gave
[respondent] no right to recover attorney fees from
appellants, Code of Civil Procedure section 998 did not
authorize the fee shifting ordered by the court.”); Ford
Motor Credit Co. v. Hunsberger, 78 Cal. Rptr. 3d 661, 665
(Ct. App. 2008) (“[S]ection 998 does not independently
create a statutory right to attorney fees”).
Just as “section 998 does not grant greater rights to
attorney’s fees than those provided by the underlying
statute,” Mangano v. Verity, Inc., 84 Cal. Rptr. 3d 526, 531
(Ct. App. 2008) (emphasis added), it also does not grant
lesser rights to fees available under California law. At
bottom, section 998 is a cost-shifting statute: it determines
who bears the burden of costs and, when authorized by
statute or contract, who is entitled to attorneys’ fees. It does
not, however, determine the availability or extent of fees. See
id. (noting that section 998 “merely expands the group of
those who are treated as prevailing parties and who therefore
may be entitled to attorney’s fees as prevailing parties under
the relevant statute,” and holding that the district court must
conduct the analysis for determining fees as required by the
underlying statute). Thus, absent explicit language in the
parties’ section 998 agreement to the contrary, Alvarado is
entitled to seek precisely those fees authorized by California
law—no more, no less.3

3

The parties do not dispute that Alvarado is the “prevailing party” for
purposes of section 998, but they disagree about the extent of her success.

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

11

I. The parties’ section 998 agreement does not preclude
Hensley fees.
The parties agree that Alvarado’s entitlement to fees is
controlled by the section 998 agreement. They also agree
that Alvarado experienced “limited success” because she
partially succeeded on her individual claims but did not
prevail on her class and PAGA claims. 4 But the parties
dispute whether their section 998 agreement prevents the
plaintiff from recovering fees for work performed on
unsuccessful claims that are closely related to her successful
claims. It does not.
When an employee successfully enforces California’s
Labor Code against her employer, or successfully brings a
PAGA action, she is entitled to reasonable attorney fees. Cal.
Labor Code § 1194 (unpaid overtime claim); § 2802(c)
(reimbursement claim); § 2699(g)(1) (PAGA claim). If the
employee achieves “limited success”—succeeding on some,
but not all, of her claims—California courts apply the
Hensley test to determine the appropriate fee award. Gunther
v. Alaska Airlines, Inc., 287 Cal. Rptr. 3d 229, 252 (Ct. App.
2021). Under Hensley, if a plaintiff “fail[s] to prevail on a
claim that is distinct in all respects from [her] successful
claims,” apportionment is proper. 461 U.S. at 440. That is,
the district court must delineate fees arising from the
plaintiff’s successful and unsuccessful claims and only
4

It is largely undisputed that Alvarado’s class and PAGA claims failed.
Her class claims were either dismissed or denied class certification. And
Alvarado did not receive any civil penalties under PAGA, nor was any
portion of her settlement distributed to the state, so she is not a successful
PAGA plaintiff. See Galarsa v. Dolgen Cal., LLC, 305 Cal. Rptr. 3d 15,
21 (Ct. App. 2023) (holding that if 75 percent of recovered funds is not
distributed to the state as required by PAGA, the funds “[are] not
recovered on a ‘PAGA claim’”).

12

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

award the former. But a plaintiff may recover fees for work
performed on her unsuccessful claims if they “are so
intertwined” with her successful claims “that it would be
impracticable, if not impossible, to separate the attorney’s
time into compensable and non-compensable units.” Hjelm
v. Prometheus Real Est. Grp., Inc., 208 Cal. Rptr. 3d 394,
410 (Ct. App. 2016) (quotation omitted).
When the claims are so related as to render
apportionment impracticable, the court has discretion to
determine whether the plaintiff’s limited success justifies a
fee award. Gunther, 287 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 252. “There is no
precise rule or formula for making these determinations.”
Hensley, 461 U.S. at 436. The court may “attempt to identify
specific hours that should be eliminated, or it may simply
reduce the award to account for the limited success.” Id. at
436–37; see also Reynolds Metals Co. v. Alperson, 599 P.2d
83, 86 (Cal. 1979) (“[A]ttorney’s fees need not be
apportioned when incurred for representation on an issue
common to both a cause of action in which fees are proper
and one in which they are not allowed.”)
Under California law, Alvarado is therefore entitled to
seek fees for her partially successful individual claims and,
in accordance with Hensley, for her class and PAGA claims
insofar as they are intertwined with her individual claims.
See Gunther, 287 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 252. Because a section 998
agreement does not automatically alter the plaintiff’s
entitlement to costs and fees, see Mangano, 84 Cal. Rptr. 3d
at 531, the availability of fees and costs under Hensley is the
default, and Walmart must point to specific language in the
parties’ section 998 agreement to displace it. Engle, 68 Cal.
Rptr. 3d at 464 (“The rule is that a section 998 offer to
compromise excludes fees only if it says so expressly.”).

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

13

Section 998 agreements are contractual in nature, so
general contract principles apply to their interpretation as
long as they do not “conflict with nor defeat the statute’s
purpose of encouraging the settlement of lawsuits prior to
trial.” Timed Out LLC v. 13359 Corp., 230 Cal. Rptr. 3d 842,
849 (Ct. App. 2018) (quotation omitted). To interpret the
parties’ 998 agreement, we first “look to the plain meaning
of the agreement’s language.” Linton v. Cnty. of Contra
Costa, 243 Cal. Rptr. 3d 183, 189 (Ct. App. 2019). If the
agreement’s language “is clear and explicit, and does not
involve an absurdity,” it controls. Cal. Civ. Code § 1638.
When a section 998 agreement is silent on fees and costs,
“those fees and costs may be recovered in a later motion.”
Timed Out, 230 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 850; see also Engle, 68 Cal.
Rptr. 3d at 168. Thus, “for attorney fees and costs to be
waived, the waiver must be express and not by implication.”
Timed Out, 230 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 850.
The parties’ section 998 agreement permits Alvarado to
seek “reasonable fees and costs actually incurred . . . in
pursuit of Plaintiff’s individual claims in this action and
recoverable by law.” A plain reading of this language
permits Alvarado to seek and obtain any fees, “recoverable
by law,” for her individual claims if, under California law,
they are reasonable. That is no more and no less than she is
otherwise entitled to under California law.
The surrounding text of the parties’ agreement supports
this interpretation. See Cal. Civ. Code § 1641 (“The whole
of a contract is to be taken together, so as to give effect to
every part, if reasonably practicable, each clause helping to
interpret the other.”). The parties anticipated that they might
disagree about what fees “incurred in pursuit of Alvarado’s
individual claims” are “recoverable by law.” They provided
for this eventuality by establishing a procedure for any

14

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

potential dispute—that Alvarado’s fees would be
“determined by the Court consistent with the terms of” the
agreement. Indeed, Walmart reserved the right to “oppose
any request for fees and costs not incurred in the prosecution
of [Alvarado’s] remaining individual claims.” Because they
could not agree on an answer themselves, they left it to the
discretion of the district court.
Walmart argues that the agreement’s plain language—
specifically its repeated mention of “individual claims”—
precludes an award of fees under Hensley altogether. The
premise of Walmart’s argument is that an award of fees
under Hensley is an award of fees for Alvarado’s class and
PAGA claims, and because the agreement only mentions
“individual claims,” Alvarado cannot recover Hensley fees.
Walmart misunderstands the point of the Hensley
analysis. If performed correctly, the Hensley analysis does
not award fees for unsuccessful claims. Instead, it ensures
that counsel is appropriately compensated for successful
claims. See Hensley, 461 U.S. at 434–35. By awarding fees
for “mixed work”—that is, work that advanced both
unsuccessful and successful claims—the Hensley inquiry
allows district courts to determine a fee award that is
proportional to a plaintiff’s success, no matter how
individual entries are labeled. Id. at 435 (describing how
when a plaintiff’s claims “involve a common core of facts”
or are “based on related legal theories,” “[m]uch of counsel’s
time will be devoted generally to the litigation as a whole,
making it difficult to divide the hours expended on a claimby-claim basis”). In short, fees awarded under Hensley are
fees awarded for Alvarado’s individual claims and therefore
plainly fall within the agreement’s terms.

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

15

Far from rendering the term “individual claims”
superfluous, our interpretation gives the term its full import.
To hold otherwise would not only gut the agreement of its
plain meaning under California law but would also require
us to find that Alvarado waived her right to seek fees to
which she is otherwise entitled—without any express
language saying as much. This we cannot do. See Timed Out,
230 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 850.
We note that, before the district court, Walmart did not
argue that the agreement precluded a Hensley analysis. To
the contrary, Walmart robustly engaged with Hensley,
arguing that Alvarado’s class and PAGA claims were
unrelated to her individual claims, and that the fees should
be apportioned accordingly. Given that Walmart failed to
even raise its now-favored interpretation of the section 998
agreement below, it can hardly be said to reflect the plain
language of the agreement.
We therefore hold that the parties’ section 998 agreement
does not limit Alvarado’s ability to seek fees or the district
court’s discretion to award fees otherwise recoverable under
California law, including those awarded under Hensley.
II. The district court abused its discretion when it failed
to provide a “concise but clear” explanation for its fee
award.
Although Alvarado may seek—and the district court
may award—fees for interrelated claims under Hensley, the
district court “must explain how it came up with the
amount.” Moreno v. City of Sacramento, 534 F.3d 1106,
1111 (9th Cir. 2008). The district court’s explanation need
not be elaborate; it may be concise. Hensley, 461 U.S. at 437.
But if it is concise, it must be clear. Id. When the district
court’s reasoning is indiscernible from the record,

16

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

contradictory, or non-existent, the award cannot stand. See
Gates v. Deukmejian, 987 F.2d 1392, 1400 (9th Cir. 1992)
(“Absent some indication of how the district court exercised
its discretion, we are unable to assess whether the court
abused that discretion.”). Although we grant the district
court great discretion in awarding attorneys’ fees, “[w]e
can’t defer to reasoning that we can’t review.” Moreno, 534
F.3d at 1116.
The district court’s decision is concise, but it is not clear.
Alvarado’s fee award is defensible only if the district court
made two conclusions: First, that under Hensley, her class
and PAGA claims are “related to” her individual claims and
need not be apportioned. And second, that her limited
success—the $22,000 she received for her individual
claims—justified her $297,799 fee request in light of the
scope of the original litigation. Gunther, 287 Cal. Rptr. 3d at
253 (“[Hensley] requires that the trial court evaluate the
significance of the overall relief obtained by plaintiff in
relation to the hours reasonably expended on the litigation
and reduce the lodestar calculation if the relief is limited in
comparison to the scope of the litigation as a whole.”). Based
on the record before us, it is unclear if the district court
properly made these determinations. Indeed, Alvarado
concedes that, at least to some degree, the district court did
not correctly apply Hensley because she was improperly
awarded $6,370.50 incurred solely to advance her class
claims. And, despite the district court’s statement that
“apportionment is moot,” the parties’ briefing below and
their continued litigation over Alvarado’s revised fee request
demonstrates otherwise.
What is more, the district court appears to have
concluded that certain PAGA-related fees were improper,
but it is unclear whether it actually deducted those fees from

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

17

the final award. After accepting Alvarado’s fee request, the
district court stated that because it “endorsed” Alvarado’s
voluntary deduction of “PAGA-related fees,” it would
deduct costs that Alvarado had “explicitly labeled ‘PAGAonly’” from her request. But the district court could not have
“endorsed” Alvarado’s deduction of PAGA-related fees,
because Alvarado did not deduct any PAGA fees in her
revised request. Thus, it is unclear whether the district court
misperceived Alvarado’s revised fee request, or whether it
had some valid reason for believing the reduced fee request
accounted for Alvarado’s PAGA-related fees. The district
court’s declaration that “apportionment is moot,” combined
with its later statement that it “endorsed” the deduction of
fees that it did not deduct, calls into question the reasoning
for its award.
The district court may have had legitimate reasons for
adopting Alvarado’s revised fee request. It is possible the
district court decided that apportionment was impractical
and concluded that Alvarado’s near 50 percent reduction of
her fee request adequately accounted for her limited success.
But it is also possible that the district court failed to conduct
the Hensley analysis entirely. Because we cannot discern
how the district court exercised its discretion, we cannot
determine whether it was appropriate, inappropriate, or
exercised at all. We therefore vacate and remand Alvarado’s
fee award for reconsideration by the district court. We take
no position on the propriety of Alvarado’s fee award and
leave for the district court to determine an appropriate fee
award consistent with the principles outlined here—and to
provide a “concise but clear” explanation for the award.
Hensley, 461 U.S. at 437.

18

ALVARADO V. WAL-MART ASSOCIATES, INC.

CONCLUSION
We conclude that the parties’ section 998 agreement
does not preclude Alvarado from recovering fees under
Hensley, but that the district court abused its discretion by
failing to provide a clear explanation for its fee award.
VACATED and REMANDED. Each party shall bear
its own costs on appeal.

