FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
In re: SVENHARD’S SWEDISH
BAKERY,
Debtor.
______________________________
SVENHARD’S SWEDISH BAKERY,

No. 23-60045
BAP No.
23-1001
OPINION

Appellant,
v.
BAKERY AND CONFECTIONARY
UNION AND INDUSTRY
INTERNATIONAL PENSION
FUND,
Appellee.
Appeal from the Ninth Circuit
Bankruptcy Appellate Panel
Gan, Lafferty III, and Brand, Bankruptcy Judges, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 20, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed September 12, 2025

2

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT.

Before: Marsha S. Berzon, Michelle T. Friedland, and
Salvador Mendoza, Jr., Circuit Judges.
Per Curiam Opinion
SUMMARY*
Bankruptcy
The panel affirmed, on a different ground, the
Bankruptcy Appellate Panel’s decision affirming the
bankruptcy court’s order denying Chapter 11 debtor in
possession Svenhard’s Swedish Bakery’s motion to assume
and assign a contract.
The bankruptcy court denied the motion because the
contract was not “executory” within the meaning of 11
U.S.C. § 365(a) and, in the alternative, because the contract
was a “financial accommodation” and therefore not
assumable or assignable under § 365(c)(2). The Bankruptcy
Appellate Panel affirmed on the first ground, leaving the
second undecided.
The panel affirmed on the second ground, holding that
the contract was a financial accommodation and therefore
not assumable or assignable. The contract was a settlement
agreement between Svenhard, a commercial bakery that had
sold its business to United States Bakery and had closed one
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT. 3

of its facilities, and the Bakery and Confectionary Union and
Industry International Pension Fund. The Pension Fund
asserted that, under the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act, Svenhard was subject to withdrawal liability
and delinquent-contribution liability. Under § 365(c)(2), a
debtor in possession is prohibited from assuming or
assigning any contract “to make a loan, or extend other debt
financing or financial accommodations, to or for the benefit
of the debtor.” Consulting Black’s Law Dictionary, the
panel concluded that the ordinary and common meaning of
“financial accommodation” at the time of enactment of § 365
included contracts to forebear or reduce payments to which
one was otherwise entitled, if those contracts were agreed
upon to aid a debtor’s poor financial condition. The panel
concluded that the settlement agreement was plainly such a
contract, and therefore was not assumable or assignable.

COUNSEL
Derrick Talerico (argued), Weintraub Zolkin Talerico &
Selth LLP, Los Angeles, California, for Appellant.
Joshua B. Shiffrin (argued), Cole Hanzlicek, and Joshua A.
Segal, Bredhoff & Kaiser PLLC, Washington, D.C.; Daniel
L. Egan, Wilke Fleury LLP, Sacramento, California; for
Appellee.

4

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT.

OPINION
PER CURIAM:
The Bankruptcy Code limits the circumstances under
which a debtor’s contracts survive bankruptcy proceedings.
In particular, under § 365 of the Bankruptcy Code, a “debtor
in possession”—“a debtor that is the subject of a Chapter 11
case and who has not been ousted from possession by the
appointment of a Chapter 11 trustee,” 8 Michael A.
Wolf, Powell on Real Property § 57A.02 (2025)—may,
subject to court approval, “assume or reject any executory
contract” to which the debtor is a party and, if the executory
contract is assumed, may assign the debtor’s rights and
obligations under that contract to another person or entity,
11 U.S.C. § 365(a), (f); id. § 1107(a). But that power is
subject to exceptions. As relevant here, a debtor in
possession is prohibited from assuming or assigning any
contract “to make a loan, or extend other debt financing or
financial accommodations, to or for the benefit of the
debtor.” Id. § 365(c)(2).
In this case, the bankruptcy court denied a motion to
assume and assign a contract brought by Debtor-Appellant
Svenhard’s Swedish Bakery (“Svenhard”). The bankruptcy
court held that the particular contract to which Svenhard is a
party is not “executory” within the meaning of § 365(a) and,
in the alternative, that it is a “financial accommodation” and
therefore not assumable or assignable under § 365(c)(2).
The Bankruptcy Appellate Panel (“BAP”) affirmed on the
first ground, leaving the second undecided.
We affirm on the second ground, holding that the
contract is a financial accommodation, without reaching
whether it is executory.

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT. 5

I.
A.
Svenhard was a commercial bakery that owned facilities
in Oakland, California, and Exeter, California. Svenhard
had long been a participating employer in the Bakery and
Confectionary Union and Industry International Pension
Fund (“the Pension Fund”) and so was obligated to make
pension contributions on behalf of certain employees
covered by and participating in the Pension Fund.
In early 2014, financial difficulties prompted Svenhard
to sell its business to United States Bakery (“USB”). As part
of that sale, Svenhard agreed to transfer the Exeter facility
and its equipment to USB, to lease the Exeter facility and its
equipment back from USB for five years, and to close the
Oakland facility. In 2015, Svenhard proceeded to close the
Oakland facility and to move its operations to Exeter. As
part of that process, Svenhard terminated its Oakland
workforce and stopped contributing to the Pension Fund.
The Pension Fund notified Svenhard that it believed that
Svenhard had effectively withdrawn from the Pension Fund
and was subject to two liabilities under the Employee
Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (“ERISA”): a
withdrawal liability of approximately $50 million (capped
by ERISA to approximately $39 million) and a delinquentcontribution liability of more than $500,000 for failing to
make severance and vacation payouts. Svenhard did not
timely contest those liabilities through the procedures
provided by ERISA. See 29 U.S.C. § 1399(b). Instead,
Svenhard gave the Pension Fund financial information
describing Svenhard’s “limited assets.”

6

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT.

The Pension Fund ultimately agreed to settle Svenhard’s
liabilities (“Settlement Agreement”) for a significantly
reduced amount, to be paid in monthly installments over
twenty years. Specifically, Svenhard promised to pay
$12,500 each month for 240 months (totaling $3 million) to
satisfy the withdrawal liability. Svenhard also agreed to pay
the delinquent-contribution liability, with interest, in
monthly installments of $8,580.80.
The Settlement
Agreement expressly indicated that the Pension Fund agreed
to that arrangement because, after reviewing Svenhard’s
financial information, the Pension Fund concluded that
pursuing the full value of its claims against Svenhard “would
almost certainly cause . . . secured creditors to assert their
rights to Svenhard’s assets, leaving little or nothing for the
Pension Fund” to recover. The Settlement Agreement
further stated that the reduced monthly payments would
likely allow Svenhard “to be able to pay while continuing to
operate its business.” A few months later, however,
Svenhard ceased operations and defaulted on the Settlement
Agreement.
B.
Around the same time that Svenhard defaulted on the
Settlement Agreement, it filed a Chapter 11 bankruptcy
petition. In those proceedings, USB filed a motion to
convert Svenhard’s bankruptcy from Chapter 11 to Chapter
7. The bankruptcy court denied that motion, and USB
appealed—first to the United States District Court for the
Eastern District of California, which dismissed the appeal
for lack of jurisdiction, and then to our court. While that
appeal was pending in our court, Svenhard, USB, and a
committee of Svenhard’s unsecured creditors participated in
a mediation facilitated by the Ninth Circuit Mediation
Program. Although the Pension Fund was one of Svenhard’s

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT. 7

unsecured creditors, it recused itself from the mediation at
Svenhard and USB’s request.
Through that mediation, Svenhard and USB reached a
conditional compromise to settle their litigation. That
compromise was contingent upon, among other things, a
ruling from the bankruptcy court allowing the Settlement
Agreement between Svenhard and the Pension Fund to be
assumed by Svenhard and assigned to USB.
C.
Pursuant to its compromise with USB, Svenhard filed
two motions in bankruptcy court. First, Svenhard filed a
motion for approval of the compromise under Federal Rule
of Bankruptcy Procedure 9019. Second, Svenhard filed a
motion under § 365 to assume the Settlement Agreement as
an “executory” contract and to assign it to USB “as a valid
and subsisting contract.” The Pension Fund opposed
Svenhard’s motions, contending that the Settlement
Agreement could not be assumed or assigned under § 365
and that a proceeding on a motion to assume and assign was
not an appropriate proceeding in which to decide the validity
of the Settlement Agreement.1
The bankruptcy court denied Svenhard’s motion to
assume and assign on two grounds: first, that the Settlement
Agreement is not “executory” within the meaning of
1

The Pension Fund has asserted that the Settlement Agreement is
voidable for fraud because Svenhard “failed to disclose to the Pension
Fund the scope of its relationship with USB, let alone that USB was
covertly encouraging negotiations to reduce the outstanding liabilities
owed to the Pension Fund.” Those issues are the subject of separate
litigation in the United States District Court for the District of Oregon.
See Bd. of Trs. of the Bakery & Confectionary Union & Indus. Int’l
Pension Fund v. U.S. Bakery, et al., No. 3:21-cv-00617-SI.

8

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT.

§ 365(a); and, second, that it is a “financial accommodation”
that cannot be assumed or assigned under § 365(c)(2). The
bankruptcy court declined to decide whether the Settlement
Agreement is a “valid and subsisting” contract, reasoning
that it would be procedurally improper to do so on a motion
to assume and assign.
Svenhard appealed to the BAP, which affirmed the
bankruptcy court’s decision that the Settlement Agreement
is not “executory” without deciding whether it is a “financial
accommodation” under § 365(c)(2). The BAP also affirmed
the bankruptcy court’s refusal to decide the validity of the
Settlement Agreement.
Svenhard timely appealed.
II.
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 158(d).
“Because appeals from the BAP are subject to de novo
review, [we] independently review[] the Bankruptcy Court’s
decision. We review conclusions of law de novo and
conclusions of fact for clear error.” In re Vortex Fishing
Sys., Inc., 277 F.3d 1057, 1064 (9th Cir. 2002).
Svenhard argues that the Settlement Agreement can be
assumed under 11 U.S.C. § 365(a) because it is “executory.”
Svenhard further argues that the financial-accommodation
exception under § 365(c)(2) does not apply because the
Settlement Agreement is “not a contract to make a loan, nor
is it a contract to extend money or credit to Svenhard[].” We
need not and do not decide whether the Settlement
Agreement is “executory” because—even if we were to
accept that the Settlement Agreement is “executory”—we
conclude that it constitutes a “financial accommodation” that
is not assumable or assignable under § 365(c)(2).

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT. 9

We begin with the text of the Bankruptcy Code. Section
365(c) provides that a debtor in possession “may not assume
or assign any executory contract . . . if . . . such contract is a
contract to make a loan, or extend other debt financing or
financial accommodations, to or for the benefit of the
debtor.” 11 U.S.C. §§ 365(c), 1107(a).2 In interpreting that
provision, we apply the “fundamental canon of statutory
construction . . . that, unless otherwise defined, words will
be interpreted as taking their ordinary, contemporary, [and]
common meaning.” Perrin v. United States, 444 U.S. 37, 42
(1979).
Because Congress did not define the term “financial
accommodations,” “‘we follow the common practice of
consulting dictionary definitions . . .’ and look to how the
term[] [was] defined ‘at the time [the statute] was adopted’”
to determine that term’s ordinary, contemporary, and
common meaning. United States v. TRW Rifle 7.62x51mm
Caliber, 447 F.3d 686, 689 (9th Cir. 2006) (third alteration
in original) (quoting United States v. Carter, 421 F.3d 909,
911 (9th Cir. 2005)). When § 365(c)(2) of the Bankruptcy
Code was enacted in 1978, see An Act to Establish a
Uniform Law on the Subject of Bankruptcies, Pub. L. No.
95-598, 92 Stat. 2549 (1978), Black’s Law Dictionary
defined “accommodation” as “[a]n arrangement or
engagement made as a favor to another” or “something done
to oblige, usually . . . a loan of money or commercial paper,”
Accommodation, Black’s Law Dictionary (rev. 4th ed.
1968). Other dictionaries from that period were in accord.
2

Section 365(c) refers to the “[t]he trustee.” Section 1107(a) provides
that a debtor in possession “shall have all the rights . . . and shall perform
all the functions and duties . . . of a trustee serving in a case under this
chapter,” subject to certain exceptions not relevant here.

10 SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT.

See Accommodation, The Am. Heritage Dictionary of the
Eng. Language (New College ed. 1976) (“A loan or other
financial favor.”); Accommodation, Webster’s Third New
Int’l Dictionary (1976) (“[S]omething that is supplied for
convenience or to satisfy a need.”). An agreement to accept
as full payment much less than the amount contractually due
in recognition of the debtor’s financial inability to pay the
full amount is assuredly a “financial favor,” and one
provided “to satisfy a need” of the debtor. Thus, the ordinary
and common meaning of “financial accommodations” at the
time of enactment included contracts to forebear or reduce
payments to which one was otherwise entitled, if those
contracts were agreed upon to aid a debtor’s poor financial
condition.3
The Settlement Agreement is plainly such a contract.
The Settlement Agreement itself memorialized that
Svenhard was liable for tens of millions of dollars that it
could not fully repay because of its “limited assets,” and that
the Pension Fund accordingly agreed to “accept a schedule
of payments . . . that Svenhard [was] likely to be able to pay
while continuing to operate its business.” In other words,
the Settlement Agreement involves the forbearance and
reduction of the amount to which the Pension Fund would
otherwise be entitled, and the Pension Fund agreed to that

3

The definition of “accommodation” has remained substantially the
same. See, e.g., Accommodation, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed.
2024) (“A loan or other financial favor.”); Accommodation, MerriamWebster’s Collegiate Dictionary (11th ed. 2022) (“[S]omething supplied
for convenience or to satisfy a need.”); Accommodation, The Am.
Heritage Dictionary of the Eng. Language (3d ed. 2000) (“A financial
favor.”).

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT. 11

arrangement expressly because of Svenhard’s poor financial
condition.4
Svenhard
argues
that
the
term
“financial
accommodations” includes only loans or other extensions of
money or credit, neither of which are present here. But,
again, the ordinary meaning of “accommodation” at the time
of § 365’s enactment was “something done to oblige,
usually”—not exclusively—“a loan of money or
commercial paper.”
Accommodation, Black’s Law
Dictionary (4th ed. 1968) (emphasis added); see also
Accommodation, The Am. Heritage Dictionary of the Eng.
Language (New College ed. 1976) (“A loan or other
financial favor.” (emphasis added)).
Also, “[t]he superfluity canon guides [us] to infer that
Congress did not intend to make any portion of a statute
superfluous,” In re Pangang Grp. Co., 901 F.3d 1046, 1056
(9th Cir. 2018), and it requires us to “give effect to every
word of a statute wherever possible,” id. (quoting Leocal v.
Ashcroft, 543 U.S. 1, 12 (2004)). Although there may be
4

Svenhard argues that even if one purpose of the Settlement Agreement
was to reduce Svenhard’s liabilities because of its poor financial
condition, another purpose was to “settle[] a pending dispute between
the parties over the amount of those original liabilities.” That purported
other purpose does not comport with the Settlement Agreement’s terms.
On appeal, Svenhard suggests that its pre-settlement withdrawal liability
may have been around $23 million—not $39 million as stated in the
Settlement Agreement. The terms of the Settlement Agreement provided
that Svenhard would pay the Pension Fund only $3 million for its
withdrawal liability. That figure is so far below either liability figure—
$23 million or $39 million—that it could not have been meant to settle
the amount actually due. Rather, the Settlement Agreement’s purpose
was to accommodate Svenhard’s inability to pay its withdrawal
liability—whether $23 million or $39 million—by requiring payment
only of a much lower amount.

12 SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT.

overlap between what constitutes a “loan,” “debt financing,”
or “financial accommodations” under § 365(c)(2), that
Congress used each of those terms indicates that each should
carry distinct meaning. Otherwise, Congress “could have
omitted the word[s] [“financial accommodations”] . . .
altogether.” Carcieri v. Salazar, 555 U.S. 379, 391 (2009).
Our obligation “to give effect, if possible, to every word
Congress used” therefore counsels reading “financial
accommodations” to include more than only loans or other
debt financing. Id. (quoting Reiter v. Sonotone Corp., 442
U.S. 330, 339 (1979)).
The cases on which Svenhard primarily relies to argue
that a contract is a “financial accommodation” only if it
involves loans or other debt financing—In re Easebe
Enterprises, Inc., 900 F.2d 1417 (9th Cir. 1990), overruled
on other grounds by In re Robert L. Helms Construction &
Development Co., 139 F.3d 702 (9th Cir. 1998) (en banc),
and In re Sun Runner Marine, Inc., 945 F.2d 1089 (9th Cir.
1991)—do not support that proposition.
In Easebe, we held that a contract through which a debtor
would receive property in exchange for a promise to pay fell
under § 365(c)(2)’s prohibition on assumption and
assignment. 900 F.2d at 1420. In so holding, we explained
that § 365(c)(2) “prohibits the assumption of debt financing
or other financial accommodations as well as loans,” and
that, like here, “the transaction at issue [did] not require the
[counterparties] to lend [the debtor] any funds.” Id.
(emphasis added). We acknowledged that § 365(c)(2)
should be “strictly construed so as not to extend to an
ordinary contract to provide goods and services that has
incidental financial accommodations or extensions of
credit,” but that recognition does not help Svenhard here. Id.
at 1419 (citation modified). The Settlement Agreement is

SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT. 13

not a contract for goods and services that has only
“incidental” financial accommodations. No goods or
services were exchanged as part of the Settlement
Agreement; its only apparent purpose was to accommodate
Svenhard’s financial needs and thereby ensure that the
Pension Fund received some payment on Svenhard’s
obligation. Thus, our holding here that the Settlement
Agreement falls under § 365(c)(2) is consistent with Easebe.
Our decision in Sun Runner is also consistent with the
result we reach here. In Sun Runner, we held that a lender’s
agreements to offer loans to third parties constituted
“financial accommodations” to the debtor because those
third-party loans were “an indispensable means of financing
the debtor’s business.” 945 F.2d at 1092. We observed that
“[t]he term ‘financial accommodation’ has been defined as
the extension of money or credit to accommodate another,”
but we did not conclude that the term was limited to loans or
other extensions of money or credit. Id. Such a conclusion
would have required us to stray beyond the particular facts
of that case, which involved loans. In any event, agreeing to
take less than ten cents on the dollar as payment of an
obligation is tantamount to an “extension of money” to the
debtor, in the amount that will not have to be paid.
Although our precedents have not defined the entire
scope of what may constitute “financial accommodations”
under § 365(c)(2), the plain text of the statute indicates that
“financial accommodations” must include more than just
loans and other debt financing. Because the Settlement
Agreement falls within the ordinary meaning of “financial
accommodations,” it accordingly cannot be assumed or
assigned under § 365(c)(2).

14 SVENHARD V. BAKERY & CONFECTIONERY UNION & INDUS. INT.

In light of that conclusion, we need not reach Svenhard’s
argument that, had the bankruptcy court granted the motion
to assume, the bankruptcy court should also have declared
that the Settlement Agreement was valid and subsisting.
III.
For the foregoing reasons, we AFFIRM.

