FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CHRISTINE M. SEARLE,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
JOHN M ALLEN, in his official
capacity as the treasurer of Maricopa
County; COUNTY OF MARICOPA;
ARAPAHO, LLC; AMERICAN
PRIDE PROPERTIES, LLC,

No. 24-4819
D.C. No.
2:24-cv-00025JJT

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
John Joseph Tuchi, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 11, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 28, 2025
Before: Sidney R. Thomas, Richard A. Paez, and Eric D.
Miller, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Paez

2

SEARLE V. ALLEN

SUMMARY*
Rooker-Feldman Doctrine
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s dismissal of Christine Searle’s action
challenging (1) the foreclosure of her home to satisfy tax
liens, (2) defendants’ retention of the equity in her home
exceeding the tax debt and related costs, and (3) the facial
constitutionality of Arizona’s then-governing law permitting
the enforcement of tax liens by private parties.
The panel held that Searle’s claims directly attacking the
state court foreclosure judgment—on the grounds that the
foreclosure violated the United States and Arizona
Constitutions because it was a taking without a legitimate
public purpose or constituted an excessive fine—were
barred by the Rooker-Feldman doctrine, which provides that
district courts lack subject matter jurisdiction to hear direct
appeals from state court final judgments. Searle’s federal
suit complained of injuries caused by the foreclosure
judgment and invited the district court to review and reject
that judgment.
The panel held that Searle’s claims challenging
defendants’ post-judgment retention of the surplus equity in
her home were not barred by Rooker-Feldman given the
Supreme Court’s recent decision in Tyler v. Hennepin
County, 598 U.S. 631 (2023), which clarified that
individuals whose property is seized and sold to settle a tax

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

SEARLE V. ALLEN

3

debt have a protected interest in the excess equity in their
homes, notwithstanding a state foreclosure judgment.
Finally, the panel held that Searle’s facial challenge to
the constitutionality of Arizona’s then-governing statute
permitting the enforcement of tax liens by private parties
without providing just compensation was not barred by
Rooker-Feldman, but was moot because Arizona has
amended the challenged law.

COUNSEL
William E. Trachman (argued) and Grady J. Block,
Mountain States Legal Foundation, Lakewood, Colorado;
Veronica Lucero, Davillier Law Group LLC, Phoenix,
Arizona; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Sean M. Moore (argued) and Charles E. Trullinger,
Attorneys, Civil Services Division; Rachel H. Mitchell,
Maricopa County Attorney; Maricopa County Attorney's
Office, Phoenix, Arizona; John L. Lohr Jr. (argued) and
David B. Goldstein, Hymson Goldstein Pantiliat & Lohr
PLLC, Scottsdale, Arizona; Jackson D. Hendrix, Burch &
Cracchiolo PA, Phoenix, Arizona; for DefendantsAppellees.
David J. Deerson and Christina M. Martin, Pacific Legal
Foundation, Sacramento, California, for Amicus Curiae
Pacific Legal Foundation.

4

SEARLE V. ALLEN

OPINION
PAEZ, Circuit Judge:
Christine Searle failed to pay property taxes on her home
in Maricopa County, Arizona. To secure payment, Maricopa
County sold the tax liens on Searle’s property for 2015 and
2016 to Arapaho, LLC Tesco. Arapaho ultimately filed a
foreclosure action against Searle. When Searle failed to
respond, Arapaho obtained a default judgment against her.
The judgment declared that Searle has “no further legal or
equitable right, title, or interest in the Property.” Upon
presentation of the judgment and pursuant to state law,
Maricopa County Treasurer John Allen executed and
delivered a deed to Arapaho conveying all rights and interest
in the home, which Searle values at over $400,000. Arapaho
promptly transferred the property to American Pride
Properties, LLC.
Searle sued Arapaho, American Pride, Maricopa County,
and Allen (collectively, “Defendants”) in district court,
challenging the foreclosure of her home, Defendants’
retention of the equity in her home exceeding the tax debt
and related costs, and the facial constitutionality of the thengoverning state law, Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 42-18204(B) (2008).
She alleged both federal and state claims, seeking damages,
an injunction against eviction, and a declaratory judgment
that the statute was unconstitutional.
The district court determined that the Rooker-Feldman1
doctrine barred Searle from raising most of her claims in
federal court and granted Defendants’ motion to dismiss.
1

See Rooker v. Fid. Tr. Co., 263 U.S. 413 (1923); D.C. Ct. of Appeals v.
Feldman, 460 U.S. 462 (1983).

SEARLE V. ALLEN

5

Under the Rooker-Feldman doctrine, federal district courts
lack subject matter jurisdiction over “cases brought by statecourt losers complaining of injuries caused by state-court
judgments rendered before the district court proceedings
commenced and inviting district court review and rejection
of those judgments.” Exxon Mobil Corp. v. Saudi Basic
Indus. Corp., 544 U.S. 280, 284 (2005).
We affirm the district court’s dismissal in part and
reverse it in part. Searle’s claims directly attacking the state
court foreclosure judgment—on the grounds that the
foreclosure violated the United States and Arizona
Constitutions because it was a taking without a legitimate
public purpose2 or constituted an excessive fine—are barred.
But her claims challenging Defendants’ post-judgment
retention of the surplus equity are not barred given the
Supreme Court’s recent decision in Tyler v. Hennepin
County, 598 U.S. 631 (2023). There, the Supreme Court
clarified that individuals whose property is seized and sold
to settle a tax debt have a protected interest in the excess
equity in their homes, notwithstanding a state foreclosure
judgment. Id. at 639. Finally, Searle’s facial challenge to the
constitutionality of the governing statute is not barred by
Rooker-Feldman, but it is moot because Arizona has
amended the challenged law.

2

Searle argues that the foreclosure of her house violated Fifth
Amendment and Arizona constitutional prohibitions on governmental
takings without a “public use,” meaning that they serve no legitimate
public purpose. This argument appears misguided because tax-lien
foreclosures serve an obvious public purpose of providing public entities
a permissible way to collect unpaid taxes and related costs. However, we
do not need to decide this issue because it is outside the scope of the
Rooker-Feldman analysis and the district court did not address it.

6

SEARLE V. ALLEN

I.
We briefly recite the allegations in Searle’s operative
Second Amended Complaint (“SAC”). In 2005, Searle
purchased a home in Gilbert, Arizona, which she estimates
is worth $400,000 to $500,000. After Searle accrued a
property tax delinquency of $1,607.68, Maricopa County
proceeded to enforce the property tax liens for 2015 and
2016. Pursuant to Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 42-18101(A) and § 4218114, which direct the county treasurer to “secure the
payment of unpaid delinquent taxes” by selling the tax liens
by auction to a private purchaser,3 the county then sold the
liens to Arapaho. In 2021, Arapaho commenced an action in
Arizona state court to foreclose one of the tax liens. See Ariz.
Rev. Stat. § 42-18106.
When Searle did not file an answer, Arapaho obtained a
default judgment against her. The judgment foreclosed
Searle’s right of redemption and ordered County Treasurer
John Allen to deliver a deed conveying title to the property
to Arapaho upon payment of a fee and presentation of the
judgment. The judgment declared that Searle had “no further
legal or equitable right, title, or interest in the Property.”
Arapaho, LLC Tesco v. Searle, No. CV2021-012279, 2021
WL 10425563, at *1 (Ariz. Super. Ct. Nov. 9, 2021). This
language was drawn from Arizona’s tax foreclosure statutes,
which authorized private purchasers of tax liens to initiate
foreclosure proceedings, after which “the parties whose
rights to redeem the tax lien are thereby foreclosed have no
3

The statute directs the county to sell the lien to the purchaser “who pays
the whole amount of delinquent taxes, interest, penalties and charges due
on the property, and who in addition offers to accept the lowest rate of
interest on the amount so paid to redeem the property from the sale.”
Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 42-18114.

SEARLE V. ALLEN

7

further legal or equitable right, title or interest in the
property.” Ariz. Rev. Stat. §§ 42-18201, 42-18204(B).
Arapaho received the deed on February 1, 2022, and
transferred the property to American Pride Properties shortly
thereafter.
After entry of the default judgment, Searle appeared and
moved to set aside the judgment on the ground that she did
not receive notice of the foreclosure action. The state court
denied the motion and Searle appealed, but the Arizona
Court of Appeals affirmed. See Arapaho LLC v. Searle, No.
1 CA-CV 22-0478, 2023 WL 1830382 (Ariz. Ct. App. Feb.
9, 2023), review denied (Oct. 17, 2023). The Arizona
Supreme Court denied review.
While Searle’s petition for review to the Arizona
Supreme Court was pending, the United States Supreme
Court decided Tyler v. Hennepin County. Tyler held that
when the government seizes and sells an individual’s
property to satisfy a tax debt, the Takings Clause of the Fifth
Amendment, which applies to the states because of the
Fourteenth Amendment, prohibits the government from
taking more than is necessary to satisfy the debt and the costs
of collection, unless the property owner receives just
compensation for the excess equity. 598 U.S. at 637-39.
After the Arizona Supreme Court denied Searle’s
petition for review, she filed the instant lawsuit. The SAC
names as defendants Arapaho, American Pride Properties,
Maricopa County Treasurer John Allen, and Maricopa
County. Citing Tyler, the SAC alleges that Defendants took
Searle’s property and retained hundreds of thousands of
dollars more than her tax debt in violation of the United
States Constitution, the Arizona Constitution, and Arizona
state law.

8

SEARLE V. ALLEN

Searle alleges nine federal and state claims. Claims one
through three assert that Defendants violated the Takings
Clause of the Fifth Amendment because they seized Searle’s
property and retained the excess equity “without a legitimate
public use,” and because they did not provide Searle with
just compensation. In claim four, Searle asserts that
Defendants violated the Eighth Amendment Excessive Fines
Clause by seizing the entire equity in her property to recover
a relatively small tax debt and retaining the excess equity.
Claims five through seven allege violations of comparable
provisions of the Arizona Constitution. Claim eight asserts
that Maricopa County and Allen violated the Arizona
Constitution’s Gift Clause by allowing Arapaho and
American Pride to acquire “a high-value property for a
fraction of its worth.” Finally, Searle alleges a state law
unjust enrichment claim.
In 2024, the Arizona legislature amended the statutory
scheme under which Searle’s property was seized to address
the Supreme Court’s holding in Tyler. See S.B. 1431, 56th
Leg., 2d Reg. Sess. (Ariz. 2024). The amendments created a
process for property owners to seek return of the excess
proceeds when a private lien purchaser forecloses and sells
their property. Id.; see Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 42-18204 (2024).
Arapaho, American Pride, and Allen moved to dismiss
Searle’s complaint under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
12(b)(1) for lack of subject matter jurisdiction and 12(b)(6)
for failure to state a claim. The district court granted the
motion in full, reasoning that it lacked subject matter
jurisdiction because of the Rooker-Feldman doctrine.
Stating that “whether Rooker-Feldman bars Plaintiff’s
claims turns on what Plaintiff alleges as her harm and from
where that harm arose,” the district court found that Searle’s
harm arose from the state court default judgment and not, as

SEARLE V. ALLEN

9

Searle argued, from the treasurer’s deed conveying the
property after the judgment. The district court concluded that
because the judgment decreed that Searle’s right of
redemption was “foreclosed and [she] ha[d] no further legal
or equitable right, title, or interest in the Property,” it also
deprived her of “any right to surplus equity.”
The district court further ruled that because the judgment
had eliminated Searle’s property rights in her home, all of
her federal claims and most of her state claims were barred
by Rooker-Feldman. Searle’s federal and state takings
claims were barred because “[t]o establish a violation of the
Takings Clause, [a plaintiff] must first demonstrate that he
has a property interest that is constitutionally protected.”
Because the state court judgment extinguished any
underlying property interest, Searle could not bring a takings
claim without effectively appealing the state court judgment.
The district court likewise found that Searle’s excessive
fines claims were barred because they challenged the seizure
of the property itself, which occurred upon entry of the state
court judgment. With respect to Searle’s unjust enrichment
claim, the district court ruled that “[b]ecause Plaintiff
challenges only Defendants’ post-judgment retention of
excess value, she can only show an impoverishment,” an
element of the claim, “if she first shows that she was entitled
to the excess value she was deprived of.” Because the state
court judgment deprived her of any interest in the excess
value, Rooker-Feldman foreclosed her claim. Although the
district court concluded that Searle’s state constitutional Gift
Clause claim was not barred by Rooker-Feldman, it declined

10

SEARLE V. ALLEN

to assert supplemental jurisdiction over it and therefore
dismissed that claim.4
II.
We review de novo a district court’s dismissal for lack
of subject matter jurisdiction under Rooker-Feldman. Noel
v. Hall, 341 F.3d 1148, 1154 (9th Cir. 2003). We resolve a
facial attack on the district court’s subject matter jurisdiction
as we would a Rule 12(b)(6) motion. See Leite v. Crane Co.,
749 F.3d 1117, 1121 (9th Cir. 2014). Accepting all factual
allegations in the operative complaint as true and drawing all
reasonable inferences in the plaintiff’s favor, we determine
whether the plaintiff’s allegations are sufficient to invoke the
court’s jurisdiction. Id.
III.
A.
Established by Rooker v. Fidelity Trust Co., 263 U.S.
413 (1923) and District of Columbia Court of Appeals v.
Feldman, 460 U.S. 462 (1983), the Rooker-Feldman
doctrine provides that “a federal district court does not have
subject matter jurisdiction to hear a direct appeal from the
final judgment of a state court.” Noel, 341 F.3d at 1154.
Rooker-Feldman also prohibits federal district courts
from considering “de facto appeals”—suits in which “the
adjudication of the federal claims would undercut the state
ruling.” Bianchi v. Rylaarsdam, 334 F.3d 895, 898 (9th Cir.
4

In addition to her arguments concerning the district court’s application
of Rooker-Feldman, Searle also argues that the district court erred in
dismissing Defendant Allen sua sponte. This argument is misguided, as
Allen had joined the motion to dismiss previously filed by Arapaho and
American Pride.

SEARLE V. ALLEN

11

2003). Thus, “Rooker-Feldman looks to federal law to
determine ‘whether the injury alleged by the federal plaintiff
resulted from the state court judgment itself or is distinct
from that judgment.’” Id. at 900 (quoting Garry v. Geils, 82
F.3d 1362, 1365 (7th Cir. 1996)). And when the federal
action constitutes a forbidden de facto appeal of a state court
judgment, the federal court “must also refuse to decide any
issue raised in the suit that is ‘inextricably intertwined’ with
an issue resolved by the state court in its judicial decision.”
Noel, 341 F.3d at 1158. “Our circuit has emphasized that
‘[o]nly when there is already a forbidden de facto appeal in
federal court does the ‘inextricably intertwined’ test come
into play.” Cooper v. Ramos, 704 F.3d 772, 778 (9th Cir.
2012) (quoting Noel, 341 F.3d at 1158).
The Rooker-Feldman doctrine “occupies ‘narrow
ground’ and applies only in ‘limited circumstances.’” Brown
v. Duringer Law Grp. PLC, 86 F.4th 1251, 1253 (9th Cir.
2023) (quoting Exxon, 544 U.S. at 284, 291). “Namely, it ‘is
confined to . . . cases [1] brought by state-court losers
[2] complaining of injuries caused by state-court judgments
[3] rendered before the district court proceedings
commenced and [4] inviting district court review and
rejection of those judgments.’” Id. at 1254 (quoting Exxon,
544 U.S. at 284); see generally Miroth v. County of Trinity,
136 F.4th 1141, 1148-51 (9th Cir. 2025).
Rooker and Feldman remain the only cases in which the
Supreme Court has found the doctrine to bar lower federal
court jurisdiction. In Rooker, the plaintiffs brought a bill in
equity to void a state court judgment for violating the
Contracts Clause and the Fourteenth Amendment Equal
Protection and Due Process Clauses, arguing that the
judgment “gave effect to a state statute alleged to be in
conflict with those clauses and did not give effect to a prior

12

SEARLE V. ALLEN

decision in the same cause . . . which is alleged to have
become the ‘law of the case.’” 263 U.S. at 414-15. In other
words, “Rooker held that when a losing plaintiff in state
court brings a suit in federal district court asserting as legal
wrongs the allegedly erroneous legal rulings of the state
court and seeks to vacate or set aside the judgment of that
court, the federal suit is a forbidden de facto appeal.” Noel,
341 F.3d at 1156.
And in Feldman, the Supreme Court held that the
plaintiffs could not seek review in federal district court of
the District of Columbia Court of Appeals’ denial of their
requests for waivers of a court rule preventing graduates of
unaccredited law schools from sitting for the bar exam. 460
U.S. at 463, 482. To the extent that the plaintiffs mounted a
general challenge to the constitutionality of that rule,
however, the Supreme Court held that the district court did
have subject matter jurisdiction. Id. at 482-83. The latter
challenge could proceed because it “d[id] not require review
of a judicial decision in a particular case.” Id. at 487.
As Rooker and Feldman demonstrate, the applicability
of the doctrine often turns on whether the federal plaintiff
“asserts as a legal wrong an allegedly erroneous decision by
a state court” or, conversely, “an allegedly illegal act or
omission by an adverse party.” Noel, 341 F.3d at 1164.
Our cases illustrate this distinction. For instance, in
Kougasian v. TMSL, Inc., the plaintiff lost two state court
tort actions over her husband’s death in a skiing accident.
359 F.3d 1136, 1137-38 (9th Cir. 2004). She then filed a
federal suit reiterating her tort claims and seeking to set aside
the state court judgments on the grounds that the defendant
had engaged in fraudulent conduct affecting the outcome. Id.
at 1138-39. Reversing the district court’s dismissal under

SEARLE V. ALLEN

13

Rooker-Feldman, we held that the plaintiff’s causes of action
based on alleged extrinsic fraud on the state court were not
barred because they concerned a wrongful act by a party
rather than an error by the court. Id. at 1140-41. And with
respect to the tort claims, all of which had been litigated and
decided in state court, we held that the claims were also not
barred by Rooker-Feldman because the plaintiff “does not,
in these causes of action, allege legal errors by the state
courts; rather, she alleges wrongful acts by the defendants,
such as negligently designing the ski run and negligently
placing or failing to remove [a] rock.” Id. at 1142.
In Maldonado v. Harris, we applied a similar rationale
in holding that Rooker-Feldman did not bar the district court
from hearing a suit seeking relief from an injunction issued
by a state court. 370 F.3d 945, 950 (9th Cir. 2004). The state
court injunction, which resolved a nuisance action brought
by the California Department of Transportation (“Caltrans”),
required Maldonado to comply with the state’s Outdoor
Advertising Act. Id. at 948. Maldonado’s federal complaint
challenged the constitutionality of that Act. Id. at 949. We
held that “[t]he legal wrong that Maldonado asserts in this
action is not an erroneous decision by the state court in the
nuisance suit brought against Maldonado by Caltrans, but
the continued enforcement by Caltrans of a statute
Maldonado asserts is unconstitutional.” Id. at 950. Thus,
Rooker-Feldman did not bar the federal action even though
it sought relief from the state court judgment. Id.
B.
Here, under Rooker-Feldman, the district court lacked
subject matter jurisdiction over Searle’s claims directly
challenging the foreclosure judgment. Those claims allege
that the state court erred in divesting Searle of her property

14

SEARLE V. ALLEN

rights in violation of the United States and Arizona
Constitutions. Searle further alleges that the foreclosure
judgment caused her injury—the loss of her home. However,
not all of Searle’s claims directly challenge the validity of
the judgment. Those claims that allege that Defendants
failed to provide her with just compensation for the surplus
equity in her home exceeding her tax debt and collection
costs are not barred by Rooker-Feldman. Rather, her claims
challenging Defendants’ retention of the surplus equity are
based on a property right which is distinct from and survives
the state court foreclosure judgment. See Tyler, 598 U.S. at
639. Similarly, Searle’s facial challenge to the
constitutionality of the governing statute, which authorized
foreclosure sales by private lien purchasers without a
procedure for returning surplus equity to the property owner,
is not barred by Rooker-Feldman. But, it is moot.
1.
Rooker-Feldman bars Searle from directly challenging
the state court foreclosure judgment in federal court. The
judgment foreclosed Searle’s right to redeem the tax lien on
her property, ordered the county treasurer to execute and
deliver a deed conveying the property to Arapaho upon its
payment of the required fee, and decreed that Searle “ha[d]
no further legal or equitable right, title, or interest in the
Property.” Arapaho, LLC Tesco v. Searle, 2021 WL
10425563, at *1.
Searle seeks relief under the Fifth Amendment Takings
Clause and its Arizona analogue because the sale of the liens
to Arapaho and the subsequent foreclosure judgment
constituted a taking without a legitimate public use. She
further alleges that the taking of the house constituted an
excessive fine under the Eighth Amendment and Arizona’s

SEARLE V. ALLEN

15

constitutional analogue because the value of the house far
exceeded her tax debt. These allegations are described in
claims one, three, four, five, and seven of the SAC, although
those enumerated claims also contain challenges to
Defendants’ retention of the surplus equity, which we
discuss separately below.
Applying the Exxon test to determine whether RookerFeldman bars Searle’s claims challenging the foreclosure as
an invalid taking or an excessive fine, we conclude that it
does and that the district court properly dismissed those
claims for lack of subject matter jurisdiction. See 544 U.S.
at 284. Before Searle filed her federal suit, the state court
entered a default judgment against her, and, although she
sought to vacate the default judgment, she was unsuccessful.
In the words of the Supreme Court, she was a “state-court
loser[].” Id. Further, her federal suit complains of injuries
caused by the foreclosure judgment, and she invites the
district court to review and reject that judgment on the
grounds that it constituted an unconstitutional taking and an
excessive fine. See id.
We held that Rooker-Feldman applied in an analogous
context in Henrichs v. Valley View Development, 474 F.3d
609 (9th Cir. 2007). There, Valley View prevailed in a state
court action and obtained a judgment quieting title to a piece
of property (“the Balboa lot”) against which Henrichs and
two others asserted a lien. Id. at 612. While the state court
proceeding was pending, Valley View sold the Balboa lot to
a third party. Id. at 613. After the state court entered the quiet
title judgment, Henrichs filed a federal suit seeking a
declaratory judgment that the state court judgment was void
because of several alleged jurisdictional defects. Id. at 61314. We held that Rooker-Feldman “squarely barred” this
claim. Id. at 614. Henrichs also sought an injunction

16

SEARLE V. ALLEN

preventing Valley View from receiving the proceeds from
the sale of the Balboa lot. Id. at 615. We held that RookerFeldman also barred this claim because the injury—Valley
View’s entitlement to the proceeds—was caused by the state
court judgment and because “[g]ranting the injunction would
require the district court to determine that the state court’s
decision was wrong and thus void.” Id. at 616.
Searle asserts that it was not the state court’s foreclosure
judgment but the county’s ensuing issuance of the treasurer’s
deed that caused the loss of her home, removing her claims
from the ambit of Rooker-Feldman. But the foreclosure
judgment authorized the Maricopa County Treasurer to
transfer the deed and extinguished Searle’s property rights
to the house. See Friedemann v. Kirk, 5 P.3d 950, 952-53
(Ariz. Ct. App. 2000) (holding that under Ariz. Rev. Stat.
§ 42-18204, the owner’s right of redemption was terminated
by the entry of the foreclosure judgment, not by the
treasurer’s subsequent delivery of the deed). The delivery of
the deed was a “mere formality.” Id. at 253. Thus, we agree
with the district court that Rooker-Feldman bars Searle’s
direct challenge to the foreclosure judgment and the transfer
of the deed to Defendants Arapaho and American Pride. Her
claims challenging the foreclosure as an invalid taking or an
excessive fine are barred.
2.
Rooker-Feldman, however, does not bar Searle’s
challenge to Defendants’ post-judgment retention of the
excess equity, which she asserts should have been paid to her
as just compensation for the taking of her home. Under
Tyler, a property owner’s right to just compensation for the
surplus equity in a home taken to settle a tax debt survives
the foreclosure judgment itself. 598 U.S. at 639. The district

SEARLE V. ALLEN

17

court therefore erred in concluding that Searle’s interest in
the surplus equity in her home was “inextricably
intertwined” with the foreclosure judgment and thus also
barred by Rooker-Feldman. See Cooper, 704 F.3d at 779
(explaining that claims are inextricably intertwined where
“the relief requested in the federal action would effectively
reverse the state court decision or void its ruling” (quoting
Fontana Empire Ctr., LLC v. City of Fontana, 307 F.3d 987,
992 (9th Cir. 2002))).
The SAC’s enumerated claims one, two, and six directly
challenge Defendants’ failure to provide just compensation
in violation of the Takings Clauses of the United States and
Arizona Constitutions, 5 and claims three and five also
challenge Defendants’ post-judgment conduct in retaining
the excess equity as a taking without a valid public use. The
portions of Searle’s claims that challenge the retention of
excess equity rather than the foreclosure judgment itself are
not barred by Rooker-Feldman.
In Tyler, Hennepin County seized and sold Tyler’s home
to satisfy a tax debt, retaining the full sale price. 598 U.S. at
634-35. The Supreme Court held that the retention of the
excess equity constituted a “classic” taking requiring just
compensation under the Fifth Amendment. Id. at 639. Thus,
the county owed Tyler compensation for the sale price of her
house, less the tax debt and collection costs. See id. at 63839.
5

Arizona’s Takings Clause is not necessarily coextensive with the
related provision in the Fifth Amendment. See Bonito Partners, LLC v.
City of Flagstaff, 270 P.3d 902, 906 n.1 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2012). However,
because neither party suggests that distinct interpretation of the Arizona
Takings Clause would lead to a different result under Rooker-Feldman,
we leave that analysis, if necessary, to the district court.

18

SEARLE V. ALLEN

Under Tyler, a property owner has a right to
compensation for the excess equity in a property even after
her other rights and interests in the property are extinguished
by the foreclosure judgment. See id. at 639-40 (recognizing
the common law rule that if a tax collector seizes a
taxpayer’s property, he is “bound by an implied contract in
law . . . to render back the overplus” of the property when
sold (quoting 2 William Blackstone, Commentaries on the
Laws of England 453 (1771))). Tyler therefore recognized a
right that survives a tax foreclosure sale and a valid
foreclosure judgment. See id. at 639, 644 (explaining that
Tyler had a right to the surplus equity in her home “once
absolute title has transferred to the State”). As Searle argues,
she “would have no Takings claim if she undermined the
state foreclosure judgment,” but “is entitled to just
compensation precisely because that judgment will stay in
place.”
In fact, Tyler expressly rejected the argument that
“[w]here state law recognizes no property interest in surplus
proceeds from a tax-foreclosure sale conducted after
adequate notice to the owner, there is no unconstitutional
taking.” Id. at 636; see id. at 639. The Supreme Court
explained that “[s]tate law is one important source” of
property rights, but not “the only source.” Id. at 638.
“Otherwise, a State could ‘sidestep the Takings Clause by
disavowing traditional property interests’ in assets it wishes
to appropriate.” Id. (quoting Phillips v. Wash. Legal Found.,
524 U.S. 156, 167 (1998)).
Constitutional error in the foreclosure proceeding
implicates an error by the state court, which is why any such
challenge is barred by Rooker-Feldman. But Defendants’
alleged retention of the proceeds from the sale of the
property (less the tax debt and costs) does not implicate any

SEARLE V. ALLEN

19

state court error and only implicates Defendants’ wrongful
conduct. Searle’s Takings Clause claims based on
Defendants’ failure to compensate her for the surplus
proceeds from the sale are not barred by Rooker-Feldman.
3.
Similarly, Searle’s claims alleging that the retention of
surplus proceeds constituted unjust enrichment or an
excessive fine are not barred by Rooker-Feldman. These
allegations are described in Searle’s enumerated claims nine,
four, and seven, which, like many of her other claims, also
contain allegations that are barred by Rooker-Feldman for
challenging the foreclosure judgment directly.
Under Arizona law, an unjust enrichment requires
“(1) an enrichment, (2) an impoverishment, (3) a connection
between the enrichment and impoverishment, (4) the
absence of justification for the enrichment and
impoverishment, and (5) the absence of a remedy provided
by law.” Wang Elec., Inc. v. Smoke Tree Resort, LLC, 283
P.3d 45, 49 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2012) (quoting Freeman v.
Sorchych, 245 P.3d 927, 936 (Ariz. Ct. App. 2011)).
Whether Searle’s unjust enrichment claim is barred by
Rooker-Feldman therefore depends on whether she has an
interest in the excess equity in the property that survives the
state court judgment. Because Tyler recognizes such an
interest, Rooker-Feldman does not bar her unjust enrichment
claim. For the same reason, Searle’s claims challenging the
retention of surplus as an excessive fine under the Eighth
Amendment and Arizona’s constitutional analogue are also
not barred by Rooker-Feldman. We express no opinion on
the viability of an excessive-fine claim but leave that issue
to the district court in the first instance. See Tyler, 598 U.S.
at 647-48.

20

SEARLE V. ALLEN

4.
Defendants each assert that, given their distinct
positions, Rooker-Feldman bars Searle’s claims against
them. Arapaho and American Pride (“Private Defendants”)
argue that “the District Court cannot grant Searle a money
judgment against the [Private] Defendants without
nullifying the portion of that Judgment which vests title in
the Property to Arapaho free from Searle’s interest as
required by Arizona’s tax enforcement statutes.” We reject
this argument for the same reason discussed above: Tyler
held that such a state judgment did not extinguish all of the
plaintiff’s property rights. Rather, Searle retained a right to
just compensation under the Takings Clause for the excess
equity, which Defendants allegedly owe her.6
Maricopa County and John Allen (“County
Defendants”), meanwhile, argue that they “only took two
actions relevant to this lawsuit: (1) selling the tax lien on
[Searle’s] property for tax years 2015 and 2016 to Arapaho;
and (2) delivering the treasurer’s deed for [Searle’s] property
to Arapaho pursuant to the state court judgment.” In so
doing, however, County Defendants executed an allegedly
unconstitutional statutory process that deprived Searle of the
excess equity in her home, which is exactly what she
challenges. Rooker-Feldman does not prevent these claims
from proceeding against all Defendants.

6

Private Defendants also argue that private entities cannot be liable for
just compensation claims under the Fifth Amendment because they lack
sovereign authority. The district court did not decide this issue, which is
outside of the scope of the Rooker-Feldman inquiry. On remand, the
district court may address this issue in the first instance, if necessary.

SEARLE V. ALLEN

21

C.
Searle’s facial challenge to the constitutionality of the
Arizona statute allowing the enforcement of tax liens by
private parties without providing just compensation, Ariz.
Rev. Stat. § 42-18204(B), is not barred by Rooker-Feldman.
However, it is moot, and we therefore lack jurisdiction under
Article III to consider it. See McDonald v. Lawson, 94 F.4th
864, 868 (9th Cir. 2024).
Rooker-Feldman does not bar facial challenges to the
constitutionality of the statutory or regulatory scheme under
which the plaintiff lost a state court action. That is because
such challenges “do not require review of a judicial decision
in a particular case.” Feldman, 460 U.S. at 487. The
Supreme Court emphasized this point in Skinner v. Switzer
when it explained that “a state-court decision is not
reviewable by lower federal courts, but a statute or rule
governing the decision may be challenged in a federal
action.” 562 U.S. 521, 532 (2011).
While Searle’s facial challenge to the statutory scheme
is not barred by Rooker-Feldman, it is moot because the
Arizona legislature has amended the governing statute since
she filed her original complaint. See American Diabetes
Ass’n v. United States Dep’t of the Army, 938 F.3d 1147,
1151-52 (9th Cir. 2019) (applying mootness doctrine to
policy change based on timing of plaintiff’s original
complaint). A “‘repeal, amendment, or expiration of
legislation’ gives rise to ‘a presumption that the action is
moot, unless there is a reasonable expectation that the
legislative body is likely to enact the same or substantially
similar legislation in the future.’” McDonald, 94 F.4th at 868
(quoting Bd. of Trs. of Glazing Health & Welfare Tr. v.
Chambers, 941 F.3d 1195, 1197 (9th Cir. 2019) (en banc));

22

SEARLE V. ALLEN

see also Teter v. Lopez, 125 F.4th 1301, 1306-07 (9th Cir.
2025) (en banc). “A reasonable expectation of the same or
similar legislation being re-adopted ‘must be founded in the
record.’” McDonald, 94 F.4th at 869 (quoting Glazing
Health, 941 F.3d at 1199).
The Arizona legislature amended Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 4218204 to conform to the Supreme Court’s decision in Tyler.
To that end, the legislature passed Senate Bill 1431, which
created a statutory procedure requiring private lien
purchasers to return excess proceeds to the foreclosed
property owner upon request. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 4218204 (2024). As Searle’s SAC notes, following Tyler,
Arizona officials, including the Attorney General, have
acknowledged the unconstitutional deficiencies in the old
scheme. The record does not show a reasonable expectation
that the old law will be re-adopted. To the contrary, the facts
alleged in the complaint strongly suggest that the new law is
not likely to be repealed or amended in such a way that it
would conflict with Tyler. Searle has failed to rebut the
presumption that her facial challenge is moot.
IV.
The Rooker-Feldman doctrine is distinct from preclusion
claims arising from separate but related lawsuits. See Miroth,
136 F.4th at 1154; see generally Noel, 341 F.3d at 1164.
Searle’s claims may be precluded by a recent adverse state
court judgment in a related proceeding.7 But the preclusive
effect of such a judgment was not before the district court
and was not addressed by the parties in their appellate briefs.

7

Private Defendants’ motion to supplement the record, Dkt. 48, is
denied.

SEARLE V. ALLEN

23

We therefore leave it to the district court to decide that issue
in the first instance, as necessary.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND
REMANDED.
The parties shall bear their own costs on appeal.

