FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JORGE FELIX IBARRA-PEREZ,
also known as Jorge Ibarra-Perez,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 24-631
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-01100DWL-CDB

v.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
Dominic Lanza, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 2, 2025
Phoenix, Arizona
Filed August 27, 2025
Before: Michael Daly Hawkins, William A. Fletcher, and
Ryan D. Nelson, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge W. Fletcher;
Dissent by Judge R. Nelson

2

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

SUMMARY *
Immigration
The panel reversed the district court’s dismissal, for lack
of jurisdiction, of Jorge Felix Ibarra-Perez’s suit for damages
under the Federal Tort Claims Act, and remanded.
Ibarra-Perez’s suit was based on his claim that he had
been improperly removed to Mexico after completion of his
removal proceedings, in which he had been granted
withholding of removal to Cuba. Because withholding of
removal is country specific, Immigration and Customs
Enforcement (“ICE”) retained the authority to remove
Ibarra-Perez to any other country authorized by
statute. Ibarra-Perez objected to the removal, repeatedly
telling the officials that he feared what would happen to him
if he were removed to Mexico. After his removal, IbarraPerez was recruited and threatened by gang members in
Mexico. He returned to the United States two days after his
removal and was ultimately granted asylum.
The panel held that 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g) did not bar IbarraPerez’s suit. Under that provision, “no court shall have
jurisdiction to hear any cause or claim by or on behalf of any
alien arising from the decision or action . . . to commence
proceedings, adjudicate cases, or execute removal
orders.” The panel rejected the government’s argument that
Ibarra-Perez’s objection to his removal to Mexico was a
challenge to the “execution” of a removal order. Rather, the
panel concluded that Ibarra raised purely legal, and thus
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

3

reviewable, arguments challenging ICE’s removal to
Mexico without providing any process that would have
allowed him to present evidence supporting his fear of
removal to Mexico.
The panel addressed the dissent’s argument that the
petition-for-review process was the proper pathway for
Ibarra-Perez to challenge his post-hearing removal. Noting
that the dissent relied on § 1252(a)(5) and (b)(9)—two
provisions aimed at channeling noncitizens’ claims into the
petition-for-review process—the panel concluded that
neither section applied because Ibarra-Perez challenged
actions taken after his removal proceedings had ended. The
panel explained that, if § 1252(g) bars jurisdiction to review
removals outside of removal proceedings, and if
§ 1252(a)(5) and (b)(9) provide the only remedy to IbarraPerez, then ICE can send anyone to any country without any
review.
Dissenting, Judge R. Nelson concluded that § 1252(g)
precluded review of Ibarra-Perez’s claims because, at
bottom, Ibarra-Perez challenged the execution of his
removal order. Judge R. Nelson wrote that the majority
invented an exception to § 1252(g)—for legal questions—
that conflicts with the statutory text, Supreme Court
precedent, and the holding of sister circuits. Judge R.
Nelson wrote that the majority’s holding is radical and
sweeping: any deportee can evade § 1252(g) and raise any
claim about the government’s authority to deport him.
Judge R. Nelson also wrote that, even if the decision to
remove Ibarra-Perez to Mexico were unlawful, § 1252(g)
makes clear that courts only have jurisdiction to hear such a
claim and issue a remedy through the petition-for-review
process. Ibarra-Perez had adequate opportunity to litigate

4

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

his alleged persecution in Mexico by appealing to the BIA
and then filing a petition for review, but he failed to use that
opportunity. Moreover, Judge R. Nelson concluded that,
even if § 1252(g) did not bar review, Ibarra-Perez’s claims
were barred by § 1252(b)(9), which prohibits review of “all
questions of law and fact” that arise from removal
proceedings outside the petition-for-review process.

COUNSEL
Trina A. Realmuto (argued), Mary A. Kenney, and Aidan
Langston, National Immigration Litigation Alliance,
Brookline, Massachusetts; Laura Belous, Rocio C. Acosta,
Florence Immigrant and Refugee Rights Project, Tucson,
Arizona; for Plaintiff-Appellant
Joshua Dos Santos (argued) and Mark B. Stern, Attorneys;
Brian M. Boynton, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney
General; United States Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; Theo Nickerson, Attorney; Brock J. Heathcotte,
Assistant United States Attorney; Gary M. Restaino, United
States Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United
States Department of Justice, Phoenix, Arizona; for
Defendant-Appellee.
Matt Adams and Christopher Strawn, Northwest Immigrant
Rights Project, Seattle, Washington, for Amicus Curiae
Northwest Immigrant Rights Project.

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

5

OPINION
W. FLETCHER, Circuit Judge:
After a hearing before an Immigration Judge (“IJ”), at
which he had sought relief based on persecution in Cuba,
plaintiff-appellant Jorge Felix Ibarra-Perez was granted
withholding of removal to Cuba. Ibarra-Perez had stayed
briefly in Mexico after he left Cuba and before he came to
the United States. At his hearing before the IJ, Ibarra-Perez
had described not only persecution in Cuba but also threats
and extortion in Mexico. The government had not asked for
an order removing Ibarra-Perez to Mexico, and the IJ did not
designate Mexico as a country to which he could be
removed. Neither the government nor Ibarra-Perez appealed
the IJ’s decision to the Board of Immigration Appeals
(“BIA”).
After completion of proceedings before the IJ, federal
immigration officials removed Ibarra-Perez to Mexico.
Ibarra-Perez vehemently objected to the removal, repeatedly
telling the officials that he feared what would happen to him
if he were removed to Mexico. While in Mexico after his
removal, Ibarra-Perez was recruited and threatened by gang
members. He was able to return to the United States two
days after his removal. Upon his return to the United States,
he was detained for six months before being granted asylum.
Ibarra-Perez brought suit for damages under the Federal
Tort Claims Act (“FTCA”), contending that he was
improperly removed to Mexico. The district court dismissed
Ibarra-Perez’s suit for lack of subject matter jurisdiction
under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1).

6

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

The merits of Ibarra-Perez’s FTCA suit are not before us.
The question before us is jurisdictional—whether the
limitation contained in 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g) should be read
broadly to preclude Ibarra-Perez’s suit, or whether it should
be read narrowly to allow it. The Supreme Court has
instructed that we should read § 1252(g) narrowly. See Reno
v. Am.-Arab Anti-Discrimination Comm. (AADC), 525 U.S.
471, 487 (1999); Dep’t of Homeland Sec. v. Regents of the
Univ. of Cal., 591 U.S. 1, 19 (2020). Following the Court’s
instruction, we hold that the district court has subject matter
jurisdiction over Ibarra-Perez’s FTCA suit.
We therefore reverse.
I. Background
Because Ibarra-Perez’s suit was dismissed under Rule
12(b)(1), we accept as true all of the plausible factual
allegations in his complaint. Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662,
678 (2009). The government does not contend that his
allegations are implausible. The following narrative is based
on these allegations.
Ibarra-Perez fled Cuba after two decades of beatings,
surveillance, threats, and harassment because of his
opposition to the Castro regime. Before arriving at the
United States, Ibarra-Perez spent several months in Mexico.
While in Mexico, Ibarra-Perez was “extorted by Mexican
police officers and other authorities on multiple occasions,
and forced to pay officers money in order to avoid detention
and deportation to Cuba.” Ibarra-Perez applied for asylum
in Mexico. Mexico denied asylum but granted a one-year
humanitarian visitor permit.
To escape the threats and extortion in Mexico, IbarraPerez presented himself at the DeConcini Port of Entry in

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

7

Nogales, Arizona in August 2019, seeking asylum in the
United States. In September 2019, U.S. Customs and Border
Protection took Ibarra-Perez into immigration custody and
issued a Notice to Appear, charging him with removability
under 8 U.S.C. § 1182(a)(7)(A)(i)(I).
Ibarra-Perez filled out a pro se application for asylum,
withholding of removal, and protection under the
Convention Against Torture (“CAT”) on a Form I-589.
Because Ibarra-Perez has limited ability to read and write in
English, he had another detained person help him fill out the
application. He indicated on the form that “he did not
consider Mexico to be a ‘safe country.’” In addition to his
Form I-589, Ibarra-Perez submitted a declaration in Spanish
that was translated into English. In that declaration, he
“detailed the multiple times [he had been] threatened and
extorted while in Mexico.” Ibarra-Perez’s Form I-589 and
declaration were submitted to the immigration court, and an
Immigration and Customs Enforcement (“ICE”) attorney
received copies.
On January 10, 2020, Ibarra-Perez had a hearing before
IJ Jennifer I. Gaz. Ibarra-Perez appeared pro se. At the
hearing, Ibarra-Perez described the persecution he had
suffered in Cuba. He explained if he had not received a
humanitarian visa from Mexico, he “might have been jailed
by the government or deported back to Cuba” or “maybe [he]
might have been kidnapped.” He also stated that he feared
removal to Mexico. The IJ found that Ibarra-Perez had
suffered past persecution in Cuba on account of his political
opinion and granted him withholding of removal to Cuba.
At no point did the IJ designate Mexico, or any other
country, as an alternative country of removal. Government
counsel never mentioned Mexico as a possible country of
removal during proceedings before the IJ.

8

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

In her order withholding removal to Cuba, the IJ wrote
that she would have granted asylum to Ibarra-Perez if she
had not been prevented from doing so by the Transit Ban
then in effect. That ban required migrants who passed
overland through another country or countries on their way
to the southern border of the United States to first seek
asylum in one of those countries. See 8 C.F.R. § 1208.13(c)
(2020). 1
Continuing to act pro se and believing that the IJ’s order
granting him withholding of removal to Cuba “prevented
him from being deported from the United States,” IbarraPerez did not appeal the IJ’s denial of asylum. The
government did not appeal the IJ’s grant of withholding of
removal. The IJ’s decision thus became final. See 8 C.F.R.
§ 1003.39 (2025); 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(47)(B)(i)–(ii).
The government continued to detain Ibarra-Perez.
Because withholding of removal is country specific, the
government “retain[ed] the authority to remove [IbarraPerez] to any other country authorized by statute.” Johnson
v. Guzman Chavez, 594 U.S. 523, 536 (2021). On January
14, 2020, an ICE officer contacted consular representatives
from Mexico, Nicaragua, and Colombia to inquire whether
they would allow Ibarra-Perez entry into their countries. The
next day at 12:35 p.m., Mexico agreed to accept him. At
about 2:00 p.m. that day, while Ibarra-Perez was in a holding
Though it is not critical to our decision, we note that the IJ likely erred
in concluding that the Transit Ban barred Ibarra-Perez’s asylum
application. Ibarra-Perez testified during his hearing before the IJ that
he had sought asylum in Mexico before seeking entry into the United
States. Ibarra-Perez was asked whether he had applied for asylum in
Mexico. He responded, “Yes.” He was then asked, “Was the application
granted or denied?” He responded, “No. I received a humanitarian visa
for a year.”
1

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

9

cell, an ICE agent told him in English that he would be
deported to Mexico. Ibarra-Perez, who understood some
English, told the officer that he could not go back to Mexico
and asked if he could be removed to Spain or Canada instead.
The ICE officer promised to return with more information
but never came back. Later that day, while Ibarra-Perez was
still in the holding cell, an ICE officer with a computer
translation program, wrote on the computer that Ibarra-Perez
would be deported to Mexico. Ibarra-Perez told the officer
that he was afraid to be deported to Mexico. The officer left
without providing any further information.
An ICE officer later asked a Spanish speaking guard to
translate for Ibarra-Perez. The guard told Ibarra-Perez that
he would be deported “whether he liked it or not.” IbarraPerez panicked and raised his voice, saying he could not be
deported because he had won his case. ICE officers
handcuffed Ibarra-Perez, bound him at the ankles and waist,
and took him in a van to Florence, Arizona. Ibarra-Perez
told an ICE officer at Florence that we was “afraid to be
deported to Mexico.” The officer ignored him.
At about 6:00 a.m. on January 16, ICE officers delivered
Ibarra-Perez to Mexican officials in Nogales, Sonora,
Mexico. At 9:00 a.m., Ibarra-Perez was released from
Mexican custody. It was “cold and rainy,” and he was
dressed only in the light clothing he had worn when he came
to the United States border seeking entry. Ibarra-Perez went
to a Mexican government office at about 11:00 a.m. A
woman at the office told him to go look for work. At about
noon, Ibarra-Perez contacted his daughter in Florida who
wired approximately $100 to a bank in Mexico. He slept that
night in a church-affiliated shelter.

10

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

The next day, January 17, Ibarra-Perez left the shelter to
look for work. As he was walking, a truck with three men
slowed down next to him. One of the men said he wanted to
talk to Ibarra-Perez. Ibarra-Perez tried to keep walking.
Another man opened his jacket and showed a gun. The men
forced Ibarra-Perez into their truck. One of the men showed
Ibarra-Perez photographs taken the day before, including a
photograph of him getting the money his daughter had wired
to him. The men told Ibarra-Perez that he had two options—
to work for them as a drug mule or to pay them $500 per
month. Ibarra-Perez told the men that he would give them
an answer the next day. He asked them where he could find
them. They responded, “We’ll find you.”
Ibarra-Perez went to a food hall run by the “Kino Border
Initiative” and told “other immigrants” there what had
happened. “They told him he could pay, work for the
criminal groups, disappear and end up dead, or turn himself
in at the U.S. border.” An attorney from the Florence
Immigration & Refugee Rights Project was providing legal
services to the Kino Border Initiative that day. The attorney
contacted an ICE official. Later that day, accompanied by
the attorney, Ibarra-Perez presented himself at the Port of
Entry in Nogales. Ibarra-Perez was allowed to physically
reenter the United States, but was taken into custody.
On January 21, a new Notice to Appear was issued,
charging Ibarra-Perez with removability under 8 U.S.C.
§ 1182(a)(7)(A)(i)(I).
Ibarra-Perez’s attorney moved
successfully before IJ Gaz to dismiss the new Notice to
Appear and to reopen Ibarra-Perez’s earlier proceeding. The
IJ found that “[r]eopening is appropriate in light of the due
process concerns.” (Brackets in original.) She wrote that the
government has “‘an affirmative obligation’ that applies
‘regardless of whether the country of deportation is

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

11

designated during or after removal proceedings—to provide
a meaningful opportunity to be heard on asylum and
withholding claims regarding any potential country of
removal.”
While the reopened proceeding was pending before the
IJ, our court held on July 6, 2020, that the Transit Ban was
invalid. See E. Bay Sanctuary Covenant v. Barr, 964 F.3d
832 (9th Cir. 2020), amended by, 994 F.3d 962 (9th Cir.
2021). On July 16, the IJ granted asylum to Ibarra-Perez
based on his past persecution in Cuba and dismissed his
withholding and CAT claims as moot. The government did
not appeal. Ibarra-Perez was held in continuous custody
from the time of his reentry in January until the IJ’s decision
in July.
Ibarra-Perez brought suit under the FTCA for damages
suffered as a result of what he contends was an illegal
removal to Mexico. He alleges false imprisonment,
negligence, abuse of process, and intentional infliction of
emotional distress. The district court dismissed his
complaint because it concluded it lacked subject matter
jurisdiction under 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(5), (b)(9), and (g).
Ibarra-Perez timely appealed.
II. Standard of Review
We have appellate jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
We review de novo the district court’s determination of its
subject matter jurisdiction. Garcia v. Serv. Emps. Int’l
Union, 993 F.3d 757, 762 (9th Cir. 2021).

12

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

III. Discussion
A. Country-of-Removal Designations
The statute that governs determination of countries to
which a noncitizen can be removed is 8 U.S.C. § 1231.
Section 1231(b)(1) applies to “Aliens arriving at the United
States.” This subsection refers only to arrivals by “vessel or
aircraft,” but it has been interpreted to apply to other means
of arrival at the border. See 8 C.F.R. § 241.25(d) (“Any alien
ordered excluded who arrived at a land border on foot shall
be deported in the same manner as if the alien had boarded a
vessel or aircraft in foreign contiguous territory.”); see also
Jama v. ICE, 543 U.S. 335, 351 n.11 (2005) (“[Section]
1231(b)(1) . . . applies only to aliens placed in removal
proceedings immediately upon their arrival at the border.”).
Section 1232(b)(2) applies to “Other aliens.” The two
subsections prescribe slightly different ways in which the
country of removal is determined. Ibarra-Perez contends
that removal in his case is governed by § 1231(b)(2). With
the case in its current posture, the government has not taken
a position on which subsection applies. For purposes of the
appeal now before us, we need not decide that question, for
our analysis applies to both subsections.
Both the immigration court and the Department of
Homeland Security (“DHS”), which includes ICE, have
authority to select a country of removal pursuant to
§ 1231(b)(1) and (b)(2). The immigration court acts first.
“After determining that a noncitizen is removable, an IJ must
assign a country of removal.” Hadera v. Gonzales, 494 F.3d
1154, 1156 (9th Cir. 2007). The IJ “shall identify a country,
or countries in the alternative, to which the alien’s removal
may in the first instance be made, pursuant to the provisions
of [§ 1231(b)].” 8 C.F.R. § 1240.12(d); see also id.

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

13

§ 1240.10(f) (“The [IJ] shall also identify for the record a
country, or countries in the alternative, to which the alien’s
removal may be made pursuant to [§ 1231(b)(2)] if the
country of the alien’s designation” fails). The IJ’s
designation is subject to judicial review through the petitionfor-review process. See, e.g., Andriasian v. INS, 180 F.3d
1033, 1041 (9th Cir. 1999); Himri v. Ashcroft, 378 F.3d 932,
938 (9th Cir. 2004); Hadera, 494 F.3d at 1156–59; Dzyuba
v. Mukasey, 540 F.3d 955, 957 (9th Cir. 2008) (per curiam).
After immigration court proceedings have ended, “DHS
retains the authority to remove the alien to any other country
authorized by the statute.” Johnson, 594 U.S. at 536. If DHS
“is unable to remove the alien to the specified or alternative
country or countries, the order of the [IJ] does not limit the
authority of [DHS] to remove the alien to any other country
as permitted by [§ 1231(b)].” 8 C.F.R. § 1240.12(d); see
also id. §§ 241.15, 208.16(f), 1208.16(f). However, there
are restrictions on DHS’s removal authority. For purposes
of the case before us, the most important is 8 U.S.C.
§ 1231(b)(3)(A): “Notwithstanding [§ 1231(b)(1)] and
[§ 1231(b)(2)] the Attorney General may not remove an
alien to a country if the Attorney General decides that the
alien’s life or freedom would be threatened in that country
because of the alien’s race, religion, nationality, membership
in a particular social group, or political opinion.” 2 DHS
must also “notify individuals who are subject to deportation
that they have the right to apply for asylum in the United
States and for withholding of deportation to the country to
Section 1231 refers to the Attorney General. In 2002, Congress
transferred the Attorney General’s immigration enforcement
responsibilities to the Secretary of Homeland Security. Clark v.
Martinez, 543 U.S. 371, 374 n.1 (2005). We therefore interpret
references to the Attorney General as referring to the Secretary.

2

14

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

which they will be deported”; otherwise, DHS violates their
constitutional right to due process. Andriasian, 180 F.3d at
1041; see also Wani Site v. Holder, 656 F.3d 590, 594 (7th
Cir. 2011) (“We recognize that the government retains broad
discretion to designate a country of removal . . . . But it must
exercise that authority in the appropriate way . . . .”).
B. Section 1252(g)
The only question presented in this case is whether 8
U.S.C. § 1252(g) precludes federal courts from exercising
subject matter jurisdiction over his suit. “‘[W]e are guided
here . . . by the general rule to resolve any ambiguities in a
jurisdiction-stripping statute in favor of the narrower
interpretation,’ and by the ‘strong presumption in favor of
judicial review.’” Arce v. United States, 899 F.3d 796, 801
(9th Cir. 2018) (per curiam) (citations omitted) (first quoting
ANA Int’l, Inc. v. Way, 393 F.3d 886, 894 (9th Cir. 2004);
then quoting INS v. St. Cyr, 533 U.S. 289, 298 (2001)).
“[W]here Congress intends to preclude judicial review of
constitutional claims its intent to do so must be clear.”
Webster v. Doe, 486 U.S. 592, 603 (1988).
Section 1252(g) provides in relevant part: “[N]o court
shall have jurisdiction to hear any cause or claim by or on
behalf of any alien arising from the decision or action by the
Attorney General to commence proceedings, adjudicate
cases, or execute removal orders against any alien under this
chapter.” (Emphasis added.).
The Supreme Court has given a “narrow reading” to
§ 1252(g). AADC, 525 U.S. at 487; see also Regents of the
Univ. of Cal., 591 U.S. at 19 (“Section 1252(g) is . . .
narrow.”). “The provision applies only to three discrete
actions that the Attorney General may take: her ‘decision or
action’ to ‘commence proceedings, adjudicate cases, or

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

15

execute removal orders.’” AADC, 525 U.S. at 482 (emphasis
in original) (quoting 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g)). Instead of
“sweep[ing] in any claim that can technically be said to
‘arise from’ the three listed actions,” the provision “refer[s]
to just those three specific actions themselves.” Jennings v.
Rodriguez, 583 U.S. 281, 294 (2018) (plurality opinion)
(describing the holding of AADC). “There are of course
many . . . decisions or actions that may be part of the
deportation process” not implicated by § 1252(g), “such as
the decisions to open an investigation, to surveil the
suspected violator, to reschedule the deportation hearing, to
include various provisions in the final order that is the
product of the adjudication, and to refuse reconsideration of
that order.” AADC, 525 U.S. at 482.
The Court has characterized § 1252(g) as a “discretionprotecting provision.” Id. at 487. The Court wrote, “Section
1252(g) was directed against a particular evil: attempts to
impose judicial constraints upon prosecutorial discretion.”
Id. at 485 n.9. We have jurisdiction to decide a “purely legal
question” that “does not challenge the Attorney General’s
discretionary authority.” United States v. Hovsepian, 359
F.3d 1144, 1155 (9th Cir. 2004) (citing Ali v. Ashcroft, 346
F.3d 873, 878–79 (9th Cir. 2003), vacated on other grounds
sub nom., Ali v. Gonzales, 421 F.3d 795 (9th Cir. 2005)); see
Jimenez-Angeles v. Ashcroft, 291 F.3d 594, 599 (9th Cir.
2002); Barahona-Gomez v. Reno, 236 F.3d 1115, 1119–21
(9th Cir. 2001); Cath. Soc. Servs., Inc. v. INS, 232 F.3d 1139,
1150 (9th Cir. 2000) (en banc). We have jurisdiction “even
if the answer to that legal question . . . forms the backdrop
against which the Attorney General later will exercise
discretionary authority.” Hovsepian, 359 F.3d at 1155; see,
e.g., Kong v. United States, 62 F.4th 608, 617 (1st Cir. 2023)
(holding FTCA challenge to detention not barred by

16

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

§ 1252(g) because “[Kong’s] assertions of illegal detention
[were] plainly collateral to ICE’s prosecutorial decision to
execute Kong’s removal”); Madu v. U.S. Att’y Gen., 470
F.3d 1362, 1368 (11th Cir. 2006) (“While [§ 1252(g)] bars
courts from reviewing certain exercises of discretion by the
attorney general, it does not proscribe substantive review of
the underlying legal bases for those discretionary decisions
and actions.”); Bowrin v. INS, 194 F.3d 483, 488 (4th Cir.
1999) (“[Section] 1252(g) stripped the federal courts of
jurisdiction only to review challenges to the Attorney
General’s decision to exercise her discretion to initiate or
prosecute [the three] specific stages of the deportation
process.”).
The government argues that Ibarra-Perez’s FTCA suit,
objecting to his removal to Mexico by ICE, falls “squarely”
within § 1252(g). In the government’s view, Ibarra-Perez’s
objection to his removal to Mexico is a challenge to
“execution” of a removal order within the meaning of
§ 1252(g). We disagree.
Ibarra-Perez raises purely legal arguments in challenging
his removal. He does not contend that ICE was categorically
forbidden to remove him to Mexico. Rather, he contends
that he had a right to meaningful notice and an opportunity
to present a fear-based claim before he was removed to
Mexico. ICE officials removed Ibarra-Perez to Mexico
despite Ibarra-Perez’s Form I-589, declaration, and
testimony before the IJ, all of which indicated that he had
good reason to fear returning to Mexico, and despite IbarraPerez having repeatedly told ICE officials that he so feared.
Ibarra-Perez alleges that in removing him to Mexico, ICE
officials violated the Due Process Clause of the Fifth
Amendment, the Immigration and Nationality Act (“INA”),
and international law. For example, he points to our holding

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

17

in Andriasian that a “last minute” country of removal
designation “violated a basic tenet of constitutional due
process.” 180 F.3d at 1041. He also contends that ICE did
not have the statutory authority to remove him to Mexico
without having first given him an opportunity to present a
fear-based claim, pointing out that ICE’s removal authority
under § 1231(b)(1) and (b)(2) is subject to the protections
specified in (b)(3). See 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(3).
Ibarra-Perez does not challenge ICE’s discretionary
authority to decide “when” or “whether” to execute a
removal order. See Jimenez-Angeles v. Ashcroft, 291 F.3d
594, 599 (9th Cir. 2002); Rauda v. Jennings, 55 F.4th 773,
777 (9th Cir. 2022). He does not claim, for example, that
ICE should have delayed his removal or exercised its
discretion not to remove him. Instead, he challenges ICE’s
separate decision about where to send him. Cf. Johnson, 594
U.S. at 536–40 (removal orders are “separate” from
withholding-of-removal orders that limit “where” a
noncitizen can be removed). His removal order designated
Cuba as his country of removal and did not list an alternative
country of removal. Because Mexico was not mentioned in
the order of removal, Ibarra-Perez does not challenge the
“execution” of his removal order.
There is a reason the Supreme Court has instructed that
the jurisdictional bar of § 1252(g) is narrow, applying “only
to three discrete actions the Attorney General may take: her
‘decision or action’ to commence proceedings, adjudicate
cases, or execute removal orders.’” AADC, 525 U.S. at 482
(emphasis in original). The government’s broad reading of
§ 1252(g) would lead to a result that is not contemplated in
the statute and that has been disavowed by the Supreme
Court. The government’s reading of § 1252(g) would
entirely insulate from judicial review any post-hearing

18

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

decision by ICE to remove noncitizens to third countries
where they would be in danger of persecution, torture, and
even death.
Our cases decided under § 1252(g) are consistent with
our narrow reading. From the beginning, we have been clear
that § 1252(g) does not prohibit challenges to unlawful
practices merely because they are in some fashion connected
to removal orders. In Walters v. Reno, 145 F.3d 1032 (9th
Cir. 1998)—one of our first cases to interpret § 1252(g)—
we specifically held § 1252(g) did not bar due process
claims. Id. at 1052–53; see also Sulit v. Schiltgen, 213 F.3d
449, 453 (9th Cir. 2000). There, plaintiffs sought injunctive
relief on the ground that certain Immigration and
Naturalization Service administrative procedures used to
obtain final orders with respect to document fraud violated
their due process rights. Walters, 145 F.3d at 1036. These
orders “render[ed] the [noncitizen] deportable and
permanently excludable.” Id. The government argued the
district court lacked jurisdiction under § 1252(g) to issue an
injunction prohibiting the deportation (as it was then called)
of noncitizens that received inadequate process. Id. at 1052.
We held § 1252(g) “does not prevent the district court from
exercising jurisdiction over the plaintiffs’ due process
claims.” Id. Plaintiffs’ due process claims did “not arise
from a ‘decision or action by the Attorney General to
commence proceedings, adjudicate cases, or execute
removal orders against any alien,’ but instead constitute
‘general collateral challenges to unconstitutional practices
and policies used by the agency.’” Id. (quoting 8 U.S.C.
§ 1252(g); then quoting McNary v. Haitian Refugee Ctr.,
Inc., 498 U.S. 479, 492 (1991)). We wrote, “Although the
constitutional violations ultimately may have led to the
plaintiffs’ erroneous deportation, the resulting removal

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

19

orders were simply a consequence of the violations, not the
basis of the claims.” Id.
Arce, a recent case decided in our circuit, also supports
our subject matter jurisdiction. Anaya Arce expressed a fear
of harm if removed to Mexico. Arce, 899 F.3d at 798. An
asylum officer determined that he had not established a
reasonable fear of persecution or torture. Id. An IJ agreed
with that determination. Id. at 799. Anaya Arce then
obtained a temporary stay of removal from our court. Id.
Despite the stay of removal, DHS officials removed him to
Mexico. Id. Our court ordered that he be brought back to
the United States. Id. Once back in the United States, Anaya
Arce brought suit under the FTCA, alleging false arrest and
imprisonment, intentional infliction of emotional distress,
and negligence. Id. He sought “damages suffered as a result
of the wrongful removal.” Id. at 798.
The government argued that the claims in Anaya Arce’s
FTCA suit “f[e]ll squarely within the scope of § 1252(g)
because they ‘ar[ose] from’ the Attorney General’s decision
or action to execute the removal order,” and that we
therefore had no subject matter jurisdiction. Id. at 799. We
disagreed, holding that we had jurisdiction because Anaya
Arce’s FTCA suit was premised on a lack of legal authority
to remove him to Mexico. Id. at 800. We wrote that Anaya
Arce “points out—correctly—that the Attorney General
lacked the authority to execute the removal order because of
the stay of removal issued by our court.” Id.
Ibarra-Perez’s FTCA suit is similarly premised on a lack
of legal authority to remove him to Mexico. He argues that
before he could be removed to a country not named in his
removal order, he had due process and statutory rights to
present evidence supporting his contention that he would

20

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

suffer cognizable harm if he were removed to that country.
He brings nearly identical tort claims to those brought by
Anaya Arce, who also sought damages for wrongful
removal.
Arce forecloses our dissenting colleague’s
argument that Ibarra-Perez cannot bring tort claims based on
his allegedly wrongful removal to Mexico. Our dissenting
colleague attempts to narrow Arce to its facts, arguing that
its holding only applies to violations of court orders.
However, we see no reason to treat a violation of a Ninth
Circuit court order any differently from a violation the
Constitution, INA, or international law.
The government relies on our recent decision in Rauda,
to argue that § 1252(g) precludes our exercise of jurisdiction.
We disagree with the government. Matias Rauda was
ordered removed to El Salvador by an IJ; the BIA dismissed
his appeal; and we denied his petition for review. Rauda, 55
F.4th at 776. Matias Rauda then moved to reopen before the
BIA. Id. While his motion to reopen was pending and his
removal order remained in effect, Matias Rauda filed a
habeas petition in district court and sought a temporary
restraining order that would enjoin the government from
removing him until the BIA ruled on his motion to reopen.
Id. We held that the Attorney General’s decision as to when
to execute Rauda’s valid removal order was a discretionary
decision shielded by § 1252(g) from judicial review. We
wrote, “[T]he discretion to decide whether to execute a
removal order includes the discretion to decide when to do
it.” Id. at 777 (emphasis in original) (quoting Tazu v. Att’y
Gen. U.S., 975 F.3d 292, 297 (3d Cir. 2020)).
Rauda made no new law. It fits easily into a long series
of decisions in our circuit and sister circuits holding that
discretionary decisions are shielded from review. See, e.g.,
Arce, 899 F.3d at 800–01; Hovsepian, 359 F.3d at 1155; Ali,

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

21

346 F.3d at 878–79; Barahona-Gomez, 236 F.3d at 1119–
21; Cath. Soc. Servs., 232 F.3d at 1150; Kong, 62 F.4th at
617; Madu, 470 F.3d at 1368; Jama v. INS, 329 F.3d 630,
632 (8th Cir. 2003), aff’d sub nom. Jama v. ICE, 543 U.S.
335 (2005); Bowrin, 194 F.3d at 488. Unlike Rauda, IbarraPerez does not challenge ICE’s discretionary authority about
“when” to remove him or “whether” to remove him. Rather,
Ibarra-Perez objects to ICE’s separate decision about
“where” to send him. Specifically, he objects to the lack of
process afforded him in connection with having been sent to
a country not designated in the IJ’s removal order, despite
his vehement and repeated objections that he feared being
sent there.
Our dissenting colleague argues at length that § 1252(g)
is not limited to discretionary decisions. His argument is
foreclosed by our case law. As we wrote in Arce, “[W]e are
bound by our own precedent that limits § 1252(g)’s scope to
discretionary decisions that [the Secretary] actually has the
power to make, as compared to the violation of his
mandatory duties.” 899 F.3d at 801. We have jurisdiction
to review Ibarra-Perez’s purely legal arguments challenging
ICE’s removal to Mexico without providing any process that
would have allowed him to present evidence supporting his
fear of removal to that country.
C. Sections 1252(a)(5) and (b)(9)
The government makes no argument under § 1252(a)(5)
and (b)(9)—two provisions aimed at channeling
noncitizens’ claims into the petition-for-review process. It
notes in its brief to us that the district court had held that
these sections “bar jurisdiction to the extent that plaintiff
attempts to challenge prior removal proceedings,” and that
Ibarra-Perez “has disclaimed any challenge to the prior

22

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

removal proceedings and order.” We agree with the
government that Ibarra-Perez has not brought any challenge
under § 1252(a)(5) and (b)(9), and that those provisions are
not before us.
Despite the refusal of the government to make any
argument based on these provisions, our dissenting
colleague relies on them to argue that the petition-for-review
process in the immigration court was the proper pathway for
Ibarra-Perez to challenge his post-hearing removal. We
briefly address § 1252(a)(5) and (b)(9) to make the
following clear: If § 1252(g) bars jurisdiction to review
removals outside of removal proceedings, and if
§ 1252(a)(5) and (b)(9) provide the only remedy to IbarraPerez, ICE can send anyone to any country without any
review. Section 1252(g) is not such a bar, and § 1252(a)(5)
and (b)(9) do not provide the only remedy to someone in
Ibarra-Perez’s position.
Section 1252(a)(5) provides that a petition for review is
“the sole and exclusive means for judicial review of an order
of removal.” Section 1252(b)(9) is a “‘zipper clause’ that
consolidates all ‘questions of law and fact . . . arising from
any action taken or proceeding brought to remove an alien’
into a petition for review.” Martinez v. Napolitano, 704 F.3d
620, 622 (9th Cir. 2012) (quoting § 1252(b)(9)). The
“arising from” language appears broad, but the Supreme
Court has cautioned against an “expansive” interpretation of
§ 1252(b)(9) that would lead to “absurd” results and make
certain claims “effectively unreviewable.” Jennings, 583
U.S. at 293. We have held that § 1252(b)(9) does not does
not bar claims that are “independent of or collateral to the
removal process.” J.E.F.M. v. Lynch, 837 F.3d 1026, 1032
(9th Cir. 2016).

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

23

Because Ibarra-Perez challenges ICE’s actions taken
after his removal proceedings before the IJ and BIA had
ended, neither section applies. Section 1252(a)(5) does not
apply because Ibarra-Perez does not seek review of his
removal order. See Aden v. Nielsen, 409 F. Supp. 3d 998,
1006 (W.D. Wash. 2019) (holding that a habeas petitioner’s
challenge to a country-of-removal designation was not
barred by § 1252(a)(5) because ICE acted “outside of
removal proceedings”). Similarly, § 1252(b)(9) does not
apply because Ibarra-Perez brings claims that arose after
completion of his removal proceedings.
Instead, Ibarra-Perez challenges ICE’s separate and posthearing decision to remove him to Mexico. He could not
have contested this decision through the normal petition-forreview process because it was made after his removal
proceedings had ended. The government attorney never
mentioned Mexico as a possibility during Ibarra-Perez’s
proceedings before the IJ, and the IJ did not designate
Mexico as an alternative country of removal. To state the
obvious, Ibarra-Perez could not seek review of a decision
that had not been made.
Our dissenting colleague suggests that a motion to
reopen is the proper procedural pathway for Ibarra-Perez to
challenge his removal to Mexico. He suggests that once
Ibarra-Perez had notice that Mexico was his proposed
country of removal, he could have moved to reopen his
removal proceedings to present a new fear-based claim
addressed to Mexico. The suggestion blinks reality. The
actions of ICE officials made that impossible. Ibarra-Perez
made clear to ICE officials, loudly and repeatedly, that he
feared removal to Mexico. Instead of pausing to allow him
to file a motion to reopen, they immediately removed him.

24

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

In sum, Ibarra-Perez had no reasonable opportunity for
judicial review of ICE’s designation decision through the
standard petition-for-review process. Under the dissent’s
expansive interpretation of § 1252(g), Ibarra-Perez would
have no way to protect himself. This result is more than
merely “harsh,” as our dissenting colleague acknowledges.
Dissent at 59. It is dangerous. Under our colleague’s view
of the law, ICE can simply wait until removal proceedings
end and then immediately remove someone, without notice,
to a country where he or she faces imminent persecution,
torture, or death. The dissent’s approach would “completely
immunize[] [DHS’s] practices and procedures from due
process challenges.” Walters, 145 F.3d at 1052.
The dissent tries to distract us from the jurisdiction
question that is before us by focusing on the merits of IbarraPerez’s claims. We repeat: The merits of Ibarra-Perez’s
case are not before us. The question before us is whether the
district court has jurisdiction to decide those merits. We
conclude that it does.
IV. Conclusion
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the district court’s
dismissal of Ibarra-Perez’s complaint for lack of subject
matter jurisdiction and remand for further proceedings.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

25

R. NELSON, Circuit Judge, dissenting:
8 U.S.C. § 1252(g) strips our jurisdiction over “any
cause or claim” arising from the government’s decision to
“execute removal orders.” Jorge Ibarra-Perez argues that his
removal to Mexico—under a final and valid removal order—
was unlawful because the government did not timely tell him
he would be sent to Mexico. He seeks damages to
compensate his allegedly unlawful removal.
Ibarra-Perez’s claims are meritless. In any event, we
lack jurisdiction over them. He has improperly repackaged
a challenge to his removal proceedings as tort claims. And
by asking us to decide whether the government erred in
enforcing his removal order, Ibarra-Perez asks us to do what
Congress forbids: review the government’s decision or
action to “execute removal orders.”
To hold otherwise, the majority invents an exception to
Congress’s commands. Under the majority opinion, legal
questions about the government’s removal authority are
exempt from § 1252(g). Maj. at 15. This exception is
foreclosed by the statutory text and Supreme Court
precedent. And every circuit to address the majority’s
exception has rejected it. Congress meant what it said: “any
cause or claim” arising from the execution of removal orders
is barred.
The majority’s holding is radical and sweeping. Under
the majority’s rule, any deportee can evade § 1252(g) and
raise any claim about the government’s authority to deport
him.
The result? The majority intrudes where Congress said,
“Keep out.” Our backlogged immigration docket will now
overflow more than ever with meritless collateral challenges

26

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

to removal orders. And the Ninth Circuit will stand in the
way as the Executive Branch attempts to faithfully execute
the People’s law. Because Congress has stripped our
authority, I would affirm the district court’s order dismissing
Ibarra-Perez’s suit for lack of jurisdiction. I dissent.
I
Jorge Ibarra-Perez is a Cuban national who lived in
Mexico. He alleges that he faced persecution in both
countries. He presented at the southern border and sought
asylum and withholding of removal. An immigration judge
(IJ) found Ibarra-Perez removable, denied asylum, but
granted withholding as to Cuba. Withholding of removal is
country-specific relief. Johnson v. Guzman Chavez, 594
U.S. 523, 536 (2021). It prohibits the government from
removing an alien to a particular country, not from the
United States altogether. Id. So the IJ entered an order
authorizing Ibarra-Perez’s removal with only one restriction:
Ibarra-Perez couldn’t be sent to Cuba.
Ibarra-Perez did not appeal his removal order. He
waived his right to keep seeking asylum. And he waived any
argument that the IJ failed to address his alleged persecution
in Mexico. As a result, Ibarra-Perez’s removal order became
final and uncontested. See 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(47)(B).
The government prepared to enforce the order and sent
Ibarra-Perez to Mexico, where he had a humanitarian visa.
See id. § 1231(b)(1). That surprised Ibarra-Perez. Ignoring
his removal order, Ibarra-Perez wrongly thought he “won his
case” because his removal to Cuba was withheld. Even
though the IJ entered a valid removal order, Ibarra-Perez
says that he didn’t know he could be removed to Mexico. As
he was being transported to Mexico, Ibarra-Perez told

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

27

officials that he feared persecution in Mexico. He wanted to
be sent to Spain or Canada instead.
Officials sent Ibarra-Perez to Mexico. After he arrived,
three men allegedly demanded that he work as a drug mule.
The men did not physically harm Ibarra-Perez, and IbarraPerez did not suffer any persecution while in Mexico. Still,
after only two days in Mexico, he returned to the United
States and sued the federal government. He believes the
government should have designated Mexico as a country of
removal before enforcing his removal order. Because the
government didn’t, Ibarra-Perez argues that his removal was
unlawful. He brings claims for false imprisonment,
negligence, abuse of process, and intentional infliction of
emotional distress under the Federal Tort Claims Act. The
Biden Administration argued before the district court that
§ 1252(g) strips jurisdiction over those claims. The district
court agreed and dismissed Ibarra-Perez’s suit. Ibarra-Perez
appealed, and the government renewed its jurisdictional
argument.
II
The district court got it right. Congress deprived the
federal courts of jurisdiction over Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims.
A
Section 1252(g) strips jurisdiction over claims “arising
from” the “decision or action” to “commence proceedings,
adjudicate cases, or execute removal orders.” It applies to
“any cause or claim,” “any alien,” and any federal court, and
it governs “notwithstanding any other provision of law.” Id.
The language is clear. Federal courts should stay out of the
enforcement of removal orders.

28

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

There is one exception. If another provision within
§ 1252 restores jurisdiction over a claim, § 1252(g) does not
apply. 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g). Yet the other provisions of
§ 1252 don’t encourage judicial involvement. The statute
allows courts of appeals to review removal proceedings
through the petition-for-review process. Id. § 1252(a)(1).
That’s it. The petition for review is the “sole and exclusive”
means for judicial review of any questions—factual, legal,
or constitutional—that arise from removal proceedings. Id.
§§ 1252(a)(5), (b)(9). And even the petition-for-review
process is limited. Courts must defer to the agency’s factual
findings, and discretionary decisions may be reviewed only
for legal or constitutional error. Id. §§ 1252(a)(2)(B),
(a)(2)(D), (b)(4).
Everyone agrees Ibarra-Perez’s suit doesn’t fall within
§ 1252(g)’s sole exception, the petition-for-review process.
Ibarra-Perez waived his right to invoke that process. Thus,
the question is whether Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims fall within
§ 1252(g). If they do, his claims are barred—no exceptions.
Section 1252(g)’s scope is governed by its text. The
statute does not strip jurisdiction over “all deportationrelated claims.” Reno v. Am.-Arab Anti-Discrim. Comm.
(AADC), 525 U.S. 471, 478 (1999). “[W]hat § 1252(g) says
is much narrower.” Id. at 482. The statute bars challenges
to three actions: commencing removal proceedings,
adjudicating cases, and executing removal orders. 8 U.S.C.
§ 1252(g). Though the statute bars any claim “arising from”
those actions, a plurality of the Supreme Court has
interpreted “arising from” as referring to “just those three
specific actions themselves,” not any action that bears a
technical but-for relationship to them.
Jennings v.
Rodriguez, 583 U.S. 281, 294 (2018) (plurality op.). Yet any

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

29

challenge to the three listed actions outside the petition-forreview process is categorically barred.
B
Ibarra-Perez challenges the execution of his removal
order, one of the three actions listed in § 1252(g). To see
why, start with Ibarra-Perez’s characterization of his own
claims. He asserts that his removal to Mexico was
“unlawful.” But he disclaims any challenge to his predeportation removal proceedings. Instead, he says that his
claims arose “after” the removal order was entered and when
the government “initiated [his] deportation to Mexico.” If
that’s true, Ibarra-Perez must be challenging the execution
of his removal order. There’s nothing else for him to
challenge.
Consider next “the action[s] being challenged” in his
complaint. Camarena v. ICE, 988 F.3d 1268, 1272 (11th
Cir. 2021) (quotation omitted). Ibarra-Perez raises four tort
claims. Each is tied to the execution of his removal order.
Asserting false imprisonment, Ibarra-Perez alleges that the
government wrongfully deprived his liberty by “physically
deporting him” to Mexico. Asserting abuse of process, he
claims that the government “deport[ed] [him] to a country
without lawful notice.” For his negligence claim, IbarraPerez argues that the government breached a duty “not to
cause harm or injury” when it physically deported him.
Finally, Ibarra-Perez alleges that officials intentionally
inflicted emotional distress when they deported him to a
country where they knew he’d be harmed. Each claim
asserts that the government wrongfully removed him. That
is, each attacks the government’s “decision or action” to
“execute [his] removal order[].” 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g).
There’s no other way to understand his claims.

30

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

Turn to the relief sought. See Walters v. Reno, 145 F.3d
1032, 1052 (9th Cir. 1998) (considering the remedy). IbarraPerez doesn’t ask for an injunction remedying a due process
violation. Cf. id. at 1037, 1052; Cath. Soc. Servs., Inc. v.
INS, 232 F.3d 1139, 1142, 1150 (9th Cir. 2000) (en banc).
Nor does he seek damages related to conduct collateral to his
deportation. He seeks “compensation for the harms and
losses he suffered as the result of [his] unlawful
deportation.” Put simply, he challenges the execution of his
removal order.
Ibarra-Perez’s briefing is more of the same. In his own
words, “he challenges the tortious acts and omissions [of the
government] in . . . removing him to Mexico.” Over and
over, Ibarra-Perez claims that he “was unlawfully deported,”
and that he’s bringing “a tort claim for an unlawful
removal.” Of course, Ibarra-Perez also explains why he
thinks his deportation was unlawful.
Because the
government allegedly failed to designate Mexico as a
possible country of removal, the government “lacked the
authority . . . to remove him to Mexico.” But that meritslevel procedural argument merely explains why Ibarra-Perez
thinks the government was wrong to execute his removal
order. It doesn’t change the fact that, at bottom, Ibarra-Perez
challenges the execution of that order. And claims
challenging the validity of his removal order should have
been brought through a motion to reopen.
“No matter how [Ibarra-Perez] frames it,” Rauda v.
Jennings, 55 F.4th 773, 778 (9th Cir. 2022), he challenges
“the merits of the decision to execute [a] removal order[],”
Walters, 145 F.3d at 1052. We lack jurisdiction over such
claims.

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

31

C
The majority ignores all this. The majority never
describes Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims. It never discusses
Ibarra-Perez’s concessions, requested remedy, or complaint.
Instead, the majority invents an exception to § 1252(g),
holding that legal questions are exempt from the statute.
That exception conflicts with the statutory text, Supreme
Court precedent, and the holdings of our sister circuits. It
also fails to address the question presented here.
1
According to the majority, § 1252(g) doesn’t apply to
“purely legal” questions “premised on the lack of legal
authority” to remove an alien. Maj. at 15, 19. Because
Ibarra-Perez argues that the government lacked legal
authority to execute his removal order, the majority
concludes that his claims are not a challenge to the execution
of his removal order “within the meaning of § 1252(g).” Id.
at 16.
This conclusion cannot be squared with the facts. By
arguing that the government lacked authority to execute his
removal order, Ibarra-Perez does just that—argue that the
government wrongfully executed his removal order. If that’s
not a challenge to the “decision or action” to “execute
removal orders,” what is? See 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g).
More to the point, the majority’s conclusion conflicts
with the statutory text. Section 1252(g) applies to “any
cause or claim” arising from the execution of removal
orders. “Any” means “any.” Ali v. Fed. Bureau of Prisons,
552 U.S. 214, 218–20 (2008). The statute bars all claims,
even if they raise legal questions.

32

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

Contrast § 1252(g)’s categorical language with other
parts of § 1252. After barring judicial review of the
government’s discretionary decisions, § 1252 restores
jurisdiction over “constitutional claims or questions of law”
that are “raised upon a petition for review.” 8 U.S.C.
§§ 1252(a)(2)(B), (a)(2)(D). Outside the petition-for-review
context, any exception for legal questions is conspicuously
missing. “It would be easy enough” for Congress to exempt
legal questions in § 1252(g), “just as Congress has” in other
provisions within the same section. See Nasrallah v. Barr,
590 U.S. 573, 583 (2020). But Congress did not, “and it is
not the proper role of the courts to rewrite the laws.” Id.
Without any textual support, the majority’s special
treatment for legal questions must rest, if at all, on an
inference from Congress’s silence. But Congress wasn’t
silent about the scope of § 1252(g). The statute bars “any”
claim. Unlike nearby provisions, there’s no exception for
legal questions. Congress meant what Congress said, and
that forecloses the majority’s exception.
Even if the statute’s scope were less clear, the majority’s
inference from silence would fall short. For one, the
inference presumes that Congress’s silent intent matters.
Yet as judges, we enforce the written law—not unexpressed
intentions. Oklahoma v. Castro-Huerta, 597 U.S. 629, 642–
43 (2022).
For another, silence supports conflicting inferences. See
United States v. Vonn, 535 U.S. 55, 65–66 (2002). The
majority assumes that because Congress didn’t specifically
preclude review of legal questions in § 1252(g), it must have
meant to authorize that review. It’s more likely that because
Congress didn’t exempt legal questions from § 1252(g) (as
it did elsewhere), it intended to bar them. The majority gives

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

33

no reason for selecting the former inference and shunning
the latter. It invents an exception to a jurisdictional bar
through pure judicial ipse dixit.
Nor is any explanation possible. Congress has rejected
the majority’s inference from silence. In INS v. St. Cyr, 533
U.S. 289 (2001), the Supreme Court invoked the same
inference that the majority relies on here. Because § 1252
didn’t specifically mention habeas petitions, the Court
reasoned that habeas petitions raising “pure question[s] of
law” about “the legality of Executive detention” must be
exempt from the statute. Id. at 298–300, 305. In response,
Congress amended § 1252—including subsection (g)—to
reject the inference. 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g); Nasrallah, 590
U.S. at 580. When the statute bars “any” claim, it bars “any”
claim. There’s no room for atextual exceptions.
2
The majority’s exception also conflicts with Supreme
Court precedent. In its seminal § 1252(g) case, the Court
used § 1252(g) to bar constitutional claims raising legal
questions. Plaintiffs challenged the constitutionality of an
anti-communism statute and claimed that the government
unconstitutionally sought to remove them because of their
political beliefs. AADC, 525 U.S. at 473–74. Those
constitutional claims, just like Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims,
raised pure questions of law. See id. at 487–92. And those
legal questions, just as here, implicated the government’s
legal authority to conduct immigration proceedings. See id.
Even so, the Supreme Court held that § 1252(g) barred the
claims.
We too have applied § 1252(g) to bar claims raising pure
questions of law. Rauda, 55 F.4th at 777 (“allegedly
unlawful decision” to remove an alien immediately); Sissoko

34

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

v. Rocha, 509 F.3d 947, 948–50 (9th Cir. 2007) (legality of
detention). These cases confirm that § 1252(g) does not
depend “on the particular grounds raised by an alien for
challenging” the execution of his removal order. Demore v.
Kim, 538 U.S. 510, 537 (2003) (O’Connor, J., concurring in
part and in the judgment). And they foreclose the majority’s
attempt to exempt legal questions from § 1252(g).
With all this in mind, it’s no surprise that the majority’s
holding is an outlier. Plaintiffs around the country have
argued, just like the majority, that challenges to the
government’s removal authority are exempt from § 1252(g).
Each circuit to resolve the question has rejected the
argument. See Tazu v. Att’y Gen., 975 F.3d 292, 298 (3d Cir.
2020); 1 E.F.L. v. Prim, 986 F.3d 959, 965 (7th Cir. 2021);
Silva v. United States, 866 F.3d 938, 941 (8th Cir. 2017);
Camarena, 988 F.3d at 1272. For good reason. Ruling
otherwise elevates a faulty inference from silence over
statutory text and Court precedent.
Our sister circuits gave another reason for rejecting the
majority’s rule. The majority’s rule “would gut § 1252(g).”
Tazu, 975 F.3d at 298. “[A]ny petitioner challenging the
execution of a removal order could characterize his or her
claim as an attack on [the government’s] ‘legal authority’ to
execute the order.” E.F.L., 986 F.3d at 965. Suppose an
alien disagrees with the IJ’s decision to deny withholding of
Compelled by circuit precedent, Tazu left open an exception for when
the Immigration and Nationality Act “itself t[akes] away the Attorney
General’s authority.” 975 F.3d at 298. Ibarra-Perez has made no such
argument. Similarly, though the majority cites Kong v. United States, 62
F.4th 608, 617 (1st Cir. 2023), for the proposition that § 1252(g) allows
challenges to the “legality of [arrest and] detention,” that holding is
irrelevant. Ibarra-Perez challenges the execution of his removal order,
not the validity of his arrest and detention.
1

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

35

removal. Or argues that the agency wrongly discounted
testimony showing that he’s entitled to asylum. Or that the
agency made the wrong factual findings when rejecting his
claim for relief under the Convention Against Torture. Each
claim is “premised on a lack of legal authority” to execute a
removal order. Maj. at 19. And under the majority’s theory,
every such claim is exempt from § 1252(g). In other words,
under the majority’s theory, § 1252(g) means nothing.
3
Set aside the statutory text, Supreme Court precedent,
and the wisdom of our sister circuits. The majority’s rule
still fails.
Section 1252(g) strips jurisdiction over “cause[s] or
claim[s].” Thus, the issue is whether Ibarra-Perez’s tort
claims are the type of “cause or claim” that is barred. The
majority doesn’t answer that question. It identifies a single
question presented by Ibarra-Perez’s claims that is purely
legal. Yet Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims present many factual
questions, which, under the majority’s theory, are barred.
Did government officials fail to act with reasonable
prudence or intend to harm Ibarra-Perez? Did Ibarra-Perez
suffer extreme emotional distress in Mexico? What are his
damages? By focusing on one legal question and ignoring
the many factual questions, the majority neglects to
determine our jurisdiction over Ibarra-Perez’s entire claims.
***
Section 1252(g) means what it says. “[A]ny cause or
claim,” legal or otherwise, challenging the execution of
removal orders is barred. At the very least, the statute must
mean something. And under the majority’s rule, it means
nothing. Every circuit has rejected the majority’s proposed

36

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

rule. The statutory text and Supreme Court precedent
demand the opposite result.
D
The majority gives five reasons to ignore the statutory
text, Court precedent, and out-of-circuit authority. Each
argument fails.
1
First, the majority invokes a substantive canon. Citing a
“presumption in favor of judicial review,” the majority
suggests that any “ambiguities” in § 1252(g) should be
construed narrowly. Maj. at 14 (quotation omitted). But see
Biden v. Nebraska, 600 U.S. 477, 508–09 (2023) (Barrett, J.,
concurring) (criticizing similar canons).
The majority, however, doesn’t identify any ambiguity
in § 1252(g). It provides no textual basis for concluding that
legal questions are exempt from § 1252(g). Instead, the
majority hangs its hat on an atextual exception to the
statute’s otherwise clear scope. The statute isn’t ambiguous.
The statute bars “any cause or claim” arising out of the
execution of removal orders. 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g). That’s the
type of “clear statement in favor of limiting judicial review”
that overcomes the presumption of judicial review. Rauda,
55 F.4th at 780 n.3.
2
The majority next resorts to statutory purpose. Citing
Justice Scalia’s majority opinion in AADC, the majority
notes that § 1252(g) was designed to address a “particular
evil”: judicial restraints on prosecutorial discretion. Maj. at
15 (quoting AADC, 525 U.S. at 485 n.9). Thus, the majority
reasons that § 1252(g) applies only to claims that affect

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

37

prosecutorial discretion. Because legal questions don’t
affect prosecutorial discretion, the majority concludes that
they aren’t barred by the statute.
This reasoning is ironic. The majority’s purpose-based
argument rests on a quote from Justice Scalia—perhaps the
most vocal opponent of purposivism in living memory. See
Antonin Scalia & Bryan A. Garner, Reading Law: The
Interpretation of Legal Texts 16–17 (2012) (“If any
interpretive method deserves to be labeled an ideological
‘device’ it is . . . purposivism.”). Only the Ninth Circuit
could find an endorsement for a purposivist interpretation
from Justice Scalia. 2
The majority’s purpose-based argument fails on three
additional levels. First, statutes “often go beyond the
principal evil” they are meant to address. Oncale v.
Sundowner Offshore Servs., Inc., 523 U.S. 75, 79 (1998). As
federal courts, we credit “the text of a law” over “purported
legislative intentions.” Castro-Huerta, 597 U.S. at 642.
What Congress “meant to say” cannot trump “what it did
say.” Zuni Pub. Sch. Dist. v. Dep’t of Educ., 550 U.S. 81,
119 (2007) (Scalia, J., dissenting). Thus, while AADC cited
the purpose of § 1252(g) to explain why the text said what it
did, the Court ultimately enforced not the purpose, but “what
§ 1252(g) says.” 525 U.S. at 482.
It’s easy to see why. “Only the written word is the law.”
Bostock v. Clayton County, 590 U.S. 644, 653 (2020). The
majority uses unwritten purpose to set aside statutory text.
That mode of reasoning was common when courts invoked
“reason”—or the natural law “written in men’s hearts”—to
The majority cites other cases for the statute’s purpose, but these rest
on AADC.

2

38

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

set aside or narrowly construe statutory text. Thomas
Aquinas, Summa Theologica Pt. I-II, Q.94, art. 6, s.c.
(referencing 2 Corinth. 3:3); id. Q.96, art. 6, co.; see, e.g.,
Holy Trinity Church v. United States, 143 U.S. 457, 458–59,
470–71 (1892). That mode of reasoning has no place in our
interpretive practice today.
Second, the majority’s argument rests on a false premise.
The majority assumes that judicial review of the
government’s removal authority doesn’t impact
prosecutorial discretion. Yet forcing the government to
answer in court every time it removes an alien who thinks
his removal unlawful would thwart the government’s
discretionary removal authority. By stripping jurisdiction
over challenges to the government’s legal authority to
execute removal orders, § 1252(g) protects the
government’s discretion. So even if § 1252(g) were limited
to actions addressing its “principal evil,” the majority’s
legal-question exception is still wrong.
Third, the majority’s argument rests on another false
premise. The majority reasons that because § 1252(g) aims
to protect discretionary decisions, the statute must not bar
legal questions. This assumes a dichotomy between legal
questions and challenges to discretionary decisions. There
is no such dichotomy. A challenge to a discretionary
decision may raise pure questions of law. The statute
expressly recognizes that. 8 U.S.C. §§ 1252(a)(2)(B),
(a)(2)(D) (discussing legal questions that challenge
discretionary decisions). As does our precedent. Rauda, 55
F.4th at 777–78 (identifying a legal question that arose from
a discretionary decision); United States v. Hovsepian, 359
F.3d 1144, 1155 (9th Cir. 2004) (en banc) (noting legal
questions can form “the backdrop” for discretionary
decisions). Any distinction between legal questions and

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

39

challenges to discretionary decisions is “illusory.” E.F.L.,
986 F.3d at 965.
In the end, the majority’s purpose-based argument is a
nonstarter. Purpose can’t control over unambiguous text,
especially when the purpose-based argument relies on false
premises. Rather than twisting to invent an exception for
Ibarra-Perez, we should have enforced the written law.
3
Third, the majority suggests that its exception is based
on precedent. Not so. Our precedent is best read consistent
with the statutory text.
a
Start with the case that the majority says is most directly
on point, Arce v. United States, 899 F.3d 796 (9th Cir. 2018)
(per curiam). There, we stayed an alien’s removal order
while we resolved his petition for review. Id. at 799. The
government removed him anyway. The alien sued, and we
held that § 1252(g) didn’t bar his suit. Id. at 800. His claims,
we reasoned, arose “not from the execution of the removal
order, but from the violation of our court’s order.” Id. Even
if the claims related “tangentially” to the execution of a
removal order, they challenged the “decision or action to
violate a court order.” Id. If those claims were barred, we
couldn’t enforce “any court order” connected with
immigration proceedings. Id. at 801.
Arce is inapt. “[B]ut for the violation of the [court order
in Arce],” § 1252(g) would have barred the alien’s claims.
Id. at 800; see also id. at 801 (emphasizing the need to
“enforce our orders”). The majority attempts to massage
Arce to fit with this case, stating that Ibarra-Perez “brings
nearly identical tort claims to those brought by” the plaintiff

40

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

in Arce. Maj. at 20. Despite the underlying claims, however,
Arce turned on the violation of a court order. Here, by
contrast, the government didn’t violate a court order when it
deported Ibarra-Perez. So on its own terms, Arce is no help.
The majority’s remaining cases are similarly unhelpful.
The majority cites cases that follow Justice Scalia’s
observation about § 1252(g)’s purpose and note that the
three actions listed in § 1252(g) (commencing proceedings,
adjudicating cases, and executing removal orders) involve
discretion. E.g., Barahona-Gomez v. Reno, 236 F.3d 1115,
1119–21 (9th Cir. 2001); Ali v. Ashcroft, 346 F.3d 873, 878
(9th Cir. 2003), vacated on reh’g, Ali v. Gonzales, 421 F.3d
795 (9th Cir. 2005); 3 Hovsepian, 359 F.3d at 1155. But the
fact that the listed actions generally involve discretion
doesn’t mean that an action is covered by the statute only if
it’s discretionary. The execution of a removal order remains
a “decision or action . . . [to] execute removal orders” even
if it’s nondiscretionary. See 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g). In any
event, that the listed actions involve discretion does nothing
to support the majority’s rule that legal questions are
exempt.
The majority also quotes restatements of our early
§ 1252(g) decisions.
In those early decisions, the
government asked us to extend § 1252(g) beyond its text.
The majority’s citation to Ali is especially problematic since it was
vacated. Ali also cuts against the majority. Before the opinion was
withdrawn and in response to the government’s arguments, Ali
characterized the plaintiff’s claim as raising “a purely legal question.”
346 F.3d at 878. But Ali didn’t rely on that characterization to find
§ 1252(g) inapplicable. Instead, Ali rested on the (since superseded)
ground that habeas petitions are exempt from § 1252(g). Id. at 879. By
resting on an alternative ground, Ali suggests that the legal nature of the
claim wasn’t enough to render § 1252(g) inapplicable.

3

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

41

We declined, holding that § 1252(g) applies “only to the
three specific discretionary actions mentioned in its text, not
to all claims relating in any way to deportation proceedings.”
Cath. Soc. Servs., 232 F.3d at 1150; Sulit v. Schiltgen, 213
F.3d 449, 453 (9th Cir. 2000). And we emphasized that our
decisions went “no further” than this textual holding.
Barahona-Gomez, 236 F.3d at 1121.
Walters, 145 F.3d at 1052, was the first of these cases.
The parties agreed that the court had jurisdiction over the
underlying claims but disputed whether § 1252(g) barred a
portion of the requested relief. Id. at 1048, 1051–52. The
government argued that § 1252(g) stripped jurisdiction over
“any relief” that “interferes” with the execution of removal
orders. Id. at 1052. We disagreed because the underlying
claims “d[id] not arise from” the actions listed in § 1252(g).
Id.; see also 8 U.S.C. § 1252(g) (focusing on the “cause or
claim,” not the remedy). The plaintiffs didn’t challenge “the
merits of the decision to execute removal orders,” and their
deportation was “a consequence,” but “not the basis,” for
their claims. Walters, 145 F.3d at 1052. We thus described
their claims as “general collateral challenges to
unconstitutional practices and policies” and held that
§ 1252(g) did not apply. Id. (quotation omitted).
Over time, panels began to describe Walters and its
progeny less carefully. One panel described Walters as
holding that “constitutional challenges to deportation
procedures” are exempt from § 1252(g). Jimenez-Angeles v.
Ashcroft, 291 F.3d 594, 599 (9th Cir. 2002). 4 Another
Jimenez-Angeles discussed Walters but is itself inapposite. JimenezAngeles arose on a petition for review—proceedings in which Congress
has authorized review of constitutional challenges. 291 F.3d at 598, 603;
8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(D).
4

42

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

suggested that we can consider “purely legal question[s]”
that don’t challenge the government’s “discretionary
authority.” Hovsepian, 359 F.3d at 1155.
In context, these restatements of circuit precedent are not
as broad as they sound. Each case—both the early cases and
the later cases that described them—is best read to go “no
further” than limiting § 1252(g) to its text. BarahonaGomez, 236 F.3d at 1121; see also Arce, 899 F.3d at 800
(“[H]is claims arise not from the execution of the removal
order.”); Hovsepian, 359 F.3d at 1155 (“[T]he gravamen of
Hovsepian’s claim does not arise from [the three listed
actions].”); see also Cath. Soc. Servs., 232 F.3d at 1150
(similar). That is, each case holds that § 1252(g) “is simply
not implicated” by every claim that is “tangentially”
connected to immigration proceedings. Arce, 899 F.3d at
800–01. None of these cases hold—like the majority now—
that claims within the statute’s textual scope are exempt.
The majority interprets our restatements of circuit
precedent as broadly as possible. That’s an error. The
majority makes our restatements of circuit precedent
inconsistent with the very cases that they purport to describe.
These early cases went “no further” than limiting § 1252(g)
to its text. Barahona-Gomez, 236 F.3d at 1121. The
majority also places our caselaw on a collision course with
the statutory text, which applies to “any” claim, whether
legal or constitutional. The majority’s reading also conflicts
with Supreme Court precedent, which has applied § 1252(g)
to legal and constitutional claims. AADC, 525 U.S. at 487.
We should read our precedent consistent with instructions
from Congress and the Supreme Court rather than stretching
it to violate both. The majority errs in choosing otherwise.

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

43

b
Every time we’ve created an atextual exception to
§ 1252(g), we’ve been corrected. The majority courts
reversal by repeating a mistake that’s been cured before.
In our first published decision interpreting § 1252(g), we
held that constitutional claims were exempt. Am.-Arab AntiDiscrim. Comm. v. Reno, 119 F.3d 1367, 1374 (9th Cir.
1997). Our reasoning then tracked the majority’s reasoning
now. If § 1252(g) barred constitutional claims, there would
be “no other avenue[]” to review those claims. Id. Several
judges dissented from the denial of rehearing en banc. Am.Arab Anti-Discrim. Comm. v. Reno, 132 F.3d 531, 532 (9th
Cir. 1997) (O’Scannlain, J., dissenting from denial of
rehearing en banc). And the Supreme Court reversed,
applying § 1252(g) to bar a constitutional claim. AADC, 525
U.S. at 476, 487. We were wrong to deem constitutional
claims exempt from the statute.
Our next atextual exemption was superseded by
Congress. At first, a three-judge panel correctly relied on
§ 1252(g) to dismiss a habeas claim. Hose v. INS, 141 F.3d
932, 935 (9th Cir. 1998). After we vacated that correct
decision to rehear it en banc, Hose v. INS, 180 F.3d 992, 994
(9th Cir. 1999), panels began holding that habeas petitions
were exempt from § 1252(g), e.g., Magana-Pizano v. INS,
152 F.3d 1213, 1222 (9th Cir. 1998) (per curiam); Ali, 346
F.3d at 880. This time, the Supreme Court failed to correct
us, holding that habeas claims were exempt from § 1252. St.
Cyr, 533 U.S. at 310 n.33. So Congress stepped in and
amended § 1252 to correct the misunderstanding. See
Nasrallah, 590 U.S. at 580. The statute now repeats what
was “utterly clear” before: Habeas claims aren’t exempt.
See St. Cyr, 533 U.S. at 326 (Scalia, J., dissenting).

44

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

Later, a three-judge panel created an exception for
Bivens claims. Sissoko v. Rocha, 412 F.3d 1021, 1031–32
(9th Cir. 2005). The panel there invoked the same
substantive canon and purpose-based argument that the
majority repeats here. Id. Fortunately, we didn’t let our own
error stand. After the government petitioned for rehearing
en banc, we withdrew our opinion and replaced it with one
that recognized that § 1252(g) bars constitutional tort claims.
Sissoko, 509 F.3d at 947.
Apparently for the majority, three reversals aren’t
experience enough. By creating another atextual exception
to § 1252(g), the majority repeats a mistake corrected before.
4
The majority also concludes that Ibarra-Perez’s removal
to Mexico was unlawful because his final order of removal
did not list Mexico as an alternative country of removal on
it. Maj. at 17. As discussed below, the majority incorrectly
tips its hand at the merits in making this conclusion. The
majority also too narrowly construes the plain text of
§ 1252(g).
The IJ’s removal order authorized Ibarra-Perez’s
removal from the United States. The only restriction was
that the government couldn’t send him to Cuba. No order—
either from the IJ or a court—prohibited the government
executing that removal order to send him to Mexico. The
government’s decision to do so thus executed that removal
order as ordinarily understood. Section 1252(g) therefore
bars Ibarra-Perez’s claims.
This conclusion flows naturally from both Supreme
Court and Ninth Circuit precedent. The Supreme Court has
explained that when “an alien applies for withholding-only

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

45

relief, he does so as to a particular country.” Johnson, 594
U.S. at 535–36. If an immigration judge grants withholding,
the “removal order is not vacated or otherwise set aside,” but
“remains in full force.” Id. at 536. The government may
execute the removal order “to remove the alien to any other
country authorized by the statute.” Id.; see Huang v.
Ashcroft, 390 F.3d 1118, 1121 n.2 (9th Cir. 2004)
(“[N]either withholding nor deferral of removal prevents the
government from removing an alien to a third country other
than the country to which removal was withheld or
deferred”).
When the government removes an alien to a country
authorized under 8 U.S.C. § 1231 or another statute, it
“executes” that removal order in a manner that falls under
§ 1252(g). Section 1252(g) in turn categorically strips this
court from hearing claims like those Ibarra-Perez brings here
outside the petition-for-review process. Such a reading
comports with Supreme Court precedent, and indeed, what
the text of § 1252(g) states. After all, Ibarra-Perez must be
challenging something—and here the only plausible answer
is a challenge to the execution of the order of removal
entered against him. Instead, the majority adopts a tortured
reading of § 1252(g) under which it has no clear answer to
the question of what Ibarra-Perez is challenging in bringing
this lawsuit.
5
Finally, the majority tries to reframe Ibarra-Perez’s tort
claims as a due process claim that § 1252(g) cannot strip
from the federal courts. But Ibarra-Perez brings tort claims,
not due process claims. And Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims
cannot lead to any further due process in his situation. So
Ibarra-Perez is attempting to wring money damages out of

46

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

the federal government. And Congress could (and did) strip
the federal courts of jurisdiction to entertain that type of
claim.
The majority cites four cases for the proposition that
DHS must “notify individuals who are subject to deportation
that they have the right to apply for asylum in the United
States and for withholding of deportation to the country to
which they will be deported.” Andriasian v. INS, 180 F.3d
1033, 1041 (9th Cir. 1999); see Himri v. Ashcroft, 378 F.3d
932, 938 (9th Cir. 2004); Hadera v. Gonzales, 494 F.3d
1154, 1156–59 (9th Cir. 2007); Dzyuba v. Mukasey, 540
F.3d 955, 957 (9th Cir. 2008) (per curiam). Whatever these
cases say about due process, none supports our jurisdiction
over Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims.
To the contrary, these cases prove my point: challenges
to removal belong in the petition for review process and we
lack jurisdiction of these claims. In each of them, a
petitioner challenged removal to a third country on appeal
within the petition for review process. See Andriasian v.
I.N.S., 180 F.3d at 1039–40 (petitioner appealed through
normal immigration appeals to challenge destination of
removal as improper); Himri, 378 F.3d at 938 (same);
Hadera, 494 F.3d at 1155 (same); Dzyuba, 540 F.3d at 955
(same). Since these cases all arose within the petition for
review process, § 1252(g) did not strip the federal courts of
jurisdiction. By contrast, Ibarra-Perez brings tort claims to
challenge the execution of his removal order outside the
petition for review process, meaning § 1252(g) does strip our
court of jurisdiction. To the extent Ibarra-Perez had a right
to be notified that he would be deported to Mexico (which
the majority concedes the INA does not provide but claims
the due process clause does), the federal courts only had

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

47

jurisdiction to entertain that argument within the petition for
review process.
Rather than reach this conclusion, the majority opinion
resorts to bizarre hyperbole as apparent scare tactics. It
claims that “[i]f § 1252(g) bars jurisdiction over removals
occurring outside of removal proceedings, . . . ICE can send
anyone to any country without any review.” Maj. at 22.
That statement is false on many levels. ICE has no
authority to send a citizen to any country. And its decision
to send an alien to any country is bound by the petition for
review process Congress provided. None of the provisions
the majority cites authorize ICE to remove anyone to any
country without review. Such a claim is patently absurd.
Section 1252(g) only pertains to aliens with final orders of
removal entered against them. And an alien can only have a
final order of removal entered against him after an
immigration judge has thoroughly reviewed that alien’s
claims (as with Ibarra-Perez). Indeed, even if the majority
were correct that courts have jurisdiction over Ibarra-Perez’s
tort claims here, the relief would do nothing to rectify the
majority’s perceived harm. The FTCA only provides
monetary damages, not injunctive relief. So the majority’s
hyperbole is not only false, but it rings hollow.
The majority also concludes that “Ibarra-Perez
challenges ICE’s separate and post-hearing decision to
remove him to Mexico.” Maj. at 23.
The majority ignores, however, that ICE removed IbarraPerez under the final order of removal entered against him.
The decision to send him to Mexico was a part of ICE
executing that removal order, permitted under the INA—not
a separate decision divorced from the order’s execution. See
Johnson, 594 U.S. at 536. Withholding of removal does not

48

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

“vacate[] or otherwise set aside” a final order of removal
since that order “remains in full force.” Id. “DHS retains
the authority to remove the alien to any other country
authorized by the statute,” under that final order of removal.
Id. ICE’s decision to remove Ibarra-Perez to Mexico was a
choice made to execute the final order of removal entered
against him. Even if such a decision were unlawful,
§ 1252(g) makes clear that we only have jurisdiction to hear
such a claim and issue a remedy through the petition for
review process.
The majority suggests that a motion to reopen removal
proceedings could not have helped Ibarra-Perez. Maj. at 23–
24. This is nonsense. Ibarra-Perez obtained asylum. How?
By moving to reopen, the very mechanism the majority says
would not work. The majority even recognizes this. See
Maj. at 11. If Ibarra-Perez did suffer an injury, it got cured
through the petition for review process that the majority
derides. In its excitement to curtail the INS from acting
contrary to how the majority wants it to, the majority resorts
to pounding square pegs in round holes. And its pegs don’t
fit.
Now Ibarra-Perez brings statutory tort claims outside of
that petition for review process. His claims don’t attempt to
remedy the constitutional injury he allegedly suffered by
allowing him back into the country through injunctive relief.
Indeed, such relief is expressly barred by the FTCA. He
instead seeks money damages.
Congress therefore was especially free to strip us of
jurisdiction to hear his claims for monetary damages. The
United States is “generally immune from suits seeking
money damages,” and it is “Congress’s prerogative, not
ours,” to allow such money damage suits against the federal

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

49

government. Dep’t of Agric. Rural Dev. Rural Hous. Serv.
v. Kirtz, 601 U.S. 42, 48–49 (2024). Although the majority
tries to frame Ibarra-Perez’s claim in terms of constitutional
injury, § 1252(g) divests us of jurisdiction to entertain
Ibarra-Perez’s tort claims for financial compensation.
“Within constitutional bounds, Congress decides what
cases the federal courts have jurisdiction to consider.”
Bowles v. Russell, 551 U.S. 205, 212 (2007). And stripping
the federal courts of jurisdiction to hear money damages
claims challenging the execution of a removal order, easily
falls within those bounds. The majority cites no case
anywhere to the contrary. And for good reason. Congress
had the authority to categorically prevent Ibarra-Perez from
seeking money damages against the federal government.
See Kirtz, 601 U.S. at 48–49. It therefore also had the power
to prevent the federal courts from entertaining such claims
outside the petition for review process and did so through
§ 1252(g). See Patchak v. Zinke, 583 U.S. 244, 252 (2018)
(“Congress’ greater power to create lower federal courts
includes its less power to ‘limit the jurisdiction of those
Courts.’”) (citation omitted).
The two cases the majority cites on this point, Walters v.
Reno, 145 F.3d at 1052–53, and Sulit v. Schiltgen, 213 F.3d
at 453, do not save it. Neither permits an FTCA claim to
proceed when otherwise barred by § 1252(g). In Walters,
plaintiffs “brought suit against the government on behalf of
themselves and similarly situated noncitizens, seeking
declaratory and injunctive relief on the ground that the
administrative procedures used by the INS to obtain final
orders under the document fraud provisions of the
Immigration and Nationality Act . . . violated their rights to
procedural due process.” Walters, 145 F.3d at 1036.

50

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

We upheld an injunction enjoining the future deportation
of aliens receiving inadequate notice under those procedures.
Section 1252(g) did not apply because the plaintiffs’ claims
did not arise from a challenge to the execution of a removal
order, but brought “general collateral challenges to
unconstitutional practices and policies used by the agency.”
Id at 1052 (quotation omitted). And we only reached this
conclusion because “if the plaintiffs prevail[ed] on their
claims, they [would] not be entitled to any substantive
benefits; rather, they [would] only be entitled to reopen their
proceedings.” Id.
When a plaintiff seeks a substantive benefit, such as
money damages, such a challenge isn’t collateral but a direct
challenge to the execution of a removal order. Id. The
majority cannot rely on Walters. Walters confirms that
§ 1252(g) divests us of jurisdiction over claims such as the
one Ibarra-Perez brings here. Id.
Sulit also proves unavailing. In Sulit we held that
§ 1252(g) did not strip us of jurisdiction over a due process
claim where plaintiffs alleged the INS seized their green
cards “without providing a recission hearing pursuant to 8
U.S.C. § 1256.” 213 F.3d at 453. Sulit did not involve a
challenge to the execution of a removal order, which would
have been barred under § 1252(g), but a challenge to the
rescission of green cards. Id. The case does not support the
proposition that a plaintiff can bring tort claims to challenge
the execution of his removal order and disguise those claims
as due process challenges to extract money from the
government.
The majority attempts to reframe this case as one about
curing an alleged due process injury. But Ibarra-Perez’s
claims cannot cure such an injury, as injunctive relief would.

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

51

Ibarra-Perez was already able to reenter the United States
and has received asylum through the statutory petition for
review process. In that sense, the system worked just fine
for Ibarra-Perez, as Congress provided. He can only win
money damages from the United States beyond that if
Congress authorizes him to bring such a claim. And here
Congress affirmatively barred him from doing so through
§ 1252(g).
***
Ibarra-Perez challenges the execution of his removal
order, so § 1252(g) strips our jurisdiction over his claims.
The majority invents an exception for legal questions that
cannot be squared with the statutory text, conflicts with
Supreme Court precedent, creates a circuit split, and guts the
jurisdictional bar.
III
If § 1252(g) doesn’t bar Ibarra-Perez’s claims,
§ 1252(b)(9) does. That section prohibits review of “all
questions of law and fact” that arise from removal
proceedings outside the petition-for-review process. This
provision is “breathtaking in scope,” J.E.F.M. v. Lynch, 837
F.3d 1026, 1031 (9th Cir. 2016) (internal quotation marks
omitted), and covers “all claims arising from deportation
proceedings,” AADC, 525 U.S. at 482–83. It bars challenges
to “the process” through which removability is
“determined.” Jennings, 583 U.S. at 294; see also id. at 317
(Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment).
According to the majority, the provision doesn’t apply
because Ibarra-Perez doesn’t contest the validity of his
removal proceedings or removal order. Maj. at 17, 21–23.

52

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

That argument is refuted by the rest of the majority opinion.
Throughout, the majority recognizes that Ibarra-Perez
challenges the “procedures” (or lack thereof) leading to his
removal. Id. at 24. Section 1252(b)(9) bars such claims.
Jennings, 583 U.S. at 294.
In arguing otherwise, the majority backs itself into a
dilemma. If Ibarra-Perez challenges the government’s
failure to provide adequate process before removing him,
§ 1252(b)(9) bars his claim. If he instead takes the process
as given and challenges the execution of his removal order,
§ 1252(g) bars his claim. There’s no way out of this
dilemma.
As Ibarra-Perez and the majority face each horn of the
dilemma, they make concessions that run headfirst into the
other. Trying to avoid § 1252(g), the majority focuses on the
procedures leading up to Ibarra-Perez’s removal. Of course,
that runs headlong into § 1252(b)(9). Then, trying to avoid
§ 1252(b)(9), the majority changes its tune and says that the
claims have nothing to do with the validity of his removal
order or removal proceedings. Maj. at 21–23. But if that’s
true, then the only thing left for Ibarra-Perez to challenge is
the execution of his removal order, which § 1252(g) forbids.
The majority can’t have it both ways. And either way, we
lack jurisdiction over Ibarra-Perez’s claims.
The majority attempts to sidestep this issue by pointing
to a footnote in the government’s brief which states that
Ibarra-Perez has disclaimed any challenge to the prior
removal proceeding. The majority states that it agrees with
the government and thus won’t find § 1252(b)(9) applicable
here. Maj. at 21–22.
This sleight of hand gives the game away. If the majority
concedes that Ibarra-Perez isn’t bringing a challenge to his

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

53

prior removal proceeding, a challenge barred under
§ 1252(b)(9), then it is tacitly admitting that he brings a
challenge to the execution of his removal order—the only
thing he could otherwise challenge. That challenge, in turn,
is barred by § 1252(g). No matter how the majority attempts
to rationalize its conclusion, the self-evident structure of
§ 1252, when applied here, demonstrates that we lack
jurisdiction.
IV
Jurisdiction is the only question on appeal. Yet the
majority tips its hand on the merits, so I address the merits
too. Ibarra-Perez argues that a statute, two regulations, and
due process required notice that he could be sent to Mexico.
The majority similarly suggests that because Ibarra-Perez’s
removal order did not designate Mexico, his removal was
unlawful. Maj. at 23. Each argument fails. The government
was not required to notify Ibarra-Perez that he could be
removed to Mexico before entering a removal order and
sending him to Mexico. In any event, these merits
arguments confirm that Ibarra-Perez’s claims are barred by
§ 1252(g).
A
Start with Ibarra-Perez’s statutory argument. After an
alien is ordered removed, 8 U.S.C. § 1231 determines where
to send the alien. The statute creates two procedural tracks.
The first, § 1231(b)(1), is for aliens placed in removal
proceedings “immediately upon their arrival at the border.”
Jama v. ICE, 543 U.S. 335, 705 n.11 (2005) (citing 8 U.S.C.
§§ 1231(b)(1)(A), (c)(1)). These aliens are generally sent to
the country from which they traveled, but they may also be
sent to a country willing to receive them or where they have
citizenship or residence. 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(1)(C). The

54

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

statute does not give these aliens any say in designating the
country of removal. Nor does it require notice of that
country.
The second track, § 1231(b)(2), applies to aliens
removed after being “allowed into the country,” such as
through a visa. Jama, 543 U.S. at 705 n.11. Aliens on this
track have a statutory right to designate where they’d like to
be sent. 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(2)(A). The government must
honor the alien’s preference, unless an exception applies. Id.
If an exception applies, the statute lists categories of
countries where the alien may be sent. Id. § 1231(b)(2)(C)–
(E). The statute itself doesn’t require notice of the
alternative countries.
Both tracks carry a caveat. The government may not
send an alien to a country where he is likely to be persecuted
based on a protected characteristic. Id. § 1231(b)(3). This
restriction is “withholding of removal.”
All these provisions come into play only after an alien
has been “ordered removed.” Id. § 1231(a). In fact, the BIA
prohibits IJs from addressing withholding of removal before
ordering removal. Matter of I-S- & C-S-, 24 I. & N. Dec.
432, 434 (BIA 2008). That makes sense. Withholding of
removal is country-specific relief. Johnson, 594 U.S. at 536.
It prohibits removal “to” a particular country but does not
prevent removal “from the United States.” Id. (emphasis
omitted). Thus, withholding has “nothing to do” with the
government’s “legal authority” to remove an alien. Id. at
545–46; see also Nasrallah, 590 U.S. at 583 (countryspecific relief “does not affect the validity of the final order
of removal”). So while a removal order determines whether
an alien may be removed, it need not identify where the alien

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

55

will be sent. See 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(47)(A); see also
Johnson, 594 U.S. at 539.
Ibarra-Perez was never allowed into the United States
and was placed in removal proceedings at a port of entry. He
thus faced the first, less onerous track of designation
procedures. See 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(1); Matter of A-S-M-,
28 I. & N. Dec. 282, 284 n.1 (BIA 2021). He had no right to
designate a country of removal. The statute authorized his
removal to Mexico, a country willing to accept him and
where he had a visa. Id. §§ 1231(b)(1)(C)(iii), (iv); see also
8 C.F.R. § 241.25(d). And the statute did not require the
government to notify Ibarra-Perez that Mexico was an
option.
Because the applicable designation provisions don’t
require notice of the country of removal, Ibarra-Perez
focuses on the withholding-of-removal provision, which he
says creates a notice requirement not found elsewhere in the
statute. But the withholding provision doesn’t say anything
about notice, either. See 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(3). Nor does it
say anything about how to designate countries of removal.
See id. The withholding provision takes the designation
process (defined elsewhere in the statute) as given and
carves out an exception to the list of possible countries. Id.
It doesn’t silently rewrite the designation process to create a
notice requirement. See Jama, 543 U.S. at 341. Nothing in
the statute required the government to notify Ibarra-Perez
that he could be sent to Mexico.
B
The majority makes a related argument. The majority
suggests that a removal order isn’t enforceable unless it
designates a valid country of removal. Removal orders that

56

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

don’t designate a valid country can be challenged based on
a separate decision of where to send an alien. Maj. at 21.
The Supreme Court has said otherwise. “[T]he finality
of the order of removal does not depend in any way on the
outcome of [withholding] proceedings.” Johnson, 594 U.S.
at 539; see also Nasrallah, 590 U.S. at 582. So has
Congress. Congress defines a final removal order as one
“concluding that the alien is deportable or ordering
deportation.”
8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(47)(A); Monsalvo
Velazquez v. Bondi, 145 S. Ct. 1232, 1240 (2025) (noting a
final removal order is one “specifying that the government
may remove [the alien]”). A removal order meets these
criteria and is final even if it doesn’t designate a country of
removal.
Again, under the statute, the government
determines where to send an alien only after the alien is
“ordered removed.” 8 U.S.C. § 1231(a); Matter of I-S- & CS-, 24 I. & N. Dec. at 434.
Thus, the majority errs in suggesting that Ibarra-Perez’s
removal order was incomplete since it didn’t designate
Mexico. Determining where to send Ibarra-Perez has
“nothing to do” with the finality or enforceability of the
order allowing the government to remove him. Johnson, 594
U.S. at 545–46; see Nasrallah, 590 U.S. at 582. Once the IJ
ordered Ibarra-Perez removed, the government could
remove him. See 8 C.F.R. § 1240.12(d) (so indicating). No
subsequent removal order designating Mexico was required.
C
Ibarra-Perez next searches agency regulations for a
notice requirement. He first cites 8 C.F.R. § 1240.10(f).
This regulation requires IJs to “notify” certain aliens that
they have a right to designate a country of removal. Id. The

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

57

regulation also requires IJs to identify alternative countries
for these aliens. Id.
This regulation, however, applies only to aliens in the
second designation track, or those removed after being
admitting into the United States. Id. Ibarra-Perez was not
admitted into the United States. And “[w]ith respect to an
arriving alien” like Ibarra-Perez, the regulation creates no
notice requirement. Id. It merely observes that designation
will occur “pursuant to” the statutory requirements. Id. As
discussed, the statute doesn’t require notice. See supra
§ IV.A.
Ibarra-Perez also cites 8 C.F.R. § 1240.12(d), which
requires IJs to “identify a country, or countries in the
alternative, to which the alien’s removal may in the first
instance be made.” While this regulation requires IJs to
identify a possible country of removal (here, Cuba), it
doesn’t require a list of all alternatives. Nor does it require
IJs to list the specific country to which the alien is ultimately
removed (here, Mexico). Indeed, the regulation says that if
the government can’t send the alien to the listed countries,
the regulation “does not limit the authority of the
[government] to remove the alien to any other country as
permitted by” the statute. Id. While the “better practice”
might be to notify the alien of all possible alternatives, “[t]he
regulations, however, do not require it.” Matter of Sagasti,
13 I. & N. Dec. 771, 773 (BIA 1971); see also 70 Fed. Reg.
661, 671 (2005) (noting alternatives “can be” designated but
acknowledging that’s not required).
D
Finally, Ibarra-Perez suggests that due process required
the government to designate Mexico before entering and
enforcing his removal order.

58

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

The Fifth Amendment provides that no “person” may be
deprived of “life, liberty, or property, without due process of
law.” U.S. Const. amend. V. Because deportation deprives
persons of the rights “to stay and live and work in this land
of freedom,” due process attaches to removal proceedings.
Bridges v. Wixon, 326 U.S. 135, 154 (1945). These
proceedings must comport with “essential standards of
fairness.” Id. Those standards include notice of, and
opportunity to challenge, the grounds for removal.
These principles are important. Yet we should exercise
caution before creating procedural hurdles for our coequal
branches. Too often, when courts pick up the due process
hammer, everything becomes a nail. Caution is especially
important in immigration law. “[O]ver no conceivable
subject is the legislative power of Congress more complete.”
Reno v. Flores, 507 U.S. 292, 305 (1993) (quotation
omitted).
Ibarra-Perez invites us to throw caution to the wind.
Ibarra-Perez could have challenged whether he could be
removed from the United States and failed in doing so. But
he demands another opportunity to challenge the
government’s decision to send him to Mexico over
alternative destinations.
Due process guarantees no such opportunity. Due
process attaches only to the deprivation of life, liberty, or
property. Paul v. Davis, 424 U.S. 693, 700–01 (1976); Kerry
v. Din, 576 U.S. 86, 90–92 (2015) (plurality op.). While
removal from the United States implicates a liberty interest,
Bridges, 326 U.S. at 154; Kerry, 576 U.S. at 91, being sent
to Mexico does not. Ibarra-Perez prefers to be sent to Spain
or Canada rather than Mexico, but that preference is not
“life,” “liberty,” or “property” as those phrases were

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

59

originally understood. See Kerry, 576 U.S. at 91–92
(canvassing the original meaning). Nor does any statute or
regulation grant Ibarra-Perez a liberty interest in being sent
somewhere other than Mexico. See id. at 98; Cleveland Bd.
of Educ. v. Loudermill, 470 U.S. 532, 538 (1985). An IJ
ordered Ibarra-Perez removed, and the applicable
regulations and statute authorized removal to Mexico.
Thus, while due process required the “essential standards
of fairness” in determining whether Ibarra-Perez could be
removed from the United States, due process said nothing
about how the government should have determined where to
send Ibarra-Perez. See Yamataya v. Fisher, 189 U.S. 86, 101
(1903) (recognizing only a due process right to be heard on
“the questions involving [the] right to be and remain in the
United States”). Without an interest in being sent to Spain
or Canada, Ibarra-Perez had no constitutional right to notice,
or an opportunity to dispute, that he would be sent to Mexico
instead. 5
Perhaps that feels harsh. Four responses. First, federal
judges aren’t empowered to rectify everything that appears
unfair. Deportation to Mexico is neither “a criminal
proceeding” nor “punishment,” and “[n]o judicial review is
guaranteed by the Constitution.” Carlson v. Landon, 342
U.S. 524, 537 (1952).

Andriasian v. INS, 180 F.3d 1033, 1041–42 (9th Cir. 1999), is not to
the contrary. There, an IJ denied asylum because the petitioner failed to
show persecution in Armenia—a country the petitioner “had no reason
to anticipate would be a subject of the asylum hearing.” Id. In dicta, we
opined that it was arbitrary to deny asylum based on “an applicant’s
inadequate presentation of evidence” on an unforeseeable matter. Id.
Ibarra-Perez’s asylum claim wasn’t denied on arbitrary grounds.
5

60

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

Second, aliens need not wait for a list of possible
countries of removal before identifying where they fear
persecution. Aliens should know the countries in which they
fear persecution. Generally, the list of such countries will be
short. It’s not asking much to require aliens to identify those
countries on their own.
Third, if process were required, Ibarra-Perez would at
most be entitled to an opportunity to seek withholding of
removal. And he lacks a meritorious withholding claim.
Ibarra-Perez claims that before coming to the United States,
Mexican officials required him to pay fees to stay in Mexico.
After being removed to Mexico, three men demanded that
he act as a drug mule or hand over a fee. At no point does
Ibarra-Perez claim that he was physically harmed or subject
to a pattern of serious mistreatment. See Sharma v. Garland,
9 F.4th 1052, 1061 (9th Cir. 2021). Under our precedent,
Ibarra-Perez’s vague and unrelated allegations fall short of
the “extreme concept” of persecution, which is required for
withholding of removal. See id. at 1062. So even if process
were required, Ibarra-Perez has no basis to oppose removal
to Mexico.
Fourth, Ibarra-Perez received the process that would
have been required. He told the IJ that he feared persecution
in Mexico, and nothing prevented him from building that
argument out. If the IJ rejected his argument, Ibarra-Perez
could have appealed to the BIA. If unsuccessful before the
BIA, he could have petitioned for our review. And finally,
if those were inadequate opportunities to establish
persecution in Mexico, Ibarra-Perez could have moved to
reopen his removal proceedings to introduce evidence of
persecution in Mexico. See 70 Fed. Reg. at 671. The
government has suggested that it may agree to reopen
proceedings when aliens lack notice of the country of

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

61

removal. Id. In short, Ibarra-Perez had adequate opportunity
to litigate his alleged persecution in Mexico and failed to use
that opportunity.
E
This merits discussion confirms that Ibarra-Perez’s
claims are barred by § 1252(g). Under the majority opinion
and on remand, Ibarra-Perez’s claims will proceed towards
a merits resolution. But the district court can’t address the
merits without reviewing the validity of Ibarra-Perez’s
removal order and the “process by which” his order was
entered—which Congress prohibits courts from addressing
outside the petition for review. See Jennings, 583 U.S. at
294. To determine whether the government violated a
regulation by failing to designate Mexico, the district court
must consider which track of designation procedures applies
to Ibarra-Perez and whether the government complied with
those procedures. To determine whether the government
violated due process, the court must analyze Ibarra-Perez’s
removal proceedings, verify whether Ibarra-Perez had a fair
opportunity to seek withholding from Mexico, and
determine whether Ibarra-Perez had a meritorious
withholding claim. See Vargas-Hernadez v. Gonzales, 497
F.3d 919, 926–27 (9th Cir. 2007). These questions are
routinely raised on petitions for review. Id.; Himri v.
Ashcroft, 378 F.3d 932, 938 (9th Cir. 2004). And Congress
has prohibited courts from reviewing these questions outside
the petition for review. See 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(5); Jennings,
583 U.S. at 294. This confirms that Ibarra-Perez’s claims
are the type barred by § 1252(g).
V
Ibarra-Perez had a final and valid removal order. He
claims the government was wrong to execute that order.

62

IBARRA-PEREZ V. USA

Congress has precluded us from exercising jurisdiction over
such claims. In any event, Ibarra-Perez is wrong that the
government removed him unlawfully. Because the majority
finds jurisdiction and allows this case to proceed, I dissent.

