FOR PUBLICATION
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS

FILED
SEP 12 2025
MOLLY C. DWYER, CLERK

FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
In re: Google Play Store Antitrust Litigation
_______________________________
EPIC GAMES, INC., a Maryland
Corporation,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

U.S. COURT OF APPEALS

No. 24-6256
D.C. Nos.
3:21-md-02981-JD
3:20-cv-05671-JD
Northern District of California,
San Francisco
ORDER

v.
GOOGLE LLC; GOOGLE IRELAND,
LTD.; GOOGLE COMMERCE,
LTD.; GOOGLE ASIA PACIFIC PTE,
LTD.; GOOGLE PAYMENT CORP.,
Defendants - Appellants.
EPIC GAMES, INC.,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
GOOGLE LLC; GOOGLE IRELAND,
LTD.; GOOGLE COMMERCE, LTD.;
GOOGLE ASIA PACIFIC PTE, LTD.;
GOOGLE PAYMENT CORP.,
Defendants - Appellants.

No. 24-6274
D.C. No.
3:20-cv-05671-JD
Northern District of California,
San Francisco

EPIC GAMES, INC., a Maryland
Corporation,

No. 25-303
D.C. No.
3:20-cv-05671-JD
Northern District of California,
San Francisco

Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
GOOGLE LLC; GOOGLE IRELAND,
LTD.; GOOGLE COMMERCE, LTD.;
GOOGLE ASIA PACIFIC PTE, LTD.;
GOOGLE PAYMENT CORP.,
Defendants - Appellants.

Before: M. Margaret McKeown, Danielle J. Forrest, and Gabriel P. Sanchez,
Circuit Judges.
Google LLC’s Motion for a Stay of Permanent Injunction Pending Google’s
Forthcoming Petitions for Rehearing and, if Necessary, Certiorari is denied. The
request for a stay pending a petition for rehearing is moot because the court issued
an administrative stay pending decision on the petition for rehearing and the court
denied that petition on September 12, 2025.
The Permanent Injunction (“Injunction”) was issued on October 7, 2024.
This is not a situation in which Google must comply with key provisions of the
Injunction immediately upon issuance of the mandate. Rather, the district court
recognized that a lag time between the judgment and imposition of the key
provisions of the Injunction would be appropriate. To facilitate the spirit of that

2

24-6274

ruling, on August 1, 2025, we stayed the Injunction pending appeal, despite the
district court’s denial of Google’s motion for a stay.
For the key provisions that Google attacks—paragraphs 11 and 12 of the
Injunction related to “restor[ing] competition in the Android app-distribution
market with the catalog-access and app-store-distribution remedies,” Op. at 40—
Google has eight months from the issuance of the mandate to comply with the
Injunction. However, by this Order we modify the Injunction to extend the time
for compliance with paragraphs 11 and 12 to ten months following issuance of the
mandate. Also, per Google’s request in its initial Emergency Motion for Partial
Stay of the Permanent Injunction, we extend the short-term compliance deadlines,
contained in paragraphs 4-7 and 9-10 of the Injunction, until thirty days after the
issuance of the mandate. (The thirty-day compliance deadline contained in
paragraph 13 remains intact.)
Under the terms of the Injunction, either party “may request a modification
of the injunction for good cause.” This provision continues to apply except with
respect to paragraphs 11 and 12; Epic may not request a compliance deadline
shorter than the ten-month deadline imposed by this Order. Google’s motion does
not encompass paragraph 8 of the Injunction; Google has represented that it
already made the contractual changes ordered with respect to carriers and phone
manufacturers. Imposition of the verdict has already been suspended more than

3

24-6274

twenty months since the December 2023 jury verdict in favor of Epic and almost a
year since the Permanent Injunction. We also note that Google has represented
that it will file any petition for certiorari within forty-five days of a decision on its
stay motion.
To obtain a stay of the mandate pending certiorari under Federal Rule of
Appellate Procedure 41(d), Google is required to show 1) “a reasonable probability
that four members of the Court would consider the underlying issue sufficiently
meritorious for the grant of certiorari[;]” 2) “a significant possibility of reversal of
the lower court’s decision;” and 3) “a likelihood that irreparable harm will result if
that decision is not stayed.” White v. Florida, 458 U.S. 1301, 1302 (1982). We
recognize that Google need not demonstrate “exceptional circumstances . . . to
justify a stay,” Bryant v. Ford Motor Co., 886 F.2d 1526, 1528 (9th Cir. 1989),
because it is “often the case” that our court issues a stay pending certiorari, United
States v. Pete, 525 F. 3d 844, 850 (9th Cir. 2008).
Although we stayed the Injunction pending appeal, in our comprehensive
sixty-seven-page opinion, our unanimous panel upheld the jury’s finding of
antitrust liability and the district court’s Injunction. We emphasize that this Order
is issued after a jury trial and multitudinous district court proceedings. Unlike
many stay orders, this Order does not relate to a stay pending issuance of a
preliminary injunction but rather relates to a stay request following a jury trial, a

4

24-6274

permanent injunction, and a final judgment. Following a fifteen-day jury trial with
forty-five witnesses in which the jury found Google violated federal and state
antitrust laws, the district court undertook additional testimony and hearings and
issued detailed findings with respect to the Injunction.
Google’s primary contention on appeal focuses on factual disagreements
with the district court, an effort to shoehorn the results of the Epic v. Apple
litigation into this case, and a misapprehension of essential antitrust principles. As
for security concerns, we held that the Injunction “explicitly address these risks”
through adoption of reasonable measures “to ensure that the platforms or stores,
and the apps they offer, are safe from a computer systems and security standpoint.”
Op at 64–65. In addition, the Injunction provides for a Technical Committee to
assist in resolving technical disputes, including security concerns.
In view of the rationale and details laid out in our opinion, we conclude that
Google has not met the requirements under Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure
41(d) regarding a meritorious petition for certiorari or the significant possibility of
reversal. In addition, Google’s claim for irreparable harm is unfounded in light of
trial testimony. Finally, we are unpersuaded by Google’s claim that market
confusion, monetary expenditures, and national security support a claim of
irreparable harm.

5

24-6274

Motion for stay of mandate denied; motion for stay of mandate pending
filing of petition for rehearing denied as moot; and Permanent Injunction
issued October 7, 2024, modified in accordance with this Order.

6

24-6274

