FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
VINCENT A. AMBROSETTI,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS;
BERNADETTE FARRELL,

No. 24-2270
D.C. No.
3:21-cv-00211AR
OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Karin J. Immergut, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 10, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 27, 2025
Before: SIDNEY R. THOMAS and MILAN D. SMITH,
JR., Circuit Judges, and DOUGLAS L. RAYES, District
Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.
The Honorable Douglas L. Rayes, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.

*

2

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

SUMMARY **
Copyright / Discovery Sanctions
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s judgment in favor of defendants Bernadette
Farrell and her publisher Oregon Catholic Press, and
remanded, in Vincent Ambrosetti’s action alleging that
Farrell violated the Copyright Act by copying Ambrosetti’s
liturgical work, “Emmanuel,” in her own Christian music
composition, “Christ Be Our Light.”
Affirming in part, the panel held that the district court
did not abuse its discretion by excluding certain evidence as
a sanction for Ambrosetti’s late disclosure of that evidence,
as well as the theory of access premised on that
evidence. The panel concluded that the discovery sanctions
were not claim dispositive because Ambrosetti still could,
and did, proceed with other theories of access and striking
similarity on his copyright claim. Accordingly, the district
court was not required to explicitly consider whether the
claimed discovery misconduct involved willfulness, fault, or
bad faith, nor to consider the availability of lesser
sanctions. The panel further concluded that the district court
did not abuse its discretion when it excluded the evidence on
the grounds that Ambrosetti had not shown that his failure to
produce the evidence was either substantially justified or
harmless under Fed. R. Civ. P. 37(c)(1).
Reversing in part, the panel held that the district court
erred in granting summary judgment to defendants because,
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

3

even without the excluded evidence, there were triable issues
of fact as to (1) whether there was a reasonable possibility
that Farrell had access to “Emmanuel,” under either a chain
of events theory or a widespread dissemination theory,
before she wrote “Christ Be Our Light” and (2) whether the
works were substantially similar under the extrinsic test or
were strikingly similar.

COUNSEL
Donald J. Schmid (argued), Law Offices of Donald J.
Schmid LLC, South Bend, Indiana; Stephanie J. Grant,
Parna A. Mehrbani, and Sasha A. Petrova, Tonkon Torp
LLP, Portland, Oregon; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Bert P. Krages II (argued), Portland, Oregon; Leonard D.
DuBoff, The DuBoff Law Group LLC, Portland, Oregon; for
Defendants-Appellees.

4

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
In this copyright infringement case, Plaintiff Vincent
Ambrosetti alleges that Defendant Bernadette Farrell copied
his liturgical work, “Emmanuel,” in her own Christian music
composition, “Christ Be Our Light.” The district court
granted summary judgment to Farrell and her publisher,
Defendant Oregon Catholic Press, on the basis that
Ambrosetti could show neither access nor striking similarity.
On appeal, Ambrosetti challenges the district court’s
exclusion of certain evidence as a sanction for late disclosure
as well as its grant of summary judgment to Defendants. We
conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion by
excluding Ambrosetti’s evidence and the theory of access
premised on that evidence. However, we hold that the
district court erred by granting summary judgment to
Defendants because there are triable issues of fact as to
whether there is a reasonable possibility Farrell had access
to “Emmanuel” before she wrote “Christ Be Our Light” and
whether the works are substantially or strikingly similar.
Accordingly, we affirm in part, reverse in part, and remand.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiff Vincent Ambrosetti is a musician and
songwriter who wrote the music and lyrics to—and owns
both the rights and title to the copyright of—the 1980 song
“Emmanuel.” Ambrosetti is a prolific songwriter who has
composed more than 400 works of sacred music. Ambrosetti
is also the president and founder of the King’s Minstrels
Charitable Trust, which does business as International
Liturgical Publications (ILP). ILP is a non-profit publisher
of sacred music for the Catholic Church.

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

5

Ambrosetti first published “Emmanuel” in 1980 as part
of a songbook called “Singing Holy.” “Singing Holy” was
an anthology of 102 works—98 of which were written by
Ambrosetti—published by ILP and presented at a
convention of the National Association of Pastoral Music
(NPM).
In approximately 1985, Ambrosetti did a
commercial recording of “Emmanuel” with the National
Philharmonic of London as part of a collection called “I Will
Sing,” which was also published by ILP. “I Will Sing” was
re-released in the late 1980s by the Daughters of St. Paul.
Ambrosetti also recorded and released “Emmanuel” several
other times between 1980 and the early 1990s, including a
commercial recording with the Baltimore Symphony
Orchestra in the late 1980s and another recording for a choral
collection of sacred music in 1980 and again in 1985.
Ambrosetti publicly performed “Emmanuel” at hundreds
of events in the United States during the 1980s through early
1990s. One of those performances was at the 1985 NPM
convention in Cincinnati, Ohio, and another was at the 1988
NPM regional convention in Buffalo, New York. NPM
conventions attracted around 4,000 to 5,000 attendees in the
1980s. A national convention in the 1980s would have had
25 or more showcase events during which music publishers
would have one hour to perform and promote their works.
These showcase events would be held concurrently in six to
eight sessions, with publishers performing their works in
separate rooms and often in separate buildings.
At the 1985 NPM convention, Ambrosetti allegedly met
Owen Alstott, then the publisher and chief executive of
Oregon Catholic Press (OCP). At the meeting, Ambrosetti
provided Alstott with a copy of “Emmanuel.” In 1986,
Ambrosetti sent Alstott a second copy of “Emmanuel.” In
1986 and 1987, Ambrosetti received letters from Alstott,

6

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

acknowledging receipt of music from Ambrosetti. Also in
1986, Alstott, who lived in the United States, traveled to
London to negotiate with composers who were associated
with the St. Thomas More Group. During this trip, Alstott
met British musician Bernadette Farrell, a founding member
of that group. Alstott and Farrell began a personal
relationship in 1991 and were married in 1992. Alstott and
Farrell discussed music before their marriage.
In 1993, Farrell composed the song “Christ Be Our
Light” (Christ) for a liturgy held in a church in East London.
OCP, which has been the sole publisher of Farrell’s musical
works since 1986, published “Christ.” Prior to composing
“Christ,” Farrell had made a handful of trips to the United
States. Her first trip was in 1987, when she conducted a
workshop on pastoral liturgy at the University of Notre
Dame. Her second trip was in 1988, when she attended the
NPM regional convention in Buffalo and sang in the OCP
Choir for the St. Thomas More Centre Showcase. Farrell
states that she did not attend other showcase events at that
conference. She also made a handful of trips to the United
States in 1989, 1990, 1991, and 1992.
PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On May 8, 2020, Ambrosetti sued Farrell and OCP
(Defendants) in the Northern District of Indiana, seeking
damages and injunctive relief for copyright infringement. 1
Ambrosetti had filed a prior lawsuit against Farrell and OCP in the
Northern District of Indiana on August 27, 2019, but that lawsuit was
dismissed on May 7, 2020, because Ambrosetti had failed to obtain a
registration for “Emmanuel” before filing the lawsuit. Ambrosetti v. Or.
Cath. Press, 458 F. Supp. 3d 1013, 1020 (N.D. Ind. 2020). A plaintiff
must show that he or she owns the copyright in the infringed work to
prevail on a copyright claim. See Williams v. Gaye, 895 F.3d 1106, 1119
1

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

7

The complaint alleged that Farrell was familiar with
“Emmanuel” prior to 1993 and that she copied “Emmanuel”
when composing “Christ.” In February 2021, the case was
transferred to the District of Oregon. The cutoff date for fact
and expert discovery was December 6, 2021. The cutoff date
for depositions was January 20, 2022. The depositions of
Ambrosetti, Farrell, Alstott, and others were taken in
January 2022.
The deadline for filing dispositive motions was February
22, 2022. Five days before this deadline, during a meet-andconfer call regarding Defendants’ intended motion for
summary judgment, Ambrosetti disclosed for the first time
the letters he received from Alstott in 1986 and 1987. Before
this point, Ambrosetti had not mentioned submitting music
to OCP. Ambrosetti stated that he had discovered these
letters by accident while organizing old files to prepare to
sell ILP’s Tennessee offices.
On February 22, 2022, Defendants filed their motion for
summary judgment. On March 15, 2022, Ambrosetti filed
his opposition, and on March 16, Ambrosetti filed a
corrected declaration stating that he had provided a copy of
music including “Emmanuel” to Alstott at the 1985
conference and sent him another copy of “Emmanuel” in
1986, and that Alstott had sent him two letters
acknowledging receipt of the music. In their reply brief,
Defendants requested that the district court preclude
Ambrosetti from asserting a theory of access based on these
(9th Cir. 2018). Ambrosetti obtained the registration in “Emmanuel” on
March 4, 2020, after the filing of his prior lawsuit but before the filing
of the one underlying this appeal. Ambrosetti, 458 F. Supp. 3d. at 1020.
The parties do not dispute that Ambrosetti now owns the copyright to
“Emmanuel.”

8

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

letters, noting that they had relied on Ambrosetti’s existing
theories of access—that “Emmanuel” had been widely
published and performed prior to 1993—in preparing for
depositions and additional discovery. Ambrosetti did not
file a sur-reply, and the issue was extensively discussed at
oral argument.
On January 25, 2024, the magistrate judge issued his
findings and recommendations. As sanctions for the
untimely disclosure, he excluded the two letters from Alstott
and precluded Ambrosetti from arguing that Farrell could
have accessed “Emmanuel” via the copies of “Emmanuel”
that Ambrosetti had provided to Alstott. The magistrate
judge found Ambrosetti failed to genuinely dispute that there
was no reasonable possibility that Farell could have accessed
“Emmanuel” before composing “Christ.” First, Ambrosetti
could not argue the Alstott had provided Farrell with copies
of “Emmanuel.” Second, his other theories of access only
created a “bare” possibility that Farrell could have accessed
“Emmanuel” before composing “Christ” rather than a
“reasonable” possibility that she could have done so. Next,
the magistrate judge found that, regardless, Ambrosetti had
not sufficiently demonstrated that “Christ” and “Emmanuel”
were substantially similar, and that because he had not
shown substantial similarity, he could not show striking
similarity either.
Ambrosetti timely objected to the findings and
recommendations, claiming that the magistrate judge had
misapplied the test for “substantial similarity” and had
“incorrectly recommended exclusion of key evidence.” On
March 13, 2024, the district court issued an opinion and
order adopting in part and rejecting in part the magistrate
judge’s findings and recommendations. The district court
agreed with the magistrate judge that Alstott’s letters and the

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

9

theory of access based on those letters should be excluded
and that Ambrosetti had not raised a genuine issue of
material fact as to his other theory of access. The district
court disagreed with the magistrate judge’s conclusions as to
substantial similarity, however, concluding that when
“Christ” and “Emmanuel” were evaluated as independent
combinations of elements and viewed in the light most
favorable to Ambrosetti, he had demonstrated substantial
similarity. Nonetheless, the district court agreed that
Ambrosetti had not shown a genuine issue of material fact as
to striking similarity. And without either access or striking
similarity, Ambrosetti’s suit could not proceed, so the
district court granted summary judgment to Defendants.
Ambrosetti timely appealed.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
The district court had jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 1338(a). Transgo, Inc. v. Ajac Transmission Parts Corp.,
768 F.2d 1001, 1013 (9th Cir. 1985). We have appellate
jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Williams v. Gaye,
895 F.3d 1106, 1116 (9th Cir. 2018).
“We review the district court’s rulings concerning
discovery, including the imposition of discovery sanctions,
for abuse of discretion. But to the extent the imposition of
sanctions turns on the resolution of an issue of law, review
is de novo.” Goodman v. Staples the Off. Superstore, LLC,
644 F.3d 817, 822 (9th Cir. 2011) (internal citation omitted).
“We review de novo the district court’s decision to grant
summary judgment.” Ets-Hokin v. Skyy Spirits, Inc., 225
F.3d 1068, 1073 (9th Cir. 2000). Under the summary
judgment standard, we “must determine whether, viewing
the evidence in the light most favorable to the non-moving
party, there are any genuine issues of material fact and

10

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

whether the district court correctly applied the substantive
law.” Leisek v. Brightwood Corp., 278 F.3d 895, 898 (9th
Cir. 2002).
ANALYSIS
I. The legal framework for copyright infringement
“A copyright plaintiff must prove (1) ownership of the
copyright; and (2) infringement—that the defendant copied
protected elements of the plaintiff’s work.” Three Boys
Music Corp. v. Bolton, 212 F.3d 477, 481 (9th Cir. 2000).2
A plaintiff may prove infringement with “circumstantial,
rather than direct, evidence.” Williams, 895 F.3d at 1119.
“Absent direct evidence of copying, proof of infringement
involves fact-based showings that the defendant had ‘access’
to the plaintiff’s work and that the two works are
‘substantially similar.’” Three Boys Music Corp., 212 F.3d
at 481 (quoting Smith v. Jackson, 84 F.3d 1213, 1218 (9th
Cir. 1996)). Even if there is no evidence of access, a plaintiff
can still prevail if he or she can show “striking similarity”
between the works. Unicolors, Inc. v. Urb. Outfitters, Inc.,
853 F.3d 980, 985 (9th Cir. 2017) (quoting Baxter v. MCA,
Inc., 812 F.2d 421, 423 (9th Cir. 1987)). As such, a plaintiff
can proceed on a copyright claim in one of two ways in the
absence of direct evidence: by showing access and
substantial similarity, or by showing striking similarity
alone.

We overturned part of Three Boys and many of the other copyright
cases cited here in Skidmore v. Led Zeppelin, 952 F.3d 1051, 1066 (9th
Cir. 2020) (en banc) (holding that a high degree of access to a
copyrighted work does not justify a lower standard of proof for
substantial similarity). For simplicity, our opinion omits this subsequent
history.
2

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

11

II. The district court did not abuse its discretion by
imposing discovery sanctions
Ambrosetti first argues that the district court abused its
discretion by failing to apply the proper legal standard when
imposing its “claim dispositive” discovery sanctions. Under
our precedent, when a sanction results in the dismissal of a
claim, a district court must explicitly consider “whether the
claimed noncompliance involved willfulness, fault, or bad
faith, and also to consider the availability of lesser sanctions”
before imposing the sanction. R & R Sails, Inc. v. Ins. Co.
of Pa., 673 F.3d 1240, 1247 (9th Cir. 2012) (internal citation
omitted). Ambrosetti argues that because the exclusion of
Alstott’s letters and the related theory of access resulted in
the dismissal of his otherwise legally sufficient claim for
copyright infringement, the district court abused its
discretion when it failed to engage in the R & R Sails
analysis.
Ambrosetti’s argument fails for a simple reason: the
sanctions were not claim dispositive. As our precedent
makes clear, a discovery sanction is not claim dispositive
just because the sanction made it “much more difficult,
perhaps almost impossible” for a party to proceed with their
claim or argument. Yeti by Molly, Ltd. v. Deckers Outdoor
Corp., 259 F.3d 1101, 1106 (9th Cir. 2001). Rather, a
sanction is claim dispositive only where it is “fatal” to the
claim. R & R Sails, 673 F.3d at 1247. For example, in R &
R Sails, the district court’s preclusion of the invoices at issue
amounted “in practical terms” to a dismissal of R & R’s
claim because without those invoices, it had no evidence
with which to support its Brandt fees claim or its request for
punitive damages. Id. Therefore, the sanction was claim
dispositive, and the extra analysis as to bad faith and lesser
sanctions was required. Id. Meanwhile, in Yeti, although the

12

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

district court excluded the testimony of the defendant’s only
damages expert, that sanction was not claim dispositive
because “although onerous, [it] was less than a dismissal.”
259 F.3d at 1106.
Here, while the exclusion of Alstott’s letters certainly
makes Ambrosetti’s path forward more difficult, it did not
“in practical terms” amount to the dismissal of Ambrosetti’s
claim because Ambrosetti could—and did—proceed with
other theories of access. Indeed, both before and after
Ambrosetti discovered the letters, he argued that Farrell had
accessed “Emmanuel” via her and Alstott’s attendance at the
NPM conferences or via the song’s widespread
dissemination. The exclusion of the letters was not fatal to
Ambrosetti’s copyright infringement claim; it only limited
his arguments about access to those he had timely developed
before the discovery deadlines. And even if Ambrosetti
could not proceed on any theory of access, he could still
argue that “Christ” and “Emmanuel” were strikingly similar
because a copyright infringement claim based on striking
similarity does not require a separate showing of access.
Unicolors, Inc., 853 F.3d at 985. In short, nothing about the
sanctions here was a “fatal blow” to Ambrosetti’s copyright
claim. R & R Sails, 673 F.3d at 1247.
Moreover, although Ambrosetti has abandoned any
challenge to the exclusion of these letters outside of the R &
R Sails argument articulated above, we conclude that the
district court did not abuse its discretion when it decided to
exclude the letters on the grounds that Ambrosetti had not
shown that his failure to produce the letters was either
“substantially justified” or “harmless.” Fed. R. Civ. P.
37(c)(1). As the magistrate judge noted, Ambrosetti and
OCP had been “ensnarled in litigation” for nearly eight years
by that point, so there was good cause to be skeptical that

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

13

critical documents could still be unearthed. Additionally,
Ambrosetti had not shown that introducing a new theory
after the close of discovery had not harmed Defendants. See
Torres v. City of Los Angeles, 548 F.3d 1197, 1213 (9th Cir.
2008) (burden is on the party facing the sanction to
demonstrate the failure to comply with Rule 26(a) is
substantially justified or harmless); Ollier v. Sweetwater
Union High Sch. Dist., 768 F.3d 843, 862 (9th Cir. 2014)
(explaining that the goal of Rule 26 “is to encourage parties
to try cases on the merits, not by surprise, and not by
ambush”). Accordingly, even if Ambrosetti had not
abandoned any challenge to the district court’s
determinations as to harm and justification, we would
conclude that the district court did not abuse its discretion by
excluding the letters and theory of access on those grounds.
III. The district court erred by granting summary
judgment to Defendants
Nonetheless, we conclude that the district court erred by
granting summary judgment to Defendants. Even without
Alstott’s letters, genuine issues of material fact remain as to
whether Farrell had access to “Emmanuel” before
composing “Christ.” Moreover, although we agree with the
district court that there is a genuine issue of material fact as
to whether the works are substantially similar, we disagree
with the district court’s conclusions as to striking similarity
and conclude that there is a genuine dispute of material fact
as to striking similarity as well.
A. There is a genuine issue of material fact as to
whether Farrell had access to “Emmanuel”
before composing “Christ”
Even excluding the two letters from Alstott, Ambrosetti
has demonstrated a genuine issue of material fact as to

14

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

whether Farrell otherwise could have accessed “Emmanuel”
before she composed “Christ.”
“To show circumstantial evidence of ‘access,’ the
plaintiff may generally either provide (a) ‘evidence of a
“chain of events . . . between the plaintiff’s work and
defendants’ access to that work” or’ (b) ‘evidence that “the
plaintiff’s work has been widely disseminated.”’”
Woodland v. Hill, 136 F.4th 1199, 1207 (9th Cir. 2025)
(alteration in original) (quoting Unicolors, 853 F.3d at 985).
“To prove access, a plaintiff must show a reasonable
possibility, not merely a bare possibility, that an alleged
infringer had the chance to view the protected work.” Art
Attacks Ink, LLC v. MGA Ent. Inc., 581 F.3d 1138, 1143 (9th
Cir. 2009).
Although Ambrosetti is not terribly clear as to this point,
he appears to raise both a “chain of events” theory and a
“widespread dissemination” theory. See id. at 1143–44
(determining that the plaintiff implicitly raised a chain of
events argument in addition to its widespread dissemination
argument). Under a “chain of events” theory, circumstantial
evidence can be used to prove access by “establishing a
chain of events linking the plaintiff’s work and the
defendant’s access.” Id. at 1143. Meanwhile, under a
“widespread dissemination” theory, a plaintiff may show
access by demonstrating that the work has been broadly
distributed; evidence of such widespread dissemination
often “centers on the degree of a work’s commercial success
and on its distribution through radio, television, and other
relevant mediums.” Loomis v. Cornish, 836 F.3d 991, 997
(9th Cir. 2016). Where the “relevant market” is smaller, the
issue is whether the allegedly copied work “saturat[ed]” that
market. Id.

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

15

Under his “chain of events” theory, Ambrosetti argues
that Farrell could have accessed “Emmanuel” either through
her attendance at the 1988 NPM convention or via Alstott’s
attendance at the 1985 NPM conference. Ambrosetti argues
that their attendance at these events demonstrated a genuine
issue of material fact as to whether he had raised a reasonable
possibility of access and that the district court erred by
failing to view the evidence in the light most favorable to
him. We agree.
In this case, there is no dispute that Alstott attended the
1985 NPM convention and that Farrell attended the 1988
NPM convention. 3 At both conventions, Ambrosetti
performed “Emmanuel.” These were not large events:
rather, a regional NPM convention at the time would have
had about 1,000 attendees, while a main convention would
have had about 4,000 to 5,000 attendees. Taken together,
those facts are sufficient, viewing the evidence in the light
most favorable to Ambrosetti, to demonstrate a “reasonable”
possibility that Farrell could have accessed “Emmanuel”
before composing “Christ” rather than a “bare” possibility
that she could have done so. See 4 Melville B. Nimmer &
David Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright § 13D.05[B][2]
(2025) (a reasonable possibility of access arises if the
evidence “ma[kes] plausible a realistic scenario whereby
defendant heard the protected work prior to composing its
own song,” such as evidence that the plaintiff and defendant
both performed at the same music venue at the same time).

Although Ambrosetti does not mention this fact in his appellate
briefing, an OCP publisher, John Limb, also attended the 1985 NPM
convention in Cincinnati. Like Alstott, Limb claims he did not attend
ILP’s showcase.
3

16

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

Indeed, Farrell’s and Alstott’s admitted attendance at the
NPM conventions distinguishes this case from those in
which we have determined that the plaintiffs had shown only
a bare possibility of access. In Art Attacks, there was no
evidence that the parties ever attended the Los Angeles
County Fair at the same time, which destroyed the plaintiffs’
chain of events theory. 581 F.3d at 1144. Moreover, in
Briggs v. Blomkamp, a district court case upon which the
magistrate judge also relied, there was no evidence that the
defendant had accessed the website where the plaintiff had
posted his screenplay; the plaintiff merely speculated that
this website was the kind of website that the defendant would
likely have perused. 70 F. Supp. 3d 1155, 1166 (N.D. Cal.
2014), aff’d sub nom. Briggs v. Sony Pictures Ent., Inc., 714
F. App’x 712 (9th Cir. 2018). In both cases, the plaintiffs
could only theorize that the defendants might have been in
the right place (or on the right website) at the right time.
Here, the parties actually attended, and performed at, the
same small events. Although Farrell and Alstott have denied
that they attended Ambrosetti’s showcases at those
conventions, it is up to the trier of fact to determine whether
to believe their stories. See Three Boys Music Corp., 212
F.3d at 484 (a party’s credibility “should be left to the jury”
(quoting Arnstein v. Porter, 154 F.2d 464, 469 (2d Cir.
1946), abrogated on other grounds as recognized in Heyman
v. Com. & Indus. Ins. Co., 524 F.2d 1317, 1319 (2d Cir.
1975)). It is not for us or the district court to determine the
merits of their denials. “In other words, [a] defendant cannot
obtain summary judgment based on lack of access through
his own unilateral denial of that access, in the face of
plaintiff’s evidence for its existence.” Nimmer on Copyright
§ 13D.05[C][2] n.77.

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

17

Meanwhile, as to Ambrosetti’s “widespread
dissemination” theory, he argues that the worldwide
distribution and publication of “Emmanuel” prior to 1993 is
sufficient to demonstrate a reasonable possibility that Farrell
could have heard “Emmanuel” prior to composing “Christ.”
The magistrate judge rejected this theory primarily because
Ambrosetti had failed to establish the “amount of sales” that
he had generated and so failed to show that “Emmanuel” had
enjoyed sufficiently substantial commercial success before
1993.
Although some of our past decisions have distinguished
“bare possibility” and “reasonable possibility” in part based
on numerical analysis of sale units, there is ultimately no
“bright-line rule” where some number of units distributed
always equals—or does not equal—access. See Nimmer on
Copyright § 13D.05[C][1] (first citing Rice v. Fox Broad.
Co., 330 F.3d 1170, 1178 (9th Cir. 2003) (17,000 copies sold
was insufficient to show widespread dissemination); then
citing Art Attacks, 581 F.3d at 1144 (2,000 T-shirts sold per
year was insufficient); and then citing L.A. Printex Indus.,
Inc. v. Aeropostale, Inc., 676 F.3d 841, 848 (9th Cir. 2012)
(local sale of 50,000 yards of fabric over four-year period
created a reasonable inference that defendants had
opportunity to view and copy the design)). Rather, each case
must be evaluated based on its “actual facts” and whether
those facts show a “reasonable opportunity” for a defendant
to access a plaintiff’s work. See id.
Critically, we have held that saturation of a relevant
market can create a reasonable possibility of access. See
Loomis, 836 F.3d at 997. Here, Ambrosetti, Alstott, and
Farrell were all members of the same part of the same
liturgical music community during the relevant period, as
demonstrated by their attendance at the same niche

18

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

conventions. Cf. id. at 998 (no evidence that the alleged
infringers were part of the local Santa Barbara music scene
during a brief ten-day stay in the city). Ambrosetti does not
need to show widespread dissemination among musicians
generally, but only among members of this small scene. 4 To
that end, he has highlighted that “Emmanuel” has been in the
music library of the Archbishop of Canterbury (London)
since before Farrell composed “Christ”; that the Daughters
of Saint Paul, which distributed “I Will Sing,” has the
broadest Catholic distribution of any publishing house in the
world; that he did several commercial recordings of
“Emmanuel” with various orchestras; and that he performed
“Emmanuel” at hundreds of events at parishes, dioceses, and
other organizations, among other assertions about radio play
and the importance of “Emmanuel” within ILP’s catalogue.
Ambrosetti’s declaration contains several more indicia of
widespread dissemination as well.
Accordingly, although “distinguishing ‘reasonable’ from
‘bare’ poses a complicated line-drawing exercise,” Nimmer
on Copyright § 13D.05[B][2] (footnote omitted), we must
remember that summary judgment asks only “if the evidence
is such that a reasonable jury could return a verdict for the
nonmoving party.” Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477
U.S. 242, 248 (1986). Considering the record holistically,
given the limited size of the relevant liturgical music scene
Additionally, although Farrell was in the United Kingdon for much of
the relevant period, she did make several trips to the United States during
this time, often related to her work as a composer of liturgical music.
Moreover, Alstott seemingly lived and worked in the United States for
most of this period, as did Limb. Therefore, to the extent that some of
Ambrosetti’s evidence of widespread distribution is local to the United
States, that does not snuff out his dissemination theory of access in this
particular case.
4

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

19

during the applicable time period and the variety of ways in
which Ambrosetti has shown that Farrell could have come
across “Emmanuel,” even without actual sales numbers for
ILP’s catalogues, we conclude that Ambrosetti has adduced
sufficient facts to create a triable issue as to his
dissemination theory as well. See Three Boys Music Corp.,
212 F.3d at 483–84 (explaining several attenuated but
plausible bases for the plaintiffs’ widespread dissemination
theory).
Of course, Ambrosetti need only rely on one theory of
access: “showing both simply cements access.” Nimmer on
Copyright § 13D.05[C]. Still, a plaintiff must also show
sufficient similarity to demonstrate copying. Id. For the
reasons explained below, we conclude Ambrosetti has met
his burden at this stage on the issues of substantial and
striking similarity as well.
B. There is a genuine issue of material fact as to
whether “Emmanuel” and “Christ” are
substantially similar
Although we disagree with the district court’s
conclusions as to access, we agree with the district court that,
when viewed in the light most favorable to Ambrosetti,
“Christ” and “Emmanuel” are substantially similar under the
extrinsic test, so Ambrosetti survives summary judgment.
We apply a two-part test for substantial similarity. 5
Williams, 895 F.3d at 1119. Under the extrinsic test, we
5
“We do not . . . have a ‘well-defined standard for assessing when
similarity in selection and arrangement becomes “substantial,’” largely
because it is a fact-driven and context-dependent inquiry.” Hanagami v.
Epic Games, Inc., 85 F.4th 931, 943 (9th Cir. 2023) (quoting
Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 883 F.3d 1111, 1121 (9th Cir. 2018). “We
have suggested generally that the ‘selection and arrangement of elements

20

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

“consider[] whether two works share a similarity of ideas
and expression as measured by external, objective criteria.”
Swirsky v. Carey, 376 F.3d 841, 845 (9th Cir. 2004). This
test “often requires analytical dissection of a work and expert
testimony.” Three Boys Music Corp., 212 F.3d at 485. Such
“‘[a]nalytical dissection’ requires breaking the works ‘down
into their constituent elements, and comparing those
elements for proof of copying as measured by “substantial
similarity.”’” Swirsky, 376 F.3d at 845 (quoting Rice v. Fox
Broad Co., 148 F. Supp. 2d 1029, 1051 (C.D. Cal. 2001),
rev’d in part on other grounds, 330 F.3d 1170 (9th Cir.
2003)). Meanwhile, the intrinsic test “test[s] for similarity
of expression from the standpoint of the ordinary reasonable
observer, with no expert assistance.” Jada Toys, Inc. v.
Mattel, Inc., 518 F.3d 628, 637 (9th Cir. 2008) (quoting
Apple Comput., Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 35 F.3d 1435, 1442
(9th Cir. 1994)). Courts apply only the extrinsic test at
summary judgment. See Funky Films, Inc. v. Time Warner
Ent. Co., 462 F.3d 1072, 1077 (9th Cir. 2006).
“Because the requirement is one of substantial similarity
to protected elements of the copyrighted work, it is essential
to distinguish between the protected and unprotected
material in a plaintiff’s work.” Swirsky, 376 F.3d at 845
(emphasis in original). “Still, ‘substantial similarity can be
found in a combination of elements, even if those elements
are individually unprotected.’” Williams, 895 F.3d at 1119–
20 (quoting Swirsky, 376 F.3d at 848). “Each note in a scale,
for example, is not protectable, but a pattern of notes in a
tune may earn copyright protection.” Metcalf v. Bochco, 294
must be similar enough that “the ordinary observer, unless he set out to
detect the disparities, would be disposed to overlook them.”’” Id.
(quoting Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1121).

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

21

F.3d 1069, 1074 (9th Cir. 2002). “We have extended
copyright protection to ‘a combination of unprotectable
elements . . . only if those elements are numerous enough
and their selection and arrangement original enough that
their combination constitutes an original work of
authorship.’” Skidmore v. Led Zeppelin, 952 F.3d 1051,
1074 (9th Cir. 2020) (en banc) (quoting Satava v. Lowry, 323
F.3d 805, 811 (9th Cir. 2003)).
Ambrosetti presented expert analysis by Dr. Lawrence
Ferrara, who opined that “Emmanuel” and “Christ” have
“significant similarities.” Dr. Ferrara ultimately compiled a
list of twenty-three aggregate similarities between the works.
Defendants did not include the reports of their own expert
musicologist in their motion papers, purportedly because
they could present the facts and argument more precisely in
their own briefing and because they believed that Dr.
Ferrara’s report on its own did not create triable issues of
fact. To that end, Defendants argue that Dr. Ferrara’s
extensive reports and testimony “do not alter the fact that”
“Emmanuel” and “Christ” have markedly different pitch
sequences, 6 rhythms, and metrical placement and that many
of the other similarities between the works are simply
commonplace building blocks within liturgical music. They
also argue that the district court erred in determining that Dr.

“Pitch” (or scale degree) refers to how high or low a note is. Gray v.
Hudson, 28 F.4th 87, 92 (9th Cir. 2022). While notes in a scale can be
referred to with alphabetic names (A, B, C, etc.), as is common in music
copyright cases, see, id. at 93, the parties here have opted here to refer to
notes by numerical degrees. In the key of E minor, the pitch “E” is scale
degree 1, the pitch F# is scale degree 2, the pitch “G” is scale degree 3,
the pitch “A” is scale degree 4, the pitch “B” is scale degree 5, the pitch
“C” is scale degree 6, and the pitch “D” is scale degree 7.

6

22

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

Ferrara’s list of similarities was sufficient to meet our
criteria for a selection and arrangement theory.
We agree with the district court that there are genuine
issues of material fact as to whether the two works are
substantially similar. As we emphasized in Williams, “at
summary judgment, so long as the [plaintiffs] ‘presented
“indicia of a sufficient disagreement concerning the
substantial similarity of [the] two works,” then the case must
be submitted to a trier of fact.’” 895 F.3d at 1137 (second
alteration in original) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Swirsky,
376 F.3d at 844). Defendants and Dr. Ferrara have presented
principled disagreements as to whether differences in, for
example, rhythm and metrical placement, make “Christ” and
“Emmanuel” sufficiently similar in the context of the overall
compositions. And there was “nothing inherently unsound”
about Dr. Ferrara’s methodology; he clearly explained, for
example, why (in his view) the differences in pitch and
rhythm could not be separated from the similar melodic
development of the two works. Swirsky, 376 F.3d at 846–
47.
While defendants would have us break down the works
into pitch sequences, rhythms, and metrical placements and
analyze each element alone, doing so would be improper.
See Swirsky, 376 F.3d at 847–48 (“Objective analysis of
music under the extrinsic test cannot mean that a court may
simply compare the numerical representations of pitch
sequences and the visual representations of notes to
determine that two choruses are not substantially similar,
without regard to other elements of the compositions. Under
that approach, expert testimony would not be required at
all[.]”). While each item in Dr. Ferrara’s list of twenty-three
similarities might not be protectable, together, their unique
combination is. Skidmore, 952 F.3d at 1074. We cannot

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

23

separate out each piece of glass within the kaleidoscope of
an overall work: rather, we must view the work as the sum
of all the relevant elements together.
Relatedly, critiquing the district court for relying on Dr.
Ferrara’s list of aggregate similarities overlooks the
substantial explanation Dr. Ferrara provided as to how those
individually unprotectable elements—such as pitch
sequence, rhythmic durations, and scale degrees—combine
to form significantly similar works. Assuredly, under
Skidmore, a plaintiff cannot simply toss together a list of
common building blocks that two works purportedly share
and call it a day. Id. at 1075 (“Presenting a ‘combination of
unprotectable elements’ without explaining how these
elements are particularly selected and arranged amounts to
nothing more than trying to copyright commonplace
elements.” (quoting Satava, 323 F.3d at 811–12)). But Dr.
Ferrara did explain how these elements were selected and
arranged in unique form, explaining the relationship among
the pitch sequences, rhythmic choices, melodic
development, and so forth. His concluding list of twentythree aggregate similarities is merely one part of his overall
analysis.
Moreover, while the parties agree that certain elements
in “Christ” and “Emmanuel”—like the key of E Minor, 3/4
meter, and the pitch sequence 5-1-2-3—are commonplace
building blocks within liturgical music, those similarities
make up only a minor part of the overlap between the works.
And Defendants have not identified any prior works that
share the same combination of pitches, rhythm, meter, and
other choices that Dr. Ferrara explains makes the works very
similar. See Granite Music Corp. v. United Artists Corp.,
532 F.2d 718, 720 (9th Cir. 1976) (“Evidence of similar
musical phrases appearing in prior works . . . demonstrates

24

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

that the . . . probability of independent, coincidental
production was great.”). Rather, Defendants identify several
works with pitch sequences similar to “Emmanuel” and
“Christ” and argue that the differences in rhythm and
metrical placement make those works sound different from
both “Christ” and “Emmanuel.” 7 This argument, however,
merely supports Ambrosetti, given that Dr. Ferrara generally
agrees but concludes that “Christ” and “Emmanuel” are
similar to each other, just not those works. Defendants’
inability to point to prior art that shares all or most of the
relevant similarities outside of pitch sequence further
undercuts their argument.
Ultimately, as we have repeatedly observed, “[s]ummary
judgment is ‘not highly favored’ on questions of substantial
similarity in copyright cases.” L.A. Printex, 676 F.3d at 848
(quoting Shaw v. Lindheim, 919 F.2d 1353, 1355 (9th Cir.
1990)); see also Twentieth Century-Fox Film Corp. v. MCA,
Inc., 715 F.2d 1327, 1330 n.6 (9th Cir. 1983) (“Since
substantial similarity is usually an extremely close question
of fact, summary judgment has traditionally been disfavored
in copyright litigation.”).
While “no one magical
combination” of factors like melody, rhythm, and pitch “will
automatically substantiate a musical infringement suit,”
Defendants also assert—insufficiently and only in passing—that
Ambrosetti has at best “thin” copyright protection. But we have
emphasized that “[a] selection and arrangement copyright is not always
thin.” Skidmore, 952 F.3d at 1076 n.13. That Defendants themselves
identify a variety of other songs that share similar pitch sequences but
that sound dissimilar because of different rhythms, metrical placements,
meters, and so forth illustrates the “wide range of possible expression
and broad creative choices” involved in creating the works at issue.
Hanagami, 85 F.4th at 947. Accordingly, “Emmanuel” merits broad
copyright protection. Id. at 947–48; see also Williams, 895 F.3d at 1120.

7

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

25

Ambrosetti has sufficiently shown via Dr. Ferrara’s
testimony that the similarity here is “substantial.” Swirsky,
376 F.3d at 849. Accordingly, like the district court, we
conclude that Ambrosetti has demonstrated “‘indicia of a
sufficient disagreement concerning the substantial similarity
of [the] two works’ so that the issue . . . should [be]
presented to a jury.” Id. at 853 (quoting Brown Bag Software
v. Symantec Corp., 960 F.2d 1465, 1472 (9th Cir. 1992)).
The extrinsic test requires nothing more. See id.
C. There is a genuine issue of material fact as to
whether “Emmanuel” and “Christ” are
strikingly similar
Moreover, we conclude that the district court erred by
granting summary judgment to Defendants because there is
a genuine issue of material fact as to whether “Christ” and
“Emmanuel” are strikingly similar. The district court had
concluded that, although Ambrosetti had shown triable
issues of fact as to whether the works were substantially
similar, he had not shown triable issues of fact as to striking
similarity. We disagree.
“Two works are strikingly similar when the similarities
between them are so great that they are ‘highly unlikely to
have been the product of independent creation.’” Malibu
Textiles, Inc. v. Label Lane Int’l, Inc., 922 F.3d 946, 953 (9th
Cir. 2019) (quoting Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 883 F.3d 1111,
1124 (9th Cir. 2018)). Where a plaintiff can show striking
similarity, he or she does not have to show access, because
“access may be inferred.” Id. at 952. “‘Striking’ similarities
from which such an inference may be drawn are similarities
of the kind that cannot be explained, in the normal course of
human events, by the possibilities of independent creation,
coincidence or prior common source.” 5 Melville B.

26

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

Nimmer & David Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright
§ 19D.07[C][1][d] (2025).
For largely the same reasons articulated above,
Ambrosetti has demonstrated genuine issues of material fact
as to whether the works are strikingly similar. Dr. Ferrara’s
expert reports and testimony thoroughly outline numerous
similarities between “Christ” and “Emmanuel” that continue
not just for a short sequence but for several musical phrases
in a row. Moreover, in his testimony, Dr. Ferrara
commented that, in his extensive experience, it “is rare that
you had a melody of this length and this substantiality and
similarity between two works.” This assertion is buoyed by
the hundreds of pages of reasoned analysis that Dr. Ferrara
provided. While he admitted that certain aspects of the two
works were commonplace—such as the 5-1-2-3 pitch
sequence that both works employ—he repeatedly asserted
that the overall similarities between the two works were “not
even remotely commonplace” and that he believed there was
“very strong musicological evidence of copying.” While Dr.
Ferrara could, of course, not opine as to any legal
conclusions, see Nationwide Transp. Fin. v. Cass Info. Sys.,
Inc., 523 F.3d 1051, 1058 (9th Cir. 2008), 8 his overall
analysis demonstrates genuine issues of material fact as to
whether the two works are so similar as to preclude the
possibility of independent creation.
Moreover, while there are also some noted differences
between the works, such as certain differences in pitch
8
Similarly, although Ambrosetti also asserts that he has sufficiently
shown that the works are strikingly similar because he averred so in a
declaration, we “can disregard a self-serving declaration that states only
conclusions and not facts that would be admissible evidence.” Nigro v.
Sears, Roebuck & Co., 784 F.3d 495, 497 (9th Cir. 2015).

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

27

sequence and rhythm, those do not necessarily preclude a
finding of striking similarity. As we have previously noted,
“a jury could find these to be knowing modifications, which
could be evidence of willful copying.” Malibu Textiles, 922
F.3d at 953–54 (“While the trial court placed great emphasis
on the minor differences between the two patterns, we feel
that the very nature of these differences only tends to
emphasize the extent to which the defendant has deliberately
copied from the plaintiff.” (quoting Concord Fabrics, Inc. v.
Marcus Bros. Textile Corp., 409 F.2d 1315, 1316 (2d Cir.
1969) (per curiam))). Here, a reasonable juror could
conclude that the differences between “Christ” and
“Emmanuel” mean that each composer created their work
independently; he or she could also conclude that Farrell
subtly but intentionally altered “Emmanuel.”
That
determination is for the trier of fact to make.
Accordingly, while “[w]e do not have a well-defined
standard for assessing when similarity in selection and
arrangement becomes . . . striking,” id. at 953 (internal
quotation marks omitted) (quoting Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at
1121), we conclude that the facts of this case demonstrate a
genuine issue of material fact as to whether it was “highly
unlikely” that Farrell composed “Christ” without having
heard “Emmanuel,” Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1124. As one
of our sister circuits stated in a similar case reversing
summary judgment (in which Dr. Ferrara served as an expert
for the defendants), “[i]t was not for the district court to
make this factual finding where such strong competing
evidence was before it.” Repp v. Webber, 132 F.3d 882, 891
(2d Cir. 1997). Instead, “[t]he issue of ‘striking similarity,’
by virtue of the supported opinions of the experts, including
that of Professor Ferrara for the defendants, was shown to be
a genuine issue of material fact.” Id. So too here.

28

AMBROSETTI V. OREGON CATHOLIC PRESS

CONCLUSION
In conclusion, the district court did not abuse its
discretion by excluding Alstott’s letters and the theory of
access premised on those letters. However, even without
those letters, Ambrosetti has demonstrated genuine issues of
material fact as to whether the Farrell had a reasonable
possibility of accessing “Christ” before composing
“Emmanuel”; whether the works are substantially similar;
and whether the works are strikingly similar. We therefore
affirm the district court’s exclusion of the letters and the
related theory of access but reverse its grant of summary
judgment to Defendants. We remand for proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND
REMANDED.
Each side shall bear its own costs on appeal.

