FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.

No. 24-2638
D.C. No.
4:23-cr-00206BLW-1

LOGAN HARDEN PATRICK,
Defendant - Appellant.

ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Idaho
B. Lynn Winmill, District Judge, Presiding
Submitted May 22, 2025 *
Seattle, Washington
Filed September 15, 2025
Amended December 19, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould, Richard C. Tallman, and
Morgan B. Christen, Circuit Judges.
Order;
Opinion by Judge Tallman
The panel unanimously concludes this case is suitable for decision
without oral argument. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a)(2).

*

2

USA V. PATRICK

SUMMARY **
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed the district court’s order, in a
criminal case, imposing a fine and special assessment due
immediately while also creating a payment schedule.
Logan Harden Patrick argued that 18 U.S.C. §
3572(d)(1) only allows the district court to either impose
these monetary penalties due in full immediately, or impose
a payment schedule, but that doing both violates the statute.
Reviewing this question of pure statutory interpretation
de novo, the panel held that the district court did not
violate § 3572(d)(1). The district court properly made the
fine and special assessment due immediately but allowed
Patrick to discharge his obligations with minimal payments
in recognition of his indigency. The district court’s order
comports with our case law interpreting § 3572(d)(1) in the
restitution context and with the case law of our sister circuits
in this context.

COUNSEL
Christian S. Nafzger and William M. Humphries, Assistant
United States Attorneys; Justin D. Whatcott, Acting United
States Attorney; Joshua D. Hurwit and Bart M. Davis,
United States Attorneys; Office of the United States
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

USA V. PATRICK

3

Attorney, United States Department of Justice, Boise, Idaho;
Blythe H. McLane, Special Assistant United States
Attorney, Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Pocatello, Idaho; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Hannah G. Pugh, Melissa D. Winberg, and Samuel
Macomber, Assistant Federal Public Defenders; Federal
Defender Services of Idaho, Boise, Idaho; Bryan Wheat,
Trial Attorney, Federal Defenders of Eastern Washington
and Idaho, Pocatello, Idaho; for Defendant-Appellant.

ORDER
The opinion captioned United States v. Patrick, 152
F.4th 1089, filed on September 15, 2025, is amended. An
amended opinion will be filed contemporaneously with this
order.
Appellee’s petition for panel rehearing (Dkt. 40) is
denied as moot. Pursuant to Ninth Circuit General Order
5.3(a), the parties may file new petitions for panel or en banc
rehearing.

4

USA V. PATRICK

OPINION
TALLMAN, Circuit Judge:
Defendant-Appellant Logan Harden Patrick pled guilty
to possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine in
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(C), and
18 U.S.C. § 2. He was sentenced to 151 months in prison,
followed by three years of supervised release. During the
sentencing hearing, the district court ordered a fine of $1,000
and a special assessment of $100 “due immediately.” In
recognition of his indigency, the court set up a monthly
payment schedule for Patrick while he was incarcerated and
on supervised release. On appeal, Patrick does not contest
the imposition of the fine or special assessment, totaling
$1,100. Rather, he argues that ordering the total due
immediately while also creating a payment schedule violates
18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1), which allows the district court to
either make the monetary penalties due immediately or
create an installment schedule, but not both.
We hold that the district court did not violate
18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1). The district court properly made
the fine and special assessment due immediately but allowed
Patrick to discharge his obligations with minimal payments
in recognition of his indigency. The district court’s order
comports
with
our
case
law
interpreting
18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1) in the restitution context and with
the case law of our sister circuits in this context. We affirm.
I
On July 25, 2023, Patrick was indicted on one count of
possession with intent to distribute methamphetamine in
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(C), and

USA V. PATRICK

5

18 U.S.C. § 2. On April 11, 2024, Patrick pled guilty to
these charges. That same day, he was sentenced to 151
months in prison, followed by three years of supervised
release. He was also ordered to pay a $100 special
assessment and a $1,000 fine “due immediately.” The
district court noted it was “cognizant” that “a fine may create
undue stress” for Patrick given his financial situation, but it
saw “no reason why Mr. Patrick [could not] participate in the
[Bureau of Prisons] Inmate Financial Responsibility
Program” (IFRP), and that by participating in the IFRP, “he
should be able to discharge [his fine and special assessment]
completely while incarcerated.”
The district court ordered the following regarding the
fine and special assessment:
While in custody--I will order that those
amounts be due immediately but will also in
recognition of your financial resources, order
payment under the following schedule unless
modified by the Court: While in custody, you
will submit nominal payments of not less
than $25 per quarter pursuant to the Bureau
of Prisons Inmate Financial Responsibility
Program, and during the term of supervised
release, you will submit nominal monthly
payments of 10 percent of your gross income
but not less than $50--$25 per month. The
foregoing--the payment schedule does not

6

USA V. PATRICK

preclude the government from seeking
collection under 18 U.S. Code Section 3613.
Patrick’s counsel objected to these payments being due
immediately as Patrick was “currently indigent.” The
district court responded,
I thought the process was to make [the fine
and special assessment] payable immediately
but allow the defendant to discharge it
through a payment schedule but that it was
still necessary to order that it be due
immediately so that it’s a current obligation
subject, though, to his ability to pay it in
installments.
The district court continued that it was “going to stick with
that” as it had been doing it this way “for a lot of years . . . in
a lot of cases,” but told Patrick that it would “check into” his
objection to see if it was missing something. In handling this
issue, the court mirrored the practice of innumerable judges
in districts throughout our circuit based on the judgment and
commitment orders we see on appeal. The district court
nonetheless invited Patrick to appeal the issue in the
meantime if he felt “strongly enough about it.”
Following the sentencing hearing, the district court
entered judgment against Patrick the same day. The
judgment included the $1,000 fine and $100 assessment.
The “Schedule of Payments” section of the judgment stated,
B ☒ Payment to begin immediately (may be
combined with . . . ☒ F below); . . .

USA V. PATRICK

7

F ☒ Special instructions regarding the
payment of criminal monetary penalties:
While in custody, the defendant shall submit
nominal payments of not less than $25 per
quarter pursuant to the Bureau of Prisons’
Inmate Financial Responsibility Program.
During the term of supervised release, the
defendant shall submit nominal monthly
payments of 10% of gross income, but not
less than $25 per month, unless further
modified by the Court.
On April 16, 2024, the Government sent Patrick a letter
stating that, “[t]he total owing on [his] criminal judgment as
of today, April 16, 2024, is $1,100.00.” Mot. to Suppl. R. or
Take Judicial Notice 5, Dkt. No. 7. 1 The letter stated that its
purpose was to “demand that [Patrick] pay this amount
immediately” and that the Government would “record a
judgment lien unless the obligation [had] been paid in full.”
Id.
Patrick accepted the district court’s invitation and timely
appealed. On appeal, he raises only one issue: whether the
district court violated 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1) by ordering
the fine and special assessment due immediately while also
imposing a payment schedule.
He argues that
18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1) only allows the district court to
either impose these monetary penalties due in full
immediately, or impose a payment schedule, but that doing
both violates the statute. Patrick does not challenge the
imposition of the fine or special assessment, or their
We grant the Government’s Motion to Take Judicial Notice of the
letter.
1

8

USA V. PATRICK

amounts; he only objects to the district court’s decision to
impose them as both due immediately and subject to a
payment schedule. To remedy the district court’s alleged
error, Patrick asks us to vacate his fine and special
assessment and remand for resentencing.
II
The district court had jurisdiction in this case under
18 U.S.C. § 3231 as Patrick was charged with a federal
criminal offense. We have jurisdiction to review the final
judgment and sentence imposed on Patrick under
28 U.S.C. § 1291.
III
The parties dispute the proper standard of review to
apply. Patrick argues that we should apply a de novo
standard of review because this case presents a question of
statutory interpretation, namely whether imposing monetary
penalties due immediately and outlining a payment plan for
those monetary penalties where the defendant is
impecunious violates 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1). See United
States v. Anderson, 46 F.4th 1000, 1004 (9th Cir. 2022).
The Government agrees that we review questions of
statutory interpretation de novo. But it argues that the
district court order imposing the monetary penalties was a
payment schedule, so we should review the district court’s
decision for an abuse of discretion. See United States v.
Inouye, 821 F.3d 1152, 1156 (9th Cir. 2016) (per curiam), as
amended (May 31, 2016).
We think the issue poses a question of pure statutory
interpretation—whether the district court violated the terms
of 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1) by imposing a fine and special
assessment due immediately while also providing Patrick

USA V. PATRICK

9

with a payment schedule. We review questions of statutory
interpretation de novo and thus apply a de novo standard of
review to Patrick’s sole issue on appeal. McKinney-Drobnis
v. Oreshack, 16 F.4th 594, 603 (9th Cir. 2021).
IV
Patrick’s argument is based on the text of the statute
itself.
The
relevant
statutory
section,
18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1), provides as follows:
A person sentenced to pay a fine or other
monetary penalty, including restitution, shall
make such payment immediately, unless, in
the interest of justice, the court provides for
payment on a date certain or in installments.
If the court provides for payment in
installments, the installments shall be in
equal monthly payments over the period
provided by the court, unless the court
establishes another schedule.
Patrick argues that the statute uses disjunctive language that
either allows the district court to impose a fine due in full
immediately, a fine due in full on a certain date, or a fine due
in payments on an installment schedule. He argues that the
district court may choose one from these three options, but
that imposing a combination of these options, as the district
court did, violates the statute’s disjunctive language.
Because the district court made both Patrick’s fine and
special assessment due in full immediately and provided him
with a payment schedule to pay off his monetary penalty
while he was incarcerated and on supervised release, Patrick
argues that the district court violated the disjunctive text of
the statute, warranting remand.

10

USA V. PATRICK

The Government responds that establishing a payment
schedule did not mean that the minimum payment amount
was all that was due each payment period—the whole sum
was due immediately, but due to Patrick’s indigency, the
district court set forth minimum payment amounts for
Patrick to pay over time. By doing this, “[t]he district court
recognized that Mr. Patrick must satisfy the entire balance if
able, and the government still may enforce the total
monetary penalties pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3613 if property
is available” and no other federal law prohibits it. The
Government also points out that the district court’s actions
and interpretation of the statute are in line with case law from
our sister circuits. We agree with most, but not all, of the
Government’s arguments.
Patrick focuses on the language “[a] person sentenced to
pay a fine or other monetary penalty . . . shall make such
payment immediately, unless, in the interest of justice, the
court provides for payment on a date certain or in
installments.” Id. (emphasis added). Patrick is correct that
we have not previously interpreted this language in the
context of criminal fines or special assessments. However,
we recently interpreted this statutory section in the context
of a restitution order in United States v. Myers,
136 F.4th 917 (9th Cir. 2025).
In Myers, we evaluated whether the Government’s
attempt to collect a total restitution amount contravened a
restitution order that required payment of the restitution
award to begin immediately but also indicated minimum
monthly payment amounts while Myers was incarcerated.
Id. at 927. We held it did not. Id. at 928. Myers was ordered
to pay $40,406 in restitution “immediately” and to pay “not
less than 25% of his monthly gross earnings” as payment
towards this restitution amount while he was incarcerated.

USA V. PATRICK

11

Id. at 920. On appeal, Myers argued “that while the
restitution order require[d] him to begin making payments
immediately, it [did] not make the entire restitution amount
due immediately” because it provided for monthly payments
of not less than 25% of Myers’s monthly gross earnings,
making only the monthly payment amount due and
collectable each month. Id. at 927. We rejected this
argument because the federal criminal code requires
restitution to be paid immediately unless the district court
orders otherwise and the district court in Myers did not
specify an installment plan pursuant to § 3572(d)(1). Rather,
“[t]he order sets a floor on Myers’s restitution payments:
they ‘shall not be less than’ 25% of his monthly prison
earnings.” Id.
At sentencing, the court must announce in total whatever
monetary penalties, fines, assessments, or restitution the
court is ordering. How else can a payment schedule be
formulated? By default, § 3572(d)(1) makes the fine and
special assessment due immediately. Thus, the Bureau of
Prisons knew what “financial obligation[s]” Patrick had and
could help him “develop a financial plan” to pay this
obligation through the IFRP. See 28 C.F.R. § 545.11
(“When an inmate has a financial obligation, unit staff shall
help that inmate develop a financial plan and shall monitor
the inmate’s progress in meeting that obligation. . . . The
financial plan developed . . . will include the following
obligations, ordinarily to be paid in the priority order as
listed: (1) Special Assessments . . . (3) Fines and court costs
. . . .”). The district court also provided a payment schedule
to help Patrick meet his current obligations—“not less than
$25 per quarter” while imprisoned through the IFRP and
10% of his monthly gross income, but “not less than . . . $25
per month” while he was out on supervised release. The

12

USA V. PATRICK

language of the district court order tracks the statute and
declares that the entire monetary penalty was due
immediately, but the payment schedule indicates the
minimum amount Patrick needs to pay towards his current
obligation and guides his payments through the IFRP and
while on supervised release. Id.
This conclusion is supported by the district court’s
comments at the sentencing hearing. At the sentencing
hearing, the district court said it was “cognizant of [Patrick’s
counsel’s] concern that a fine may create undue stress” for
Patrick but was still ordering the fine due immediately as it
“s[aw] no reason why Mr. Patrick [could] not participate in
the Inmate Financial Responsibility Program, and if so, he
should be able to discharge that completely while
incarcerated.” But the district court also cited to 18 U.S.C.
§ 3613(c), which states that a criminal fine “is a lien in favor
of the United States on all property and rights to property of
the person fined as if the liability of the person fined were a
liability for a tax.” The district court’s citation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 3613 during the sentencing hearing further demonstrates
that the district court ordered the whole monetary penalty
due immediately because it wished the entire amount to
function as a lien on Patrick’s property, while recognizing
that Patrick did not have the financial resources to pay the
monetary penalties in a lump sum.
While we have not specifically evaluated the
implications of 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1) in the context of
criminal fines and special assessments, some of our sister
circuits have, and their analyses and conclusions support our
affirmance. In United States v. Ellis, the district court
ordered Ellis to pay a fine and special assessment “due
immediately.” 522 F.3d 737, 737–38 (7th Cir. 2008). The
district court continued, “[p]ayments are due

USA V. PATRICK

13

immediately, . . . but may be paid from prison earnings in
compliance with the Inmate Financial Responsibility
Program.” Id. at 738. It then set out a payment schedule for
any financial penalties that remained unpaid during Ellis’s
period of supervised release. Id. The Seventh Circuit
concluded that allowing Ellis to discharge the fine and
special assessment through the IFRP did not conflict with the
district court’s “immediate payment order.” Id. at 738–39
(citation modified). This is because “if a fine is ordered
payable immediately, immediate payment does not mean
immediate payment in full; rather it means payment to the
extent that the defendant can make it in good faith, beginning
immediately.” Id. at 738 (citation modified).
Similarly, in Matheny v. Morrison, the Eighth Circuit
found that it was within the Bureau of Prisons’ discretion to
place the defendants on an IFRP payment plan where both
defendants received criminal fines that were “due in full
immediately.” 307 F.3d 709, 712 (8th Cir. 2002) (citation
modified). This is because “[t]he immediate payment
directive is generally interpreted to require ‘payment to the
extent that the defendant can make it in good faith, beginning
immediately.’” Id. (quoting McGhee v. Clark, 166 F.3d 884,
886 (7th Cir. 1999)).
The rationale our sister circuits applied in Ellis and
Matheny is directly applicable here. As in these cases, the
district court ordered Patrick’s fine and special assessment
due immediately, then went on to set minimum payment
amounts for Patrick—$25 a quarter while he was
incarcerated, and 10% of his gross income, not to be less than
$25 a month, while he was on supervised release. The
district court’s order follows the template upheld by the
Seventh and Eighth Circuits—when the court entered
judgment at sentencing, Patrick’s total monetary penalties

14

USA V. PATRICK

were due immediately, but the court expressly permitted him
to participate in the IFRP to discharge his penalties over time
due to his indigency.
As the Government points out, in United States v.
Holden we found it inconsistent for the district court to order
restitution payment in a single lump sum while also creating
a payment schedule. 908 F.3d 395, 404–05 (9th Cir. 2018).
This is because “requiring a single lump-sum payment of
immediate restitution in full and setting a payment schedule
are mutually exclusive orders.” Id. at 404. However,
Patrick’s situation is distinct from Holden; here, the district
court did not order the payment to be made in a single lump
sum. See id. Rather, the district court recognized that
Patrick’s indigency prevented him from making payment of
the total he owed and thus set up a schedule of minimum
payments towards the total amount which was due
immediately. See Matheny, 307 F.3d at 712 (“The
immediate payment directive is generally interpreted to
require payment to the extent that the defendant can make it
in good faith, beginning immediately.” (citation modified)).
This further supports our conclusion that the district court
did not act inconsistently or violate the statute when it
ordered the fine and special assessment due immediately
while at the same time creating a payment schedule and
allowing Patrick to participate in the IFRP.
Patrick offers two cases from our sister circuits that he
argues support his view that the district court violated 18
U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1): United States v. Savage, 954 F.3d 610
(3d Cir. 2020), and United States v. Ellis, 522 F.3d 737 (7th
Cir. 2008), the case we discuss above. However, neither
case supports his argument. In Savage, the district court
imposed a fine that was due immediately and merely

USA V. PATRICK

15

recommended that Savage work with the IFRP to satisfy it.
As the Third Circuit explained:
nothing in § 3572(d)’s language precludes
the Bureau of Prisons under its Inmate
Financial Responsibility Program regulations
from setting a payment schedule to satisfy a
fine that was due to be paid immediately.
Accordingly, the sentencing court’s
recommendation that Savage participate in
the Inmate Financial Responsibility Program
did not transform his fine payable
immediately into one subject to installments.
Put
simply
the
Inmate
Financial
Responsibility Program provides a means to
make good faith payments but is not an
installment order.
954 F.3d at 613 (emphasis added). Rather than help
Patrick’s case, Savage’s holding and rationale cut against it
by making clear that the court could have, but did not, enter
a total fine amount and simultaneously specify that the
defendant would be allowed to pay off the obligation in
installments.
Similarly, Ellis, which we discuss above, does not
support Patrick’s argument. Patrick highlights Ellis because
in it the Seventh Circuit stated that the district court “has the
option of making a fine payable immediately or in
installments.” 522 F.3d at 738. However, Patrick ignores
that the Ellis court went on to uphold the district court order
making the fine and special assessment due immediately but
allowing Ellis to pay his fines through the IFRP, just like the
district court ordered Patrick to do. Id. at 738–39.

16

USA V. PATRICK

Patrick also overlooks the possibility that he might
receive a windfall, such as an inheritance, civil case
settlement, or a gift while the outstanding debt remained
unpaid. It would make no sense to preclude garnishment of
the balance owing should his economic circumstances
change for the better. Indeed, Congress specified in
§ 3572(d)(3) that judgments that permit payments in
installments shall require defendants to notify the court of
any material change in circumstances that might affect the
defendant’s ability to pay the judgment. Upon receipt of
such notification, the court may adjust a payment schedule
to require immediate payment in full. See § 3572(d)(3).
Moreover, if a person obligated to pay a fine “receives
substantial resources from any source . . . during a period of
incarceration,” he “shall be required to apply the value of
such resources to any . . . fine still owed.” 18 U.S.C.
§ 3664(n). 2 Congress also provided in 18 U.S.C. § 3613 that
the United States may avail itself of all statutory remedies to
collect debts owed to the Government when collecting
criminal fines, assessments, penalties, and restitution.
So, while Patrick’s textual argument may appear to have
support in the language of 18 U.S.C. § 3572(d)(1) itself, we
agree with the rationale of our case law, and the
We agree with the Government that the full amount imposed became
due upon entry of judgment. If Patrick receives a windfall or
accumulates substantial resources while incarcerated, § 3572(d)(3)
allows the Government to seek immediate payment in full by filing a
motion to modify the payment schedule. The district court’s payment
plan provided a benefit to Patrick, who the district court recognized as
indigent, because certain remedies in criminal penalty statutes—e.g.,
contempt, revocation of supervised release, and resentencing—are
available to the Government only if a defendant defaults. See 18 U.S.C.
§§ 3613A(a), 3614.
2

USA V. PATRICK

17

interpretations of our sister circuits, that the district court did
not violate the statute by making the monetary penalty due
immediately, but allowing Patrick to discharge the penalty
through a payment plan.
AFFIRMED.

