FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
VINOD SODHA; AMEE SODHA,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
PHILIP GOLUBOWSKI,
individually and on behalf of all
others similarly situated,
Appellee,
ROBINHOOD MARKETS, INC.;
BAIJU BHATT; JAN HAMMER;
VLADIMIR TENEV; JASON
WARNICK; PAULA LOOP; SCOTT
SANDELL; ROBERT ZOELLICK;
GOLDMAN SACHS & CO. LLC;
J.P. MORGAN SECURITIES LLC;
BARCLAYS CAPITAL, INC.;
WELLS FARGO SECURITIES,
LLC; MIZUHO SECURITIES USA
LLC; KEYBANC CAPITAL
MARKETS INC.; PIPER SANDLER
& CO.; ROSENBLATT
SECURITIES INC.; BMO CAPITAL
MARKETS CORP.; BTIG, LLC;
SANTANDER INVESTMENT

No. 24-1036
D.C. No.
3:21-cv-09767EMC
OPINION

2

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

SECURITIES INC.; ACADEMY
SECURITIES, INC.; LOOP
CAPITAL MARKETS LLC;
SAMUEL A. RAMIREZ &
COMPANY, INC. SIEBERT,
CISNEROS, SHANK & CO., L.L.C.,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Edward M. Chen, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted January 15, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed August 29, 2025
Before: JOHNNIE B. RAWLINSON and MILAN D.
SMITH, JR., Circuit Judges, and JED S. RAKOFF, District
Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.;
Partial Dissent and Partial Concurrence by Judge Johnnie
B. Rawlinson

The Honorable Jed S. Rakoff, United States District Judge for the
Southern District of New York, sitting by designation.

*

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

3

SUMMARY **
Securities Law
The panel affirmed in part and vacated in part the district
court’s dismissal of an action under Sections 11, 12, and 15
of the Securities Act of 1933 against Robinhood Markets,
Inc., an online brokerage firm, several of its officers and
directors, and the entities that underwrote Robinhood’s
initial public offering.
During the first few months of 2021, Robinhood’s
business became increasingly focused on trades in “meme
stocks” and Dogecoin, and its performance plummeted when
those trades largely ceased. In July 2021, Robinhood
conducted an initial public offering for which it prepared a
registration statement. The registration statement contained
only limited information about Robinhood’s performance
during the second quarter of 2021. After the initial public
offering, Robinhood reported financial results from that
second quarter, and its stock price dropped. Plaintiffs
alleged that the registration statement omitted material
information under both the “misleading” prong of Section
11, which prohibits “an omission in contravention of an
affirmative legal disclosure obligation,” and the “required to
be stated” prong of Section 11, which prohibits “an omission
of information that is necessary to prevent existing
disclosures from being misleading.”
Vacating in part, the panel held that the district court
applied the wrong legal standards in evaluating plaintiffs’
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

4

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

two legal theories that relied on (1) Section 11’s
“misleading” prong and (2) Section 11’s “required to be
stated” prong and Item 303 of Regulation S-K. As to the
first theory, agreeing with the Second Circuit, the panel held
that Sections 11 and 12 create a duty to disclose all material
information in cases like this one, where the omissions
challenged by plaintiffs involved the relationship between a
prior statement concerning a particular time period and an
event subsequent to that time period. Accordingly,
Robinhood was required to disclose “material” interim
information. Disagreeing with the First Circuit, the panel
held that the “extreme departure” test, requiring intra-quarter
disclosures only when the interim results reflect an extreme
departure from historical results, is not the law of this
circuit. The panel remanded for the district court to ascertain
whether plaintiffs adequately alleged that the omitted
information was material and thus adequately alleged that
Robinhood had a duty to disclose that information.
As to plaintiffs’ second theory, the panel held that Item
303 requires a registrant to disclose known trends, demands,
commitments, events, or uncertainties that are reasonably
likely to cause a material change in the company’s financial
condition or results of operations. The panel held that the
district court erred in analyzing the Item 303 theory because
Item 303’s disclosure obligations are not limited to
sufficiently persistent “trends,” Item 303 requires
quantification of the disclosed uncertainties to the extent
reasonably practicable, and Item 303 imposes a different
standard for disclosures than Section 11’s “misleading”
prong. The panel vacated the district court’s conclusion that
Item 303 did not require disclosure of the interim results at
issue, and remanded for further consideration.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

5

The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal of
plaintiffs’ third theory, which relied on Section 11’s
“required to be stated” prong and Item 105 of Regulation SK. The panel held that Item 105, which requires registrants
to provide a discussion of the material factors that make an
investment in the registrant or offering speculative or risky,
did not require defendants to provide a breakdown of
Robinhood’s revenue sources during the second quarter of
2021.
Dissenting in part and concurring in part, Judge
Rawlinson agreed with the majority that the district court
properly analyzed and denied plaintiffs’ claim based on a
failure to comply with the disclosure requirements as set
forth in Item 105 of Regulation S-K. Disagreeing with and
dissenting from the balance of the majority opinion, Judge
Rawlinson wrote that Section 11 and Item 303 do not hold
registrants to the same standard applied to financial
statements under Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange
Act of 1934 and Rule 10b-5. Rather, under Morris v.
Newman (In re convergent Techs. Sec. Litig.), 948 F.2d 507
(9th Cir. 1991), registration statements accompanying initial
public offerings are analyzed by considering the statements
that were made, any disclaimers accompanying those
statements, and the information available to the
market. This court’s precedent cautions against reliance on
subsequent events to establish the existence of misleading
statements. Judge Rawlinson wrote that, fairly read in light
of the disclaimers and the information existing in the market
of investors, the statements in Robinhood’s prospectus were
not misleading. Under amended Item 303, Robinhood was
afforded flexibility in providing interim disclosures based on
its assessment of the business cycle.

6

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

COUNSEL
Deborah Clark-Weintraub (argued), Emilie B. Kokmanian,
and Thomas L. Laughlin IV, Scott & Scott Attorneys at Law
LLP, New York, New York; Hal Cunningham and John T.
Jasnoch, Scott & Scott Attorneys at Law LLP, San Diego,
California; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Kevin Orsini (argued), Antony L. Ryan, and Brittany L.
Sukiennik, Cravath Swaine & Moore LLP, New York, New
York; Elizabeth A. Kim and Mark R. Conrad, Conrad
Metlitzky Kane LLP, San Francisco, California; Richard
Jacobsen and Jennifer Keighley, Orrick Herrington &
Sutcliffe LLP, New York, New York; Alexander K.
Talarides and James N. Kramer, Orrick Herrington &
Sutcliffe LLP, San Francisco, California; for DefendantsAppellees.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

7

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
Robinhood Markets, Inc. (Robinhood) is an online
brokerage firm that profits by matching retail investors with
market makers. During the first few months of 2021,
Robinhood’s business became increasingly focused on
trades in “meme stocks” and Dogecoin, and its performance
plummeted when those trades largely ceased. In July 2021,
Robinhood conducted an initial public offering (IPO). It
prepared a registration statement, which included financial
data and key performance indicators from the first quarter of
2021 and warned of several risks that might affect
Robinhood in the future.
However, the registration
statement contained only limited information about
Robinhood’s performance during the second quarter of
2021, which had ended shortly before the IPO. After the
IPO, Robinhood reported financial results from that second
quarter, and its stock price dropped.
Plaintiffs, who seek to represent a class of Robinhood
investors, sued Robinhood, several of its officers and
directors, and the entities that underwrote Robinhood’s IPO
(Defendants). Plaintiffs brought claims pursuant to Sections
11, 12, and 15 of the Securities Act of 1933. See 15 U.S.C.
§§ 77k, 77l, 77o. Each of those claims requires Plaintiffs to
prevail on at least one of their underlying legal theories, one
of which relies on Section 11’s “misleading” prong, one of
which relies on Item 303 of Regulation S-K, and one of
which relies on Item 105 of the same regulation. See 17
C.F.R. §§ 229.105, 229.303. The district court dismissed
Plaintiffs’ claims, finding that none of their three theories
obligated Defendants to disclose the omitted information.

8

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

We hold that the district court applied the wrong legal
standard in evaluating Section 11’s “misleading” prong and
Item 303, so we vacate the district court’s order and remand
so it can apply the correct standard as to those theories. We
affirm the district court’s dismissal of the Item 105 theory.
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
I.

Robinhood’s Business

Robinhood is an online broker that targets retail
investors, many of whom are first-time investors. Its “core
product offering” is its retail investing platform, which
allows customers to trade “U.S. listed stocks and Exchange
Traded Funds . . . , as well as related options and American
[Depository] Receipts . . . and . . . cryptocurrencies.”
Robinhood also offers debit cards and a paid subscription
service that provides customers with “enhanced instant
access to deposits, professional research, [certain] market
data and, upon approval, access to margin investing.”
Robinhood does not charge fees to customers when they
execute trades. Instead, it uses a “payment for order flow”
(PFOF) model. 1 Robinhood routes customers’ orders to
market makers, and those market makers pay Robinhood for
the ability to serve its customers. This transaction-based
revenue constituted 75% of Robinhood’s revenue during
2020 and 80.5% of its revenue during the first quarter of
2021.
II.

The Meme Stock Event and Dogecoin

During 2020, over 90% of Robinhood’s transactionbased revenue came from conventional trading in stocks and
In the cryptocurrency context, these fees are called “transaction
rebates” instead.

1

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

9

options. In January 2021, however, the “meme stock event”
occurred, and retail investors purchased vast numbers of
shares in GameStop, AMC Entertainment, and other
companies. Retail investors sought to drive up these
companies’ stock prices to force hedge funds holding short
positions in these stocks to buy back the shares at a high
price. Many retail investors used Robinhood for their trades.
However, on January 28, 2021, Robinhood limited trading
in GameStop shares and increased margin requirements,
angering some of its users. By early February, the prices of
GameStop and other “meme stocks” fell from their January
highs; trading volume on Robinhood also decreased.
Between January and April 2021, the cryptocurrency
Dogecoin skyrocketed in value. As before, many investors
used Robinhood to make their trades. However, Dogecoin’s
price plummeted in late April and continued to decline
between May and July.
During the second quarter of 2021, Robinhood’s revenue
from equity and options trading declined. Transaction-based
revenue from these two categories was down 34.5% from the
previous quarter. Transaction-based revenue for the second
quarter of 2021 was also slightly below the corresponding
quantity from the last quarter of 2020. The decline in
transaction-based revenue from options was gentler, at
16.8% from the previous quarter, but the decline from
equities was steeper, at 61% from the previous quarter.
Robinhood’s revenue from equities was lower than in every
previous quarter since the first quarter of 2020. Equity
trading volume in July 2021 was also one-third less than in
June 2021, and 15% below the monthly average for the
second quarter of 2021.

10

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

There was a similar decline in Robinhood’s
cryptocurrency revenue. Although this revenue surged
during the second quarter of 2021, 62% of cryptocurrency
trades on Robinhood during this period were in Dogecoin.
Thus, when the value of Dogecoin fell sharply,
cryptocurrency trading on Robinhood fell 76% between May
2021 and June 2021. There was a further 56.67% decline
between June and July 2021. These declines were steeper
than the industry-wide average, which was 40% in June 2021
and 31.5% in July 2021.
Robinhood’s Key Performance Indicators (KPIs)
generally declined during this period. Its Monthly Active
Users (MAU) declined between May 2021 and July 2021.
There was an 11.62% decline between May and June, and an
additional 8.45% decline between June and July. Its
Average Revenue Per User (ARPU) declined almost 20%
between the first and second quarters of 2021. In the third
quarter, this metric declined 42% from the prior quarter (or
52.5% since the first quarter of 2021). Robinhood’s Assets
Under Custody (AUC) declined slightly between April and
May, increased between May and June, and declined again
between June and July, finishing below the Assets Under
Custody for the previous three months. Robinhood’s Net
Cumulative Funded Accounts (NCFA) were flat during this
period.
III.

Robinhood’s Registration Statement

On July 1, 2021, Robinhood filed a draft registration
statement with the SEC, seeking to sell shares to the public.
On July 27, it filed its final amendment to the registration
statement. The SEC declared the registration statement
effective the next day. On July 30, Defendants priced the
shares at $38 and filed the final prospectus.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

11

A. Statements About Robinhood’s Revenue
The offering documents indicated that, between the last
quarter of 2019 and the last quarter of 2020, Robinhood’s
transaction-based revenue increased from approximately
$43 million to $235 million. During the same period, its
total net revenue increased from approximately $72 million
to $318 million. During the first quarter of 2021,
transaction-based revenue increased to $420 million and
total net revenue to $522 million. The offering documents
attributed this revenue growth to user interest:
Transaction-based revenues have generally
increased sequentially in each of the periods
presented, other than the fourth quarter of
2019, due to growth in our user base which
resulted in higher trading volume on a peruser basis. In the first half of 2020, we saw a
significant increase in the number of new
accounts opened by first-time investors, as a
result of increased interest in personal
finance and investing, low interest rates and
a positive market environment, especially in
the U.S. equity markets. Throughout the
remainder of 2020 and the first quarter of
2021, we maintained substantial growth in
our user base, retention, engagement and
trading activity metrics, as well as gains and
periodic all-time highs achieved by the equity
markets.
The offering documents contained similar, but more
specific, statements addressing two of the quarters prior to

12

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

the IPO. The registration statement noted the increase in
user interest during the last quarter of 2020:
Transaction-based revenue increased by
$549.3 million, or 322%, for the year ended
December 31, 2020, compared to the year
prior. The increase was driven by a 143%
increase in Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts, which resulted in higher daily
average revenue trades . . . in options,
equities and cryptocurrencies. . . . Increased
interest in personal finance and investing,
low interest rates and a positive market
environment, especially in the U.S. equities
markets, encouraged an unprecedented
number of first-time retail investors to
become our users and begin trading on our
platform. We have seen substantial growth
in our user base, retention, engagement and
trading activity metrics, as well as continued
gains and periodic all-time highs achieved by
the equity markets.
The offering documents also addressed the first quarter of
2021:
Transaction-based revenues increased by
$324.8 million, or 340%, for the three months
ended March 31, 2021, compared to the year
prior. The increase was driven by a 151%
increase in Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts, which resulted in higher daily
average revenue trades in options, equities,
and cryptocurrencies. . . . Increased interest

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

13

in personal finance and investing, and several
high-profile securities and cryptocurrencies,
encouraged an unprecedented number of
first-time retail investors to become our users
and begin trading on our platform. We have
seen substantial growth in our user base,
engagement and trading activity metrics.
Although the offering documents did not provide final
results for the second quarter of 2021 or the beginning of the
third quarter of 2021, Robinhood said its expectations for
those periods were in line with the previous statements:
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report revenue of between $546
million and $574 million, as compared to
$244 million for the three months ended June
30, 2020, representing an increase of 129% at
the midpoint of the range. The expected
increase in revenue is primarily driven by a
130% increase in Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts and increased trading activity
related to options and cryptocurrencies, and
relatively flat equities trading activity,
relative to the three months ended June 30,
2020. . . . Trading activity was particularly
high during the first two months of the 2021
period, returning to levels more in line with
prior periods during the last few weeks of the
quarter ended June 30, 2021, and remained at
similar levels into the early part of the third
quarter. We expect our revenue for the three
months ending September 30, 2021 to be
lower, as compared to the three months ended

14

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

June 30, 2021, as a result of decreased levels
of trading activity relative to the record highs
in trading activity, particularly in
cryptocurrencies, during the three months
ended June 30, 2021, and expected
seasonality.
The offering documents included the disclaimer that
Robinhood “experienced strong growth in new customers
during the first six months of 2021,” and that Robinhood did
“not know whether, over the long term, cohorts comprised
of these new customers will have the same characteristics as
our prior cohorts.” Thus, Robinhood explained, “[t]o the
extent these new customers do not grow their cumulative net
deposits or trading frequency on our platform to the same
extent as new customers that joined in prior periods, [its]
ability to expand and grow [its] relationship with these
customers will be impacted.”
The offering documents also detailed the portions of
Robinhood’s transaction-based revenue attributable to trades
in options, equities, and cryptocurrencies, for the threemonth periods ending in December 2019, March 2020,
December 2020, and March 2021.
B. Statements About Robinhood’s Key Performance
Indicators
The offering documents included tables and graphs
showing that Robinhood’s Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts, Monthly Active Users, Assets Under Custody,
and Average Revenues Per User had been increasing yearly
since 2017. Between December 31, 2017, and March 31,
2021, its Net Cumulative Funded Accounts increased from
1.9 million to 18.0 million; its Monthly Active Users

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

15

increased from 1.8 million to 17.7 million; its Assets Under
Custody rose from $4.5 billion to $80.9 billion; and its
Average Revenues Per User grew from $37 to $137. They
also estimated that these metrics would continue to increase
in the second quarter of 2021. However, Plaintiffs object to
the following portion of the registration statement, which
addresses Robinhood’s performance in the second quarter of
2021, as misleading:
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts of 22.5 million, as compared to 9.8
million for the three months ended June 30,
2020, representing an increase of 130%. For
the month ended June 30, 2021, we expect to
report MAU of 21.3 million, as compared to
10.2 million for the month ended June 30,
2020, representing an increase of 109%. As
of June 30, 2021, we expect to report AUC of
$102 billion, as compared to $33 billion as of
June 30, 2020, representing an increase of
205%.
The increase in these Key
Performance Metrics resulted primarily from
an increase in new users joining our platform,
driven by general market interest trading. We
anticipate the rate of growth in these Key
Performance Metrics will be lower for the
period ended September 30, 2021, as
compared to the three months ended June 30,
2021, due to the exceptionally strong interest
in trading, particularly in cryptocurrencies,
we experienced in the three months ended

16

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

June 30, 2021 and seasonally in overall
trading activities.
C. Statements About Risks Robinhood Faced
The offering documents included a warning that
Robinhood “may not continue to grow on pace with
historical rates.” Robinhood offered many reasons why
continued growth might not occur:
We have grown rapidly over the last few
years, and therefore our recent revenue
growth rate and financial performance should
not be considered indicative of our future
performance. In particular, since March
2020, we have experienced a significant
increase in revenue, MAU, AUC and Net
Cumulative Funded Accounts. . . . In
addition, for the three months ended March
31, 2021, during which we experienced high
trading volume and account sign-ups as well
as high market volatility, particularly in
certain market sectors, our revenue was
$522.2 million, as compared to $127.6
million for the three months ended March 31,
2020, and on March 31, 2021, we had Net
Cumulative Funded Accounts of 18.0
million, as compared to 7.2 million on March
31, 2020, representing growth of 309% and
151%, respectively. The circumstances that
have accelerated the growth of our business
may not continue in the future, and we expect
the growth rates in revenue, MAU, AUC and
Net Cumulative Funded Accounts to decline

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

in future periods, and such declines could be
significant. You should not rely on our
revenue or key business metrics for any
previous quarterly or annual period as any
indication of our revenue, revenue growth,
key business metrics or key business metrics
growth in future periods. In particular, our
revenue growth rate has fluctuated in prior
periods. Our revenue growth rate is likely to
decline in future periods as the size of our
business grows and as we achieve higher
market adoption rates.
We may also
experience declines in our revenue growth
rate as a result of a number of factors,
including slowing demand for our platform,
insufficient growth in the number of
customers that utilize our platform,
increasing competition, a decrease in the
growth of our overall market, our failure to
continue
to
capitalize
on
growth
opportunities, including as a result of our
inability to scale to meet such growth, an
insufficient number of market makers or the
unwillingness or inability of our existing
market makers to execute our customers’
trade orders as order volumes increase,
increasing regulatory costs, increasing capital
requirements imposed by regulators and
[others], as well as cash deposit and collateral
requirements under the rules of [various
entities], economic conditions that reduce

17

18

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

financial activity and the maturation of our
business, among others.
Elsewhere, Robinhood repeated its warning that
performance during the third quarter of 2021 would be
lower:
Trading activity was particularly high during
the first two months of the 2021 period,
returning to levels more in line with prior
periods during the last few weeks of the
quarter ended June 30, 2021, and remained at
similar levels into the early part of the third
quarter.
....
. . . We anticipate the rate of growth in these
Key Performance Metrics will be lower for
the period ended September 30, 2021, as
compared to the three months ended June 30,
2021, due to the exceptionally strong interest
in trading, particularly in cryptocurrencies,
we experienced in the three months ended
June 30, 2021 and seasonality in overall
trading activities.
Plaintiffs contend that the following statements about
economic changes that could reduce Robinhood’s
performance were misleading:
Our business and reputation may be harmed
by changes in business, economic or political
conditions that impact global financial
markets, or by a systemic market event.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

As a financial services company, our
business, results of operations and reputation
are directly affected by elements beyond our
control, such as economic and political
conditions, changes in the volatility in
financial markets (including volatility as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic),
significant increases in the volatility or
trading volume of particular securities or
cryptocurrencies, broad trends in business
and finance, changes in volume of securities
or cryptocurrencies trading generally,
changes in the markets in which such
transactions occur and changes in how such
transactions are processed. These elements
can arise suddenly and the full impact of such
conditions can remain uncertain.
A
prolonged weakness in equity markets, such
as a slowdown causing reduction in trading
volume in securities, derivatives or
cryptocurrency markets, may result in
reduced revenues and would have an adverse
effect on our business, financial condition
and results of operations.
....
In addition, a prolonged weakness in the U.S.
equity markets or in specific cryptocurrencies
or equity securities or a general economic
downturn could cause our customers to incur

19

20

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

losses, which in turn could cause our brand
and reputation to suffer.
Plaintiffs further object to the statements in the offering
documents made about the effect cryptocurrency prices and
volumes could have on Robinhood’s business:
The prices of cryptocurrencies are extremely
volatile. Fluctuations in the price of various
cryptocurrencies may cause uncertainty in
the market and could negatively impact
trading volumes of cryptocurrencies, which
would adversely affect the success of
[Robinhood’s] business, financial condition
and results of operations.
....
The cryptocurrency markets are volatile, and
changes in the prices and/or trading volume
of cryptocurrencies may adversely impact
[Robinhood’s] growth strategy and business.
In addition, while we have observed a
positive trend in the total market
capitalization of cryptocurrency assets
historically, driven by increased adoption of
cryptocurrency trading by both retail and
institutional investors as well as continued
growth of various non-investing use cases,
historical trends are not indicative of future
adoption, and it is possible that the adoption
of cryptocurrencies may slow, take longer to
develop or never be broadly adopted, which

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

21

would negatively impact our business,
financial conditions and results of operations.
Finally, Plaintiffs object to the following statements
about Dogecoin:
A substantial portion of the recent growth in
our net revenues earned from cryptocurrency
transactions is attributable to transactions in
Dogecoin. If demand for transactions in
Dogecoin declines and is not replaced by new
demand for other cryptocurrencies available
for trading on our platform, our business,
financial condition and results of operations
could be adversely affected.
For the three months ended March 31, 2021,
17% of our total revenue was derived from
transaction-based revenues earned from
cryptocurrency transactions, compared to 4%
for the three months . . . ended December 31,
2020. While we currently support a portfolio
of seven cryptocurrencies for trading, for the
three months ended March 31, 2021, 34% of
our
cryptocurrency
transaction-based
revenue was attributable to transactions in
Dogecoin, as compared to 4% for the three
months ended December 31, 2020. As such,
in addition to the factors impacting the
broader cryptoeconomy described elsewhere
in this section, [Robinhood’s] business may
be adversely affected, and growth in our net
revenue earned from cryptocurrency
transactions may slow or decline, if the

22

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

markets for Dogecoin deteriorate or if the
price of Dogecoin declines, including as a
result of factors such as negative perceptions
of Dogecoin or the increased availability of
Dogecoin on other cryptocurrency trading
platforms.
IV.

Robinhood’s Post-IPO Performance

On October 26, 2021, Robinhood reported its financial
results for the third quarter of 2021. Compared to its secondquarter results, its Monthly Active Users declined 11%, its
Average Revenue Per User declined 42%, its Assets Under
Custody declined approximately 7%, its total net revenue
declined 35%, its transaction-based revenue declined
approximately 41%, its transaction rebates from
cryptocurrency trading declined 78%, its PFOF revenue
from equity trading declined 61%, and its PFOF revenue
from options trading declined 16.7%. Robinhood warned
that its fourth-quarter revenue would likely be even lower.
Analysts and reporters characterized these results
negatively. Robinhood’s stock price also fell by about 10%.
Robinhood also attracted negative attention the next
month after a hacker obtained customers’ personal
information and a service outage prevented customers from
accessing their accounts. The company’s stock price further
declined as criticism over the revenue decline, cyberattack,
and disruption continued to mount. Robinhood’s results
from the fourth quarter of 2021, which were published on
January 27, 2022, reflected a further decline in revenue and
Key Performance Indicators. Analysts again reacted
negatively, and Robinhood’s stock price continued to drop.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

V.

23

Procedural History

The initial complaint in this case was filed on December
17, 2021. Lead plaintiffs and lead counsel were appointed
on March 24, 2022. Thereafter, Plaintiffs filed a First
Amended Complaint (FAC) on June 20, 2022. Defendants
moved to dismiss the FAC on August 18, 2022. On February
10, 2023, the district court granted that motion but permitted
Plaintiffs to amend their pleadings. Plaintiffs thereafter filed
a Second Amended Complaint (SAC) on March 13, 2023,
which is the operative pleading in this appeal. The SAC
asserted claims for violations of Sections 11, 12(a), and 15.
Defendants again moved to dismiss on May 12, 2023.
The district court granted Defendants’ motion, this time
with prejudice. The district court found that Defendants
were not liable pursuant to Sections 11, 12(a), or 15 for
failing to disclose the pre-IPO declines in KPIs and certain
sources of revenue. The district court also found that no
Securities Act claim could lie against Defendants for failing
to disclose the increased percentage of Robinhood’s revenue
attributable to “fad trading.” Plaintiffs now appeal.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
“We review dismissals for failure to state a claim under
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) de novo and may
affirm on any ground supported by the record.” Hansen v.
Musk, 122 F.4th 1162, 1168 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting
Saloojas, Inc. v. Aetna Health of Cal., Inc., 80 F.4th 1011,
1014 (9th Cir. 2023)). In doing so, we “accept[] the
allegations in the complaint as true and view[] them in the
light most favorable to the plaintiff.” Adams v. Cnty. of
Sacramento, 116 F.4th 1004, 1008 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting

24

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

Galanti v. Nev. Dep’t of Corr., 65 F.4th 1152, 1154 (9th Cir.
2023)).
DISCUSSION
Plaintiffs’ three claims, which arise pursuant to Sections
11, 12, and 15 of the Securities Act of 1933, can be analyzed
together. See 15 U.S.C. §§ 77k, 77l, 77o. Neither side
suggests any difference between the Section 11 and 12
claims, and both sides focus on the former statute. We
follow the same approach in this opinion. Likewise, Section
15 penalizes persons who control a company that violates
Sections 11 and 12. See 15 U.S.C. § 77o(a). “[S]ection 15
. . . require[s] [an] underlying primary violation[] of the
securities laws.” In re Rigel Pharms., Inc. Sec. Litig., 697
F.3d 869, 886 (9th Cir. 2012). Indeed, both sides agree that
the Section 15 claim rises or falls with the others.
Section 11 penalizes the Defendants “[i]n case any part
of the[ir] registration statement, when such part became
effective, contained an untrue statement of a material fact or
omitted to state a material fact required to be stated therein
or necessary to make the statements therein not
misleading[.]” 15 U.S.C. § 77k(a). Plaintiffs do not allege
that any part of the registration statement is untrue, only that
it omits certain material facts. Section 11’s “omissions”
clause contains two prongs, the “required to be stated”
prong, which prohibits “an omission of information that is
necessary to prevent existing disclosures from being
misleading,” and the “misleading” prong, which prohibits
“an omission in contravention of an affirmative legal
disclosure obligation.” In re Morgan Stanley Info. Fund Sec.
Litig., 592 F.3d 347, 360 (2d Cir. 2010).
Here, Plaintiffs raise three theories. The first arises
under the “misleading” prong. The second and third arise

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

25

under the “required to be stated” prong. Specifically,
Plaintiffs rely on the affirmative disclosure obligations in
Items 303 and 105 of Regulation S-K. See 17 C.F.R.
§§ 229.105, 229.303. We address each theory in turn.
I. Section 11’s “Misleading” Prong
Plaintiffs argue that “[t]he applicable standard for
whether information is required to be disclosed under
§§ 11(a) and 12(a)(2) . . . is simply the standard for
materiality[.]”
In other words, Plaintiffs argue that
Defendants had a duty to disclose whenever there is “a
substantial likelihood that disclosure of the omitted
information would have been viewed by a reasonable
investor as having significantly altered the total mix of
information available.” The district court did not hold that
Defendants had a duty to disclose all material information.
Instead, the district court required Plaintiffs to allege that
“disclosure of [the omitted] information [wa]s ‘necessary to
make the statements made [in the registration statement], in
light of the circumstances under which they were made, not
misleading.” Golubowski v. Robinhood Mkts., Inc., No. 21cv-09767, 2024 WL 269507, at *7 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 24, 2024)
(quoting Retail Wholesale & Dep’t Store Union Loc. 388
Ret. Fund v. Hewlett-Packard Co., 845 F.3d 1268, 1278 (9th
Cir. 2017)). In applying this standard, the district court
explained that “inclusion of . . . out-of-quarter or intraquarterly reports” was “only rendered necessary to the extent
that they reflect[ed] declines so extraordinary as to be
unusual and indicative of larger future trends when viewed
in context of the company’s historical data.” Id. The district
court’s decision was consistent with First Circuit precedent,
which requires intra-quarter disclosures only when the

26

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

interim results reflect an “extreme departure” from historical
results. 2
As we explain, Sections 11 and 12 create a duty to
disclose all material information in cases like this one. We
also explain why, even if the duty to disclose did not
coalesce with materiality, the “extreme departure” test is not
the law of this circuit.
A. Duty to Disclose and Materiality
Our cases have drawn a theoretical distinction between
materiality and the duty to disclose. Accordingly, we have
explained that “[t]he materiality of information is different
from the issue of whether a statement is false or misleading.”
In re Rigel Pharms., 697 F.3d at 880 n.8. We have also
recognized that “not all adverse events would be material
and, more importantly, . . . not all material adverse events
would have to be disclosed.” Id. “[A]s long as the omissions
do not make the actual statements misleading,” disclosure is
not required “even if the company discloses some [related
information] and even if investors would consider the
omitted information significant.” Id.; see also Retail
Wholesale, 845 F.3d at 1278 (finding “no duty to disclose”
where the “failures to speak did not ‘affirmatively create an
The district court used both “extraordinary” and “extreme” to describe
the degree of decline necessary to make the registration statement
misleading without disclosure of the interim results. See, e.g., 2024 WL
269507, at *8. We primarily use the term “extreme” because the leading
First Circuit case in this area uses that term, see Shaw v. Digital
Equipment Corp., 82 F.3d 1194 (1st Cir. 1996), abrogated on other
grounds by 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(2), and because several district courts
in our circuit have relied on Shaw, see, e.g., In re Novatel Wireless Sec.
Litig., 830 F. Supp. 2d 996, 1023 n.31 (S.D. Cal. 2011). However,
neither party argues that there is any difference between these phrases,
and we discern none.
2

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

27

impression of a state of affairs that differs in a material way
from the one that actually exists’” (quoting Brody v.
Transitional Hosps. Corp., 280 F.3d 997, 1006 (9th Cir.
2002))). 3
However, we agree with the Second Circuit that this
“distinction has meaning only in certain contexts.” In re
Time Warner Inc. Sec. Litig., 9 F.3d 259, 267 (2d Cir. 1993).
On the one hand, “where the issue is whether an individual’s
relationship to information imposed upon him a duty to
disclose, the inquiry as to his duty is quite distinct from the
inquiry as to the information’s materiality.” Id. “On the
other hand, where the disclosure duty arises from the
combination of a prior statement and a subsequent event,
which, if not disclosed, renders the prior statement false or
misleading, the inquiries as to duty and materiality
Rigel and Retail Wholesale involved Rule 10b-5, which was
promulgated pursuant to Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of
1934 rather than Section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933, but this
distinction does not change our analysis. Section 11 does punish certain
“pure omissions,” Macquarie Infrastructure Corp. v. Moab Partners,
L.P., 601 U.S. 257, 264–65 (2024), because unlike Rule 10b-5, its
“omissions clause also applies when an issuer fails to make mandated
disclosures—those ‘required to be stated’—in a registration statement,”
Omnicare, Inc. v. Laborers Dist. Council Constr. Indus. Pension Fund,
575 U.S. 175, 186 n.3 (2015). But focusing on the “misleading” prong
of the omissions clause, the relevant language is nearly identical in Rule
10b-5 and Section 11. Compare 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b-5(b) (imposing
liability on those who “omit to state a material fact necessary in order to
make the statements made, in the light of the circumstances under which
they were made, not misleading”) with 15 U.S.C. § 77k(a) (imposing
liability on those whose registration statements “omitted to state a
material fact . . . necessary to make the statements therein not
misleading”). Indeed, Rigel held that a Section 11 claim was not viable
“[f]or the same reasons [as] . . . the section 10(b) claim[.]” 697 F.3d at
886. These cases apply with full force here.
3

28

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

coalesce.” Id. Like the Second Circuit, we find it “difficult
to imagine a circumstance where [a] prior statement would
not be rendered misleading” in light of an undisclosed event
if the “undisclosed information is material.” Id. at 267–68.
Here, all the omissions challenged by Plaintiffs involve
the relationship between a prior statement concerning a
particular time period and an event subsequent to that time
period. 4 Specifically, Plaintiffs allege that Robinhood did
not disclose that several financial metrics and key
performance indicators declined after the end of the last
reported fiscal quarter. Thus, there was a statement related
to a particular time period (i.e., the disclosure of the results
from the last reported fiscal quarter), followed by an
undisclosed event (i.e., the decline in Robinhood’s
performance) that took place after that period. Plaintiffs also
allege that Robinhood’s decision to disclose some positive
interim results but omit other negative interim results, even
though those negative results were provided in prior
quarters, was misleading. Because Plaintiffs’ contention
relies in part on the distinction between the previous
quarter’s results and the interim results, it also involves the
relationship between a prior statement and a subsequent
event. Finally, Plaintiffs allege that Robinhood warned of
certain future risks but did not state that those risks had
To be sure, “Plaintiffs cannot use the benefit of 20-20 hindsight to turn
management’s business judgment into securities fraud.” In re Worlds of
Wonder Secs. Litig., 35 F.3d 1407, 1419 (9th Cir. 1994). Thus, Plaintiffs
cannot fault Robinhood’s IPO disclosures for omitting events that took
place after the IPO. See id. But that is not their theory here. Instead,
Plaintiffs argue Robinhood should have disclosed events taking place
during the partially completed fiscal quarter before the IPO. Worlds of
Wonder does not bar claims against a registrant that knew about a
material event before the IPO but chose not to disclose it.
4

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

29

already come to fruition. Again, Plaintiffs’ theory concerns
a prior time period (i.e., the time period during which
Robinhood suffered from the risks that had allegedly come
to fruition) and some subsequent event (i.e., the later time
period during which the risks falsely portrayed as contingent
actually came to pass). This case therefore does not require
us to draw a distinction between materiality and the duty to
disclose. Accordingly, Robinhood was required to disclose
“material” interim information.
Robinhood claims we have rejected such a duty, but its
primary Ninth Circuit authority does not support it. As we
have explained, registrants have no duty to disclose interim
sales when they “lag[] behind [the issuer’s] internal
projections.” In re Worlds of Wonder Secs. Litig., 35 F.3d
1407, 1419 (9th Cir. 1994). A registrant that discloses the
difference between interim results and internal projections
necessarily discloses those projections. But “actually
disclos[ing] [an] internal business plan” exposes a registrant
to claims “that no basis existed for such a prediction.” Id.
Worlds of Wonder did not require registrants to make
disclosures that would invite charges of speculation. See id.
This case is different because Plaintiffs allege that
Robinhood’s interim results lagged behind its last reported
results. Their claim does not rely on plans or projections. If
Robinhood had disclosed the difference between its interim
results and last reported results, then it would have revealed
its results but it would not have speculated about the future.
Our other cases addressing the disclosure of interim
results respect this distinction. Robinhood relies on In re
VeriFone Sec. Litig., 11 F.3d 865, 869 (9th Cir. 1993), but it
is distinguishable because it addressed “forecasts” rather
than actual results. Robinhood also relies on In re
Convergent Technologies Sec. Litig., 948 F.2d 507 (9th

30

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

Cir.), as amended on denial of reh’g (Dec. 6, 1991), but the
portion it cites only concerns “internal projections,” which
the registrant had no duty to disclose. 948 F.2d at 516. As
in Worlds of Wonder, that fact mattered: Convergent noted
that “[t]here [was] no evidence . . . that the [undisclosed]
estimates were made with such reasonable certainty even to
allow them to be disclosed to the public.” Id. Here, because
Robinhood omitted its actual results, not any estimates, these
cases do not support its position. 5
B. The Extreme Departure Test
The First Circuit has rejected a general duty to “disclose
[even] material information concerning [the registrant’s]
performance in the quarter in progress.” Shaw v. Digital
Equip. Corp., 82 F.3d 1194, 1203 (1st Cir. 1996), abrogated
on other grounds by 15 U.S.C. § 78u-4(b)(2). However, the
First Circuit has held that if an “issuer is in possession of
nonpublic information indicating that the quarter in progress
at the time of the public offering will be an extreme
departure from the range of results which could be
anticipated based on currently available information, it is
consistent with the basic statutory policies favoring
5
Robinhood does not cite In re Stac Elecs. Secs. Litig., 89 F.3d 1399
(9th Cir. 1996), but that case’s gloss on Convergent also cuts against
Robinhood’s position. Among other things, Stac recognized the key
“difference between knowing that any product-in-development may run
into a few snags, and knowing that a particular product has already
developed problems so significant as to require months of delay.” 89
F.3d at 1406 (quoting Convergent, 948 F.2d at 515). No registrant would
have to disclose that its product development timeline might fall short of
its estimates, but a registrant might have to disclose existing problems.
See id. Here, Plaintiffs fault Robinhood’s prospectus for omitting
problems which occurred after the last quarterly financial statement but
before the prospectus. That is nothing like the “contingen[t]” future
event omitted in Stac. See id. at 1406–07.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

31

disclosure to require inclusion of that information in the
registration statement.” Id. at 1210 (emphasis added). Shaw
rejected “any bright-line rule that an issuer engaging in a
public offering is obligated to disclose interim operating
results for the quarter in progress whenever it perceives a
possibility that the quarter’s results may disappoint the
market.” Id. For one thing, “[t]here is always some risk that
the quarter in progress at the time of an investment will turn
out for the issuer to be worse than anticipated.” Id. “The
market takes this risk of variability into account in
evaluating the company’s prospects based on the available
facts concerning the issuer’s past historical performance, its
current financial condition, present trends and future
uncertainties.” Id.
By contrast, the Second Circuit holds that “the longstanding test for assessing the materiality of an omission of
interim financial information” is the same as the test for the
“duty to disclose such information.” Stadnick v. Vivint
Solar, Inc., 861 F.3d 31, 36 (2d Cir. 2017). That test is
whether “a reasonable investor would view the omission as
significantly altering the total mix of information made
available.” Id. (cleaned up) (quoting DeMaria v. Andersen,
318 F.3d 170, 180 (2d Cir. 2003)). The Second Circuit
expressly declined to adopt the First Circuit’s “extreme
departure” test. Id.
We have previously “decline[d] to pass on the validity of
an ‘extreme departure’ threshold in this circuit.” Steckman
v. Hart Brewing, Inc., 143 F.3d 1293, 1298 (9th Cir. 1998).
Because that question is now squarely presented, we find the
Second Circuit’s reasons for rejecting Shaw’s “extreme
departure” test persuasive, and we hold that the Shaw test is
not the law of this circuit. Instead, the proper test for the
duty to disclose is the test for materiality.

32

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

First, as Stadnick noted, “courts are familiar” with the
“classic materiality standard in the omission context[.]” 861
F.3d at 37. The extreme departure test is far less
administrable. Indeed, we have “counsel[ed] the need for
caution in glossing the [relevant text] with further enigmatic
language such as ‘extreme departure’ or ‘dramatic
decrease’” because “[s]hort phrases can not fully capture the
richness of the concepts behind the standards” and “short
phrases may obfuscate rather than clarify the standards.”
Steckman, 143 F.3d at 1298 n.1. By following the Second
Circuit’s lead and collapsing the duty to disclose into
materiality, we make the securities law in this circuit clearer
and more predictable.
Second, the Shaw test “leaves too many open questions,
such as: the degree of change necessary for an ‘extreme
departure’; which metrics courts should look to in assessing
whether such a departure has occurred; and the precise role
of the familiar ‘objectively reasonable investor’ in assessing
whether a departure is extreme.” Stadnick, 861 F.3d at 37–
38. The First Circuit has never proposed satisfactory
answers to these questions, and neither have these parties or
any of the district courts following the First Circuit’s lead.
Third, the Shaw test “can be analytically
counterproductive” in leading courts to focus on a small
number of metrics that are not “fair indicators” of the
registrant’s performance. Stadnick, 861 F.3d at 38. Indeed,
that is exactly what the district court did here. It proceeded
indicator by indicator and evaluated whether each
constituted a sufficient departure to create a duty to disclose.
A more holistic approach, focusing on the “total mix of
information” available to investors, TSC Indus., Inc. v.
Northway, Inc., 426 U.S. 438, 449 (1976) (internal quotation
marks omitted), is the appropriate standard.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

33

In view of the foregoing, we hold that the district court
applied the incorrect legal standard to Plaintiffs’ theory
pursuant to Section 11’s “misleading” prong. We therefore
vacate that portion of the district court’s opinion and remand.
On remand, the district court shall ascertain whether
Plaintiffs adequately alleged that the omitted information
was material. If they did, then they have adequately alleged
that Robinhood had a duty to disclose the omitted
information. We express no view on how Plaintiffs’ claims
would fare under that legal standard. 6
II.

Item 303

Plaintiffs allege that Item 303 of Regulation S-K
required disclosure of the interim results.
Item 303 requires the registrant to provide a “discussion
and analysis” capturing the registrant’s “financial condition
and results of operations.” 17 C.F.R. § 229.303(a).
Plaintiffs’ Item 303 theory is based on 17 C.F.R.
§ 229.303(b)(2)(ii). 7 Pursuant to that provision, the
Among other things, we do not decide which omissions, if any,
Plaintiffs adequately alleged to be material. Our opinion also has
nothing to say about any element of Plaintiffs’ claims—or any defense
available to Robinhood—other than materiality and the duty to disclose.
We hold only that the district court applied the wrong legal standard to
those issues and remand so it may apply the correct one. Finally, because
this case comes to us at the pleading stage, we do not decide whether
Plaintiffs have proven any element of their claims. We have only
considered their allegations.
6

On its face, that provision—and the others in the same paragraph—
apply to “[f]ull fiscal years.” 17 C.F.R. § 229.303(b). There is a separate
paragraph that applies to “[i]nterim periods.” Id. § 229.303(c). But even
in interim periods, “[t]he discussion and analysis must include a
discussion of material changes in those items specifically listed in [the
full fiscal year] paragraph” of Item 303. Id. That is why even Robinhood

7

34

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

registrant must “[d]escribe any known trends or
uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably likely to
have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales
or revenues or income from continuing operations.” 17
C.F.R. § 229.303(b)(2)(ii). Also, “[i]f the registrant knows
of events that are reasonably likely to cause a material
change in the relationship between costs and revenues (such
as known or reasonably likely future increases in costs of
labor or materials or price increases or inventory
adjustments), the change in the relationship must be
disclosed.” Id.
For Item 303 to impose a duty to disclose, there must be
“a trend, demand, commitment, event or uncertainty [that] is
known.” Steckman, 143 F.3d at 1297. Assuming that
requirement is satisfied, we follow a two-step analysis. First,
we assess whether “the known trend, demand, commitment,
event or uncertainty [is] likely to come to fruition[.]” Id.
(quoting Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations, Securities
Act Release No. 6835 (May 18, 1989), Fed. Sec. L. Rep.
(CCH) ¶ 72,436, at 62,843, 1989 WL 1092885, at *6 (1989
Release)). Second, “[i]f management cannot make that
determination,” then we “must evaluate objectively the
consequences of the known trend, demand, commitment,
event or uncertainty, on the assumption that it will come to
fruition.” Id. (quoting same). “Disclosure is then required
unless management determines that a material effect on the
registrant’s financial condition or results of operations is not
reasonably likely to occur.” Id. (emphases omitted) (quoting
same).
says that 17 C.F.R. § 229.303(b)(2)(ii) is cross-referenced in the interim
periods paragraph and is “relevant here.” We agree.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

35

The district court rejected Plaintiffs’ argument that Item
303 required Defendants to disclose the facts identified in
the SAC. 2024 WL 269507, at *13–14. Specifically, the
district court concluded that “[a] ‘trend’ under Item 303”
must “accurately reflect[] persistent conditions of the
particular registrant’s business environment,” found that
Defendants had made disclosures that “further put investors
on notice of the possibility of downward trends,” and
concluded that “the inquiry to discern if a ‘trend’ exists
warranting disclosure Item 303 is akin to the inquiry under
Section 11 generally.” Id.
The district court erred in analyzing the Item 303 theory
because Item 303’s disclosure obligations are not limited to
sufficiently persistent “trends,” Item 303 requires
quantification of the disclosed uncertainties to the extent
reasonably practicable, and Item 303 imposes a different
standard for disclosure than Section 11’s “misleading”
prong.
A. Item 303 and Trends
As already noted, Item 303 only requires disclosure of
certain “trends,” “uncertainties,” and “events.” See 17
C.F.R. § 229.303(b)(2)(ii). “As regards trends, . . . this
element . . . require[s] an assessment of whether an observed
pattern accurately reflects persistent conditions of the
particular registrant’s business environment.” Oxford Asset
Mgmt., Ltd. v. Jaharis, 297 F.3d 1182, 1191 (11th Cir.
2002). “It may be that a particular pattern is, for example,
of such short duration that it will not support any conclusions
about the registrant’s business environment.” Id.; see also
Trend,
Cambridge
English
Dictionary,
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/trend

36

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

(last visited Feb. 5, 2025) (defining “trend” as “the general
direction of changes or developments”).
On this point, several district courts have held a “trend”
cannot be a “pattern of two months” or fewer. See, e.g., In
re Omega Healthcare Invs., Inc. Sec. Litig., 563 F. Supp. 3d
259, 276 n.15 (S.D.N.Y. 2021) (“[A]s a matter of law,
patterns lasting less than two months do not constitute
‘trends’ that would trigger disclosure obligations under Item
303.”). Other courts, however, have not treated this as “a
settled rule” and have determined that whether a pattern
constitutes a “trend” is a more fact-specific inquiry.
Sundaram v. Freshworks, Inc., No. 22-cv-06750-, 2023 WL
6390622, at *7 (N.D. Cal. Sept. 28, 2023).
The latter view is more persuasive. For one thing, “Item
303’s disclosure obligations, like materiality under the
federal securities laws’ anti-fraud provisions, do not turn on
restrictive mechanical or quantitative inquiries.” Panther
Partners Inc. v. Ikanos Commc’ns, Inc., 681 F.3d 114, 122
(2d Cir. 2012). 8 A bright-line two-month rule would
contravene that principle. Also, other securities regulations
set precise rules for the timing of disclosures. See, e.g., 17
C.F.R. §§ 210.3-12(g), 249.308a(a). Because Item 303
contains no such rules, we will not read them in. As a
practical matter, few business patterns shorter than two
months will be “trends.” But some short patterns may
“support . . . conclusions about the registrant’s business
environment.” Jaharis, 297 F.3d at 1191. For example, the
Although this Second Circuit decision does not bind us, we find its
reasoning persuasive. As Panther Partners notes, the Supreme Court
has cautioned against imposing “bright-line” and “categorical” rules in
the securities context. See Matrixx Initiatives, Inc. v. Siracusano, 563
U.S. 27, 39–40 (2011).

8

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

37

fallout from economic crises—like those unleashed by the
COVID pandemic or the 2008 collapse of the real estate
market—may have persistent effects on some businesses
that are recognizable after less than two months. Thus, the
two-month rule is overly restrictive. More critically, neither
Defendants nor the cases adopting a two-month rule explain
why the text, structure, purpose, or history of the relevant
regulation require that rule. See, e.g., Nguyen v. MaxPoint
Interactive, Inc., 234 F. Supp. 3d 540, 546 (S.D.N.Y. 2017).
To be sure, not every set of interim financial results is a
trend. The cases adopting the two-month rule are correct
that there is “no general ‘obligation to disclose the results of
a quarter in progress.’” Id. (quoting Arfa v. Mecox Lane Ltd.,
No. 10-cv-9053, 2012 WL 697155, at *12 (S.D.N.Y. Mar. 5,
2012), aff’d, 504 F. App’x 14 (2d Cir. 2012)). But holding
that some patterns less than two months long can be trends
for purposes of Item 303 would not impose an “unworkable
and potentially misleading . . . system of instantaneous
disclosure out [of] the normal reporting periods,” see In re
Focus Media Holding Ltd. Litig., 701 F. Supp. 2d 534, 540
(S.D.N.Y. 2010) (alteration in original) (quoting In re
Turkcell Iletisim Hizmetler, A.S. Sec. Litig., 202 F. Supp. 2d
8, 13 (S.D.N.Y. 2001)), for at least four reasons. First, Item
303 only requires disclosure of “known” developments. 17
C.F.R. § 229.303(b)(2)(ii). When changes are too recent to
have come to management’s attention, they need not be
disclosed. Second, Item 303 only requires disclosure of
developments that are “reasonably likely” to reflect changes
to the registrant’s business, rather than statistical noise in the
registrant’s performance. Id. Third, interim financial
developments may not be material. Item 303 “is primarily
concerned with developments that render the registrant’s
[previously] reported results less indicative of the

38

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

registrant’s future prospects[.]” Jaharis, 297 F.3d at 1191;
accord 17 C.F.R. § 229.303(a) (“The discussion and
analysis must focus specifically on material events and
uncertainties known to management that are reasonably
likely to cause reported financial information not to be
necessarily indicative of future operating results or of future
financial condition.”). Fourth, not every material change
will be persistent, important, or unusual enough to be a
“trend.”
Even so, Item 303 covers more than just trends. The
relevant portion of Regulation S-K also indicates that certain
“events” and “uncertainties” must be disclosed. 9 17 C.F.R.
§ 229.303(b)(2)(ii). Unlike “trends,” “uncertainties” and
“events” are not restricted to patterns with some minimum
duration. Neither term suggests persistence over time. See,
e.g., Uncertainty, Cambridge English Dictionary,
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/unce
rtainty (last visited Feb. 5, 2025) (defining “uncertainty” as
“a situation in which something is not known, or something
that is not known or certain”). Indeed, “events” generally
occur at a specific point in time, rather than over an extended
period. See, e.g., Event, Cambridge English Dictionary,
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/event
(last visited Feb. 5, 2025) (defining “event” as “anything that
happens, especially something important or unusual”).
Here, Plaintiffs alleged that Robinhood’s “dramatically
lower PFOF from equities trading, cratering trading volume
Among our cases, even those that primarily discuss “trends” have cited
with approval the statement that “[r]equired disclosure [can be] based on
currently known trends, events and uncertainties” alike. See, e.g.,
Steckman v. Hart Brewing, Inc., 143 F.3d 1293, 1297 (9th Cir. 1998)
(emphasis omitted) (quoting 1989 Release at *4).

9

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

39

in equities and cryptocurrency, and declining KPIs”
constitute “events, trends and uncertainties.” However,
although the district court analyzed whether these
developments constituted trends, it never addressed whether
they were events or uncertainties. See Golubowski, 2024
WL 269507, at *13–14. The district court erred in focusing
exclusively on the “trends” prong of Item 303.
B. Item 303 and Quantification
Plaintiffs argue that, even once a trend is disclosed, its
effects must be “quantified to the extent reasonably
practicable[.]” The language Plaintiffs rely on comes from
one of the examples in the 1989 Release, 10 which does not

10
We agree with the 1989 Release’s reasoning. Also, Plaintiffs rely on
the 1989 Release, and Robinhood offers us no reason not to. Moreover,
our cases have cited the 1989 Release with approval. See, e.g., Steckman,
143 F.3d at 1297. We therefore employ it here.

To be sure, the SEC has issued more recent guidance. See Management’s
Discussion and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary
Financial Information, Securities Act Release No. 10890 (Nov. 19,
2020), 2020 WL 7013369 (November 2020 Release); Commission
Guidance on Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations, Securities Act Release No. 3310751 (Jan. 30, 2020), 2020 WL 1313719 (Jan. 30, 2020) (January 2020
Release). But these new releases do not grapple with the quantification
issue—or any of the other issues presented here. See November 2020
Release at *10–40; see generally January 2020 Release.
For example, although the SEC amended Item 303 “to allow for
flexibility in comparisons of interim periods,” it did so by “allow[ing]
registrants to compare their most recently completed quarter to either the
corresponding quarter of the prior year [as the rule previously required]
. . . or to the immediately preceding quarter” at their option. November
2020 Release at *63. Plaintiffs do not accuse Robinhood of comparing
their most recently completed quarter to the incorrect previous quarter.

40

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

say expressly that the registrant must always quantify (to the
extent reasonably practicable) the effects they disclose. See
1989 Release, at *6 (requiring quantification “to the extent
reasonably practicable” in an illustration involving
Superfund cleanup costs). However, Defendants do not
deny that quantification is required; they contend only that
“granular detail” is not required.
The regulation’s text supports Plaintiffs. Registrants
must “[d]escribe” certain trends or uncertainties “reasonably
likely to have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on
net sales or revenues or income from continuing operations.”
17 C.F.R. § 229.303(b)(2)(ii). Even when a “particular
known trend, event, or uncertainty” is disclosed, “whether,
and to what extent” that trend, event, or uncertainty will
affect the registrant may be “key information” that
“should . . . [be] disclosed.” See Panther Partners, 681 F.3d
at 121 (emphasis added) (quoting Litwin v. Blackstone Grp.,
L.P., 634 F.3d 706, 718–19 (2d Cir. 2011)). Indeed,
disclosing trends that might affect registrants but not
disclosing any information about the extent of those effects
would be of little use.

Thus, the November 2020 Release’s added flexibility does not help
Robinhood.
As another example, the SEC has suggested that performance indicators
which do not “present[] the pulse of the business” might not be material
and so their omission might not be actionable. January 2020 Release, at
*1 (quoting Proposed Amendments to Annual Report Form; Integration
of Securities Act Disclosure Systems, Securities Act Release No. 336176, 45 Fed. Reg. 5972, 5979–80 (Jan. 15, 1980)). Here, however, the
district court will decide on remand whether Robinhood’s omissions
were material. Thus, we need not decide which indicators present
Robinhood’s pulse.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

41

Thus, when a trend must be disclosed pursuant to Item
303, its effects must be quantified to the extent reasonably
practicable. However, there will be cases where no
quantification is reasonably practicable. Moreover, any duty
to quantify an effect does not necessarily require granular
information about that effect. See 1989 Release, at *6
(requiring, in the example Plaintiffs rely on, disclosure of
“aggregate potential . . . costs” (emphasis added)).
C. Item 303 and Section 11’s “Misleading” Prong
The district court held that “the inquiry to discern if a
‘trend’ exists warranting disclosure under Item 303 is akin
to the inquiry under Section 11 generally in determining
whether out-of-quarter disclosures were extraordinary
enough to require disclosure.” Golubowski, 2024 WL
269507, at *13. The district court concluded that, as it
explained while discussing the balance of the Section 11
claim, “the complained-of omissions were not so persistent
as to require disclosure.” Id. This analysis is mistaken.
Section 11’s “misleading” prong and Item 303 use
substantially different standards. Although there is some
overlap, the district court erred in failing to address the key
differences.
We have recognized that Item 303 “specifies its own
standard for disclosure—i.e., reasonably likely to have a
material effect” and requires more disclosure than the
materiality test typically used in securities law. In re
NVIDIA Corp. Secs. Litig., 768 F.3d 1046, 1055 (9th Cir.
2014) (quoting 1989 Release, at *6 n.27). That materiality
test requires a “substantial likelihood” that the disclosure
would have been considered significant by a reasonable
investor. See Basic Inc. v. Levinson, 485 U.S. 224, 231
(1988) (quoting TSC Indus., Inc. v. Northway, Inc., 426 U.S.

42

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

438, 449 (1976)); see also Worlds of Wonder, 35 F.3d at
1413 n.2 (applying this materiality test to a Section 11
claim). By contrast, Item 303 requires only that it be
“reasonably likely” that the relevant event will occur. See In
re NVIDIA, 768 F.3d at 1055 (contrasting the materiality
standard with the standard for Item 303).
Because Item 303 imposes a broader duty of disclosure
than Section 11’s “misleading” prong, the “extreme
departure” test is especially inapplicable here. Thus, the
district court’s determination that Robinhood’s problems
were not “historically extraordinary,” 2024 WL 269507, at
*14, is not a basis for rejecting Plaintiffs’ Item 303 theory.
For the foregoing reasons, we vacate the district court’s
conclusion that Item 303 does not require disclosure of the
interim results at issue and remand for further consideration
of that theory in a manner consistent with this opinion. As
before, we express no view on how Plaintiffs’ claims would
fare under the correct legal standard. 11
III.

Item 105

In addition to the omission of the interim results,
Plaintiffs object to Defendants’ failure to provide a
breakdown of Robinhood’s revenue sources during the
second quarter of 2021. Plaintiffs contend that Item 105 of
Regulation S-K required disclosure of this information.
However, the district court correctly rejected Plaintiffs’

11
Among other things, we express no view on whether Plaintiffs have
alleged that Robinhood had sufficient knowledge of any trend, event, or
uncertainty; whether the meme stock event was sufficiently persistent to
qualify as a trend; and whether quantification of the meme stock event
would be reasonably practicable here.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

43

argument that Item 105 required Defendants to disclose
these facts. 2024 WL 269507, at *14–18.
Item 105 requires registrants to “provide . . . a discussion
of the material factors that make an investment in the
registrant or offering speculative or risky.” 17 C.F.R.
§ 229.105(a). Registrants must also “[c]oncisely explain
how each risk affects the registrant or the securities being
offered.” Id. § 229.105(b).
Plaintiffs first argue that “[a]n issuer violates Item 105
when . . . its risk disclosures present risks as contingent when
they have already come to fruition.” Plaintiffs rely on
Mingbo Cai v. Switch, Inc., No. 2:18-cv-01471, 2019 WL
3065591, at *6 (D. Nev. July 12, 2019), but even if Mingbo
Cai were binding, it held only that the plaintiffs’ Item 105
theory was viable because there was no “language in the
registration statement that indicates the specific risks arising
from [the registrant’s] new sales strategy.” In other words,
Mingbo Cai addressed the disclosure’s specificity, not
whether it was contingent.
In addition, the text of Item 105 only requires disclosure
of factors making an investment “speculative or risky.” 17
C.F.R. § 229.105(a).
What makes an investment is
“speculative or risky” is that it may lose value in the future. 12
If Defendants failed to adequately disclose past events but
See,
e.g.,
Risky,
Cambridge
English
Dictionary,
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/risky (last visited
Dec. 9, 2024) (defining “risky” as “involving the possibility that
something bad might happen or that something will fail or lose money”);
Speculative,
Cambridge
English
Dictionary,
https://dictionary.cambridge.org/us/dictionary/english/speculative (last
visited Dec. 9, 2024) (defining “speculative” as “based on a guess and
not on information”).

12

44

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

sufficiently disclosed those future risks, they would have
adequately disclosed the factors making the investment
speculative or risky and would not have violated Item 105.
To be sure, presenting past harms as contingent future risks
may be misleading, and may be actionable under Section
11’s “misleading” prong. However, mischaracterizing a past
harm as a future risk cannot, standing alone, violate Item
105.
Plaintiffs’ other Item 105 argument is that Defendants
failed to disclose that “Robinhood’s revenues had become
far more volatile than they had been historically, due to their
dependence on [t]ransaction [r]ebates from speculative
trading in cryptocurrencies, primarily Dogecoin, rather than
transaction-based revenue from traditional trading in
equities and options.”
Defendants did disclose this risk. They explained that
“[t]he prices of cryptocurrencies are extremely volatile” and
that “changes in the prices and/or trading volume of
cryptocurrencies may adversely impact [Robinhood’s]
growth strategy and business.” Defendants also disclosed
the change in Robinhood’s revenue. Defendants noted that
“[a] substantial portion of the recent growth in
[Robinhood’s] net revenues earned from cryptocurrency
transactions is attributable to transactions in Dogecoin.”
They explained that “in addition to the factors impacting the
broader cryptoeconomy . . . [Robinhood’s] business may be
adversely affected . . . if the markets for Dogecoin
deteriorate or if the price of Dogecoin declines[.]” They also
disclosed that “[i]f demand for transactions in Dogecoin
declines and is not replaced by new demand for other
cryptocurrencies available for trading on [the] platform,
[Robinhood’s] business, financial conditions, and results of
operations could be adversely affected.” Defendants even

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

45

quantified the effect of Dogecoin on their business during
the first quarter of 2021:
For the three months ended March 31, 2021,
17% of our total revenue was derived from
transaction-based revenues earned from
cryptocurrency transactions, compared to 4%
for the three months . . . ended December 31,
2020. While we currently support a portfolio
of seven cryptocurrencies for trading, for the
three months ended March 31, 2021, 34% of
our
cryptocurrency
transaction-based
revenue was attributable to transactions in
Dogecoin, as compared to 4% for the three
months ended December 31, 2020.
Plaintiffs respond that Defendants should have disclosed
the equivalent statistics for the second quarter of 2021. This
is unpersuasive. Plaintiffs have offered good reasons to
believe that Item 303 requires registrants to quantify the
items they are disclosing. But there is no comparable
argument for Item 105. Indeed, a quantification requirement
makes much less sense in the Item 105 context. Registrants
can more readily quantify existing trends, uncertainties, and
events than future risk factors. 13 On its face, Item 105 only
requires registrants to “concisely explain” how the risks they
are disclosing may affect them. Defendants disclosed a

13
We do not decide whether Item 105 requires quantification in some
circumstances. Because Plaintiffs do not explain why Item 105 requires
quantification here, we decide only that Item 105 does not ordinarily
require registrants to quantify future business risks, which would often
be impossible.

46

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

concise explanation of
cryptocurrency volatility.

the

potential

effects

of

This is especially true because Robinhood disclosed that
it “experienced strong growth in new customers during the
first six months of 2021,” but did “not know whether, over
the long term, cohorts comprised of these new customers
will have the same characteristics as . . . prior cohorts.” As
a result, Defendants disclosed, and investors knew, that no
matter which stocks had the attention of “meme stock”
investors at the time of the registration statement, demand
for Robinhood’s services could plummet if those investors’
interests changed.
Also, the second quarter of 2021 ended less than one
month before Robinhood’s registration statement was filed.
Even if Defendants were required to break down the fraction
of their revenue attributable to Dogecoin, it is hard to fault
Defendants for providing the data from the previous quarter.
Plaintiffs’ briefing does not cite any allegations that the
further statistics they seek were available for disclosure.
Because we discern no error in the district court’s
analysis of this theory, we affirm.
CONCLUSION
Because the district court applied the wrong legal
standards to Section 11’s “misleading” prong and the Item
303 theory, we vacate the district court’s opinion in relevant
part and remand so it may re-evaluate those theories under
the correct standards. However, we affirm the district
court’s rejection of the Item 105 theory.
AFFIRMED in part, VACATED in part, and
REMANDED.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

47

Each side shall bear its own costs on appeal.
Rawlinson, Circuit Judge, dissenting in part and concurring
in part:
I agree with the majority that the district court properly
analyzed and denied Plaintiffs’ claim based on a failure to
comply with the disclosure requirements as set forth in Item
105 of Regulation S-K. However, I disagree with and
dissent from the balance of the majority opinion.
I. Disclosures Generally
At the outset, it is worth repeating the disclosures that
were made by Robinhood Markets, Inc. (Robinhood) in the
registration documents accompanying its initial public
offering (IPO), as acknowledged by the majority.
Revenue Growth Generally
Transaction-based revenues have generally
increased sequentially in each of the periods
presented, other than the fourth quarter of
2019, due to growth in our user base which
resulted in higher trading volume on a peruser basis. In the first half of 2020, we saw a
significant increase in the number of new
accounts opened by first-time investors, as a
result of increased interest in personal
finance and investing, low interest rates and
a positive market environment, especially in
the U.S. equity markets. Throughout the
remainder of 2020 and the first quarter of
2021, we maintained substantial growth in

48

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

our user base, retention, engagement and
trading activity metrics, as well as gains and
periodic all-time highs achieved by the equity
markets.
Majority Opinion, pp. 11.
Revenue Growth - Last Quarter 2020
Transaction-based revenue increased by
$549.3 million, or 322%, for the year ended
December 31, 2020, compared to the year
prior. The increase was driven by a 143%
increase in Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts, which resulted in higher daily
average revenue trades . . . in options,
equities and cryptocurrencies. Our daily
average revenue trades for options, equities
and cryptocurrencies increased from 0.2
million to 0.6 million, an increase of 306%,
0.6 million to 2.2 million, an increase of
274%, and less than 0.1 million to 0.1
million, an increase of 175%. Increased
interest in personal finance and investing,
low interest rates and a positive market
environment, especially in the U.S. equities
markets, encouraged an unprecedented
number of first-time retail investors to
become our users and begin trading on our
platform. We have seen substantial growth
in our user base, retention, engagement and
trading activity metrics, as well as continued
gains and periodic all-time highs achieved by
the equity markets.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

49

Revenue Growth - First Quarter 2021
Transaction-based revenues increased by
$324.8 million, or 340%, for the three months
ended March 31, 2021, compared to the year
prior. The increase was driven by a 151%
increase in Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts, which resulted in higher daily
average revenue trades in options, equities,
and cryptocurrencies. Our daily average
revenue trades for the quarter for options,
equities and cryptocurrencies increased from
0.4 million to 1.1 million, an increase of
188%, 1.3 million to 5.1 million, an increase
of 291%, and 0.1 million to 1.4 million, an
increase of 1,375%. Increased interest in
personal finance and investing, and several
high-profile securities and cryptocurrencies,
encouraged an unprecedented number of
first-time retail investors to become our users
and begin trading on our platform. We have
seen substantial growth in our user base,
engagement and trading activity metrics.
Expectations - Second Quarter 2021 and Third
Quarter 2021
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report revenue of between $546
million and $574 million, as compared to
$244 million for the three months ended June
30, 2020, representing an increase of 129% at
the midpoint of the range. The expected
increase in revenue is primarily driven by a

50

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

130% increase in Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts and increased trading activity
related to options and cryptocurrencies, and
relatively flat equities trading activity,
relative to the three months ended June 30,
2020. We also saw increases in the 2021
period in margin and stock lending activity as
well as an increase in Robinhood Gold
subscribers.
Trading activity was
particularly high during the first two months
of the 2021 period, returning to levels more
in line with prior periods during the last few
weeks of the quarter ended June 30, 2021,
and remained at similar levels into the early
part of the third quarter. We expect our
revenue for the three months ending
September 30, 2021 to be lower, as compared
to the three months ended June 30, 2021, as
a result of decreased levels of trading activity
relative to the record highs in trading
activity, particularly in cryptocurrencies,
during the three months ended June 30, 2021,
and expected seasonality.
Emphasis added.
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report operating expenses of
between $486 million and $536 million, as
compared to $186 million for the three
months ended June 30, 2020, representing an
increase of 174% at the midpoint of this
range. The expected increase in operating
expenses is primarily driven by an increase in

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

total headcount of approximately 190%, as
well as an increase in cloud infrastructure to
support increased activity on the platform
and an increase in the Robinhood Referral
Program as a result of significant user
growth. We also saw an increase in legal
settlements and reserves related to the
settlement of NYDFS Matter, an increase in
Fraudulent Deposit Transactions, and
chargebacks related to our cash management
offering for the three months ended June 30,
2021. Upon effectiveness of our IPO, we
expect to recognize a one-time cumulative
share-based compensation expense of
approximately $1 billion related to
[Restricted Stock Units] for which the timebased vesting condition was satisfied or
partially satisfied as of the date of this
offering and for which the performance
condition was satisfied in this offering, which
expense we expect to incur during the quarter
in which the offering occurs.
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report net loss of between $487
million and $537 million, as compared to net
income of $58 million for the three months
ended June 30, 2020. The net loss is
primarily driven by the factors mentioned
above as well as the change in fair value of
convertible notes and warrant liability of
$528 million (assuming an initial public
offering price of $40.00, which is the midpoint of the estimated offering price range set

51

52

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

forth on the cover page of this prospectus),
which was market-to-market as of the end of
the three months ended June 30, 2021.
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts of 22.5 million, as compared to 9.8
million for the three months ended June 30,
2020, representing an increase of 130%. For
the month ended June 30, 2021, we expect to
report [Monthly Active Users] of 21.3
million, as compared to 10.2 million for the
month ended June 30, 2020, representing an
increase of 109%. As of June 30, 2021, we
expect to report [Assets Under Custody] of
$102 billion, as compared to $33 billion as of
June 30, 2020, representing an increase of
205%,
The increase in these Key
Performance Metrics resulted primarily from
an increase in new users joining our platform,
driven by general market interest trading. We
anticipate the rate of growth in these Key
Performance Metrics will be lower for the
period ended September 30, 2021, as
compared to the three months ended June
30,2021, due to the exceptionally strong
interest in trading, particularly in
cryptocurrencies, we experienced in the three
months ended June 30, 2021 and seasonality
in overall trading activities.
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report Adjusted [Earnings Before
Interest,
Taxes,
Depreciation
and
Amortization] of between $59 million and

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

53

$103 million, as compared to $63 million for
the three months ended June 30, 2020,
representing an increase of approximately
29% at the midpoint of this range. The
expected increase in Adjusted EBITDA was
primarily due to revenue increases outpacing
increases in operating expenses for the three
months ended June 30, 2021.
DISCLAIMER
We experienced strong growth in new
customers during the first six months of
2021. We do not know whether, over the long
term, cohorts comprised of these new
customers will have the same characteristics
as our prior cohorts. To the extent these new
customers do not grow their cumulative net
deposits or trading frequency on our
platform to the same extent as new customers
that joined in prior periods, our ability to
expand and grow our relationship with these
customers will be impacted.
Emphasis added.
Statements of Future Risks
We may not continue to grow on pace with historical
rates.
We have grown rapidly over the last few
years, and therefore our recent revenue
growth rate and financial performance should
not be considered indicative of our future

54

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

performance. In particular, since March
2020, we have experienced a significant
increase in revenue, MAU, AUC and Net
Cumulative Funded Accounts. For example,
for the years ended 2019 and 2020, our
revenue was $277.5 million and $958.8
million, respectively, representing annual
growth of 245%. In addition, for the three
months ended March 31, 2021, during which
we experienced high trading volume and
account sign-ups as well as high market
volatility, particularly in certain market
sectors, our revenue was $522.2 million, as
compared to $127.6 million for the three
months ended March 31, 2020, and, on
March 31, 2021, we had Net Cumulative
Funded Accounts of 18.0 million, as
compared to 7.2 million on March 31, 2020,
representing growth of 309% and 151%,
respectively. The circumstances that have
accelerated the growth of our business may
not continue in the future, and we expect the
growth rates in revenue, MAU, AUC and Net
Cumulative Funded Accounts to decline in
future periods, and such declines could be
significant. You should not rely on our
revenue or key business metrics for any
previous quarterly or annual period as any
indication of our revenue, revenue growth,
key business metrics or key business metrics
growth in future periods. In particular, our
revenue growth rate has fluctuated in prior
periods. Our revenue growth rate is likely to

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

decline in future periods as the size of our
business grows and as we achieve higher
market adoption rates.
We may also
experience declines in our revenue growth
rate as a result of a number of factors,
including slowing demand for our platform,
insufficient growth in the number of
customers that utilize our platform,
increasing competition, a decrease in the
growth of our overall market, our failure to
continue
to
capitalize
on
growth
opportunities, including as a result of our
inability to scale to meet such growth, an
insufficient number of market makers or the
unwillingness or inability of our existing
market makers to execute our customers’
trade orders as order volumes increase,
increasing regulatory costs, increasing
capital requirements imposed by regulators
and [self-regulatory organizations,] as well as
cash deposit and collateral requirements
under the rules of [the Depository Trust
Company, National Securities Clearing
Corporation, and the Options Clearing
Corporation], economic conditions that
reduce financial activity and the maturation
of our business, among others. If our revenue
growth rate declines, investors’ perceptions
of our business and the trading price of our
Class A common stock could be adversely
affected.
Emphasis added.

55

56

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

Our results of operations and other operating metrics
may fluctuate from quarter to quarter, which makes
these metrics difficult to predict.
Our results of operations are heavily reliant
on the level of trading activity on our
platform and net deposits. In the past, our
results of operations and other operating
metrics have fluctuated from quarter to
quarter, including due to movements and
trends in the underlying markets, changes in
general
economic
conditions
and
fluctuations in trading levels, each of which
is outside our control and will continue to be
outside of our control. Additionally, our
limited operating history makes it difficult to
forecast our future results. As a result,
period-to-period comparisons of our results
of operations may not be meaningful, and our
past results of operations should not be relied
on as indicators of future performance.
Further, we are subject to additional risks
and uncertainties that are frequently
encountered by companies in rapidly
evolving markets. Our financial condition
and results of operations in any given quarter
can be influenced by numerous factors, many
of which we are unable to predict or are
outside of our control, which could include:
*the continued market acceptance of our
products and services;

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

*our ability to retain existing customers and
attract new customers;
*our
continued
development
and
improvement of our products and services,
including our intellectual proprietary
technology and customer support functions;
*the timing and success of new product and
service introductions by us or our
competitors, or other changes in the
competitive landscape of our market;
*increases in marketing, sales and other
operating expenses that we may incur to grow
and expand our operations and to remain
competitive;
*the timing and amount of non-cash
expenses, such as stock-based compensation
and asset impairment;
*the success of our expansion into new
markets, products and services, such as
cryptocurrency trading, fractional shares
trading or our Cash Management product;
*decreased trading in global markets or
decreased demand for financial services
products generally;
*continued growth in the adoption and use of
cryptocurrencies and the public perception
thereof;
*system disruptions, outages and other
performance problems or interruptions on our
platform, or breaches of security or privacy;

57

58

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

*disputes with our customers, adverse
litigation and regulatory judgments,
enforcement actions, settlements or other
related costs and the public perception
thereof;
*fraudulent,
unlawful
or
otherwise
inappropriate customer behavior, such as
when customers initiate deposits into their
accounts, make trades on our platform using
a short-term extension of credit from us and
then repatriate or reverse the deposits,
resulting in a loss to us of the credited amount
(which we refer to as “Fraudulent Deposit
Transactions”);
*changes in the legislative or regulatory
environment, scope or focus of regulatory
investigations
and
inquiries,
or
interpretations of regulatory requirements;
*our development of any unique features or
services that may be the subject of regulatory
criticism or form the basis for regulatory
enforcement action, including regulatory
actions to prohibit certain practices or
features;
*the overall tax rate for our business, which
may be affected by any changes to our
valuation allowance, domestic deferred tax
assets, and the effects of changes in our
business;
*changes in tax laws or judicial or regulatory
interpretations of tax laws, which are

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

59

recorded in the period such laws are enacted
or interpretations are issued, and may
significantly affect the effective tax rate of
that period;
*changes in accounting standards, policies,
guidance, interpretations or principles;
*changes in requirements imposed on us by
regulators or by our counterparties,
including net capital requirements imposed
by the SEC and [Financial Industry
Regulatory Authority] and cash deposit and
collateral requirements imposed by the DTC,
NSCC and OCC;
*volatility in the overall market which could,
among other things, impact demand for our
services, the magnitude of our cash deposit
and collateral requirements and our growth
strategy and business more generally; and
*general economic conditions in either
domestic or international markets, including
the impact of the ongoing COVID-19
pandemic.
Emphasis added.
Our business and reputation may be harmed by
changes in business, economic or political conditions that
impact global financial markets, or by a systemic market
event.
As a financial services company, our
business, results of operations and reputation
are directly affected by elements beyond our

60

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

control, such as economic and political
conditions, changes in the volatility in
financial markets (including volatility as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic),
significant increases in the volatility or
trading volume of particular securities or
cryptocurrencies, broad trends in business
and finance, changes in volume of securities
or cryptocurrencies trading generally,
changes in the markets in which such
transactions occur and changes in how such
transactions are processed. These elements
can arise suddenly and the full impact of such
conditions can remain uncertain.
A
prolonged weakness in equity markets, such
as a slowdown causing reduction in trading
volume in securities, derivatives or
cryptocurrency markets, may result in
reduced revenues and would have an adverse
effect on our business, financial condition
and results of operations.
Significant
downturns in the securities markets,
cryptocurrencies or in general economic and
political conditions may also cause
individuals to be reluctant to make their own
investment decisions and thus decrease the
demand for our products and services and
could also result in our customers reducing
their engagement with our platform.
In addition, a prolonged weakness in the U.S.
equity markets or in specific cryptocurrencies
or equity securities or a general economic
downturn could cause our customers to incur

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

61

losses, which in turn could cause our brand
and reputation to suffer. . . .
Emphasis added.
Robinhood made the following specific disclosures
about cryptocurrency in general and Dogecoin in particular:
The prices of cryptocurrencies are
extremely volatile. Fluctuations in the price
of various cryptocurrencies may cause
uncertainty in the market and could
negatively impact trading volumes of
cryptocurrencies, which would adversely
affect the success of [Robinhood’s]
business, financial condition and results of
operations.
The cryptocurrency markets are volatile, and
changes in the prices and/or trading volume
of cryptocurrencies may adversely impact
[Robinhood’s] growth strategy and business.
In addition, while we have observed a
positive trend in the total market
capitalization of cryptocurrency assets
historically, driven by increased adoption of
cryptocurrency trading by both retail and
institutional investors as well as continued
growth of various non-investing use cases,
historical trends are not indicative of future
adoption, and it is possible that the adoption
of cryptocurrencies may slow, take longer to
develop or never be broadly adopted, which
would negatively impact our business,

62

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

financial conditions
operations.

and

results

of

Bolding and Emphasis added.
...
A substantial portion of the recent growth in
our
net
revenues
earned
from
cryptocurrency transactions is attributable
to transactions in Dogecoin. If demand for
transactions in Dogecoin declines and is not
replaced by new demand for other
cryptocurrencies available for trading on
our platform, our business, financial
condition and results of operations could be
adversely affected.
For the three months ended March 31, 2021,
17% of our total revenue was derived from
transaction-based revenues earned from
cryptocurrency transactions, compared to 4%
for the three months year ended December
31, 2020. While we currently support a
portfolio of seven cryptocurrencies for
trading, for the three months ended March 31,
2021, 34% of our cryptocurrency transactionbased revenue was attributable to
transactions in Dogecoin, as compared to 4%
for the three months ended December 31,
2020. As such, in addition to the factors
impacting the broader cryptoeconomy
described elsewhere in this section,
[Robinhood’s] business may be adversely
affected, and growth in our net revenue
earned from cryptocurrency transactions may

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

63

slow or decline, if the markets for Dogecoin
deteriorate or if the price of Dogecoin
declines, including as a result of factors such
as negative perceptions of Dogecoin or the
increased availability of Dogecoin on other
cryptocurrency trading platforms.
Majority Opinion, pp. 21-22 (emphasis and bolding in
the original).
Despite these extensive disclosures and warnings, the
majority agrees with Plaintiffs’ assertion that Robinhood
failed to meet the requirements of Section 11 of the
Securities Act of 1933 (15 U.S.C. § 77k) and Item 303 of
Regulation S-K.
Section 11 of the Securities Act of 1933 provides:
In case any part of the registration statement,
when such part became effective, contained
an untrue statement of a material fact or
omitted to state a material fact required to be
stated therein or necessary to make the
statements therein not misleading, any person
acquiring such security . . . may, either at law
or in equity, in any court of competent
jurisdiction, sue . . .
15 U.S.C. § 77k(a).
Item 303 of Regulation S-K provides in pertinent part:
(a) Objective.
The objective of the
discussion and analysis [of financial
condition and results of operations] is to
provide material information relevant to an

64

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

assessment of the financial condition and
results of operations of the registrant
including an evaluation of the amounts and
certainty of cash flows from operations and
from outside sources. The discussion and
analysis must focus specifically on material
events and uncertainties known to
management that are reasonably likely to
cause reported financial information not to be
necessarily indicative of future operating
results or of future financial condition. This
includes descriptions and amounts of matters
that have had a material impact on reported
operations, as well as matters that are
reasonably likely based on management’s
assessment to have a material impact on
future operations. . . .
17 C.F.R. § 229.303(a).
Item 303 requires discussion of “Liquidity and capital
resources, [R]esults of operations [and] Critical accounting
estimates.” Id. at § 229.303(b)(1)-(3).
In discussing liquidity, the registrant must analyze its
“ability to generate and obtain adequate amounts of cash to
meet its requirements.” Id. at § 229.303(b)(1). This
discussion is to encompass “material cash requirements from
known contractual and other obligations.” Id. The registrant
is required to “[i]dentify any known trends or any known
demands, commitments, events or uncertainties that will
result in or that are reasonably likely to result in the
registrant’s liquidity increasing or decreasing in any material
way.” Id. at § 229.303(b).

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

65

In addressing results of operations, the registrant is
expected to “[d]escribe any unusual or infrequent events or
transactions or any significant economic changes that
materially affected the amount of reported income from
continuing operations . . .”, and “any known trend or
uncertainties that have had or that are reasonably likely to
have a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales
or revenue or income from continuing operations.” Id. at
§ 229.303(b)(1)(i)-(ii).
Plaintiffs assert that Robinhood “fail[ed] to disclose the
ongoing significant declines in [Payment For Order Flow]
from equities and options trading, equities and
cryptocurrency trading volumes, and [Key Performance
Indicators]. But this assertion seeks to hold Robinhood to
the same standard applied to required financial statements.
Tellingly, Plaintiffs rely on precedent from this circuit
interpreting the requirements of Section 10(b) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934, and 17 C.F.R. § 240.10b5 (Rule 10b-5), rather than Section 11, namely Retail
Wholesale & Department Store Union Local 338 Retirement
Fund v. Hewlett-Packard Co., 845 F.3d 1268 (9th Cir.
2017). Importantly, the requirements of Rule 10b-5 do not
apply to Item 303 claims. See Steckman v. Hart Brewing,
Inc., 143 F.3d 1293, 1296 (9th Cir. 1998), in which we
criticized reliance on cases decided under Section 10(b) for
“Item 303 claims brought under Section 12(a)(2).”
For statements accompanying IPOs, we have
emphasized that our consideration of the statements made is
not done in a vacuum. Rather, we analyze the offering
statements by considering the statements that were made,
any disclaimers accompanying those statements, and the
information available to the market. See Morris v. Newman

66

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

(In re Convergent Techs. Sec. Litig.), 948 F.2d 507, 512, 515
(9th Cir. 1991), as amended.
In Convergent Technologies, stock purchasers brought a
class action against Convergent, some of its officers and
directors, the underwriters, and another corporation
(collectively, Defendants) with the class consisting of “all
those who bought Convergent stock between a March 17,
1983 public stock offering, and February 17, 1984, the day
after Convergent disclosed negative information to a group
of stock analysts.” Id. at 508-09. The complaint principally
alleged misrepresentations of “the growth in demand for
Convergent’s existing line of computer workstation
products.” Id. at 509. According to the complaint,
Convergent “concealed . . . severe production and
profitability problems with two product lines under
development.” Id.
The challenged statements related to three Convergent
products: 1) the AWS/IWS workstation, 2) the Next
GENeration (NGEN) workstation, and 3) the Workslate
Product Line. AWS/IWS and NGEN were computer
workstations sold to original equipment manufacturers
rather than to the public. In contrast, the Workslate Product
Line was essentially a “portable laptop computer” to be sold
directly to the public rather than to original equipment
manufactures. Id. at 510-11.
The AWS/IWS Workstation
Convergent began shipping the IWS in early 1981, and
subsequently developed the AWS, a lower cost version of
the IWS. See id. at 509.
In September, 1981, Convergent entered into an
agreement with Burroughs, an original equipment

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

67

manufacturer, which required Burroughs to purchase 10,000
AWS/IWS workstations by the end of 1983. However, in
July, 1982, “Convergent agreed to reduce prices on its
AWS/IWS workstations by 30% in return for [a] firm
commitment” from Burroughs “to buy 30,000 units in
1983.” Convergent never disclosed the 30,000 unit
commitment to the public. Id. (internal quotation marks
omitted).
By March, 1983, the beginning of the class period,
Burroughs had purchased more than the 10,000 workstations
provided for in the original agreement. See id. Shortly
thereafter, Burroughs informed Convergent that it would
purchase 17,500 AWS workstations in addition to all the
NGENs Convergent produced. Burroughs and Convergent
incorporated these commitments into an amendment in
September, 1983. See id.
In the latter part of July, 1983, Convergent concluded
that sales growth for the AWS/IWS workstations would slow
for the balance of the year. On August 5, 1983, Convergent
issued the following press release:
Net sales for the third quarter of 1983 will be
approximately equal to Convergent’s net
sales for the second quarter because of
customer anticipation of Convergent’s next
generation of products, which are expected to
be available for volume shipments in the first
half of calendar 1984.
Fourth quarter
revenues cannot be predicted with certainty,
but could be below third quarter revenues.
Because of price reduction on existing
products and start-up costs associated with
three new product lines, the Company

68

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

anticipates that until volume shipments of its
new products begin there will be a decrease
in gross profit margin, and may be a
substantial decrease in net income.
Id. at 510 (alterations omitted).
The NGEN Product Line
In 1982, Convergent began to finalize development
plans for the NGEN workstation. Convergent anticipated
that the NGEN product would cost approximately half the
cost of the AWS/IWS with significant improvements in
performance. However, in early 1983, Convergent became
aware of serious problems with the NGEN line relating to
pricing and costs. See id.
In its Prospectus issued on March 17, 1983, Convergence
stated its intent to introduce the NGEN product line. The
Prospectus represented that “[v]olume shipments . . . are
planned for 1984; consequently, they are not expected to
have a significant impact on 1983 revenues.” Id. The
Prospectus also cautioned that [w]hile the Company believes
that the technical risks in the development of these products
are well controlled, the product cost objectives are very
aggressive, and there is no assurance that they can be
achieved.” Id.
In its Prospectus dated August 30, 1983, Convergent
repeated the admonition of “no assurance that the aggressive
cost objective for these products can be achieved.” Id. The
August Prospectus did not disclose the more detailed cost
analyses that were circulated internally after the Prospectus
was issued. These analyses “reflected that Convergent had
made progress in its cost reduction battle, but had not yet
attained positive gross margins for most NGEN

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

69

configurations.” Id. at 510-11. Although Convergent
continued its improvement efforts throughout the second
half of 1983, Convergent did not achieve its projected gross
margins until the first half of 1984. See id. at 511.
The Workslate Product Line
In March of 1983, Convergent had not yet finalized the
form of the Workslate Product, developed its marketing
strategy, or fashioned a prototype. In its March Prospectus,
Convergent disclosed some of the risks that it anticipated
with the Workslate Product Line. Convergent warned that
the product would require “complex” development,
including the incorporation of “proprietary technology.” Id.
Therefore, introduction of the product could “be subject to
delay, which [could] adversely impact the Company’s ability
to market these products.” Id. Convergent also warned that:
“[t]here can be no assurance that [Convergent] will
successfully complete the development of its new products,
or that it will be successful in manufacturing the new
products in high volume or marketing the products in the
face of intense competition.” Id. These risks were repeated
in the August Prospectus and more risks were added,
including that the product “required the implementation of
advanced manufacturing processes and the development and
management of retail distribution channels,” neither of
which were within Convergent’s experience. Id. (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The problems encountered with the manufacturing and
distribution of the Workslate Product continued to increase
throughout 1983. By early December of that year, the
management at Convergent became aware that the company
would be unable to manufacture the Workslate Product in
the projected volumes. See id.

70

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

In February, 1984, “Convergent revealed at a meeting of
analysts that it would attempt to raise prices” for the
Workslate Product, that the Workslate Product was being
sold at a price below the cost of production, and that the
product had been prematurely released, and required a
redesign. Id. Over the next two days, Convergent stock fell
17%. See id.
The Plaintiffs challenged the disclosures for each of
these three product lines.
AWS/IWS Product Line
The Plaintiffs challenged the statements made in the
March 17 Prospectus addressing the AWS/IWS Product
Line. The Plaintiffs delineated the following two statements
as misleading:
[1]. Burroughs Corporation accounted for
approximately 48% of the total revenue of the
Company in 1982. While the level of the
Company’s future revenues from sales to
Burroughs cannot be predicted with any
certainty, the Company believes that
Burroughs may continue to account for a
similar percentage of revenue in 1983.
[2]. In view of the Company’s anticipated
orders of its existing products, the Company
believes it will be required to increase
inventories, to carry increased levels of
receivables and to acquire additional capital
equipment.
Id. at 512.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

71

The Plaintiffs conceded that the statements made were
true, but maintained that they “did not reveal the entire
picture.” Id. Specifically, the Plaintiffs asserted that the
statements were misleading because “they (1) implied
growth would continue at the torrid pace Convergent had set
in the past, and (2) failed to reveal that Burroughs had
decreased its orders for 1983. Id. at 513 (internal quotation
marks omitted).
We rejected the Plaintiffs’ contentions. Addressing the
“implied growth” argument, we concluded that the
“challenged statements do not imply any comparison
between the rate of past and future growth. They simply
report past performance and assert specific limited
predictions for the future.” Id. (emphasis added). We noted
that “the market clearly understood that Convergent could
not maintain the growth it had enjoyed in the past. Id. We
observed that “an omission is materially misleading only if
the information has not already entered the market.” Id.
Indeed, “[i]f the market has become aware of the allegedly
concealed information, the facts allegedly omitted . . . would
already be reflected in the stock’s price.” Id. (citation and
internal quotation marks omitted). We noted that “[a]s a
general matter, investors know of the risk of obsolescence
posed by older products forced to compete with more
advanced rivals.” Id. (citation omitted). And in the case of
Convergent, “[t]he market clearly knew demand for the
AWS/IWS workstation would decrease as Convergent
began to make NGEN available to its customers.” Id.
We specifically discussed the fact that “securities
analysts knew that NGEN posed just such a risk to sales of
the AWS/IWS workstation.” During February, 1983,
securities analysts reported the “major product transition on
the horizon, and . . . in anticipation of the next generation

72

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

of products, it is possible that major new customers may
defer taking delivery of current products in favor of the new
line.” Id. (citation, alteration and internal quotation marks
omitted). Similar reports were produced after the March
Prospectus. See id. Considering the “more than 60 analysts
reports and articles in the trade and financial press discussing
Convergent’s prospects for 1983,” we concluded that
“[t]here can be no doubt that the market was aware
AWS/IWS demand would not increase at the same rate it had
in the past.” Id. Accordingly, the challenged statements
were not misleading as to implied growth. See id.
Addressing
the
“decreased
orders”
alleged
misrepresentation, we observed that there was actually no
decrease in orders from Burroughs. Id. at 513-14. The
Plaintiffs unjustifiably relied on a non-binding “agreement
to purchase” 30,000 units rather than an “actual purchase
order” for 17,500 units to calculate the asserted decrease. Id.
at 514. We determined that there was no misleading failure
to disclose a decrease in the number of orders from
Burroughs. Rather, the Plaintiffs “mischaracterize[d] the
17,500 purchase commitment [in the purchase order] as a
decrease in existing orders. [But] [t]he 30,000 figure [relied
upon by the Plaintiffs] never was a commitment to buy.
Instead, [t]he 17,500 figure which was such a commitment,
amounted to nearly a 100% increase over Burroughs’
previous purchase commitment.”
Id. (emphasis in the
original).
The Plaintiffs also referenced a May 18 report to
shareholders to bolster their argument regarding failure to
disclose “decreased orders.” Id. The challenged statement
read: “Our growth in the first quarter of 1983 was the result
of increases in shipments to our large [original equipment
manufacturer] customers.” Id. The Plaintiffs characterized

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

73

this statement as misleading investors “by implying that
Convergent expected the upward first quarter trend to
continue throughout the year.” Id. We “reject[ed] this
contention,” noting that “[a]lthough in its annual Form 10K filing a company must discuss factors that would cause
reported financial information not to be necessarily
indicative of future financial operating results, no such
obligation exists in the quarterly report at issue here. Id.
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis
added).
Finally, the Plaintiffs relied on an August 5 press release
to support its “decreased orders” contention. The press
release stated:
Net sales for the third quarter of 1983 will be
approximately equal to its net sales for the
second quarter because of customer
anticipation of deliveries of its new
generation of products, which are expected to
be available for volume shipments in the first
half of calendar 1984.
Fourth quarter
revenues cannot be predicted with certainty,
but could be below third quarter revenues.
Because of price reduction on existing
products and startup costs associated with
three new product lines, the Company
anticipates that until volume shipment of its
new products begins there will be a decrease
in gross profit margin, and may be a
substantial decrease in net income.
Id. (alteration omitted).

74

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

The Plaintiffs characterized this press release as
“misstat[ing] the demand for Convergent’s AWS/IWS
workstation because Convergent knew at the time that third
and fourth quarter revenues for 1983 would actually decline,
not just remain flat.” Id. We rejected this argument from
the Plaintiffs as well. We determined that the Plaintiffs
“made no such showing” of Convergent’s asserted
knowledge. Id. Rather, “Convergent’s revenues for the
second half of 1983 were pretty much what the August press
release predicted.” Id. For the third quarter, “rather than
being merely flat” revenues declined when compared to the
second quarter, “but only by approximately 10%.” Id. And,
for the fourth quarter, revenues were actually higher than for
the second and third quarters. Thus, we concluded, “while
Convergent was somewhat optimistic regarding the third
quarter, it actually underestimated fourth quarter revenues.”
Id. (emphasis in the original). Such a showing was
inconsistent with knowledge of declining revenues. See id.
Disclosures Regarding NGEN Profitability
The Plaintiffs contended that Convergent misled
investors by failing to disclose “certain cost and production
problems regarding Convergent’s NGEN product line.” Id.
at 515. The Plaintiffs contended that because of the
undisclosed cost and production problems, “Convergent sold
some configurations of the NGEN workstation at a negative
gross margin through 1983 and into the beginning of 1984.”
Id. Convergence countered that it “adequately disclosed the
NGEN cost problems in the March Prospectus” in the
following language from the March Prospectus:
The Company anticipates NGEN will be both
significantly more powerful and less
expensive than existing workstation

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

75

products. While the Company believes that
the technical risks in the development of
these products are well controlled, the
product cost objectives are very aggressive
and there is no assurance that they can be
achieved.
Id. (alterations omitted).
We agreed that this cautionary language in the March
Prospectus adequately disclosed to potential investors the
risk associated with the release of this new product. We
concluded that “[c]learly, Convergent’s disclosures warned
investors that problems with attaining internal cost
objectives could impact the ultimate profitability of NGEN.”
Id. (emphasis added). The Plaintiffs nevertheless insisted
that this disclosure “did not sufficiently warn investors as to
the particularized risks then known by Convergent, or the
magnitude of those risks.” Id. But we disagreed, making a
distinction between “knowing that any product-indevelopment may run into a few snags, and knowing that a
particular product has already developed problems so
significant as to require months of delay.” Id. (quoting In re
Apple Computer Sec. Litig., 886 F.2d 1109, 1115 (9th Cir.
1989)) (emphasis added).
We went on to delineate how the March Prospectus
“virtually overflow[ed] with Convergent’s repeated
emphasis of significant risk factors,” including: 1) the
undertaking of “substantial development, manufacturing and
marketing risks;” 2) the lack of any assurance that
Convergent would “successfully complete the development
of its new products or . . . be successful in manufacturing the
new products in high volume or marketing the products in
the face of intense competition;” 3) the lack of available

76

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

components from sole or limited sources having “a
temporary adverse [e]ffect on the Company by delaying
shipments;” and 4) a lack of assurance that the “aggressive”
product cost objectives could be achieved. Id. (emphasis
added).
We also observed that Convergent continued during the
class period to warn of the risks associated with the
development and production of NGEN. In the August
Prospectus Convergent disclosed that “[t]he risks involved
with NGEN relate to the completion of the new products in
accordance with their technical specifications, the
availability of advanced components critical to high volume
production of the new products and the achievement of
product cost objectives.” Id. at 515-16 (alterations omitted).
The August Prospectus also cautioned that “[a]s a result
of the[] risks” of the NGEN development, “the new product
areas may not contribute to revenues within the time periods
the Company anticipates.” Id. at 516. In addition,
Convergent reiterated the lack of “assurance that the
aggressive cost objectives for these products can be
achieved, nor is there assurance of the availability of
necessary quantities of disk drives or the advanced
microprocessors necessary to permit timely production of
these products.” Id. Finally, Convergent disclosed that
“NGEN’s microprocessor, which [had] only been
manufactured in limited quantities [was] being allocated by
its sole source manufacturer.” Id. In light of these copious
disclosures, we concluded that “[n]o investor, in the face of
these substantive disclosures, could reasonably conclude
that Convergent had surmounted all obstacles in NGEN’s
path.” Id.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

77

Workslate Disclosures
Similar to their challenge to the NGEN disclosures, the
Plaintiffs asserted that Convergent’s risk disclosures for the
Workslate Product “were too general and were misleading
given the known delays and mechanization problems that
existed with Workslate.” Id. We rejected the Plaintiffs’
assertion, observing that the prospectuses issued in March
and August “provided more than generalized statements of
risk.” Id. We referenced the following warnings that could
affect production: 1) “the implementation of advanced
manufacturing processes and the development and
management of retail distribution channels;” 2) “the timely
availability of several advanced components . . .; 3) the
implementation of . . . advanced manufacturing processes;”
4) “the development and management . . . of retail channels
of distribution, an area in which [Convergent] [had] no prior
experience;” 5) the potential “inability of . . . vendors to
supply the [advanced technology components] in adequate
quantities;” and 6) “unanticipated problems” in the
“manufacturing processes” that “have not been widely used
in the United States.” Id.
Convergent Technologies is a compelling prototype for
analysis of the issues raised in the case before us. The
majority gives short shrift to this precedent, dismissing it as
addressing only “internal projections.” Majority Opinion, p.
30.
But the analysis in Convergent Technologies
specifically provides the framework for assessing “alleged
misleading statements and omissions” writ large.
Convergent Techs., 948 F.2d at 509. There is simply no
meaningful distinction between challenges predicated on
internal projections and those predicated on “last reported
results.” Majority Opinion, p. 29.

78

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

I. Internal Projections
We have held that “issuers need not reveal all internal
projections,” because “[c]ompanies generate numerous
estimates internally, and they may reveal the projection they
think best while withholding others, as long as the projection
revealed had a reasonable basis.” Nursing Home Pension
Fund, Local 144 v. Oracle Corp. (In re Oracle Corp. Sec.
Litig.), 627 F.3d 376, 391 (9th Cir. 2010) (citations omitted).
In Convergent Technologies, we recognized this principle,
observing that “Convergent had at its disposal more detailed
internal NGEN projections. But Convergent was not obliged
to disclose these internal projections.” Id.
However, we went well beyond an analysis of internal
projections to determine that Convergent’s disclosures
comported with the securities laws. For example, we
rejected the plaintiffs’ contentions that the prospectus
“misled the market by overstating the demand for
Convergent’s
AWS/IWS
workstation”
because
Convergent’s statements “were true,” id. at 512 (footnote
reference omitted). We also rejected the contention that
Convergent’s report to its shareholders was misleading. See
id. at 514. Independent of Convergent’s internal projections,
we also concluded that “[a]lthough in its annual Form 10–K
filing a company must discuss factors that would cause
reported financial information not to be necessarily
indicative of future financial operating results, no such
obligation exist[ed] in the quarterly report at issue.” Id.
(citation omitted).
Notably, we have not limited the analysis in Convergent
Technologies to internal projections. In Anderson v. Clow
(In re Stac Elec. Sec. Litig.), 89 F.3d 1399, 1406 (9th Cir.
1996), we recognized that, when discussing internal

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

79

projections in Convergent Technologies, we distinguished
Convergent’s disclosures “from [a] Fifth Circuit case . . .,
noting that Convergent’s prospectus virtually overflowed
with risk factors” and that Convergent was not obliged to
disclose its internal projections because such projections are
tentative.” (citation, alteration, and internal quotation marks
omitted) (emphasis added).
Thus, the majority’s minimization of Convergent
Technologies as relevant only to internal projections is
unsupported by our precedent and by the Convergent
Technologies opinion itself.
Rather, our review in
Convergent Technologies demonstrates that challenges
predicated on internal trends, projections, key performance
indicators, and last reported results are equally relevant to
consideration of “the totality of information available” in
evaluating the sufficiency of Robinhood’s disclosures. In re
Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d at 391; see also
Convergent Tech., 948 F.2d at 513.
The majority acknowledges that “all the omissions
challenged by Plaintiffs involve the relationship between a
prior statement concerning a particular time period and an
event subsequent to that time period.” Majority Opinion, p.
28. Plaintiffs specifically alleged that Robinhood failed to
disclose “that several financial metrics and key performance
indicators declined after the end of the last reported fiscal
quarter.” Id. (emphasis added).
As an initial matter, we have not endorsed reliance on
subsequent events to establish a misleading statement and/or
an omission under Item 303. See Miller v. Pezzani (In re
Worlds of Wonder Securities Litigation), 35 F.3d 1407, 1419
(9th Cir. 1994) (“Plaintiffs submit no admissible evidence to
show that [Worlds of Wonder’s] sales had decreased so

80

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

dramatically at the time of the Debenture offering that
[Worlds of Wonder’s] management could have known about,
and thus would have had a duty to disclose, the impending
collapse of Laser Tag sales. Plaintiffs cannot use the benefit
of 20-20 hindsight to turn management’s business judgment
into securities fraud.”) (citation omitted) (emphasis added).
Nevertheless, without citing any supporting case
authority, the majority supports its analysis with the
following reasoning: “Because Plaintiffs’ contention relies
in part on the distinction between the previous quarter’s
results and the interim results, it also involves the
relationship between the previous quarter’s results and the
interim results, it also involves the relationship between a
prior statement and a subsequent event. Majority Opinion,
p. 28 (emphasis added). However, this reasoning is not
consistent with our precedent cautioning against reliance on
subsequent events to establish the existence of misleading
statements, see Worlds of Wonder, 35 F.3d at 1419. It also
ignores our precedent delineating our approach to analyzing
offering statements by considering the statements made,
disclosures accompanying those statements, and the
information available to the market. See Convergent Techs.,
948 F.2d at 512, 515; see also Worlds of Wonder, 35 F.3d at
1413-14.
More importantly, fairly read in light of the disclaimers
and the information existing in the market of investors, the
statements in the prospectus were not misleading. See
Convergent Techs., 948 F.2d at 515-16; see also id. at 516
(observing that “Instruction 7 to Item 303(a) explicitly states
that ‘forward-looking’ information need not be disclosed in
Regulation S-K filing”) (quoting 17 C.F.R. § 229.303(a)
(1990)).

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

81

It bears emphasizing that, for offering documents, there
are time parameters on financial statements that are required
to support the prospectus. Under 17 C.F.R. § 210.3-12:
If the financial statements in a filing are as of
a date the number of days specified in
paragraph (g) of this section or more before
the date the filing is expected to become
effective, or proposed mailing date in the case
of a proxy statement, the financial statements
shall be updated, except as specified in the
following paragraphs, with a balance sheet as
of an interim date within the number of days
specified in paragraph (g) of this section and
with statements of comprehensive income
and cash flows for the interim period between
the end of the most recent fiscal year and the
date of the interim balance sheet provided
and for the corresponding period of the
preceding fiscal year. Such interim financial
statements may be unaudited and need not be
presented in greater detail than is required by
§ 210.10-01. Notwithstanding the above
requirements, the most recent interim
financial statements shall be at least as
current as the most recent financial
statements filed with the Commission on
Form 10–Q.
17 C.F.R. § 210.3-12(a) (emphasis added). 17 C.F.R.
§ 210.3-12(g) provides that “[f]or purposes of paragraph (a)
of this section, the number of days shall be: (I) 130 days for
large accelerated filers and accelerated filers (as defined in
§ 240.12b–2 of this chapter); and (II) 135 days for all other

82

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

registrants.” 17 C.F.R. § 210.3-12(g)(1). Additionally, 17
C.F.R. § 249.308a states that:
(a) Form 10-Q shall be used for quarterly
reports under section 13 or 15(d) of the
Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 U.S.C.
78m or 78o(d)), required to be filed pursuant
to § 240.13a–13 or § 240.15d–13 of this
chapter. A quarterly report on this form
pursuant to § 240.13a–13 or § 240.15d–13 of
this chapter shall be filed within the
following period after the end of the first
three fiscal quarters of each fiscal year, but
no quarterly report need be filed for the fourth
quarter of any fiscal year:
(1) 40 days after the end of the fiscal quarter
for large accelerated filers and accelerated
filers (as defined in § 240.12b– 2 of this
chapter); and
(2) 45 days after the end of the fiscal quarter
for all other registrants.
17 C.F.R. § 249.308a(a).
The import of these regulations is their focus on a period
of time rather than a snapshot view, which seriously
undermines the majority’s unsupported reliance on
dictionary definitions to support its snapshot analysis. See
Majority Opinion, p. 38. In any event, the majority’s
approach completely elides the crucial consideration that the
disclosure required under Item 303 is directed toward a
company’s actual knowledge of “a trend, demand,
commitment, event or uncertainty.” Steckman v. Hart

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

83

Brewing, Inc., 143 F.3d 1293, 1296 (9th Cir. 1998) (citation
omitted) (emphasis added).
The majority relies on Item 303(a) and Item 303(b)(2)(ii)
to support its holding that Robinhood may be strictly liable
under Section 11 because it did not provide intra-quarterly
disclosures of specific key performance indicators that were
incomplete. See Majority Opinion, pp. 33, 35, 37-39. Prior
to its amendment, “[t]he first paragraph of . . . Item 303(a)
instruct[ed] registrants to discuss their financial condition,
changes in financial condition, and results of operations for
full fiscal years,” whereas “Item 303(c) [now] provides for
interim disclosure requirements.” Management’s Discussion
and Analysis, Selected Financial Data, and Supplementary
Financial Information, 2020 WL 7013369, at *11-*12
(S.E.C. Nov. 19, 2020) (2020 November Release). 1 “Item
303(a) relating to known trends and uncertainties literally
[was] applicable to full fiscal years. Item 303(b) relate[d] to
interim periods and only provide[d] in this respect that [a
registrant] discuss material changes in results of operation
from the end of the last fiscal year to the end of the most
recent quarter and for the corresponding period of the
preceding fiscal year.” Harold S. Bloomenthal and Samuel
Wolff, 2 Sec. Law Handbook § 28:48 n.2 (2024) (emphases
added). Item 303(a), as amended, currently provides an
objective for disclosures under Item 303. See 17 C.F.R.
§ 229.303(a). Thus, prior to amendment, Items 303(a) and
303(b)(2)(ii), involved more extensive periods during which
a registrant could assess and report a trend or uncertainty.
The majority relies on the Management’s Discussion and Analysis of
Financial Condition, Securities Act Release No. 6835 (May 18, 1989)
(1989 Release). See Majority Opinion, p. 39 n.10. The S.E.C.’s 2020
November Release provides more recent guidance.
1

84

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

The amended version of Item 303 became effective on
February 10, 2021, 2 and includes amended disclosure
requirements for interim periods under Item 303(c). Item
303(c) provides:
If interim period financial statements are
included or are required to be included by 17
CFR 210.3 [Article 3 of Regulation S–X], a
management’s discussion and analysis of the
financial condition and results of operations
must be provided so as to enable the reader to
assess material changes in financial condition
and results of operations between the periods
specified in paragraphs (c)(1) and (2) of this
section. The discussion and analysis must
include a discussion of material changes in
those items specifically listed in paragraph
(b) of this section.
(1) Material changes in financial condition.
Discuss any material changes in financial
condition from the end of the preceding fiscal
year to the date of the most recent interim
balance sheet provided. If the interim
financial statements include an interim
balance sheet as of the corresponding interim
date of the preceding fiscal year, any material
changes in financial condition from that date
to the date of the most recent interim balance
sheet provided also must be discussed. If
discussions of changes from both the end and
the corresponding interim date of the
The second amended complaint alleges that Robinhood’s registration
statement issued for its IPO was “effective July 28, 2021.”

2

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

preceding fiscal year are required, the
discussions may be combined at the
discretion of the registrant.
(2) Material changes in results of operations.
(i) Discuss any material changes in the
registrant’s results of operations with respect
to the most recent fiscal year-to-date period
for which a statement of comprehensive
income is provided and the corresponding
year-to-date period of the preceding fiscal
year.
(ii) Discuss any material changes in the
registrant’s results of operations with respect
to either the most recent quarter for which a
statement of comprehensive income is
provided and the corresponding quarter for
the preceding fiscal year or, in the
alternative, the most recent quarter for which
a statement of comprehensive income is
provided and the immediately preceding
sequential quarter. If the latter immediately
preceding sequential quarter is discussed,
then provide in summary form the financial
information for that immediately preceding
sequential quarter that is subject of the
discussion or identify the registrant’s prior
filings on EDGAR that present such
information. If there is a change in the form
of presentation from period to period that
forms the basis of comparison from previous
periods provided pursuant to this paragraph,
the registrant must discuss the reasons for

85

86

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

changing the basis of comparison and
provide both comparisons in the first filing in
which the change is made.
17 C.F.R. § 229.303(c) (emphases added).
In the November 2020 Release, the S.E.C. “adopt[ed]
amendments to modernize, simplify, and enhance certain
financial disclosure requirements in Regulation S-K.” 2020
November Release at *1. The S.E.C. amended Item 303(c)
with respect to “interim disclosure requirements” to “allow
for more flexibility in the interim periods compared.” Id. at
*11 (emphasis added). The S.E.C. observed that “[c]urrent
Item 303(b) require[d] registrants to provide MD&A
disclosure for interim periods that enables market
participants to assess material changes in financial condition
and results of operations between certain specified periods.”
Id. at *35 (footnote reference omitted) (emphases added).
The S.E.C. “proposed amending current Item 303(b) (to be
renumbered as proposed Item 303(c)) to allow for flexibility
in comparisons of interim periods and to simplify the item.”
Id. at *36 (emphasis added). In ultimately amending Item
303(c), the S.E.C. explained that:
the flexibility provided by these amendments
will help registrants provide a more tailored
and meaningful analysis that is relevant to
their specific business cycles while also
providing
investors
with
material
information to assess quarterly performance.
Because not all businesses are seasonal, a
comparison to the corresponding quarter of
the preceding year may not be as meaningful
as a comparison to the preceding quarter.
Additionally, by requiring registrants not

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

87

only to explain the reasons for a change in
comparison from prior periods but also to
provide both comparisons when there is such
a change, we believe investors will benefit
from greater insight into a registrant’s
decision making and have sufficient
disclosure to understand any period-overperiod change.
Id. (emphases added). “Amended Item 303(c)(2)(I) will
continue to require registrants to discuss any material
changes in their results of operations between the most
recent year-to-date interim period(s) and the corresponding
period(s) of the preceding fiscal year for which statements
of comprehensive income are provided.” Id. at *37
(emphasis added). “Amended Item 303(c)(2)(ii) . . .
require[s] registrants to compare their most recently
completed quarter to either the corresponding quarter of the
prior year (as is currently required) or the immediately
preceding quarter.” Id. (emphases added). “This more
flexible approach is intended to allow registrants to provide
an analysis that is better tailored to their business cycles.”
Id. at *63 (emphasis added). According to the S.E.C., “the
amendments . . . provide[d] registrants flexibility to choose
the interim period presented, which could allow them to
provide a more tailored analysis.” Id. (emphasis added).
Notably, there is no mention of post-report metrics. See id.
The majority’s analysis concluding that Robinhood was
compelled to provide additional disclosures within months
of its IPO does not take into account the differing temporal
requirements for Item 303(b), involving full fiscal years, and
Item 303(c), involving interim disclosures for specified
periods. This distinction is particularly important in light of

88

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

the extensive disclosures that Robinhood did provide in its
offering documents versus the intra-quarterly financial
information relied on in the complaint for a truncated period
of time prior to issuance of the IPO. As the district court
observed,
Plaintiffs did not allege inaccuracies in the
Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) that
Robinhood reported. Plaintiffs alleged that
[Robinhood] had access to intra-quarterly
results that showed a decline in its KPIs in
months leading up to the company’s IPO that
were inconsistent with the KPIs reported in
the Offering Documents. However, as a
general matter, [Robinhood] had no
obligation to disclose incomplete intraquarterly results (May to July 2021) because
SEC regulations do not require the disclosure
of interim quarterly results.
Under Item 303(c), Robinhood is afforded flexibility in
providing interim disclosures based on its assessment of its
business cycle, whereas the majority’s approach, relying on
disclosures for full fiscal years under 17 C.F.R.
§ 229.303(b)(2)(ii), exposes Robinhood to strict liability
under Section 11 for not disclosing certain “incomplete
intra-quarterly results” occurring within months of the IPO.
Id. This approach is not only inconsistent with Item 303(c),
but with our precedent.

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

89

In Steckman, we explained that, under Item
303(a)(3)(ii), 3 “a disclosure duty exists where a trend,
demand, commitment, event or uncertainty is both
[1] presently known to management and [2] reasonably
likely to have material effects on the registrant’s financial
condition or results of operation.” 143 F.3d at 1296 (citation
omitted) (emphasis in the original). “If management
determines that fruition of the trend is not reasonably likely
to occur, no disclosure is required.” Id. at 1297 (citation and
alteration omitted) (emphasis added). We elaborated that
“[t]he first element is the showing of a known adverse
trend.” Id. (emphasis added). We concluded that the
complaint failed to state a claim because it “fail[ed] to allege
any facts by which management could reasonably expect
that the known trend would have a material impact on the
company’s revenues, sales, etc.” Id. at 1298 (emphasis
added). We opined that “[t]he allegation that [the company]
was increasing its accounts receivable in the fourth quarter
of 1995 to borrow from sales in the first quarter of 1996
amounts to nothing. Accounts receivable naturally grow
3
When Steckman was decided in 1998, 17 C.F.R. § 229.303(a)(3)(ii)
provided that, for “full fiscal years,” the registrant was required to:

Describe any known trends or uncertainties that have
had or that the registrant reasonably expects will have
a material favorable or unfavorable impact on net sales
or revenues or income from continuing operations. If
the registrant knows of events that will cause a
material change in the relationship between costs and
revenues (such as known future increases in costs of
labor or materials or price increases or inventory
adjustments), the change in the relationship shall be
disclosed.
17 C.F.R. 229.303(a)(3)(ii)(1998). This language is currently found in
17 C.F.R. § 229.303(b)(2)(ii) for “full fiscal years.”

90

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

over time as a company’s sales grow. A 3% difference is too
insignificant to show knowledge of an adverse trend which
could be reasonably expected to have a material impact.” Id.
(emphasis added) (internal quotation marks omitted). Thus,
the district court did not err in following our lead and
focusing on whether Robinhood failed to disclose a “known
trend.” Id.
Indeed, the second amended complaint alleged trends
with respect to Robinhood’s key performance indicators.
In addition to the trends alleged, the complaint also made
allegations concerning Robinhood’s business fundamentals.
For example, the complaint alleged that “the Offering
Documents misleadingly portrayed a state of affairs at odds
with Robinhood’s business fundamentals in the months
leading to the IPO. In 2021, Robinhood’s largest source of
revenue was no longer fees from its customers’ conventional
trading in stocks and options, as it had been previously.
Instead, since at least the start of the year, Robinhood’s
revenue had been driven by speculative, fad-trading in meme
stocks and the novelty cryptocurrency Dogecoin.” The
complaint further alleged that “Robinhood’s core
fundamentals had changed since the historical periods
depicted,” and “MAU, ARPU and AUC were declining prior
to the IPO.”
II. Key Performance Indicators
The S.E.C. has provided specific guidance for
disclosures under Item 303 addressing a company’s financial
metrics and key performance indicators. The S.E.C. has
“noted that for each business, there is a limited set of critical
variables which presents the pulse of the business.”
Commission Guidance on Management’s Discussion and
Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations,

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

91

2020 WL 1313719, at *1 (S.E.C. Jan. 30, 2020) (2020
January Release) (footnote reference omitted).
“[C]ompanies should identify and address those key
variables and other qualitative and quantitative factors that
are peculiar to and necessary for an understanding and
evaluation of the individual company. Such information
could constitute key performance indicators and other
metrics.” Id. (footnote reference omitted).
The S.E.C. “would generally expect, based on the facts
and circumstances,” certain disclosures “to accompany the
metric,” including “[a] clear definition of the metric and how
it is calculated,” “[a] statement indicating the reasons why
the metric provides useful information to investors,” and “[a]
statement indicating how management uses the metric in
managing or monitoring the performance of the business.”
Id. at 2.
The complaint does not plausibly allege that Robinhood
failed to provide these requisite disclosures concerning its
key performance indicators. Indeed, Robinhood stated in a
“Special Note Regarding Forward-Looking Statements” that
its prospectus included “forward-looking statements”
encompassing its “expected results of operations and key
performance metrics for the period ended June 30, 2021 and
for future periods.” As previously discussed in minute
detail, Robinhood provided a plethora of “forward-looking
statements” as well as profuse disclaimers. For example,
Robinhood explained that for Monthly Active Users (MAU):
We define MAU as the number of Monthly
Active Users during a specified calendar
month. A Monthly Active User is a unique
user who makes a debit card transaction,

92

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

transitions between two different screens on
a mobile device while logged into their
account or who loads a page in a web
browser, at any point during the relevant
month. A user need not satisfy these
conditions on a monthly or recurring basis or
have a Funded Account to be included in
MAU. . . .We utilize MAU to measure how
many customers interact with our products
and services during a given month. MAU
does not measure the frequency or duration
of the interaction, but we consider it a useful
indicator for engagement. Additionally,
MAUs are positively correlated with, but are
not indicative of the performance of revenue
and other key performance indicators.
Robinhood disclosed that, at the end of March, 2021, its
MAU totaled 17.7 million. Sodha’s complaint alleges that,
for this single indicator, MAU increased to 24.1 million in
May, representing an increase of approximately 4 million
MAU, but decreased to 19.5 million in July, 2021, still
approximately 2 million more MAU than reported in the
prospectus. 4 In its prospectus, Robinhood estimated that, in
June 30, 2021, its MAU would be 21.3 million. Robinhood
cautioned that:
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report revenue of between $546
million and $574 million, as compared to
$244 million for the three months ended June
In Convergent Techs., we rejected a similar reliance on a purported
interim decrease in orders placed. See 948 F.2d at 513-14.

4

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

30, 2020, representing an increase of 129% at
the midpoint of this range. The expected
increase in revenue is primarily driven by a
130% increase in Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts and increased trading activity
related to options and cryptocurrencies, and
relatively flat equities trading activity,
relative to the three months ended June 30,
2020. We also saw increases in the 2021
period in margin and stock lending activity as
well as an increase in Robinhood Gold
subscribers.
Trading activity was
particularly high during the first two months
of the 2021 period, returning to levels more
in line with prior periods during the last few
weeks of the quarter ended June 30, 2021,
and remained at similar levels into the early
part of the third quarter. We expect our
revenue for the three months ending
September 30, 2021 to be lower, as compared
to the three months ended June 30, 2021, as a
result of decreased levels of trading activity
relative to the record highs in trading activity,
particularly in cryptocurrencies, during the
three months ended June 30, 2021, and
expected seasonality. . . .
For the three months ended June 30, 2021, we
expect to report Net Cumulative Funded
Accounts of 22.5 million, as compared to 9.8
million for the three months ended June 30,
2020, representing an increase of 130%. For
the month ended June 30, 2021, we expect to
report MAU of 21.3 million, as compared to

93

94

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

10.2 million for the month ended June 30,
2020, representing an increase of 109%. As
of June 30, 2021, we expect to report AUC of
$102 billion, as compared to $33 billion as of
June 30, 2020, representing an increase of
205%. The increase in these Key
Performance Metrics resulted primarily from
an increase in new users joining our
platform, driven by general market interest
trading. We anticipate the rate of growth in
these Key Performance Metrics will be lower
for the period ended September 30, 2021, as
compared to the three months ended June 30,
2021, due to the exceptionally strong interest
in trading, particularly in cryptocurrencies,
we experienced in the three months ended
June 30, 2021 and seasonality in overall
trading activities.
Robinhood further specifically cautioned that:
Our results of operations and other operating
metrics may fluctuate from quarter to quarter,
which makes these metrics difficult to
predict.
Our results of operations are heavily reliant
on the level of trading activity on our
platform and net deposits. In the past, our
results of operations and other operating
metrics have fluctuated from quarter to
quarter, including due to movements and
trends in the underlying markets, changes in
general economic conditions and fluctuations

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

95

in trading levels, each of which is outside our
control and will continue to be outside of our
control. Additionally, our limited operating
history makes it difficult to forecast our
future results. As a result, period-to period
comparisons of our results of operations may
not be meaningful, and our past results of
operations should not be relied on as
indicators of future performance. Further, we
are subject to additional risks and
uncertainties that are frequently encountered
by companies in rapidly evolving markets.
Our financial condition and results of
operations in any given quarter can be
influenced by numerous factors, many of
which we are unable to predict or are outside
of our control . . .
We credited similar disclosures in Convergent
Technologies as foreclosing a plausible claim under Item
303. See 94 F.2d at 515.
III. Payment For Order Flow
Robinhood specifically disclosed in its prospectus the
risks associated with payment for order flow. With respect
to Robinhood’s revenue model, the prospectus warned that:
Rather than earning revenue from fixed
trading
commissions
which,
before
Robinhood introduced commission free
trading, had often ranged from $8 to $10 per
trade, the significant majority of our revenue
is transaction-based. We earn transactionbased revenue from market markers in

96

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

exchange for routing our users’ equity, option
and cryptocurrency trade orders to market
makers for execution. With respect to
equities and options trading, such fees are
known as payment for order flow, or PFOF,
and with respect to cryptocurrency trading
such fees are known as Transaction Rebates.
For the three months ended March 31, 2021,
PFOF and Transaction Rebates represented
81% of our total revenues and, as a result, our
revenues
are
currently
substantially
dependent on these fees. Our transactionbased revenue model could be harmed by
decreased levels of trading generally or by
industry or regulatory changes that could
tighten spreads on transactions.
In addition, PFOF practices have drawn
heightened scrutiny from the U.S. Congress,
the SEC and other regulatory and legislative
authorities. These regulators and authorities
may adopt additional regulation relating to,
or any bans or limitations on, PFOF practices
as a result of such heightened scrutiny or
otherwise pursue additional inquiries or
investigations relating to PFOF practices.
Any such restrictions or bans on our ability to
collect PFOF could impact the value of our

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

Class A common stock offered by this
prospectus.
The prospectus elaborated that:
For the year ended December 31, 2020,
revenue derived from PFOF and Transaction
Rebates represented 75% of our total
revenues, and for the three months ended
March 31, 2021, represented 81% of our total
revenues. Computer-generated buy/sell
programs and other technological advances
and regulatory changes in the marketplace
may continue to tighten spreads on
transactions, which could lead to a decrease
in our PFOF earned from market makers. Our
transaction-based revenue could also be
harmed by decreased levels of trading
generally.
The prospectus further cautioned that:
any negative publicity surrounding PFOF or
Transaction Rebate practices generally, or
our implementation of these practices, could
harm our brand and reputation. For example,
as a result of the January 2021 Trading
Restrictions, we faced allegations that our
decision to temporarily prevent our
customers from purchasing certain specified
securities was influenced by our relationship
with certain market makers. . . . If our
customers begin to disfavor PFOF and
Transaction Rebate practices generally or the

97

98

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

specific market markers with whom we do
business due to any negative media attention,
they may have an adverse view of our
business model and decide to limit or cease
the use of our platform. Additionally, some
customers may prefer to invest through our
competitors that do not engage in PFOF or
Transaction Rebate practices or engage in
them differently than do we. Any such loss
of customer engagement as a result of any
negative publicity associated with PFOF and
Transaction Rebate practices could have an
adverse effect on our business, financial
condition and results of operations.
With respect to its key performance indicators,
Robinhood provided “material information” that was
“necessary in order to make the presentation of the metric,
in light of the circumstances under which it is presented, not
misleading,” id. at *2 (footnote references omitted)
(emphasis added). In addition, as the district court noted, the
marketplace was abuzz with talk of Robinhood and its novel
approach to investments, including the concomitant risks:
[Robinhood’s] trading events were amongst
the biggest news stories of the year. See, e.g.,
Year in Review: A Look Back at the Biggest
News of 2021, Wall Street Journal (Dec. 19,
2021); Nicole Lyn Pesce, Google’s 2021
Year in Search: AMC and GME stocks,
Dogecoin, stimulus checks and shortages
dominated queries, MarketWatch (Dec. 11,
2021); Stan Choe, Dogecoin has its day;
cryptocurrency is latest ‘meme’ craze, AP

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

99

News (Apr. 20, 2021). And Robinhood
included information about the volatility
regarding the trading frenzies—including
lawsuits filed against Robinhood and
congressional inquiries—in its Offering
documents. Robinhood also disclosed the
existence of bubbles from the meme stock
event and information about the Dogecoin
event in the Offering Documents. Plaintiffs
appear to acknowledge the highly publicized
nature of these events in their complaint.
Accordingly, a reasonable investor would
have been aware of the meme stock and
Dogecoin events in early 2021; these events,
also disclosed in the Offering Documents,
cannot support a securities claim. Rubke v.
Capitol Bancorp Ltd., 551 F.3d 1156, 1163
(9th Cir. 2009) (explaining that it is
axiomatic that there can be no omission claim
when the allegedly undisclosed information
was in the public domain before the IPO).
Notably, the second amended complaint confirms the
well-known volatility of Robinhood’s business operations
based on widespread public interest and media reports. For
example, the second amended complaint alleges that:
In January 2021, shares of GameStop, AMC
Entertainment (AMC) and other companies
whose shares were heavily shorted, surged on
unprecedented volume as retail investors
banded together in places like Reddit (under
the subreddit r/WallStreetBets), to squeeze
short-sellers who had bet against these

100

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

companies. By driving up the share prices of
these companies, the retail investors hoped to
force hedge funds betting against the
companies to cover their losses by buying
back the shares, thereby increasing their
share prices. Single stock options were also
a popular choice of retail investors looking to
participate in the squeeze, and volumes
jumped to previously unseen highs in January
2021. This so-called meme stock event
resulted in high volatility and heavy trading
volume in the stocks and options in question,
and, in the short term, benefited [sic]
Robinhood as many of these retail traders
flocked to its platform to execute their trades.
The meme stock event began in earnest in
mid to late January 2021. At the close of
trading on January 25, 2021, GameStop, a
struggling video game retailer and one of the
most shorted names in the U.S. stock market,
had been traded more than any other S&P 500
stock with hundreds of millions of shares
changing hands.
The rally gained steam the following day
after Elon Musk tweeted Gamestonk!! to his
42 million followers with a link to the
WallStreetBets message board. In response,
GameStop’s stock price, which had begun the
year trading around $5, surged again with
nearly 200 million shares changing hands.
GameStop shares kept soaring the following
day after CNBC reported that hedge fund

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

Melvin Capital had closed out its short
position in the company the prior day after
taking a huge loss and requiring a cash
infusion of nearly $3 billion from outside
investors. At the same time, other heavily
shorted companies with troubled businesses,
including AMC Entertainment and Bed Bath
& Beyond, also got caught up in the frenzy.
AMC jumped 300% on January 27 alone,
with more than one billion shares changing
hands in its highest volume day ever. Bed
Bath & Beyond’s shares rose 43% the same
day.
The second amended complaint also alleged that:
as the meme stock phenomenon was abating
Dogecoin,
one
of
only
seven
cryptocurrencies that could be traded on
Robinhood’s platform, was taking flight.
Although it ended 2020 at less than half a
penny, in January 2021, Dogecoin soared
more than 800% on heavy volume after
gaining
cult
status
on
Reddit’s
WallStreetBets message board. On February
4, 2021, trading in Dogecoin surged again
after Elon Musk tweeted about it, sending
Dogecoin up more than 50%. By midFebruary 2021, Dogecoin had risen more
than 950% since the beginning of the year, to
more than five cents per coin.
In April, the price of Dogecoin skyrocketed
again on heavy trading. On April 14, 2021,

101

102

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

Dogecoin surpassed ten cents in value for the
first time, as investors geared up for the direct
listing of cryptocurrency exchange Coinbase
Global. Then, on April 15, 2021, following
another Elon Musk tweet, Dogecoin rallied
past 25 cents for the first time on heavy
volume that knocked out Robinhood’s crypto
trading systems for several hours. Once
trading was restored, Dogecoin kept climbing
hitting a then all-time high of 44 cents on
April 16, 2021. The high volume of trading,
which was up nearly 300%, once again
caused Robinhood to experience sporadic
crypto order failures and delayed notification
for some customers.
Then, on April 28, 2021, Elon Musk tweeted
his upcoming appearance on Saturday Night
Live (SNL), calling himself Dogefather. In
the ten days between April 28 and Elon
Musk’s May 8, 2021 turn as SNL host,
Dogecoin rose from approximately $0.30 to
approximately $0.73. However, the price of
Dogecoin plummeted during the program
after Elon Musk agreed Dogecoin was a
hustle. Between May and July, Dogecoin’s
price sank by 78%, and volume plummeted.
These allegations reflect that Plaintiffs were acutely
aware of the volatility of market events impacting
Robinhood’s business operations, and their losses were not
caused by any failure to disclose on the part of Robinhood.
The information and disclosures provided by
Robinhood, together with the marketplace information,

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

103

equal or exceed what we have previously accepted as
adequate under Item 303 to preclude liability. See
Convergent Tech., 948 F.2d at 512, 515.
IV. Conclusion
The majority opinion fails to focus on what Robinhood
knew when the prospectus was issued, and failed to adhere
to our precedent interpreting Item 303. Rather, as the
majority concedes, it collapses the requirements for interim
and annual reports, see Majority Opinion, p. 31, and relies
on out-of-circuit authority to support its analysis.
As previously noted, the November 2020 SEC guidance
focuses on flexibility in interim reports and consideration of
“the pulse of the business.” See November 2020 Release at
*1. Nowhere in the majority opinion are these concepts
mentioned or incorporated. Rather, the majority relies upon
a handful of matrix entries during a limited period to assess
the “materiality” of a correct statement based on a
fluctuation in the matrix, even if the fluctuation was not
known to the company when the prospectus was issued.
This approach would subject virtually every company to
liability for after-the-fact matrix fluctuations of which the
company had no knowledge.
The majority replaces the flexibility afforded by Item
303, as reflected in more recent S.E.C. guidance, with
uncertainty, as it “express[es] no view on whether Plaintiffs
have alleged that Robinhood had sufficient knowledge of
any trend, event, or uncertainty; whether the meme stock
event was sufficiently persistent to qualify as a trend; and
whether quantification of the meme stock event would be
reasonably practicable here.” Majority Opinion p. 42, n.11.
However, the S.E.C. guidance relied on by the majority, see
id. p. 39, n.10, mentions known trends or similar language

104

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

on at least twenty-three occasions. See 1989 Release at *3*6, *9-*10. And as discussed, Robinhood disclosed “known
trends” concerning its revenue growth, as well as its
expectations for the second quarter 2021 and third quarter
2021. Robinhood also quantified its operating expenses,
user growth, net losses, changes in its key performance
metrics, spikes in cryptocurrency trading, “significant
increase[s] in revenue, MAU, AUC and Net Cumulative
Funded Accounts,” expectations that “the growth rates in
revenue, MAU, AUC and Net Cumulative Funded Accounts
[would] decline in future periods, and such declines should
be significant,” volatility in cryptocurrency prices and
Dogecoin demand, and Robinhood’s PFOF risks. Under the
majority’s approach, Robinhood faces potential strict
liability under Section 11 based on the majority’s failure to
apply the appropriate standard, i.e. disclosures that
Robinhood actually made, and whether those disclosures
failed to include a known trend. Instead, the majority
“express[es] no view” on these required elements of a claim
under Item 303. Majority Opinion, p. 42, n.11.
If the majority actually applied the correct analysis from
Convergent Technologies, it would be compelled under our
precedent to conclude that Robinhood’s prospectus and
associated documents “virtually overflow[ed] with
[Robinhood’s] repeated emphasis of significant risk
factors,” and that Robinhood sufficiently disclosed what it
knew about any impacts on its operations and key
performance metrics from known trends. 948 F.2d at 516.
By ignoring the significant disclosures and
quantifications that were made by Robinhood, and declining
to apply the standard set forth in our precedent for Item 303
analysis, the majority essentially transforms its opinion into
dicta that lends only additional confusion to assessing

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

105

liability under the securities regulations. Despite its
expansive disclosures, Robinhood is left not only with the
majority’s indecisive analysis, but also with this perplexing
guidance:
when a trend must be disclosed pursuant to
Item 303, its effects must be quantified to the
extent reasonably practicable. However,
there will be cases where no quantification is
reasonably practicable. Moreover, any duty
to quantify an effect does not necessarily
require granular information about that
effect.
Majority Opinion, p. 41. The majority attempts to clarify
this language, see id., by referencing a thirty-six-year-old
hypothetical provided by the S.E.C. in 1989:
Facts: A registrant has been correctly
designated a [potentially responsible party]
by the EPA with respect to cleanup of
hazardous waste at three sites. No statutory
defenses are available. The registrant is in
the process of preliminary investigations of
the sites to determine the nature of its
potential liability and the amount of remedial
costs necessary to clean up the sites. Other
[potentially responsible parties] also have
been designated, but the ability to obtain
contribution is unclear, as is the extent of
insurance coverage, if any. Management is
unable to determine that a material effect on
future financial condition or results of
operations is not reasonably likely to occur.

106

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

Based upon the facts of this hypothetical
base, MD&A disclosure of the effects of the
[potentially responsible party] status,
quantified to the extent reasonably
practicable, would be required. For MD&A
purposes, aggregate potential cleanup costs
must be considered in light of the joint and
several liability to which a [potentially
responsible party] is subject. Facts regarding
whether insurance coverage may be
contested, and whether and to what extent
potential sources of contribution or
indemnification constitute reliable sources of
recovery may be factored into the
determination of whether a material future
effect is not reasonably likely to occur.
1989 Release at *6 (footnote reference omitted). The
S.E.C.’s hypothetical involving consideration of hazardous
waste cleanup costs has absolutely no relevance to the
majority’s discarding of Robinhood’s extensive disclosures
concerning the extreme volatility of its trading platform. In
the hypothetical, the company is able to consider its
“aggregate potential cleanup costs” based on “the joint and
several liability to which a [potentially responsible party] is
subject.” Id. Under this rationale, Robinhood would be
required to quantify the “effects” of “trends” resulting from
uncontrollable market events, Majority Opinion, p. 40, even
though Robinhood already quantified its operating expenses,
user growth, net losses, changes in its key performance
metrics, spikes in cryptocurrency trading, “significant
increase[s] in revenue, MAU, AUC and Net Cumulative
Funded Accounts,” expectations that “the growth rates in
revenue, MAU, AUC and Net Cumulative Funded Accounts

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

107

[would] decline in future periods, and such declines should
be significant,” volatility in cryptocurrency prices and
Dogecoin demand, and Robinhood’s
PFOF risks.
Robinhood’s disclosures, replete with quantifications,
coupled with widespread market and public knowledge of
the risks faced by Robinhood as a result of meme stock,
cryptocurrency, and Dogecoin trading, far exceeded the
requirements of the S.E.C.’s hypothetical involving
consideration of “aggregate potential [cleanup] costs”
during the course of hazardous waste litigation. Id. In light
of Robinhood’s significant disclosures regarding the
panoply of risks it faced, there is simply no basis under our
precedent for this litigation to proceed.
I cannot agree in good conscience that this approach
conforms to our precedent, or to the expressed intent of the
SEC to provide flexibility to the prospectus issuer and “to
simplify compliance efforts for registrants.”
2020
November Release at *1. I respectfully dissent. 5
Because our precedent dictates the outcome of this case, there is no
need to address the “extreme departure” standard applied by the district
court. See Steckman, 143 F.3d at 1298. But I do not agree with the
majority’s conclusion that the term “extreme departure” is “far less
administrable” as “enigmatic language” that “leaves too many open
questions.” Majority Opinion, pp. 32. Indeed, the securities laws and
resulting litigation are often governed by the application of an extreme
departure standard. For example, we have articulated that, under Section
10-b of the Securities Exchange Act, a plaintiff may allege “deliberate
recklessness” due to “an extreme departure from the standards of
ordinary care which presents a danger of misleading buyers or sellers
that is either known to the defendant or is so obvious that the actor must
have been aware of it.” Schueneman v. Arena Pharms., Inc., 840 F.3d
698, 704-05 (9th Cir. 2016) (citations and alteration omitted) (emphases
in the original). We apply this requirement in securities cases under the
Private Securities Ligation Reform Act although it is “not an easy
5

108

SODHA V. GOLUBOWSKI

standard to comply with” as “it was not intended to be.” Id. (citation
omitted). We could similarly define an extreme departure standard here.
This approach is much closer to the intent of the statute than collapsing
the analysis for interim reports and annual reports into one mushy
“materiality” standard. See November 2020 Release at *11.

