FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LENA CHILDS, an individual;
DONALD CHILDS, an individual; T.
CHILDS, a minor by and through her
guardian ad litem, Lena Childs; A.
CHILDS, a minor by and through her
guardian ad litem, Lena Childs,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING,
LLC, a California Limited Liability
Corporation; LINCOLN MILITARY
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT LP, a
Delaware Limited Partnership,
Defendants - Appellants,
and
INDEPTH CORPORATION, a
California Corporation,
Defendant - Appellee.

No. 24-1256
D.C. No.
3:19-cv-02329JM-SBC
OPINION

2

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Southern District of California
Jeffrey T. Miller, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 4, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed August 28, 2025
Before: Mary H. Murguia, Chief Judge, and Gabriel P.
Sanchez and Holly A. Thomas, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Sanchez
SUMMARY *
Removal Jurisdiction
Affirming the district court’s order remanding to state
court an action that defendants had removed to federal
district court, the panel held that the district court lacked
federal enclave, federal officer, or federal agency
jurisdiction.
Donald and Lena Childs, who rented military housing on
Saipan Road within the Naval Amphibious Base Coronado,
alleged negligence and other state law claims against San
Diego Family Housing, a public-private venture created by

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

3

federal statute, and Lincoln Military Property Management,
the property manager.
The panel held that under 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d), federal
courts of appeals generally lack jurisdiction to review a
district court’s remand order based on lack of subject matter
jurisdiction. Here, however, the panel had jurisdiction to
review the remand order in its entirety under a statutory
exception to the jurisdictional bar because one of the
asserted grounds for removal was federal officer removal
under 28 U.S.C. § 1442.
The panel held that the district court lacked federal
enclave jurisdiction. Under 40 U.S.C. § 3112 (the “1940
Act”), when the United States acquires land, its jurisdiction
over that federal property depends upon its acceptance of
jurisdiction. From 1941 to 1976, the United States acquired
the lands now comprising Naval Amphibious Base
Coronado, including the “Saipan Property.” The panel held
that there was no federal enclave jurisdiction under a theory
that the government acquired the land through civil
condemnation because there was no evidence of the
government’s assent to jurisdiction over the Saipan Property
through the filing of notice or written consent. The panel
rejected defendants’ argument that the 1940 Act, and its
notice-filing requirement, did not apply on the theory that
the relevant parcel was “made” by the United States by
dredging and filling the San Diego Bay and therefore was
not “acquired.”
The panel held that the district court lacked federal
officer removal jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1442, which
required defendants to demonstrate that they were persons
within the meaning of the statute; there was a causal nexus
between defendants’ actions, taken pursuant to a federal

4

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

officer’s directions, and plaintiffs’ claims; and defendants
could assert a colorable federal defense. The panel affirmed
the district court’s determination that defendants did not
meet the causal nexus requirement because they did not
show how their challenged actions in failing to reasonably
manage water intrusion and mold contamination at the
Saipan Property occurred because of what they were asked
to do in fulfilling the governmental function of housing
military service members and their families.
The panel held that the district court lacked federal
agency jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 451 because, under the
six-factor test of In re Hoag Ranches, 846 F.2d 1225 (9th
Cir. 1988), defendant San Diego Family Housing was not a
federal agency.

COUNSEL
Christian B. Clark (argued), Lenden F. Webb, and Katherine
E. Cervantes, Webb Law Group APC, Fresno, California, for
Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Kristin N. Reyna DeHart (argued) and Matthew P. Nugent,
Gordon Rees Scully Mansukhani LLP, San Diego,
California; Don Willenburg, Gordon Rees Scully
Mansukhani LLP, Walnut Creek, California; for
Defendants-Appellants.
Christina Matian, Bremer Whyte Brown & O'Meara LLP,
San Diego, California, for Defendant-Appellee.
Daniel L. Winik (argued) and Michael S. Raab, Attorneys,
Appellate Staff; Brian M. Boynton, Principal Deputy
Assistant Attorney General; Civil Division, United States

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

5

Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Tara K. McGrath,
United States Attorney, Office of the United States Attorney,
United States Department of Justice, San Diego, California;
for Amicus Curiae the United States of America.
OPINION
SANCHEZ, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiffs Donald and Lena Childs rented military
housing within the Naval Amphibious Base Coronado.
During their lease, the Childs dealt with water-intrusion and
mold contamination issues that allegedly damaged their
personal property and impacted their health. According to
Plaintiffs, Defendants San Diego Family Housing, a publicprivate venture created by federal statute, and Lincoln
Military Property Management, the property manager, were
aware of these issues and did not adequately remediate the
problem. Plaintiffs filed the instant action in state court
asserting negligence and other state law claims. Defendants
removed the action to federal district court on the basis of
federal enclave, federal agency, and federal officer
jurisdiction. After assessing each of these grounds for
removal, the district court concluded that it lacked
jurisdiction over the action and remanded to state court. We
conclude that no basis for federal jurisdiction applies and
affirm.
I.
A.
Defendant San Diego Family Housing (“SDFH”) is a
public-private venture between the Navy and Lincoln/Clark

6

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

San Diego, LLC under the Military Housing Privatization
Initiative (“MHPI”). See 10 U.S.C. §§ 2871‒2885. SDFH
contracted with Lincoln Military Property Management
(“Lincoln”) to provide property management services to the
Silver Strand I housing community, which includes military
housing on Naval Amphibious Base Coronado (“NAB
Coronado”). In 2016, Plaintiffs Donald and Lena Childs,
with their minor children, leased a home from SDFH at 1333
Saipan Road, Coronado, California (“the Saipan Property”).
Soon after Plaintiffs moved into their home, the property
began to suffer from repeated water-intrusion and related
mold contamination.
According to Plaintiffs, these
problems caused damage to their personal property and
eventually impacted the family’s health, causing fatigue,
shortness of breath, chronic headaches, and other symptoms.
After reporting these issues to Defendants, Lincoln sent
InDepth, a mold remediation company, to inspect the
property. InDepth discovered visible mold in multiple areas
of the home and allegedly told Plaintiffs that there “[was] no
reason to run any tests” because the mold was visible.
InDepth informed Lincoln of its findings, and Lincoln
provided temporary relocation assistance to the Childs while
InDepth performed remediation services.
After Plaintiffs were told that the remediation service
was successfully completed, Plaintiffs requested
documentation verifying that the mold had been addressed,
which Lincoln allegedly refused to provide. Upon their
return to the property, Plaintiffs engaged their own mold
testing service provider who ran tests that indicated
heightened levels of hazardous mold. Plaintiffs told Lincoln
and InDepth about the test results and allege that Defendants
dismissed their concerns and insisted that the home was
habitable. Plaintiffs refused to remain at the property, and,

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

7

after rejecting alternative housing in the same community,
Defendants immediately ceased paying the Childs’
relocation costs.
Defendants allegedly refused to
acknowledge the presence of mold and took no further steps
to properly remediate the property.
B.
In 2019, Plaintiffs brought suit in state court against
SDFH, Lincoln, and InDepth, asserting claims for
negligence, private nuisance, breach of contract, breach of
the implied warranty of habitability, breach of the implied
covenant of peaceful and quiet enjoyment, and constructive
eviction. SDFH and Lincoln removed the action to federal
court on the basis of federal enclave, federal officer, and
federal agency jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1331 and 28
U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1). Upon removal, SDFH and Lincoln
moved to dismiss the action under a claim of derivative
sovereign immunity pursuant to the Yearsley doctrine. See
Yearsley v. W.A. Ross Constr. Co., 309 U.S. 18 (1940). The
district court denied the motion, and Defendants appealed.
We held that the district court’s order rejecting dismissal was
not an immediately appealable collateral order and
dismissed the appeal. See Childs v. San Diego Fam. Hous.
LLC, 22 F.4th 1092, 1099 (9th Cir. 2022).
Following remand, SDFH and Lincoln moved for
summary judgment on the grounds that Yearsley provided
them derivative sovereign immunity and that the legal effect
of federal enclave jurisdiction precluded most of Plaintiffs’
state law claims. 1 The United States then filed a Statement
SDFH and Lincoln also challenged Plaintiffs’ settlement with InDepth.
The district court did not address the propriety of that settlement in its
remand order, and Defendants do not seek review of this issue on appeal.
1

8

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

of Interest before the district court asserting that (1) Yearsley
did not apply to Defendants, (2) the Saipan Property was not
within a federal enclave, and (3) under this court’s
intervening precedent in Lake v. Ohana Military
Communities, LLC, 14 F.4th 993 (9th Cir. 2021), the district
court lacked federal officer or agency jurisdiction.
The district court ordered supplemental briefing and
eventually rejected all of Defendants’ proffered grounds for
federal jurisdiction. Specifically, the district court found that
Defendants failed to establish that the Saipan Property was
within a federal enclave because there was no evidence that
the United States had retained or assented to exclusive
federal jurisdiction over the property. Next, the district court
concluded that Defendants failed to show the requisite causal
nexus between the challenged actions and the federal
government’s involvement in Defendants’ housing
management to establish federal officer jurisdiction under 28
U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1). Finally, the district court concluded
that Defendants were unable to establish federal agency
jurisdiction under the six-factor test of In re Hoag Ranches,
846 F.2d 1225, 1227‒28 (9th Cir. 1988). The district court
remanded the case to state court. 2 Defendants timely
appealed.

In its remand order, the district court also ruled on Defendants’
evidentiary objections, sustaining their objection to an unauthenticated
parcel map of NAB Coronado, thereby declining to take judicial notice
of the parcel map. The district court also sustained, in part, Defendants’
objections to the declaration of a senior land surveyor, Lonie Cyr,
determining that legal conclusions as to whether the federal government
exercises exclusive jurisdiction over the Saipan Property were improper
witness testimony.
2

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

9

II.
Before reaching the merits of these claims, we must first
assess our appellate jurisdiction to review the district court’s
remand order. Federal courts of appeals generally lack
jurisdiction to review a district court’s remand order based
on lack of subject matter jurisdiction. See 28 U.S.C.
§ 1447(d) (“An order remanding a case to the State court
from which it was removed is not reviewable on appeal or
otherwise,” subject to certain exceptions); see also Yakama
Indian Nation v. State of Wash. Dept. of Revenue, 176 F.3d
1241, 1248 (9th Cir. 1999) (“Remand orders based on a
defect in removal procedure or lack of subject matter
jurisdiction are immune from review even if the district
court’s order is erroneous.”). Nonetheless, § 1447(d)
provides for two exceptions to this bar. Under the statute, a
remand order is reviewable for actions initially removed
pursuant to the federal officer removal statute codified at
§ 1442. See 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d) (“[A]n order remanding a
case to the State court from which it was removed pursuant
to section 1442 or 1443 of this title shall be reviewable by
appeal or otherwise.”). In their notice of removal, SDFH and
Lincoln asserted federal enclave jurisdiction under § 1331 as
well as federal officer and federal agency jurisdiction under
§ 1442(a)(1). Because one of the asserted grounds for
removal was § 1442, we have jurisdiction to review the
remand order in its entirety. Id. § 1447(d); see also BP
P.L.C. v. Mayor and City Council of Baltimore, 593 U.S.
230, 238 (2021) (explaining that the scope of appellate
jurisdiction extends to the “whole of [the district court’s]
order” when a defendant cites § 1442 as a ground for
removal).

10

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

III.
We review de novo the district court’s decision to
remand a removed case and its determination that it lacks
subject matter jurisdiction. Lively v. Wild Oats Mkts., Inc.
456 F.3d 933, 938 (9th Cir. 2006). The defendant bears the
burden of proving that the requirements for removal
jurisdiction have been met. Leite v. Crane Co., 749 F.3d
1117, 1122 (9th Cir. 2014). On appeal, Defendants renew
their contentions that subject matter jurisdiction exists under
(1) 28 U.S.C. § 1331 because the Saipan Property is located
within a federal enclave, (2) 28 U.S.C. § 1442 (federal
officer removal statute) because SDFH and Lincoln operated
under the Navy’s oversight and control in dealing with the
Childs’ complaints, and (3) 28 U.S.C. § 1442 because SDFH
qualifies as a federal agency. We consider each of these
arguments in turn.
A.
Federal enclave jurisdiction is dependent on the federal
government’s exercise of exclusive legislative jurisdiction.
See Lake, 14 F.4th at 1003‒04; Paul v. United States, 371
U.S. 245, 263‒64 (1963); United States v. Jenkins, 734 F.2d
1322, 1325‒26 (9th Cir. 1983). The Enclave Clause of the
Constitution authorizes Congress to:
[E]xercise exclusive Legislation in all Cases
whatsoever, over such District . . . as may, by
Cession of particular States, and the
Acceptance of Congress, become the Seat of
the Government of the United States, and to
exercise like Authority over all Places
purchased by the Consent of the Legislature
of the State in which the Same shall be, for

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

11

the Erection of Forts, Magazines, Arsenals,
dock-Yards, and other needful Buildings.
U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 17. Beyond the Enclave Clause’s
specified method of establishing exclusive federal
jurisdiction through the purchase of land with a state’s
consent, the Supreme Court has also recognized two other
methods by which the federal government can acquire
exclusive jurisdiction over land. First, Congress may
condition the admission of a state to the Union on a cession
of jurisdiction of land within that state. Fort Leavenworth
R.R. Co. v. Lowe, 114 U.S. 525, 526‒27 (1885). And
second, states themselves may cede legislative jurisdiction
over land within their borders to the federal government. Id.
at 540–42.
Defendants’ arguments for enclave jurisdiction over the
Saipan Property do not involve a straightforward application
of any of these methods. Instead, Defendants rely on an
intricate web of state and federal statutes to support their
theory. Therefore, to determine whether federal enclave
jurisdiction exists over the Saipan Property requires a brief
historical detour.
In 1897, California passed a law ceding “to the United
States of America exclusive jurisdiction over all lands within
this State now held, occupied, or reserved by the
Government of the United States for military purposes or
defense, or which may hereafter be ceded or conveyed to
said United States for such purposes.” 1897 Cal. Stat. ch.
56, § 1. 3 In 1940, Congress passed legislation applying to
This state law also required the United States to provide “a sufficient
description by metes and bounds” of the land and that “a map or plat of
such lands” be filed in “the proper office of record in the county” in
3

12

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

land acquired thereafter which required the federal
government’s assent to exclusive or partial jurisdiction over
federal property located within state boundaries. See 40
U.S.C. § 255 (1940) (re-codified at 40 U.S.C. § 3112); Paul,
371 U.S. at 264; Adams v. United States, 319 U.S. 312, 313
(1943). The 1940 Act provided that “it shall be conclusively
presumed that no [exclusive or partial] jurisdiction has been
accepted,” “[u]nless and until the United States has accepted
jurisdiction over lands hereafter to be acquired.” 40 U.S.C.
§ 255 (1940). The 1940 Act mandated that the federal
government indicate its acceptance of jurisdiction by “filing
a notice of such acceptance with the Governor of such State
or in such other manner as may be prescribed by the laws of
the State where such lands are situated.” Id. Following recodification, the statutory text makes clear that “[i]t is not
required that the Federal Government obtain exclusive
jurisdiction in the United States over land or an interest in
land it acquires.” 40 U.S.C. § 3112(a).
From 1941 to 1976, the United States acquired the lands
now comprising NAB Coronado, including the Saipan
Property, in a series of land transactions as well as by
dredging and filling portions of the San Diego Bay. The
precise mode and date of the federal government’s
acquisition of the Saipan property, however, is contested by
the parties.
The United States and Plaintiffs rely on a declaration by
Lonie Cyr, a senior land surveyor for the Navy, who attests
that the government did not acquire the lands where the
Saipan Property is located until 1955 through civil
which the land is located. 1897 Cal. Stat. ch. 56, § 1. The statute was
amended with minor modifications in 1943, see 1943 Cal. Stat. ch. 134
§ 114, but was later repealed in 1947, see 1947 Cal. Stat. ch. 1532.

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

13

condemnation. 4 According to Plaintiffs and the United
States, because the acquisition of land through civil
condemnation occurred after the 1940 Act, federal enclave
jurisdiction over the Saipan Property requires the federal
government’s assent to exclusive jurisdiction by “filing a
notice of . . . acceptance with the Governor of [the] State or
in such other manner as may be prescribed by the laws of the
State where [the] lands are situated.” 40 U.S.C. § 255
(1940). By this time, California had also enacted legislation
conditioning any transfer of jurisdiction on, inter alia, the
federal government’s written assent and the State Lands
Commission’s declaration that the transfer was “in the
interest of the State.” 1951 Cal. Stat. ch. 875, § 1. Because
Defendants have not offered any evidence that the federal
government assented to exclusive federal jurisdiction over
this property by filing notice or written consent, there can be
no federal enclave jurisdiction under this theory.
Defendants respond that the 1940 Act (and its noticefiling requirement) does not apply to the Saipan Property
because the relevant parcel was not “acquired” through civil
condemnation in 1955; it was instead “made” by the United
States by dredging and filling the San Diego Bay to create a
seaplane base between 1941 and 1943. According to
Defendants, the United States “has sole ownership over land
created in this manner,” and they rely on United States v.
F.E.B. Corp., 52 F.4th 916, 926‒29 (11th Cir. 2022) to

Defendants’ claim that this proffered fact was excluded by the district
court is incorrect. The district court expressly overruled Defendants’
objections concerning the factual contentions in the Cyr Declaration,
such as how the property came into the United States’ ownership. See
supra n. 2.

4

14

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

buttress their arguments. 5 But, as the 1940 Act clarified, the
United States’ acquisition and ownership of land does not
require that the United States obtain exclusive jurisdiction
over that land. See 40 U.S.C. § 255 (1940); 40 U.S.C.
§ 3112(a).
Therefore, Defendants’ claim of enclave
jurisdiction requires two predicates: (1) a factual predicate
that the Saipan Property originated from the United States’
own dredging and filling operation from 1941 to 1943 and
not the 1955 condemnation proceeding; and (2) a legal
predicate that land created by the United States for its own
use lies outside the scope of the 1940 Act because it was not
“acquired” and instead passed exclusively to the United
States based on California’s 1897 ceding statute. We need
not resolve the parties’ dispute over the factual predicate
because Defendants’ arguments fail as to the legal predicate.
The 1940 Act does not itself define the term “acquire.”
See generally, 40 U.S.C. § 255 (1940); see also 40 U.S.C.
§§ 3101‒3177. “Where Congress does not furnish a
definition of its own,” courts “generally seek to afford a
statutory term its ordinary or natural meaning.”
HollyFrontier Cheyenne Refin., LLC v. Renewable Fuels
Ass’n, 594 U.S. 382, 388 (2021) (quotation and citation
omitted). Under Black’s Law Dictionary, the term “acquire”
means “[t]o gain possession or control of” or “to get or
obtain” “by any means.” Acquire, Black’s Law Dictionary
(12th ed. 2024); see also Acquire, Black’s Law Dictionary
(3d ed. 1933) (“[t]o become the owner of property; to make
5
That case involved a dispute about ownership of an island created by
the Navy via dredging activities near Key West, Florida. The question
presented was not about whether the United States held exclusive
jurisdiction over the island, but whether the United States had a claim of
ownership over the island pursuant to the Submerged Lands Act, 43
U.S.C. §§ 1301–1315.

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

15

property one’s own” “[t]o gain permanently”). Under both
its contemporary and historical plain meanings, the term
“acquire” contemplates the United States’ acquisition of
land created by dredging and filling operations and therefore
the Saipan Property falls within the scope of the 1940 Act’s
requirements.
This plain meaning of the term “acquire” also accords
with the purpose of the 1940 Act. The Act followed several
Supreme Court decisions that addressed “controversies
concerning the relation of federal and state powers over
government property,” and, specifically, whether the federal
government’s acquisition of property resulted in exclusive
federal jurisdiction. Adams, 319 U.S. at 314 (collecting
cases). Before enactment, federal government officials
conducted a cooperative study which resulted in legislation
“aimed at giving broad discretion to the various agencies in
order that they might obtain only the necessary jurisdiction.”
Id. The 1940 Act achieved this goal by enshrining a
presumption against federal jurisdiction in the absence of
express federal assent. See 40 U.S.C. § 255 (1940).
Defendants rely on a definition of “acquire” from an
inapplicable statute relating to timber resources on federal
lands. See 16 U.S.C. § 620e (noting the definitions of § 620e
apply only “[f]or purposes of sections 620 to 620j of this title
[16 U.S.C. §§ 620‒620j]”). And the relevant chapter at
issue, Title 40, Subtitle II, Chapter 31, does not contain any
provision which would suggest that the term “acquire”
should be limited to lands obtained via transaction as
opposed to creation by the government itself. See generally,
40 U.S.C. §§ 3101‒3177.
Even if we were to credit Defendants’ contention that the
land was created by the United States and therefore the 1940

16

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

Act does not apply because there was no “acquisition,” the
California 1897 statute does not save their argument. That
statute provided for the transfer of exclusive jurisdiction
only in lands “which may hereafter be ceded or conveyed to
said United States for” military purposes or defense. 1897
Cal. Stat. ch. 56, § 1. If, under Defendants’ theory, the land
was created by the United States through dredging and
filling, the land cannot have been ceded or conveyed by the
State of California to the United States.
Finally, Defendants presented a different theory for
exclusive jurisdiction before the district court that merits
some discussion. Defendants earlier argued that the federal
government retains exclusive jurisdiction over lands created
by dredging and filling for the government’s use under the
Submerged Lands Act. See 43 U.S.C. § 1313(a). This, too,
is incorrect. Although § 1313 carves out an exception to the
Act’s general transfer of federal title and claims to
submerged lands within the territorial boundaries of states,
nothing in the text of § 1313 suggests that it extinguished
state jurisdiction over submerged lands within its territories.
Id. Indeed, Congress’ purpose in passing the Submerged
Lands Act was “not for the Federal Government to retain
exclusive jurisdiction over navigation of the waters above
the submerged lands, but for the Federal Government to
retain concurrent jurisdiction over those waters.” Barber v.
State of Hawai’i, 42 F.3d 1185, 1191 (9th Cir. 1994).
Accordingly, regardless of the parties’ competing
versions of events as to how the Saipan Property came into
the United States’ possession, Defendants have failed to
provide any evidence that the federal government has
assented to exclusive jurisdiction over it so as to establish
federal enclave jurisdiction.

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

17

B.
The district court did not err in determining that it lacked
original jurisdiction under the federal officer removal
statute. Under 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a), federal courts may
exercise removal jurisdiction over actions commenced in
state court against an “officer (or any person acting under
that officer) of the United States or of any agency thereof, in
an official or individual capacity, for or relating to any act
under color of such office.” To satisfy federal officer
removal jurisdiction under § 1442(a), defendants must
demonstrate (1) that they are persons “within the meaning of
the statute;” 6 (2) that “there is a causal nexus between [their]
actions, taken pursuant to a federal officer’s directions, and
plaintiff’s claims;” and (3) that they “can assert a colorable
federal defense.” Durham v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 445
F.3d 1247, 1251 (9th Cir. 2006) (cleaned up).
The district court correctly determined that Defendants
did not meet the causal nexus requirement. Under this
requirement, a private defendant must show that they were
“acting under a federal officer in performing some act under
color of federal office” and “that such action is causally
connected with the plaintiff’s claims against it.” Cnty. of San
Mateo v. Chevron Corp., 32 F.4th 733, 755 (9th Cir. 2022).
Here, Plaintiffs’ claims relate to SDFH and Lincoln’s
alleged failure to properly inspect, warn of, cure, and
otherwise reasonably manage the water-intrusion and mold
contamination issues that the Childs family experienced at

It is undisputed that Defendants are “persons” for the purposes of
§ 1442(a).
6

18

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

the Saipan property. 7 In their Notice of Removal,
Defendants asserted that they were acting under naval
officers in “fulfill[ing] the governmental function of housing
military service members and their families,” and they
further claimed that “the alleged bodily injuries and property
damage arose from [SDFH] and [Lincoln’s] performance of
their duties to the Navy under the Operating Agreement and
Property Management Agreement.”
Although Defendants have proffered numerous pieces of
evidence in support of their causal nexus theory, they fail to
show how their challenged actions occurred “because of
what they were asked to do by the Government.” Goncalves
By & Through Goncalves v. Rady Children’s Hosp. San
Diego, 865 F.3d 1237, 1245 (9th Cir. 2017) (quoting
Isaacson v. Dow Chem. Co., 517 F.3d 129, 137 (2d Cir.
2008)); see also Stirling v. Minasian, 955 F.3d 795, 800 (9th
Cir. 2020) (explaining that the “relationship between
someone acting under a federal officer and the federal officer
‘typically involves subjection, guidance, or control.’”
(quoting Fidelitad, Inc. v. Insitu, Inc., 904 F.3d 1095, 1099
(9th Cir. 2018)). Rather, the agreements, policies, letters,
and declarations offered by Defendants demonstrate, at
most, only general federal oversight over Defendants’
housing management efforts and compliance with applicable
laws and regulations.
Our decision in Lake v. Ohana Military Communities is
instructive to our analysis. There, the defendant was also a
military housing public-private venture established under
the MHPI. 14 F.4th at 999. In holding that the defendant
Plaintiffs also assert that many of Defendants’ actions were in violation
of state housing laws, their lease agreements, and Defendants’ own
policies.

7

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

19

failed to demonstrate a causal nexus between its alleged
failure to warn of pesticide contamination on the premises
and the Navy’s oversight, we emphasized the “sole and
exclusive management and control” afforded to the
government’s private counterpart and the defendant’s
inability to show that the Navy’s involvement in other
aspects of the housing arrangement amounted to anything
more than mere “consent power over aspects of the housing
arrangement.” Id. at 1004‒05. After determining that no
federal officer had “directed” the defendant to take the
challenged actions, we concluded that “the central issue” in
the causal nexus analysis was “unmet.” Id. at 1005.
As in Lake, the Operating Agreement here shows that the
government’s private counterpart, Lincoln/Clark San Diego,
LLC, enjoyed “exclusive management and control of the
business of [SDFH]” as well as “full authority to take all
actions necessary or appropriate to pursue the business and
carry out the purpose of the Company.” See id. at 1004‒05.
Defendants’ reliance on other provisions of the Operating
Agreement relating to income sharing and approval rights
over matters like cash flow, contracts and capitalization,
hiring, and other clerical duties does not demonstrate federal
control or direction over the relevant actions at issue here—
mold testing and remediation. See id. at 1004 (“It is not
enough that the regulation is highly detailed and . . . the
private firm’s activities are highly supervised and
monitored.” (quotations and citation omitted)).
Defendants also point to their Ground Leases for
evidence of federal control, but these agreements explicitly
assigned responsibilities, costs, and liability over mold

20

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

management during the applicable term to SDFH. 8
Moreover, we have previously explained that “the federal
government’s willingness to lease federal property . . . to a
private entity for that entity’s commercial purposes does not,
without more, constitute the kind of assistance required to
establish that the private entity is ‘acting under’ a federal
officer.” Cnty. of San Mateo, 32 F.4th at 760.
Defendants rely on the Navy’s input and consent over
their Operation and Management Plan (“O&M Plan”), which
included a Mold Management Plan that SDFH was required
to prepare. But the O&M Plan reflects minimum standards
under applicable laws, regulations, project requirements, and
housing policies. Nothing in the O&M Plan’s mold
management guidance constrained Defendants’ capacity to
inspect premises for mold and water contamination, 9
prevented Defendants from further investigating moldrelated complaints, or restricted Defendants’ capacity to
remediate mold-related issues within the premises.
Defendants’ reliance on the Navy’s Mold Policy is
similarly unavailing as that policy also lacks any restraining
or controlling language. Rather, the “policy”—if it can be
called that—informs readers of pertinent facts about the
hazards of mold, the efficacy of testing, and general
Although the Ground Leases assigned liability for injuries to third
parties from pre-existing mold contamination to the government, they
provide that SDFH is “responsible for any claims or liability for injury
to persons to the extent resulting from . . . the disturbance of a Mold
Condition during the applicable Term of [SDFH’s] Lease.”
8

The testing guidance contained in the O&M Plan reflects only what
maintenance technicians are required to tell residents when they request
testing. The O&M Plan otherwise does not appear to explicitly limit
additional testing.
9

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

21

recommendations by expert bodies. The same can be said of
the Navy’s periodic “letter directives” to MHPI-created
entities, such as SDFH, as these letters largely describe only
general guidelines for minimum housing standards or
statutory requirements under 10 U.S.C. § 2891a. As the
Supreme Court explains, “[a] private firm’s compliance (or
noncompliance) with federal laws, rules, and regulations
does not by itself fall within the scope of the statutory phrase
‘acting under’ a federal ‘official.’” Watson v. Philip Morris
Cos., Inc., 551 U.S. 142, 153 (2007). In any event, these
letters were sent in 2020 and therefore post-date the relevant
time period. Accordingly, nothing in these letters suffices to
demonstrate that Defendants acted pursuant to the Navy’s
instructions with regard to mold inspection and remediation.
Given the dearth of evidence suggesting federal
involvement in or control over Defendants’ mold
management practices, the cases in which we have found a
causal nexus are readily distinguishable. In Leite v. Crane
Co, the plaintiffs brought suit based on the defendants’
alleged failure to warn of potential asbestos exposure. 749
F.3d at 1119–20. There, the defendant-entity submitted
evidence showing the Navy’s knowledge of asbestos
hazards, its participation in the procurement of hazardous
equipment, and its “detailed specifications regulating the
warnings that equipment manufacturers were required to
provide.” Id. at 1120. Similarly, in Goncalves By and
Through Goncalves v. Rady Children’s Hosp. San Diego, the
challenged subrogation lien resulted directly from the
government’s delegation to the defendant-insurer its
authority to pursue subrogation claims on behalf of the
government. 865 F.3d at 1245.
Although we interpret the federal officer and agency
removal statute “broadly in favor of removal,” Durham, 445

22

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

F.3d at 1252, and “credit the defendant’s theory of the case,”
Defendants “must allege facts, not mere legal conclusions,
in compliance with the pleading standards established in Bell
Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544 (2007) and
Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009).” Leite, 749 F.3d at
1121–22, 1124. As we have explained, Defendants’
allegations suggest, at most, that the Navy “direct[ed],
supervise[d], and monitor[ed]” their general housing
activities, which does not plausibly meet their causal nexus
burden with regard to their challenged conduct. Lake, 14
F.4th at 1004 (quoting Fidelitad, 904 F.3d at 1100). Because
“the central issue in the causal nexus analysis . . . is unmet,”
id. at 1005 (quotation and citation omitted), Defendants have
failed to establish federal officer jurisdiction. 10
C.
Defendants further contend that the instant case is
removable pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1) because
SDFH is a federal agency. 11 To determine whether an entity
is an “agency” under 28 U.S.C. § 451, this court considers
the factors laid out in In re Hoag Ranches, 846 F.2d at 1227‒
28. These factors are (1) “the extent to which the alleged
Because we conclude that no federal officer directed Defendants to
take the challenged actions, we do not address Defendants’ arguments
that SDFH “was performing acts delegated to it by the Navy,” Lake, 14
F.4th at 1005 n.4, nor do we reach the question of whether Defendants
asserted a “colorable federal defense,” Durham, 445 F.3d at 1251.
10

For purposes of § 1442(a)(1), a federal “agency” is defined as “any
department, independent establishment, commission, administration,
authority, board or bureau of the United States or any corporation in
which the United States has a proprietary interest, unless the context
shows that such term was intended to be used in a more limited sense.”
28 U.S.C. § 451; see also Lake, 14 F.4th at 1005 (applying § 451 to
§ 1442(a)(1)).

11

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

23

agency performs a governmental function,” (2) “the scope of
government
involvement
in
the
organization’s
management,” (3) “whether its operations are financed by
the government,” (4) “whether persons other than the
government have a proprietary interest in the alleged agency
and whether the government’s interest is merely custodial or
incidental,” (5) “whether the organization is referred to as an
agency in other statutes,” and (6) “whether the organization
is treated as an arm of the government for other purposes,
such as amenability to suit under the Federal Tort Claims
Act.” Id.
Regarding the first factor, Defendants note that “SDFH
took over operations for a significant volume of military
housing that was affordable to Navy servicemembers within
their
[Basic
Allowance
for
Housing
(“BAH”)] . . . something the Navy previously provided on
its own.” This argument, however, is foreclosed by Lake,
where we explained that “leasing housing on a military
installation under the MHPI” is not necessarily a
“historically and exclusively governmental function” and
“[m]erely leasing housing to a servicemember cannot itself
be a governmental function” since “BAH can be used on or
off a military base.” 14 F.4th at 1005.
Under the second factor, the government’s control over
SDFH’s housing operations is limited. As in Lake, the
“exclusive management and control” conferred to SDFH’s
private managing member, Lincoln/Clark San Diego, LLC,
coupled with the Navy’s “limited rights and
responsibilities,” demonstrate that “the government only
ever had limited control.” Id. at 1006. “At most, this factor
does not weigh heavily in either direction” because an entity
subject to federal regulation does not, by virtue of that

24

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

regulation, become controlled by the federal government.
Id. at 1006.
As to the third factor, which relates to government
financing, Defendants highlight that the United States
capitalized SDFH at a rate of nearly twice the private
partner. But as we observed in Lake, “[a]n initial financial
contribution does not show ongoing operational financing.”
Id. at 1006. And Defendants have not presented any
evidence that the United States continued to finance SDFH’s
operations beyond its contributions during the development
period.
Under the fourth factor, whether any person other than
the government has a proprietary interest in the alleged
agency, the answer is clearly yes. As noted above,
Lincoln/Clark San Diego, LLC, retains “exclusive
management and control of the business of [SDFH].” See
id. at 1006. Defendants’ reliance on Acron Investments, Inc.
v. Federal Savings & Loan Insurance Corp., is misplaced.
In Acron, we concluded that the Federal Savings & Loan
Insurance Corporation was a federal agency based on the
government’s proprietary interest in the defendant
government corporation. 363 F.2d 236, 239‒40 (9th Cir.
1966), cert denied, 385 U.S. 970 (1966). Acron, however, is
distinguishable because that case addressed the character of
a government corporation in which the government had once
owned all stock but had since retired it. Id. at 240. Here, the
government has never retained an equivalent interest in
SDFH. Rather, any interest the government retains in SDFH
is merely “custodial” or “incidental” in light of
Lincoln/Clark San Diego, LLC’s exclusive control over the
venture’s business. Hoag Ranches, 846 F.2d at 1228; see
also Lake, 14 F.4th at 1006 (finding the government’s

CHILDS V. SAN DIEGO FAMILY HOUSING, LLC

25

interest in the defendant public-private venture insufficient
to satisfy factor four).
With respect to the fifth factor, Defendants do not cite
any statute that identifies SDFH or any public-private
venture formed for the purpose of military housing as an
agency. And Defendants concede that they do not satisfy
factor six. Balancing these factors, we conclude that
Defendants have not demonstrated that SDFH is a federal
agency under 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1).
IV.
In light of the foregoing, the district court correctly
determined that Defendants have not carried their burden in
demonstrating federal enclave jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1331 or federal officer or agency jurisdiction under 28
U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1).
AFFIRMED.

