FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
JORGE ALEJANDRO AVALOS,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 23-3944
D.C. No.
3:23-cr-00828DMS-1

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Southern District of California
Dana M. Sabraw, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted September 15, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed December 17, 2025
Before: Richard R. Clifton and Kenneth K. Lee, Circuit
Judges. *
Per Curiam Opinion
This opinion had been approved by the panel and finalized but had not
yet been filed when Judge Sandra Ikuta passed away. We would like to
acknowledge Judge Ikuta’s participation in this case and role in drafting
the opinion. In accordance with General Order 3.2(h), this opinion is
issued by the remaining panel members as a quorum pursuant to 28
U.S.C. § 46(d).

*

2

USA V. AVALOS

SUMMARY **
Appointments Clause
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of Jorge
Alejandro Avalos’s motion to dismiss an indictment
charging him with illegal reentry under 8 U.S.C. § 1326.
In August 2007, Avalos, a citizen of Mexico, pleaded
guilty to second-degree robbery under California Penal Code
§ 211, which is an “aggravated felony” that makes him
deportable under 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii). He was
subsequently placed in administrative removal proceedings
and ordered removed by a deciding Service officer with the
Department of Homeland Security.
Avalos argued in part that the administrative removal
proceedings were fundamentally unfair because the deciding
Service officer who issued the final administrative removal
order was an “inferior Officer” under the Appointments
Clause of the U.S. Constitution and had not been properly
appointed.
The panel rejected this argument, holding that deciding
Service officers in administrative removal proceedings are
not “inferior Officers” subject to the Appointments Clause
of the United States Constitution, as they do not occupy a
“continuing and permanent office” and do not exercise
significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United
States. Avalos therefore failed to demonstrate that the

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

USA V. AVALOS

3

removal proceedings were fundamentally unfair under 8
U.S.C. § 1326(d)(3).

COUNSEL
Zachary J. Howe (argued) and David Fawcett, Assistant
United States Attorneys; Daniel E. Zipp, Assistant United
States Attorney, Chief, Appellate Section, Criminal
Division; Andrew R. Haden, Acting United States Attorney;
Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, San Diego, California; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Jessica Agatstein (argued), Appellate Attorney, Federal
Defenders of San Diego Inc., San Diego, California, for
Defendant-Appellant.
Jessica A. Morton, Robin F. Thurston, and Ananda V. Burra,
Democracy Forward Foundation, Washington, D.C.; James
Barker and Joseph E. Begun, Latham & Watkins LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Mark Fleming, National Immigrant
Justice Center, Chicago, Illinois; for Amicus Curiae the
National Immigrant Justice Center.

4

USA V. AVALOS

OPINION
PER CURIAM:
At issue on appeal is whether deciding Service officers
in administrative removal proceedings are “inferior
Officers” subject to the requirements of the Appointments
Clause of the United States Constitution. U.S. Const., art. II,
§ 2, cl. 2; 8 C.F.R. § 238.1. We hold that they are not.
I
Jorge Alejandro Avalos is a citizen of Mexico. In
August 2007, Avalos pleaded guilty to second-degree
robbery under California Penal Code § 211, which is an
“aggravated felony” that makes him deportable under 8
U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii). See United States v. MartinezHernandez, 932 F.3d 1198, 1202 (9th Cir. 2019). He was
subsequently placed in administrative removal proceedings
and ordered removed by a deciding Service officer with the
Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
Avalos
challenges the validity of the officer’s final administrative
removal order (FARO).
A
Before addressing the facts of Avalos’s case, we begin
with an overview of the administrative removal process.
Under the administrative removal system, DHS may order
certain aliens removed without a hearing before an
immigration judge (IJ). 8 U.S.C. § 1228(b)(1), (2); GomezVelazco v. Sessions, 879 F.3d 989, 991 (9th Cir. 2018). In
order to issue a FARO, DHS must establish only that the
individual: (1) is an alien, (2) has not been lawfully admitted
for permanent residence nor has conditional permanent
resident status under 8 U.S.C. § 1186a, and (3) has been

USA V. AVALOS

5

convicted of an aggravated felony and such conviction has
become final. 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(b)(1). Administrative
removal proceedings “are summary in nature because if
DHS establishes those three predicates, the individual is
conclusively presumed removable and categorically
ineligible for most forms of discretionary relief from
removal.” Gomez-Velazco, 879 F.3d at 991 (citing 8 U.S.C.
§ 1228(b)(5), (c)).
Under the applicable regulation, two types of DHS
officers preside over administrative removal proceedings:
issuing Service officers and deciding Service officers. The
issuing Service officer serves the alien with a Notice of
Intent to issue a FARO, which “constitute[s] the charging
document.” 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(b)(2)(i). A deciding Service
officer then determines whether to issue a FARO, terminate
proceedings, or issue a notice to appear before an IJ. Id.
§ 238.1(d).
The regulation defines “deciding Service officer” as “a
district director, chief patrol agent, or another immigration
officer designated by a district director, chief patrol agent,
the Deputy Executive Associate Commissioner for
Detention and Removal, or the Director of the Office of
Juvenile Affairs, so long as that person is not the same
person as the” issuing Service officer. Id. § 238.1(a). No
other statute or regulation, beyond 8 C.F.R. § 238.1, defines
“deciding Service officer.”
The deciding Service officer’s authority is prescribed by
the regulation. First, an issuing Service officer serves an
alien with a Notice of Intent to issue a FARO. Id. § 238.1(b).
If the alien fails to submit a timely response (and the
evidence in the record establishes deportability by clear,
convincing, and unequivocal evidence) or the alien concedes

6

USA V. AVALOS

deportability, then the deciding Service officer “shall issue
and cause to be served” a FARO that states “the reasons for
the deportation decision.” Id. § 238.1(d)(1). If the alien
submits a timely response, then the deciding Service officer
must consider whether the response was sufficient. Id.
§ 238.1(d)(2). If, after receiving a response, the deciding
Service officer “finds that deportability is established by
clear, convincing, and unequivocal evidence in the record of
proceeding,” then the deciding Service officer “shall issue”
a FARO “that states the reasons for the decision of
deportability.” Id. § 238.1(d)(2)(i).
However, if “the record of proceeding, including the
alien’s timely rebuttal, raises a genuine issue of material fact
regarding the preliminary findings,” the deciding Service
officer has more options. See id. § 238.1(d)(2)(ii)(A). The
deciding Service officer “may either obtain additional
evidence from any source, including the alien, or cause to be
issued a notice to appear to initiate removal proceedings”
before an IJ. Id. If the deciding Service officer “considers
additional evidence from a source other than the alien, that
evidence shall be made a part of the record of proceeding,
and shall be provided to the alien.” Id. § 238.1(d)(2)(ii)(B).
The alien may respond to the additional evidence. Id. After
reviewing the additional evidence, if the deciding Service
officer “finds that deportability is established by clear,
convincing, and unequivocal evidence in the record of
proceeding,” then the deciding Service officer “shall issue”
a FARO with associated reasons. Id. If the deciding Service
officer “finds that the alien is not amenable to”
administrative removal, the deciding Service officer “shall,
where appropriate, cause to be issued a notice to appear for
the purpose of initiating removal proceedings before an
[IJ].” Id. § 238.1(d)(2)(iii).

USA V. AVALOS

7

After receiving a FARO, an alien may petition for review
of the order with the appropriate United States Court of
Appeals. 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(D); see 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(h)
(requiring maintenance of record for judicial review of
FARO).
B
We now turn to the facts of this case. In August 2007,
Avalos pleaded guilty to second-degree robbery under
California Penal Code § 211. Robbery under California
Penal Code § 211 “is an aggravated felony” for purposes of
§ 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii). Martinez-Hernandez, 932 F.3d at
1202. Under 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii), “[a]ny alien who
is convicted of an aggravated felony at any time after
admission is deportable.”
On July 7, 2009, an issuing Service officer drafted a
Notice of Intent to issue a FARO. The notice alleged that
Avalos was subject to administrative removal based on his
August 2007 conviction for an aggravated felony. The
notice then informed Avalos of his rights. Among other
things, the notice informed Avalos that he may be
represented by counsel, at no expense to the government,
that he could respond to the charges in writing, and that he
could petition for review from a removal order. It also
provided that Avalos could request an extension of time to
respond, rebut the charges with supporting evidence, request
an opportunity to review the government’s evidence, admit
deportability, designate a country for removal, or request
withholding of removal. See 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(c)(1)–(2)
(describing the nature of a response); id. § 238.1(b)(2)
(describing required contents of the notice).
After DHS served the notice, Avalos acknowledged
receipt and checked a box stating that he did “Not Wish to

8

USA V. AVALOS

Contest and/or to Request Withholding of Removal.”
Avalos admitted the allegations and charge in the notice,
admitted that he was “deportable” and “not eligible for any
form of relief from removal,” and waived his “right to rebut
and contest the above charges.” Avalos also waived the right
to petition for judicial review.
On July 22, 2009, relying solely on the notice and
Avalos’s waiver, the deciding Service officer adjudicated
Avalos’s case and issued a FARO removing Avalos to
Mexico. The order included the following findings of fact
and conclusions of law:
(1) Avalos was “not a citizen or national of
the United States,” and was “not lawfully
admitted for permanent residence.”
(2) Avalos had “a final conviction for an
aggravated felony as defined” under 8
U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43)(F) (defined as a
“crime of violence . . . for which the term
of imprisonment [is] at least one year”)
and was ineligible for any discretionary
relief from removal.
(3) The “administrative record established by
clear, convincing, and unequivocal
evidence that” Avalos was “deportable as
an alien convicted of an aggravated
felony
pursuant
to”
8
U.S.C.
§ 1227(a)(2)(A)(iii).
Avalos was removed to Mexico. A few weeks later, he reentered the United States and was arrested. Avalos pleaded
guilty to illegal reentry under 8 U.S.C. § 1326 and received

USA V. AVALOS

9

a federal custodial sentence. Upon his release in February
2012, Avalos was again removed to Mexico.
In April 2023, Avalos re-entered the United States again
and was arrested. The government charged him with illegal
reentry under 8 U.S.C. § 1326. Avalos moved to dismiss the
information under § 1326(d), which allows an alien to
defend against an illegal reentry charge and collaterally
challenge the validity of an underlying removal order if,
among other things, the removal proceedings were
“fundamentally unfair.” 8 U.S.C. § 1326(d)(3). Avalos
argued in part that the administrative removal proceedings
were fundamentally unfair because the deciding Service
officer who issued the FARO was an “inferior Officer[]”
under the Appointments Clause of the U.S. Constitution and
had not been properly appointed. U.S. Const., art. II, § 2, cl.
2. 1 In response, the government argued that because the
deciding Service officer was an employee and not an
“inferior Officer[],” the Appointments Clause was not
implicated.
On August 18, 2023, the district court denied Avalos’s
motion to dismiss the information, holding that there was no
Appointments Clause violation and therefore no
fundamental unfairness under § 1326(d)(3). Avalos entered
a guilty plea that preserved his right to appeal the denial of
the motion to dismiss. The district court accepted the plea
and sentenced Avalos to 18 months in custody. He now
appeals the denial of his motion to dismiss.

Under the Appointments Clause, “Congress may by Law vest the
Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the
President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments.”

1

10

USA V. AVALOS

II
The court has jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. “We
review de novo the district court’s denial of [a] motion to
dismiss” under 8 U.S.C. § 1326(d). United States v.
Portillo-Gonzalez, 80 F.4th 910, 915 (9th Cir. 2023). “We
review de novo the constitutionality of the appointment . . .
process” under the Appointments Clause. Duenas v.
Garland, 78 F.4th 1069, 1072 (9th Cir. 2023).
III
A
Under 8 U.S.C. § 1326(a), “any alien who—(1) has been
. . . removed or has departed the United States while an order
of . . . removal is outstanding, and thereafter (2) enters,
attempts to enter, or is at any time found in, the United
States . . . shall be fined . . . or imprisoned . . . or both.” 2
Generally, an alien may not collaterally challenge the
validity of the order of removal that is the predicate to an
illegal reentry charge. See 8 U.S.C. § 1326(a)(1), (b), (d).
However, § 1326(d) authorizes a collateral attack on the
proceeding that resulted in the removal order in certain
circumstances. Section 1326(d) provides:
In a criminal proceeding under this section,
an alien may not challenge the validity of the
deportation order described in subsection
“[T]here is no legally significant distinction between deportation and
removal for purposes of § 1326.” United States v. Lopez-Gonzalez, 183
F.3d 933, 934–935 (9th Cir. 1999); see also id. at 934 n.4 (citing Illegal
Immigration Reform and Immigration Responsibility Act of 1996
§ 309(d)) (“[A]ny reference in law to an order of removal shall be
deemed to include a reference to an order of exclusion and deportation
or an order of deportation.”).
2

USA V. AVALOS

11

(a)(1) or subsection (b) unless the alien
demonstrates that—
(1) the alien exhausted any administrative
remedies that may have been available to
seek relief against the [removal] order;
(2) the deportation proceedings at which
the order was issued improperly deprived
the alien of the opportunity for judicial
review; and
(3) the entry of the
fundamentally unfair.

order

was

A “removal order is fundamentally unfair under
§ 1326(d)(3) if (1) an alien’s due process rights were
violated by defects in the underlying deportation proceeding,
and (2) he suffered prejudice as a result.” United States v.
Gambino-Ruiz, 91 F.4th 981, 985 (9th Cir. 2024) (citation
modified). Avalos contends that he has satisfied all three
prerequisites under § 1326(d) and therefore may collaterally
challenge the validity of his predicate removal order.
B
Avalos’s primary argument is that his underlying
administrative removal proceeding resulted in the entry of a
deportation order that was “fundamentally unfair” under
§ 1326(d)(3) because the deciding Service officer in that
proceeding was an inferior officer who was not properly
appointed under the Appointments Clause.
The
Appointments Clause provides that “Congress may by Law
vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think
proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the
Heads of Departments.” U.S. Const., art. II, § 2, cl. 2. While

12

USA V. AVALOS

officers must be appointed in accordance with the
Appointments Clause, the Constitution “cares not a whit”
about who hires non-officer employees to their positions.
Lucia v. SEC, 585 U.S. 237, 245 (2018). 3
The Supreme Court has identified two considerations for
distinguishing between officers and employees. First,
officers occupy “continuing position[s] established by law.”
Id. (citing United States v. Germaine, 99 U.S. 508, 511–12
(1879)). Second, officers exercise “significant authority
pursuant to the laws of the United States.” Id. (quoting
Buckley v. Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 126 (1976) (per curiam)). This
inquiry “focuse[s] on the extent of power any individual
wields in carrying out his assigned functions.” Id.
1
To determine whether an individual occupies a
“continuing position established by law,” id., courts consider
various factors, including “tenure, duration, emolument, and
duties,” Germaine, 99 U.S. at 511–12. In evaluating the
individual’s duties, we consider whether those duties are
“continuing and permanent” or “occasional and
intermittent.” Id.
In Germaine, the Supreme Court held that civil surgeons
appointed by the Commissioner of Pensions to “make the
periodical examination of pensioners” were not officers with
“continuing and permanent” duties. Id. at 508, 511–12.
Because the surgeons were “only to act when called on by
the Commissioner of Pensions in some special case,” were
A separate consideration, which is not at issue in this appeal, is whether
an individual is an inferior or principal officer. Principal offers must be
appointed by the President with advice and consent of the Senate.
Kennedy v. Braidwood Mgmt., Inc., 606 U.S. 748, 759 (2025).
3

USA V. AVALOS

13

“required to keep no place of business for the public use,”
gave “no bond and t[ook] no oath,” and no “regular
appropriation [wa]s made to pay” their compensation, the
surgeons’ duties were “occasional and intermittent” rather
than “continuing and permanent.” Id. at 512; see also
Auffmordt v. Hedden, 137 U.S. 310, 326–28 (1890) (holding
merchant appraiser was not an officer because he “ha[d] no
general functions, nor any employment which has any
duration as to time, or which extends over any case further
than as he is selected to act in that particular case”).
Therefore, the surgeons did not qualify as inferior officers.
By contrast, Special Trial Judges (STJs) for the Tax
Court and Administrative Law Judges (ALJs) for the
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) have
“continuing and permanent” duties. Freytag v. Comm’r of
Internal Rev., 501 U.S. 868, 881 (1991); Lucia, 585 U.S. at
247–48. Freytag reasoned that STJs held an office
“established by Law” under the Appointments Clause, as
“the duties, salary, and means of appointment for that office
are specified by statute.” 501 U.S. at 881; see 26 U.S.C.
§ 7443A (specifying the duties, salary, and means of
appointment for STJs). Freytag contrasted STJs with
“special masters, who are hired by Article III courts on a
temporary, episodic basis, whose positions are not
established by law, and whose duties and functions are not
delineated in a statute.” 501 U.S. at 881. SEC ALJs likewise
hold “a continuing office established by law,” as they receive
career appointments by regulation “to a position created by
statute down to its ‘duties, salary, and means of
appointment.’” Lucia, 585 U.S. at 247–48 (citing 5 C.F.R.
§ 930.204(a) and Freytag, 501 U.S. at 878); see 5 U.S.C.
§§ 5372, 3105 (specifying the duties, salary, and means of
appointment for ALJs). We have also held that IJs and

14

USA V. AVALOS

members of the Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) are
officers with “responsibilities [that] are legally defined and
continuous,” as provided by statute and regulation. Duenas,
78 F.4th at 1073 (citing 8 U.S.C. § 1229a and 8 C.F.R.
§ 1003.1).
In short, a position is not continuing and permanent
where, like the position of special master, the responsibilities
of the position are temporary, episodic, and periodic rather
than continuous, the duties, functions, salary and means of
appointment are not delineated by law, and there is no
regular appropriation made to pay compensation for
discharging those responsibilities. Freytag, 501 U.S. at 881.
2
The second consideration noted in Lucia is whether
individuals exercise “significant authority pursuant to the
laws of the United States.” Lucia, 585 U.S. at 245. The
Supreme Court has recognized that this test, which focuses
“on the extent of power an individual wields in carrying out
his assigned functions,” is “framed in general terms.” Id.
Although the Court indicated it might some day “refine or
enhance the test,” it declined to do so in Lucia, and instead
applied the test by comparing the “extent of power” at issue
with the authority wielded by the STJs in Freytag, whom the
Court previously had deemed to be “inferior Officers.” See
id. at 246, 248–49; Freytag, 501 U.S. 881–82.
In Freytag, the Supreme Court determined that Tax
Court STJs were inferior officers. The STJs at issue were
authorized to hear and decide cases for the Tax Court in
“comparatively narrow and minor matters.” Freytag, 501
U.S. at 873. In more important matters, they were authorized
to prepare proposed findings and an opinion for the Tax
Court, though final decisions were rendered by a regular Tax

USA V. AVALOS

15

Court judge. Id. at 874. No limitation was placed on the
scope of issues the STJs could address. The Court held that
the STJs exercised significant authority in executing their
duties and performed “more than ministerial tasks.” Id. at
881. Specifically, the Court noted that the STJs “take
testimony, conduct trials, rule on the admissibility of
evidence, and have the power to enforce compliance with
discovery orders.” Id. at 881–82.
Following Freytag, the Court in Lucia held that SEC
ALJs were inferior officers because they “exercise the same
‘significant discretion’ when carrying out the same
‘important functions’ as STJs do.” Lucia, 585 U.S. at 248
(quoting Freytag, 501 U.S. at 878). Like STJs, SEC ALJs
could “take testimony,” “conduct trials,” “rule on the
admissibility of evidence,” and “enforce compliance with
discovery orders.” Id. (quoting Freytag, 501 U.S. at 881–
82). Moreover, “at the close of those proceedings,” SEC
ALJs “issue decisions . . . with potentially more independent
effect” than the Tax Court STJs in Freytag. Id. at 248–49.
No limitation was placed on the scope of issues the ALJs
could address. The SEC ALJs “issue decisions containing
factual findings, legal conclusions, and appropriate
remedies” which, absent SEC review, become final and are
deemed the action of the SEC. Id. at 249. Lucia concluded
that “[t]hat last-word capacity makes this an a fortiori case:
If the Tax Court’s STJs are officers, as Freytag held, then
the [SEC]’s ALJs must be too.” Id.
After Lucia, we held that IJs and members of the BIA
qualify as “inferior Officers.” Duenas, 78 F.4th at 1073.
Though primarily focused on the distinction between
principal and inferior officers, Duenas noted that IJs and
BIA members “wield substantial authority.” Id. IJs
“conduct adversarial hearings in removal proceedings . . . ,

16

USA V. AVALOS

and BIA members perform substantive appellate review of
[IJs]’ removal determinations, leading to decisions that
combine factual and legal analysis and that order suitable
remedies.” Id. (citation modified).
While the Supreme Court has not defined the exact
boundaries of the “significant authority” test, it has taken a
broad, holistic approach to the inquiry, considering the
individual’s authority as a whole and comparing it to the
authority exercised by individuals previously deemed to be
inferior officers. See Lucia, 585 U.S. at 246 (comparing
authority of SEC ALJs to Tax Court STJs in Freytag). Such
an analysis evaluates a range of factors, including the scope
and breadth of the individual’s authority, the degree of
discretion afforded, and the individual’s procedural powers,
among other things. See id. at 248 (considering ALJs’
discretion, procedural powers, and autonomy); Duenas, 78
F.4th at 1073 (considering substantive nature of IJ and BIA
authority and power to conduct adversarial hearings); United
States v. Gantt, 194 F.3d 987, 999 (9th Cir. 1999), overruled
on other grounds by United States v. W.R. Grace, 526 F.3d
499 (9th Cir. 2008) (stating that United States Attorneys are
“clearly” officers of the United States and pointing to their
broad authority to enforce federal law); U.S. ex rel. Kelly v.
Boeing Co., 9 F.3d 743, 758–59 (9th Cir. 1993) (holding that
a qui tam relator “who litigates only a single case” and “must
yield” to the government when it elects to intervene does not
exercise “significant authority”). Other circuits are in
accord, taking a flexible multi-faceted approach to the
“significant authority” inquiry. See, e.g., Lofstad v.
Raimondo, 117 F.4th 498, 498 (3d Cir. 2024) (stating that
officers may exercise “significant authority” when they have
“significant duties and discretion to carry them out,”
“[p]ower akin to a federal judge’s,” and “broad

USA V. AVALOS

17

administrative powers,” and that a court may also consider
whether the officers’ exercise of power is controlled by
another branch of government); Tucker v. Comm’r of
Internal Revenue, 676 F.3d 1129, 1133 (D.C. Cir. 2012)
(considering “(1) the significance of the matters resolved by
the officials, (2) the discretion they exercise in reaching their
decisions, and (3) the finality of those decisions”).
IV
We now consider Avalos’s argument that his
administrative removal proceedings were “fundamentally
unfair” under § 1326(d)(3) because the deciding Service
officer who issued the final removal order was an inferior
officer under the Appointments Clause and had not been
properly appointed. We turn to the two considerations for
determining whether individuals are officers or employees:
(1) whether the individual holds a continuing position
established by law, and (2) whether the individual exercises
significant authority pursuant to the laws of the United
States. Lucia, 585 U.S. at 245. Considering each in turn, we
hold that deciding Service officers neither occupy a
continuing position nor exercise significant authority, and
therefore are not inferior officers.
A
We determine whether deciding Service officers hold a
“continuing position established by law,” id., by considering
several factors, including “tenure, duration, emolument, and
duties” and whether those duties are “continuing and
permanent” rather than “occasional and intermittent.”
Germaine, 99 U.S. at 511–12. After evaluating those

18

USA V. AVALOS

factors, we conclude that deciding Service officers do not
occupy a continuing position established by law. 4
No statute sets forth the duties, functions, salary, nor
means of appointment of a deciding Service officer, and the
regulation delineating the position provides for duties that
are “occasional and intermittent” rather than “continuing and
permanent.” Id. at 512. Under the regulation, any number
of enumerated DHS employees—or “another immigration
officer designated” by particular officials—may serve as a
deciding Service officer, as long as they are not the issuing
Service officer in the case. 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(a); see also 8
U.S.C. § 1228(b)(4)(F). The regulation allows a deciding
Service officer to be selected as needed from a list of other
employees for any period of time. 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(a).
Moreover, the regulation does not provide for any “regular
appropriation” to pay deciding Service officers’
compensation. Germaine, 99 U.S. at 512. By contrast, the
statute in Freytag authorized the chief judge to “appoint
special trial judges,” and it detailed STJ responsibilities. 26
U.S.C. § 7443A. Similarly, the statutes in Lucia provided
that “each agency shall appoint . . . administrative law
judges,” 5 U.S.C. § 3105, and demarcated ALJ levels of pay,
id. § 5372. See also Morrison v. Olson, 487 U.S. 654, 663–
64 (1988) (independent counsel appointed pursuant to
Avalos argues that the government forfeited the argument that deciding
Service officers do not hold “continuing and permanent” positions by
failing to raise it in the district court and failing to develop it on appeal.
Although the government did not raise the argument before the district
court,“it is claims that are deemed waived or forfeited, not arguments.”
Obrien v. Bisignano, 142 F.4th 687, 694 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting Brown
v. Arizona, 82 F.4th 863, 873 (9th Cir. 2023) (en banc)). The government
adequately developed and presented this argument on appeal. See United
States v. Sineneng-Smith, 590 U.S. 371, 375–76 (2020).

4

USA V. AVALOS

19

statute that required that the Department of Justice “pay all
costs” related to the office and governed the length of the
independent counsel’s tenure).
Avalos argues that deciding Service officers hold
continuing positions to the same extent as the task force
members in Kennedy v. Braidwood Management, Inc.,
whom the Supreme Court held were inferior officers. See
606 U.S. at 762. But Braidwood provides no guidance for
determining when employees are inferior officers because
there was no dispute that the task force members were
officers subject to the Appointments Clause. Id. at 759. The
parties disputed only whether the task force members were
inferior or principal officers. Therefore, the Court did not
address the question whether the task force members held
“continuing position[s] established by law” or had
“significant authority” to be deemed inferior officers rather
than employees. Lucia, 585 U.S. at 245. Avalos’s reliance
on Morrison v. Olson and Weiss v. United States is also
misplaced because neither opinion squarely addressed
whether the officers’ duties were continuing and permanent
or assessed the relevant Germaine factors. See Weiss v.
United States, 510 U.S. 163, 169 (1994) (“The parties do not
dispute that military judges, because of the authority and
responsibilities they possess, act as ‘Officers’ of the United
States.”); Morrison, 487 U.S. at 671 n.12 (“It is clear that
appellant is an officer of the United States, not an
employee.”) (internal quotation marks omitted).
B
Turning to the second inquiry, deciding Service officers
do not possess authority sufficient to confer officer status.
As we explained, we consider deciding Service officers’
authority as a whole, including the scope of authority, the

20

USA V. AVALOS

range of discretion, and the nature of their procedural
powers, and then compare this holistically to the authority of
the adjudicatory officers in Freytag, Lucia, and Duenas.
First and most important, deciding Service officers are
limited in the scope of their decisions and have limited
authority to issue a FARO. Deciding Service officers are not
free to consider “any applicable ground” for removal, 8
U.S.C. § 1229a(a)(2), but may determine only if the
individual: (1) is an alien; (2) has not been lawfully admitted
for permanent residence; (3) has been convicted of an
aggravated felony; and (4) is deportable.
8 C.F.R.
§ 238.1(b)(1). Avalos argues that this authority confers
discretion on deciding Service officers because deciding
whether a particular conviction constitutes an aggravated
felony under the “categorical approach” is far from
straightforward or clearcut. See, e.g., Martinez-Hernandez,
932 F.3d at 1205. But the difficulty of analyzing a legal
issue does not mean that deciding Service officers exercise
significant discretion. If an alien has a conviction for an
aggravated felony, the deciding Service officer has no
discretionary authority to grant relief from removal; the alien
is “conclusively presumed to be deportable.” 8 U.S.C.
§ 1228(b)(5), (c). And if there is a “genuine issue of material
fact” and deportability is not shown by “clear, convincing,
and unequivocal evidence,” the deciding Service officer
cannot order removal. 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(d)(1)–(2).
Further, deciding Service officers do not possess broad
procedural powers. Although they may “obtain additional
evidence” to aid their decisions, id. § 238.1(d)(2)(ii)(A),
“administer oaths,” id. § 287.5(a), and evaluate “affidavit(s),
documentary information, or other specific evidence,” id.
§ 238.1(c)(2)(i), (d)(2)(i)–(ii), (d)(3), those powers are
meaningfully circumscribed by statute and regulation.

USA V. AVALOS

21

Deciding Service officers may solicit additional evidence
only if the alien submits a written response and the record
raises a genuine issue of material fact. Id. § 238.1(d)(2).
Admission of additional evidence does not require an
adversarial hearing. Rather, the deciding Service officer
considers the additional evidence and makes a determination
based on all the evidence. Id. § 238.1(d)(2)(ii)(B).
Comparing deciding Service officers to the adjudicatory
officers in Freytag, Lucia, and Duenas confirms they lack
sufficient authority to be deemed inferior officers. The Tax
Court STJs, SEC ALJs, BIA members, and IJs are not
limited to deciding a single legal issue, but rather prepare
opinions addressing the full scope of administrative issues.
See 26 U.S.C. § 7443A(b) (describing range of proceedings
which may be assigned to Tax Court STJs); 15 U.S.C. § 78d1(a) (SEC “shall have authority to delegate . . . any of its
functions” to an ALJ); 8 U.S.C. § 1229a (providing that IJs
consider “any applicable ground of inadmissibility . . . or
any applicable ground of deportability”). In Freytag, for
example, the statute at issue authorized the Chief Judge of
the Tax Court to assign a broad range of cases: “any
declaratory judgment proceeding,” “any proceeding under
section 7463” (disputes involving $50,000 or less), “any
proceeding in which the deficiency or claimed overpayment
does not exceed $10,000,” and “any other proceeding which
the Chief Judge may designate.” 501 U.S. at 873 (citing 26
U.S.C. § 7443A(b)). Deciding Service officers’ authority is
much more circumscribed, limited to a narrow set of cases
and considerations that do not require the exercise of
significant discretion. See 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(b)(1). And
unlike Tax Court STJs and SEC ALJs, deciding Service
officers do not possess “nearly all the [procedural] tools of
federal trial judges.” Lucia, 585 U.S. at 248. Nor does the

22

USA V. AVALOS

regulation governing deciding Service officers’ authority
provide for the kind of adversarial hearings conducted by IJs.
See 8 C.F.R. § 238.1(d); 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(a)–(b) (requiring
that IJs conduct proceedings and examine the alien and any
witnesses).
Avalos argues that we should compare the deciding
Service officers’ authority with that of the immigration
inspector in Nishimura Ekiu v. United States, who was
deemed to be an inferior officer. 142 U.S. 651 (1892). In
Nishimura Ekiu, the Court considered whether an
immigration inspector at the port of San Francisco who
refused to allow the petitioner to land had been properly
appointed. Id. at 662. Specifically, the Court considered
whether the inspector’s appointment by the Secretary of the
Treasury was improper, and whether he should have instead
been appointed by the Superintendent of Immigration. Id. at
663. The Court held that the inspector was “duly appointed”
under the statute at issue, which “manifestly contemplate[d]
and intend[ed] that the inspectors of immigration shall be
appointed by the secretary of the treasury.” Id. at 663–64.
The Court further stated that “the constitution does not allow
congress to vest the appointment of inferior officers
elsewhere than in the president alone, in the courts of law, or
in the heads of departments.” Id. at 663 (internal quotation
omitted). Avalos reads this statement as holding that the
immigration inspector was an inferior officer who had to be
appointed by the Secretary of the Treasury, a “Head[] of
Department[],” pursuant to the Appointments Clause. U.S.
Const. Art. II, § 2, cl. 2.

USA V. AVALOS

23

Assuming Avalos’s reading of Nishimura Ekiu is
correct, 5 a comparison of the immigration inspector’s
authority in that case with the authority of a deciding Service
officer does not support Avalos’s argument. Inspection
officers were granted broad authority.
They were
responsible for boarding vessels, inspecting and examining
immigrants, and removing and detaining them for
inspection. Nishimura Ekiu, 142 U.S. at 662. In determining
the “right of any alien to land,” inspectors determined a
broad range of issues, including whether individuals were
“idiots, insane persons, paupers or persons likely to become
a public charge, persons suffering from a loathsome or a
dangerous contagious disease, persons who have been
convicted of a felony or other infamous crime or
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, polygamists, and
also any person whose ticket or passage is paid for with the
money of another or who is assisted by others to come . . . .”
Act of Mar. 3, 1891, ch. 551, §§ 1, 8, 26 Stat. 1084.
Deciding Service officers do not have the same broad
authority or exercise the same level of discretion as historic
immigration inspectors.
Highlighting this point, in
Nishimura Ekiu itself, the inspector refused to allow the alien
to land because she was a “person likely to become a public
charge.” Nishimura Ekiu, 142 U.S. at 662. Today, such
determinations are made by IJs. See 8 U.S.C. §§ 1229a(a),
1182(a)(4), 1227(a)(5). Deciding Service officers’ authority
is fundamentally different, limited to the three
straightforward determinations explained above that do not
involve the exercise of significant discretion. In short,

The parties dispute whether the Court’s reference to the Appointments
Clause was dicta. We do not decide the issue in light of our conclusion
here.

5

24

USA V. AVALOS

neither the historical immigration inspector nor today’s IJs
are appropriate analogues to deciding Service officers.
Considering deciding Service officers’ duties as a whole,
we hold that they do not have significant authority. Deciding
Service officers’ authority and discretion is highly
constrained by regulation and limited to a narrow set of
issues. Such limited powers do not constitute “significant
authority pursuant to the laws of the United States.” Lucia,
585 U.S. at 245.
V
We hold that deciding Service officers in administrative
removal proceedings are not inferior officers subject to the
Appointments Clause. They do not occupy a “continuing
and permanent office,” Germaine, 99 U.S. at 512, nor do
they exercise significant authority pursuant to the laws of the
United States. Lucia, 585 U.S. at 245. Avalos therefore fails
to demonstrate fundamental unfairness under § 1326(d)(3).
AFFIRMED.

