FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
NOVALPINA CAPITAL
PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L,
Petitioner - Appellee,

No. 24-4835
D.C. No.
3:23-mc-00082IM

and
TREO ASSET MANAGEMENT,
LLC AND TREO NOAL GP,

OPINION

Intervenor - Appellant,
v.
TOBIAS READ; MICHAEL
LANGDON,
Respondents - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Karin J. Immergut, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 9, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 12, 2025

2

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

Before: SIDNEY R. THOMAS and MILAN D. SMITH,
JR., Circuit Judges, and DOUGLAS L. RAYES, District
Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.
SUMMARY**
Discovery for Use in Foreign Proceedings
Affirming the district court, the panel held that the
district court did not abuse its discretion in denying an
intervenor’s motion for reconsideration of a grant of
discovery under 28 U.S.C. § 1782 and an alternative request
to modify a protective order, where the documents produced
were used in foreign proceedings other than those identified
in the § 1782 petition.
The panel held that it had jurisdiction over the district
court’s order denying intervenor Treo Asset Management,
LLC, and Treo NOAL GP S.a.r.l.’s motion for
reconsideration and alternative request for modification of a
protective order. First, the district court properly exercised
its discretion in allowing Treo to permissively intervene
where the documents that Novalpina Capital Partners I GP
S.A.R.L. sought would allegedly be used to defend against
litigation brought by Treo, and Treo would also be one of the
*

The Honorable Douglas L. Rayes, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

3

defendants in Novalpina’s contemplated future fraud
action. Second, the district court’s order was final and
appealable under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Third, Treo had
standing because the documents in question were intended
to be, and were currently being, used in litigation against
Treo.
Agreeing with the Second and Eleventh Circuits, the
panel held that documents produced “for use” in specific
foreign proceedings under § 1782 may be used in
proceedings other than those identified in the petition, absent
an order to the contrary by the § 1782 district court.
The panel held that the district court did not abuse its
discretion
in
denying
Treo’s
motion
for
reconsideration. The panel held that the district court
applied the correct legal standard under Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 60(b)(2), and rejected Treo’s argument that the
district court failed to recognize, based on the evidence in
the record, that it had been misled by Novalpina.
Finally, the panel held that the district court also did not
abuse its discretion in denying Treo’s request to modify the
protective order.

4

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

COUNSEL
Tara J. Plochocki (argued), Sequor Law PA, Washington,
D.C.; Christopher A. Noel and Joseph Rome, Sequor Law
PA, Miami, Florida; Jesse D. Mondry, Harris Sliwoski LLP,
Portland, Oregon; for Petitioner-Appellee.
Edward B. Diskant (argued), McDermott Will & Emery
LLP, New York, New York; James Durkin, McDermott Will
& Emery LLP, Chicago, Illinois; Sagar K. Ravi, McDermott
Will & Emery LLP, Washington, D.C.; Peter D. Hawkes,
Angeli & Calfo LLC, Portland, Oregon; for IntervenorAppellants.
Ian Christy and Thomas C. Sand, Miller Nash LLP, Portland,
Oregon, for Respondents-Appellees.

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

5

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
This appeal concerns just one thread in a sprawling
tangle of litigation related to the bitter breakup between a
Luxembourg-based investment fund and its former General
Partner. While the dispute has mushroomed into a variety of
civil cases and criminal investigations winding their way
through multiple legal systems, the question before us is
simple: did the district court abuse its discretion in denying
a motion for reconsideration of a grant of discovery under 28
U.S.C. § 1782 and an alternative request to modify a
protective order, where the documents produced were used
in foreign proceedings other than those identified in the
§ 1782 petition? Because we hold that documents produced
“for use” under § 1782 as to one foreign proceeding may be
used in other proceedings, and because we find that the
district court did not abuse its discretion in determining that
it was not misled by the party requesting discovery, we
affirm.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
As might be expected from such an acrimonious split,
the parties present very different versions of the relevant
facts. To start from the undisputed beginning: in 2017,
Stephen Peel, Stefan Kowski, and Bastian Lueken (the
Founders) created the Luxembourg-based investment fund
now known as NOAL SCSp (the Fund). Petitioner-Appellee
Novalpina Capital Partners I GP S.À.R.L. (Novalpina)
served as the initial General Partner of the Fund, a position
now held by Intervenor-Appellant Treo NOAL GP S.à.r.l.,
whose parent company is Intervenor-Appellant Treo Asset
Management (collectively, Treo).

6

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

The Fund began with three limited partners, including
Peel’s family trust and a wholly owned subsidiary of a
corporation known as “Topco.” Each Founder holds a onethird interest in Topco, which is also the ultimate parent
corporation of Novalpina. Over time, the Fund added more
than 70 other institutional investors or private individuals as
limited partners, swelling the commitments in the Fund to
approximately €1 billion. The largest of these new limited
partners was the Oregon Public Employees Retirement Fund
(OPERF), which had invested approximately €200 million
in the Fund. At all relevant times, Michael Langdon was the
Director of Private Markets in the Oregon State Treasury
Investment Division, where he recommended investments in
private equity to be made on behalf of OPERF, while Tobias
Reed was the Oregon State Treasurer.
The Fund’s operating structure can be described as
intricate at best and byzantine at worst. Most relevant here,
it primarily holds its assets through a holding company
known as “Master Luxco.” Master Luxco’s holdings have
included the French pharmaceutical company LXO, the
Romanian gambling company Maxbet, and the Israeli
spyware company NSO Group. In turn, three partners
control Master Luxco: the Fund (directly holding less than
one percent of Master Luxco’s shares), the Fund (indirectly
holding just over ninety-eight percent of Master Luxco’s
shares via other entities held by the Fund), and Novalpina
(holding less than one percent of Master Luxco’s shares).
Meanwhile, the Fund is governed by a Limited
Partnership Agreement (LPA). At the time Novalpina was
serving as General Partner, the LPA stated that Luxembourg
courts were “to have the exclusive jurisdiction to settle any
disputes . . . which may arise out of or in connection with
th[e] agreement.” The LPA also provided for a Limited

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

7

Partnership Advisory Committee (LPAC) to advise the
Fund, and at all relevant times, Langdon served as Chairman
of the LPAC. The LPA also provided that in the event of
Novalpina’s removal, the Fund would have to pay it
contractual entitlements known as the Removal Entitlement
and Sponsor Commitment. The LPA stated that the total
amount of the Removal Entitlement and Sponsor
Commitment would be based on the value of the Fund at the
time Novalpina was removed, to be determined by an
independent valuer.
In late 2020, Kowski and Lueken had a falling out with
Peel. At that point, Novalpina’s and Treo’s versions of the
relevant facts begin to diverge. According to Treo, Kowski
and Lueken attempted to remove Peel from management of
Topco, leading the Fund’s limited partners to become
concerned about the Fund’s stability. The limited partners
then decided to remove Novalpina as General Partner; at the
request of the limited partners, Novalpina called an
investors’ meeting to vote on its removal. Treo argues that
in an effort to remain in power, Kowski and Lueken took a
variety of improper steps in the run-up to the removal vote,
including suspending Peel’s voting rights within Topco and
removing three of Novalpina’s independent managers, who
they replaced with allies.
These allies then allegedly caused Novalpina to exercise
its power as General Partner to install them as managers of
the Fund’s wholly owned subsidiaries. This maneuver gave
them effective control of Master Luxco. Then, according to
Treo, Novalpina, “acting via Kowski, Lueken, and the newly
appointed directors under their control, surreptitiously
amended the articles of association for Master Luxco to
require unanimity among all its shareholders . . . to approve
virtually any action or decision.” This provision, Treo

8

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

contends, gave Novalpina (through its less than one percent
stake in Master Luxco) an effective veto over any
shareholder decision of the Fund, notwithstanding its
impending removal as General Partner. The day after this
amendment, the Fund’s limited partners voted to remove
Novalpina, and several weeks later replaced it with Treo,
which remains the General Partner today.
Meanwhile, in Novalpina’s version of the facts, Peel was
the problem Founder who devised a plan to remove Kowksi
and Lueken. Peel purportedly “wanted more than his one
third of the Founder[s’] economics” and, to that end, wanted
to install a new General Partner than he alone controlled.
Langdon allegedly secretly supported Peel’s takeover
attempt. Novalpina asserts that Langdon proposed to the
LPAC that an associate of U.S. consulting firm BRG Asset
Management LLC take over as the new General Partner.
Treo was duly created as a Luxembourgish affiliate of BRG
Asset Management LLC on July 30, 2021, and nominated as
General Partner on August 6, 2021, twenty days after
Novalpina was voted out.
Novalpina claims that, following Treo’s takeover, Treo
and the LPAC induced Novalpina to agree to valuation
principles for payment of the Removal Entitlement and
Sponsor Commitment, which Novalpina acceded to in
exchange for a smooth transition in leadership despite overt
breaches of the LPA by Treo and the LPAC. Novalpina now
claims that this inducement was fraudulent and that, once
Treo and the LPAC realized how much money was at stake,
they took steps to ensure that they would never have to pay
Novalpina the money it is owed. For example, Novalpina
claims that the Fund sold LXO to a friend of Langdon’s for
€20 million less than it was worth to reduce the amount of
liquidity that would be available to pay Novalpina.

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

9

Following its ouster, Novalpina filed four lawsuits in
Luxembourg, “the Summons 1–4 proceedings.” These
lawsuits collectively seek: (1) nullification of actions taken
after its removal as General Partner, (2) its reinstatement as
General Partner, and/or (3) financial damages. Of particular
importance here, the “Summons 4” action, which includes as
defendants Treo, Langdon, and OPERF, is a merits
proceeding in which Novalpina seeks reinstatement as
General Partner and payment of the Removal Entitlement
and Sponsor Commitment. Novalpina also represents that it
is contemplating a future lawsuit against Treo and members
of the LPAC (including Langdon) alleging that they
fraudulently attempted to deprive Novalpina of the money it
is owed.
Meanwhile, Treo has filed its own lawsuit in
Luxembourg that it calls the “Veto Right Litigation.” Treo
and the Fund seek a court order nullifying the resolutions
amending Master Luxco’s articles of association to require
unanimity among shareholders to approve decisions of
Master Luxco, which it claims gave Novalpina—with its less
than one percent interest—“a right to veto legitimate and
necessary management decisions of Master Luxco, even
where those decisions were supported by the holders of the
remaining 99 percent interest.” Treo states that this litigation
“is narrowly focused and turns entirely on whether
[Novalpina] abused its authority as the then-General Partner
of the Fund to enact a provision for its own self-benefit and
to the Fund’s detriment in violation of duties owed as the
General Partner.”
PROCEDUAL BACKGROUND
On January 27, 2023, Novalpina filed an ex parte petition
for judicial assistance pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1782 in the

10

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

District of Oregon. Novalpina sought documents from Read
and Langdon “for the purpose of obtaining limited, but
critical, discovery for use in connection with a foreign civil
proceeding currently pending in the Commercial Chambers
of the Luxembourg District Court, in which Novalpina GP is
an interested person,” referring to the Veto Right Litigation,
“and for a contemplated claim to be filed in the same court”
against Langdon, Treo, and others it believed assisted Peel.1
Novalpina stated that it “[d]id not file this Petition in
connection with” its existing lawsuits but only as a defense
to the Veto Right Litigation and in support of the potential
fraud claim. Treo moved to intervene, arguing that it could
“provide the Court with important context” about the
relevant foreign proceedings, including “the manner in
which the instant request improperly seeks discovery from
‘participant[]s’ in those proceedings.” Langdon and Read
also moved to intervene. The district court granted both
motions.
On August 10, 2023, the district court granted the § 1782
petition. The district court first reviewed § 1782’s statutory
requirements, which are that “(1) the person from whom the
discovery is sought ‘resides or is found’ in the district of the
district court where the application is made; (2) the
discovery is ‘for use in a proceeding in a foreign or
international tribunal’; and (3) the application is made by a
foreign or international tribunal or ‘any interested person.’”
Khrapunov v. Prosyankin, 931 F.3d 922, 925 (9th Cir. 2019)
1

The same day, Novalpina filed a § 1782 petition in the Southern District
of New York, seeking documents from Treo Asset Management and
certain of its officers and employees for use in the same two proceedings.
Judge Gardephe later granted in part and denied in part the respondents’
motion to quash. In re Novalpina Cap. Partners I GP S.À.R.L., 23 Misc.
25 (PGG), 2025 WL 1160854, at *33 (S.D.N.Y. Apr. 21, 2025).

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

11

(quoting 28 U.S.C. § 1782(a)). The district court found that
these requirements were easily met: Langdon and Read
resided in the District of Oregon; the material sought was
“for use” in defending pending litigation and in
contemplated counter-litigation; and Novalpina was an
“interested person” as it was currently a party to the foreign
litigation and a would-be plaintiff in the future fraud suit.
Even where a petitioner meets the statutory requirements
under § 1782, a district court maintains discretion to deny a
petition. Under Intel Corp. v. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.,
542 U.S. 241 (2004), the four non-exclusive factors that
govern a court’s discretion are: “(1) whether ‘the person
from whom discovery is sought is a participant in the foreign
proceeding;’ (2) ‘the nature of the foreign tribunal, the
character of the proceedings underway abroad, and the
receptivity of the foreign government or the court or agency
abroad to U.S. federal-court judicial assistance;’
(3) ‘whether the § 1782(a) request conceals an attempt to
circumvent foreign proof-gathering restrictions or other
policies of a foreign country or the United States;’ and
(4) whether the discovery requests are ‘unduly intrusive or
burdensome.’” CPC Pat. Techs. Pty Ltd. v. Apple Inc., 119
F.4th 1126, 1129 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting Intel, 542 U.S. at
264–65). The district court found that all four factors
weighed in favor of granting the petition, noting in particular
that the first factor weighed in favor of Novalpina because
Langdon and Read “are not parties to the proceeding for
which discovery is sought.”
Novalpina, Langdon, and Read subsequently negotiated
a proposed protective order, partly at Treo’s request. Section
4.1 of the final protective order stated that protected material
could be used or disclosed in “litigation relating to the events
described in the [§ 1782 petition].” The original language of

12

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

the draft order read “litigation relating to this Petition,” but
Novalpina changed the language to “relating to the events
described in the Petition,” a change with Langdon and Read
accepted.
On January 24, 2024, Langdon and Read moved for the
district court to enter this protective order. The version of
the protective order filed that day—which was available on
the docket—contained the “relating to the events” language
that the parties had negotiated. The district court denied this
motion on January 30, finding that the motion did not
contain enough information to demonstrate good cause
existed to issue the order. On February 7, Langdon and Read
filed a renewed, unopposed motion setting forth
supplemental information. Finding good cause, the district
court then granted the protective order as necessary “to
protect the confidential nature of certain information.”
Shortly after the entry of the protective order, Novalpina
used documents obtained from Langdon and Read in the
Summons 4 litigation (in which Langdon was a defendant)
and provided those documents to third parties, such as
Kowski, to be used in separate litigation. Langdon and Read
then refused to produce further documents until Novalpina
explained why it was sharing confidential information with
non-parties and using the documents in litigation outside of
the Veto Right Litigation and the contemplated future fraud
action. On April 10, 2024, Novalpina moved to compel. On
April 24, 2024, Langdon and Read filed their opposition to
the motion to compel and filed a cross-motion to amend the
protective order. 2 Also on April 24, 2024, Treo filed a
motion for reconsideration of the grant of the § 1782 petition
2

Langdon and Read also asked for reciprocal discovery, which the
district court denied and which is irrelevant to this appeal.

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

13

under Rule 60(b)(2) or, in the alternative, to amend the
protective order.
On July 30, 2024, the district court granted Novalpina’s
motion to compel, denied Langdon and Read’s motion to
amend the protective order, and denied Treo’s motion for
reconsideration or, in the alternative, to amend the protective
order. Quoting In re Accent Delight Int’l Ltd., 869 F.3d 121,
135 (2d Cir. 2017), a § 1782 case, the district court began by
noting that, “[a]s a general matter, ‘[§] 1782 does not prevent
an applicant who lawfully has obtained discovery under the
statute with respect to one foreign proceeding from using the
discovery elsewhere unless the district court orders
otherwise.’” Then, quoting Glock v. Glock, Inc., 797 F.3d
1002, 1009 (11th Cir. 2015), another § 1782 case, the district
court noted that “[n]othing prevents a party from seeking to
negotiate a protective order precluding the evidence from
being used in [other] litigation, particularly if the party has
reason to believe that it risks exposure to [other] litigation
based on the evidence produced.”
Beginning with Langdon and Read’s motion to modify
the protective order, the district court noted that, in granting
the § 1782 petition, it “did not limit the use of materials to
the two proceedings identified by” Novalpina. It further
noted that, exactly as contemplated by Glock, Langdon and
Read had negotiated a protective order at “arm’s length” and
that Section 4.1 was “unambiguous” in not limiting the use
of protected material to the two proceedings Novalpina
identified as the basis for the § 1782 petition. The court then
commented that if Langdon and Read really relied on
Novalpina’s representations to the district court that it only
wanted the documents for use in those two proceedings, they
“would not have stipulated to a protective order that plainly
allows for the use of materials beyond the two proceedings

14

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

identified in the § 1782 Petition” and that their “subsequent
remorse regarding [Section 4.1] does not amount to the good
cause necessary for this Court to modify the Protective
Order.”
Turning to Treo’s independent motions, the district court
found insufficient evidence of Novalpina’s “chicanery,”
Glock, 797 F.3d at 1009, to justify reconsideration of the
grant of the § 1782 order and stated that Treo’s alternate
request for amendment of the protective order was denied
for the same reasons as Langdon and Read’s motion.
On August 5, 2024, Treo timely appealed. Langdon and
Read have not filed a brief in connection with this appeal.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review the denial of a motion for reconsideration for
abuse of discretion. Smith v. Pac. Props. & Dev. Corp., 358
F.3d 1097, 1100 (9th Cir. 2004). We also review the denial
of a request to modify a protective order for abuse of
discretion. Beckman Indus., Inc. v. Int’l Ins. Co., 966 F.2d
470, 472 (9th Cir. 1992). Any underlying questions of law
are reviewed de novo. Id.
ANALYSIS
I. We Have Appellate Jurisdiction Over the District
Court’s Order
We must first determine whether we have jurisdiction
over the district court’s order denying Treo’s motion for
reconsideration and its alternate request for modification of
the protective order. Although Novalpina only disputes that
Treo has standing and does not challenge other jurisdictional
issues, we nonetheless “briefly analyze the basis for our
jurisdiction because we have an independent duty to do so.”

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

15

CPC Pat. Techs. Pty Ltd. v. Apple, Inc., 34 F.4th 801, 805
(9th Cir. 2022).
As a preliminary matter, we must determine whether the
district court properly allowed Treo to permissively
intervene.3 A district court “may permit anyone to intervene
who . . . has a claim or defense that shares with the main
action a common question of law or fact.” Fed. R. Civ. P.
24(b)(1)(B). We review the district court’s decision to grant
permissive intervention under the abuse of discretion
standard. Beckman Indus., Inc., 966 F.2d at 472.
We conclude that the district court did not abuse its
discretion in allowing Treo to intervene. The documents that
Novalpina sought will allegedly be used to defend against
the Veto Right Litigation, which was brought by Treo, and
Treo would also be one of the defendants in Novalpina’s
contemplated future fraud action. Treo was in a better
position than Langdon and Read to discuss the status of this
foreign litigation and intervened specifically to “shed
additional light” on the § 1782 factors as applied in this case.
As such, Treo’s conduct was at the center of Novalpina’s
document request, and it asserted questions of fact and law
common to that request. Additionally, the district court
considered other discretionary factors, such as delay, when
determining whether to allow Treo to intervene. Ultimately,
“Rule 24 traditionally receives liberal construction in favor
of applicants for intervention,” and we see no reason not to

3

Because only an intervenor appeals the district court’s judgment, the
question of intervention is jurisdictional. Idaho Farm Bureau Fed’n v.
Babbitt, 58 F.3d 1392, 1397 n.1 (9th Cir. 1995).

16

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

construe it liberally here.4 Arakaki v. Cayetano, 324 F.3d
1078, 1083 (9th Cir. 2003).
Next, we conclude that the district court’s denial of
Treo’s motion for reconsideration and its alternative request
for modification of the protective order were “final” and
therefore appealable under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Although
discovery orders are usually not appealable because they are
interlocutory, § 1782 is unique, and we have long considered
the denial or grant of § 1782 petitions to be immediately
appealable. 5 See, e.g., Khrapunov, 931 F.3d at 931–32
(Callahan, J., concurring in the judgment and dissenting)
(collecting cases); see also In re 840 140th Ave. Ne., 634
F.3d 557, 565–67 (9th Cir. 2011). Additionally, we have
long considered motions to modify a protective order to be
immediately appealable. See Foltz v. State Farm Mut. Auto.
Ins. Co., 331 F.3d 1122, 1129 (9th Cir. 2003); Beckman
Indus., Inc., 966 F.2d at 472.
Notably, we have recently clarified a major exception to
the general rule that grants of § 1782 petitions are
immediately appealable. In CPC Patent, we found that the
grant of a § 1782 petition was not yet appealable because
4

Although the procedural posture of this case is unusual—intervention
motions are often filed and considered only after the district court grants
a § 1782 petition, see, e.g., In re Ambercroft Trading Ltd., No. 18-mc80074-KAW, 2018 WL 4773187, at *1, *4 (N.D. Cal. Oct. 3, 2018); de
Leon v. Clorox Co., No. 19-mc-80296-DMR, 2020 WL 4584204, at *2
(N.D. Cal. Aug. 10, 2020)—we conclude that it is not inherently an abuse
of discretion for a district court to allow intervention at an earlier point.
5

Treo did not have to appeal the grant of the original § 1782 petition to
appeal the denial of the motion for reconsideration. See, e.g., Straw v.
Bowen, 866 F.2d 1167, 1171 (9th Cir. 1989). And because Treo could
have immediately appealed the former, it could immediately appeal the
latter. See Zamani v. Carnes, 491 F.3d 990, 994 (9th Cir. 2007).

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

17

significant aspects of the discovery were still to be
determined. See 119 F.4th at 1129. The CPC Patent
exception is not applicable here, however, because the scope
of the discovery was sufficiently defined; indeed, the case
underlying this appeal was closed shortly before oral
argument because the parties did not anticipate any further
proceedings before the district court. All that this appeal will
determine is how the discovery can be used in other
proceedings moving forward.
Finally, Treo had standing before the district court to
challenge the grant of the original § 1782 petition and has
standing to appeal the district court’s denials of its motion
for reconsideration and alternative request for modification
of the protective order. Although Novalpina argues that
Treo has not suffered a concrete injury, this circuit has
expressly stated that “[t]he party against whom requested . . .
records are to be used has standing to challenge the validity
of the order . . . to produce the records.” In re Request for
Jud. Assistance from Seoul Dist. Crim. Ct., 555 F.2d 720,
723 (9th Cir. 1977). The crux of this dispute is that the
documents in question were intended to be, and are currently
being, used in litigation against Treo. Nothing more is
required for Treo to have standing.
II. Documents Produced “For Use” Under § 1782 May
Be Used in Proceedings Other Than Those
Identified in the Petition
Underlying this appeal is a threshold legal question that
we have not yet had the opportunity to answer: can
documents produced “for use” in specific foreign
proceedings under § 1782 be used in proceedings other than
those identified in the § 1782 petition? The district court
concluded that the answer was yes, relying on the Eleventh

18

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

Circuit’s analysis in Glock and the Second Circuit’s analysis
in In Re Accent Delight. We agree with the district court and
our sister circuits and hold that documents produced “for
use” in certain proceedings may be used in other proceedings
as well absent an order to the contrary by the § 1782 district
court.6
As we must for all questions of statutory interpretation,
we begin with the language of the statute itself. See Cheneau
v. Garland, 997 F.3d 916, 919 (9th Cir. 2021) (en banc). In
relevant part, § 1782 provides:
The district court of the district in which a
person resides or is found may order him to
give his testimony or statement or to produce
a document or other thing for use in a
proceeding in a foreign or international
tribunal . . . . The order may prescribe the
practice and procedure, which may be in
whole or part the practice and procedure of
the foreign country or the international
tribunal, for taking the testimony or statement
or producing the document or other thing. To
the extent that the order does not prescribe
otherwise, the testimony or statement shall be
taken, and the document or other thing

6

Glock concerned documents produced for use in foreign proceedings
that were subsequently used in U.S. civil litigation, while In re Accent
Delight concerned documents produced for use in one set of foreign
proceedings that were later used in other foreign proceedings. See Glock,
797 F.3d at 1010; In re Accent Delight, 869 F.3d at 133. As the Second
Circuit recognized, the same logic largely applies to both circumstances.
In re Accent Delight, 869 F.3d at 135.

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

19

produced, in accordance with the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure.
28 U.S.C. § 1782(a). As our sister circuits have recognized,
this text “reveals no great insights.” In re Accent Delight,
869 F.3d at 133. On the one hand, there is nothing in the
language of § 1782 that limits the use of discovery produced
under the statute to only the identified proceedings. Glock,
797 F.3d at 1006. On the other hand, however, “neither did
Congress include a sentence in the statute providing that
once discovery is lawfully received under § 1782, it may be
used for other legal purposes.” Id. Rather, this text merely
sets out § 1782’s basic requirements and leaves the
procedure for obtaining documents or testimony to the
district courts.
The legislative history does not provide a definitive
answer as to the intended scope of discovery use either. As
our sister circuits have explained, there is nothing in the
legislative materials accompanying the law that suggests
Congress ever contemplated the precise question at issue
here. See id. at 1007; In re Accent Delight, 869 F.3d at 134.
However, as the Supreme Court detailed in Intel, the history
of § 1782 is a history of continuous expansion—rather than
retraction—of the kind of assistance federal courts can
provide to foreign tribunals. 542 U.S. at 247–49. As the
Intel Court explained, the enactment of § 1782 in 1948
“substantially broadened” the scope of assistance that
federal courts could provide to proceedings abroad, and in
1964, Congress expanded § 1782 to cover quasi-judicial
proceedings as well. Id. at 247–48. Although the Senate
Report accompanying the 1964 amendment did not address
the use of documents in other proceedings, it did emphasize
that the district court maintained “discretion” to “refuse to

20

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

issue an order” or “impose conditions it deems desirable.”
In re Accent Delight, 869 F.3d at 134 (quoting S. Rep. No.
88-1580 (1964), as reprinted in 1964 U.S.C.C.A.N. 3782,
3788).
As such, although the text and history of § 1782 do not
provide conclusive answers as to the scope of potential
document use, they do at least “demonstrate that Section
1782 entrusts to the district courts many decisions about the
manner in which discovery under the statute is produced,
handled, and used.” Id. Therefore, we turn to the analogy
of domestic litigation, where discovery also relies heavily on
a district court’s discretion. Notably, like § 1782, the Rules
of Civil Procedure do not expressly restrict discovery
obtained from a defendant in one case from being used in a
wholly separate lawsuit. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 26. Rather,
district courts maintain discretion to limit the scope of
discovery. Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(b). Additionally, just as they
can for discovery obtained via § 1782, district courts can
enter protective orders for discovery obtained in domestic
litigation that prohibit the use of that discovery in other
proceedings. Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(c). Critically, the
availability of “common restrictions” like protective orders
would be “entirely superfluous” if § 1782 prohibited
successful applicants from using the documents in other
proceedings. In re Accent Delight, 869 F.3d at 135.
We therefore see no principled reason why documents
obtained “for use” in certain proceedings under § 1782
cannot be used in other proceedings not identified in the
§ 1782 petition. Just as they do for domestic discovery,
district courts maintain discretion over the entire § 1782
process, and as needed (and as occurred here) may enter
appropriate protective orders. Certainly, we agree with our
sister circuits that district courts—as they presumably

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

21

already do—should carefully review § 1782 petitions to
ensure that applicants are not using the petitions as a “sham”
or “ruse” for obtaining discovery for other proceedings in
which they could not otherwise obtain discovery. See id.;
Glock, 797 F.3d at 1009. If such evidence exists, it might
support denying a petition or granting a motion to reconsider
or might provide good cause for entering a protective order.
See In re Accent Delight, 869 F.3d at 135. For the reasons
explained in Parts III and IV, however, we find that in this
case, the district court did not abuse its discretion in refusing
to grant Treo’s motion to reconsider or its alternative request
to modify the protective order.
Finally, we disagree with Treo’s assertion that such a
holding conflicts with our prior precedents. Specifically,
Treo seemingly reads Khrapunov to require an express
assessment of the statutory § 1782 and discretionary Intel
factors for each foreign proceeding in which the discovery is
used. But Khrapunov concerned a § 1782 petition based on
proceedings in England in which the English courts issued
final denials of the appellee’s applications while the appeal
related to the grant of the appellee’s § 1782 petition was still
pending in this court. Khrapunov, 931 F.3d at 924. As a
result, we remanded back to the district court to conduct
additional fact-finding about the nature of the English
proceedings, including whether those proceedings could be
reopened, to determine whether the second § 1782 statutory
requirement—that the documents be produced for use in a
foreign “proceeding”—was still met. Id. at 925–26.
Khrapunov therefore only addressed the issue of whether
there must be at least one clear “proceeding” underlying the
§ 1782 petition, not whether documents produced for one (or
more) qualified “proceedings” may subsequently be used in
other litigation.

22

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

We therefore join the Second and Eleventh Circuits and
hold that documents produced “for use” under § 1782 for
certain proceedings may be used in other proceedings absent
an order to the contrary by the § 1782 district court. As such,
the district court did not commit a threshold legal error by
allowing documents produced for use in the Veto Right
Litigation and Novalpina’s future fraud lawsuit to be used in
other foreign proceedings. And, for the reasons explained
below, it did not otherwise abuse its discretion in denying
Treo’s motion for reconsideration and alternative request for
modification of the protective order.
III. The District Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion
in Denying Treo’s Motion for Reconsideration
On appeal, Treo argues that the district court abused its
discretion in denying its motion for reconsideration by
applying the wrong legal standard for Rule 60(b)(2) and by
failing to recognize, based on the evidence in the record, that
it had been misled by Novalpina. Both arguments are
unavailing.
As to the legal argument, Treo argues that when the
district court stated that it was denying Treo’s motion for
reconsideration because it did not find evidence of
Novalpina’s “chicanery,” it failed to consider the appropriate
factors under Rule 60(b)(2) and mistakenly assumed that
evidence of “chicanery” was required for relief under Rule
60(b)(2). Under Rule 60(b)(2), a district court may grant a
party relief from a final judgment, but “the movant must
show the evidence (1) existed at the time of [the judgment],
(2) could not have been discovered through due diligence,
and (3) was ‘of such magnitude that production of it earlier
would have been likely to change the disposition of the
case.’” Jones v. Aero/Chem Corp., 921 F.2d 875, 878 (9th

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

23

Cir. 1990) (quoting Coastal Transfer Co. v. Toyota Motor
Sales, U.S.A., 833 F.2d 208, 211 (9th Cir. 1987)). A motion
for reconsideration is an “extraordinary remedy” that
“should not be granted, absent highly unusual
circumstances.” Carroll v. Nakatani, 342 F.3d 934, 945 (9th
Cir. 2003) (first quoting 12 Moore’s Federal Practice
§ 59.30[4] (3d ed. 2000); and then quoting Kona Enters.,
Inc. v. Est. of Bishop, 229 F.3d 877, 890 (9th Cir. 2000)).
However, the district court did not apply the wrong legal
standard. Earlier in its order, the district court had
specifically laid out the three Rule 60(b)(2) factors. The
district court then acknowledged, quoting Carroll, that a
motion for reconsideration is an “extraordinary remedy that
‘should not be granted, absent highly unusual
circumstances.’” Notably, although Treo alleges that the
district court erroneously denied Treo’s motion because it
improperly found that Treo had not provided evidence of
Novalpina’s “chicanery,” the district court’s full sentence
reads that Treo had not provided evidence of
“chicanery . . . to justify such extraordinary relief.” In so
stating, the district court was clearly referencing the legal
standards it had set out earlier and implicitly holding that,
even if Treo had met the three prongs of Rule 60(b)(2), the
district court would not exercise its discretion to grant relief.
We find no error of law and do not require the district court
to have explained its reasoning further.
Moreover, the district court did not require evidence of
“chicanery” as an independent legal standard, as Treo
alleges. Before the district court, Treo expressly framed its
new evidence under Rule 60(b)(2)’s first prong as evidence
of “chicanery” per Glock. Indeed, even on appeal, Treo
continues to frame its new evidence as evidence of
Novalpina’s “improper efforts to circumvent the laws and

24

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

courts of the forum jurisdiction,” thereby again arguing that
its new evidence is simply evidence of Novalpina’s
misconduct. The district court solely discussed “chicanery”
because that is the only kind of new evidence that Treo
provided.7 We refuse to find a legal error simply because
Treo is upset that the district court accurately characterized
its own arguments.
Assuming then that Treo’s evidence of Novalpina’s
chicanery qualifies as new evidence that could not be
discovered with “due diligence,”8 we conclude Treo has not
provided evidence of Novalpina’s “chicanery” such that it
was an abuse of discretion for the court not to grant the
motion for reconsideration. Treo argues that “the record
presented to the district court not only established that it had
been misled in deciding to grant the Petition, but that
Petitioner’s reliance on the two proceedings identified had
7

To the extent that Treo also seems to argue that its new evidence was
also evidence of changed factual circumstances under Khrapunov, that
argument is both forfeited and unavailing. As explained above,
Khrapunov merely requires that a district court re-evaluate the statutory
§ 1782 and discretionary Intel factors when necessary to ensure that at
least one qualified proceeding underlies the grant of the § 1782 petition.
8

Notably, it is not clear that Treo’s new evidence even qualifies as new
evidence that this court can consider under Rule 60(b)(2) because Treo’s
new evidence is—in its own framing—evidence of “subsequent
developments” indicating that Novalpina lied to the district court. Under
this court’s precedent, new evidence must have existed “at the time” of
the original decision. Jones, 921 F.2d at 878. We have repeatedly
explained that “evidence of events occurring after the trial is not newly
discovered evidence within the meaning of the rules.” Corex Corp. v.
United States, 638 F.2d 119, 121 (9th Cir. 1981) (collecting cases),
abrogated on other grounds by Falk v. Allen, 739 F.2d 461 (9th Cir.
1984). However, because Treo’s argument fails on other grounds, we
assume without deciding that it has presented qualifying new evidence.

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

25

been largely pretextual.” Treo alleges that Novalpina has
made “exceedingly limited use of the discovery sought in the
Veto Right Litigation,” has not yet filed the future fraud
claim, and has made “significant use” of the documents in
other proceedings, all of which should have demonstrated to
the district court that Novalpina had engaged in the kind of
“chicanery” that warrants relief.
However, the district court is in the best position to
determine if it has been misled. See Glock, 797 F.3d at 1009
(“When subsequent challenges arise, the § 1782 court,
having entered the § 1782 order and, if applicable, the
governing protective order, is in the best position to quickly
evaluate allegations of improper use of § 1782 and the
meaning of any governing protective order.”). Treo has not
climbed the exceedingly steep hill required to show that the
district court abused its discretion when it found that,
although Treo may not have understood the potential scope
of document use under § 1782, the court itself always did.
First, for the reasons discussed above, there is nothing
inherently improper about documents produced “for use” in
certain proceedings under § 1782 from being used in other
proceedings. Second, the district court meaningfully
considered the relevant evidence of Novalpina’s purported
misconduct, as demonstrated by the fact that it refused to
award costs to Novalpina for Langdon and Read’s
noncompliance with the subpoenas. Although the district
court ultimately rejected their argument—which rested on
the same evidence of “chicanery” as Treo’s motion—it
nonetheless found that Langdon and Read were
“substantially justified” in their noncompliance. Only after
considering all this evidence did the district court also
determine that Treo had not provided evidence of
Novalpina’s “chicanery” sufficient to justify granting the

26

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

motion. Third, although Treo argues that Novalpina’s use of
the documents in the Veto Right Litigation has been “very
limited,” it does still acknowledge that the documents have
been used in that proceeding. And the Southern District of
New York did not rule on Treo’s motion to quash
Novalpina’s similar § 1782 petition against Treo Asset
Management until shortly before oral argument in this case,
which explains why the filing of Novalpina’s future fraud
proceeding had not yet occurred at the time of the district
court’s ruling. Novalpina, 2025 WL 1160854.
Ultimately, given the district court’s acknowledgement
of the relevant evidence, the proper use of the discovery in
the Veto Right Litigation, and that the district court is, of
course, in the best position to determine whether it was
misled, we cannot say that the district court’s denial of
Treo’s motion for reconsideration was “(1) illogical,
(2) implausible, or (3) without support in inferences that
may be drawn from the facts in the record.” Brandt v. Am.
Bankers Ins. Co. of Fla., 653 F.3d 1108, 1110 (9th Cir. 2011)
(cleaned up) (quoting United States v. Signed Pers. Check
No. 730 of Yubran S. Mesle, 615 F.3d 1085, 1091 (9th Cir.
2010)).
IV. The District Court Did Not Abuse Its Discretion
in Denying Treo’s Request to Modify the
Protective Order
Treo also argues that, alternatively, the district court
abused its discretion in denying its motion to modify the
protective order. Treo faults the district court both for not
making any findings that the modifications sought by Treo
were unwarranted and for not providing independent
consideration to Treo’s interest in seeing the order modified.

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

27

We again conclude that the district court did not abuse its
discretion.
First, the district court extensively explained why it was
denying Langdon and Read’s motion to modify the
protective order, which asked for the same modifications
that Treo’s motion did. The district court explained that its
order granting the § 1782 petition did not limit the use of
documents to only the Veto Right Litigation and future fraud
proceeding, and that if Langdon and Read really relied on
Novalpina’s representations that the documents would not
be used in other litigation, they “would not have stipulated
to a protective order that plainly allows for the use of
materials beyond” those two proceedings. The district court
did not need to copy and paste this analysis into its section
denying Treo’s identical request. The district court made
clear its analysis was the same for both parties and so such
duplication would be unnecessary.
Second, Treo’s argument that the district court abused its
discretion by failing to consider its individual harms and
circumstances fails because—contrary to its assertions
otherwise—Treo is indeed similarly situated to Langdon and
Read. Specifically, Treo argues that the district court’s
conclusion that Langdon and Read’s “subsequent remorse”
regarding Section 4.1 “does not amount to the good cause
necessary” to amend the protective order should not have
applied to Treo, because Treo played no role in negotiating
the protective order. But the protective order was negotiated
in part on Treo’s behalf, and the protective order was
available on the docket for weeks before it went into effect.9

9

The protective order was on the docket—but not yet in effect—in the
period between Langdon and Read’s initial filing of the protective order,

28

NOVALPINA CAP. PARTNERS I GP S.A.R.L. V. READ

Like Langdon and Read, Treo easily qualifies as a
sophisticated party, so the district court’s conclusion that
Langdon and Read’s “subsequent remorse” does not provide
good cause equally applies to Treo.
Finally, Treo’s additional arguments that the district
court abused its discretion in denying its motion to modify
the protective order because it (1) erroneously allowed
documents produced for use in certain proceedings under
§ 1782 to be used in other proceedings and (2) failed to
recognize that it had been misled by Novalpina as to the use
of the discovery, are rejected for the reasons explained
above.
AFFIRMED.

which the district court rejected, and the district court’s ultimate entry of
the protective order.

