FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ESTATE OF JILL ANN ESCHE;
SIERRA JILL WOFFORD, by and
through her guardian ad litem Wayne
Wofford; CAMRON SCOTT
ESCHE,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
MARTA J. BUNUEL-JORDANA,
M.D.; CAITLIN E. HERSCHEL,
RN; CAROLINE VASENDIN, M.D.;
JOHANNA GRUEN Ph. D.;
MEAGEN SMITH,
Defendants - Appellants,
and
RENOWN REGIONAL MEDICAL
CENTER,
Defendant.

No. 24-6244
D.C. No.
3:21-cv-00520MMD-CLB

OPINION

2

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

ESTATE OF JILL ANN ESCHE;
SIERRA JILL WOFFORD, by and
through her guardian ad litem Wayne
Wofford; CAMRON SCOTT
ESCHE,

No. 24-6245
D.C. No.
3:21-cv-00520MMD-CLB

Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
RENOWN REGIONAL MEDICAL
CENTER,
Defendant - Appellant,
and
MARTA J. BUNUEL-JORDANA,
M.D., CAROLINE VASENDIN,
M.D., JOHANNA GRUEN Ph. D.,
MEAGEN SMITH, CAITLIN E.
HERSCHEL,
Defendants.
ESTATE OF JILL ANN ESCHE;
SIERRA JILL WOFFORD, by and
through her guardian ad litem Wayne
Wofford; CAMRON SCOTT
ESCHE,

No. 24-6382
D.C. No.
3:21-cv-00520MMD-CLB

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
RENOWN REGIONAL MEDICAL
CENTER; MARTA J. BUNUELJORDANA; CAROLINE
VASENDIN; JOHANNA GRUEN
Ph. D.; MEAGEN SMITH; CAITLIN
E. HERSCHEL,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Miranda M. Du, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted August 20, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 29, 2025
Before: Marsha S. Berzon, Mark J. Bennett, and Jennifer
Sung, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Berzon

3

4

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

SUMMARY *
Collateral Order Doctrine
The panel dismissed for lack of jurisdiction interlocutory
appeals brought by Renown Regional Medical Center and
others (together, “Renown”), holding that the district court’s
denial of Renown’s good-faith defense to 42 U.S.C. § 1983
liability was not immediately appealable under the collateral
order doctrine.
Plaintiffs allege that Renown, acting under color of state
law, violated Jill Esche’s federal constitutional rights and
Nevada law when it among other things, involuntarily
hospitalized her and then allowed her to leave in so fragile a
condition that she died outside near the hospital that
night. The district court granted Renown’s motion for
summary judgment on some claims but denied its assertion
of a good-faith defense as to the remaining § 1983
claims. Renown asserted that it was not liable because it
acted in compliance with Nevada’s involuntary-commitment
statutes.
The panel held that although on the merits the case raised
troubling questions, the district court’s denial of Renown’s
good-faith defense to § 1983 liability was not immediately
appealable under the collateral order doctrine, so there was
no decision within the panel’s jurisdiction to review. The
good-faith defense is a defense to § 1983 liability and not an
immunity from suit. An erroneous ruling on liability may be
reviewed effectively on appeal from final judgment. Thus,
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

5

the collateral order doctrine does not apply, and the panel
lacked jurisdiction over the consolidated appeals.
The panel dismissed plaintiffs’ cross-appeal of the merits
of their constitutional claims for lack of pendent jurisdiction
because there was no independently reviewable issue before
the panel.

COUNSEL
Kerry S. Doyle (argued) and Roger S. Doyle, Doyle Law
Office PLLC, Reno, Nevada; Steve H. Osborne, Law Office
of Stephen H. Osborne, Reno, Nevada; for PlaintiffsAppellees.
Lorie S. Gildea (argued), Eric W. Swanis, and Elliot T.
Anderson, Greenberg Traurig LLP, Las Vegas, Nevada;
Dominique A. Pollara, Pollara Law Group, Sacramento,
California; William D. Cope, Law Office of William D.
Cope, Reno, Nevada; for Defendants-Appellants.
Jacob Z. Goldstein, Hall Prangle & Schoonveld LLC,
Chicago, Illinois, for Amicus Curiae Nevada Hospital
Association.

6

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

OPINION
BERZON, Circuit Judge:
On its merits, this case raises troubling questions: Did
private health-care providers acting under color of state law
violate a patient’s constitutional rights when, without a court
order, they forcibly held her in a hospital for a month;
subjected her to medical, including psychiatric and prenatal,
treatment; did not allow her to contact a lawyer; and then,
after her daughter was born, allowed her to leave in so fragile
a condition that she died outside near the hospital that night?
But we cannot answer those questions today. The district
court’s denial of the health-care providers’ good-faith
defense to § 1983 liability is not immediately appealable
under the collateral order doctrine, so there is no decision
within our jurisdiction to review. That conclusion eliminates
any basis for our jurisdiction over the cross-appeal brought
by the patient’s survivors. We accordingly dismiss these
appeals.
I. BACKGROUND
We briefly recount the facts in the summary judgment
record before the district court. On October 20, 2020, Jill
Esche, then seven months pregnant, was admitted to Renown
Regional Medical Center with severe hypertension. She was
acting erratically. Believing that Esche’s aggressive and
agitated behavior was caused by mental illness, and
concerned that Esche posed a danger to herself and her fetus,
a hospital psychiatrist petitioned a Nevada court for Esche to
be involuntarily admitted for mental health treatment under
the state statutory scheme governing involuntary
commitments. See generally NEV. REV. STAT. ch. 433A.

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

7

While the petition was pending, hospital staff—
assertedly pursuant to the same statutory scheme—
repeatedly declared that Esche had not been “medically
cleared” to appear at her commitment hearing, kept her in
the hospital, and administered psychiatric drugs and other
medical treatments to Esche, often over her objection.
According to Esche’s medical records, staff confined her to
one room; restricted her phone use; precluded her from
having visitors until the birth; never told her that a public
defender had been appointed to represent her in the
commitment proceeding; and instructed her not to raise with
her boyfriend (the father of her child) or mother her desire to
contact a lawyer. On November 21, 2020, just two days after
she gave birth to her daughter by C-section, the hospital
medical staff decided to withdraw the commitment petition
(but had not yet done so). Esche was then allowed to leave
the hospital. She did so against doctors’ advice and despite
exhibiting signs of respiratory and emotional distress.
Within hours, she was found dead on a porch not far from
the hospital entrance.
Esche’s estate and survivors, including her baby
daughter, Sierra Jill Wofford, (together, the “Estate”) sued
the hospital and its employees Marta J. Bunuel-Jordana,
Caroline Vasendin, Johanna Gruen, Maegen Smith, and
Caitlin E. Herschel (together, “Renown”). 1 The Estate
brought several federal constitutional claims under 42
U.S.C. § 1983, alleging that Renown violated Esche’s
Fourth Amendment right against unreasonable seizure as
well as her Fourteenth Amendment substantive and
procedural due process rights, and that the hospital was also
liable for failing to train or supervise its employees. In
1

Another defendant, Earle Oki, is not a party to these appeals.

8

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

addition, the Estate brought analogous unreasonable-seizure
and due-process claims under the Nevada Constitution, a
conspiracy claim, and claims for both general and medical
negligence.
On cross-motions for partial summary judgment,
Renown asserted a “good-faith” defense to the federal and
state constitutional claims, contending that it was not liable
because it had acted in compliance with the Nevada
involuntary-commitment statutes. The district court agreed
that Renown had complied with the statutory scheme, but
held that the good-faith defense did not apply because
Renown was neither required by law nor directed by a public
official to hold Esche involuntarily. The court then granted
summary judgment to Renown on the merits of the state and
federal unreasonable-seizure claims and of the alleged
violations of Esche’s state and federal procedural due
process rights. But it allowed the due process, conspiracy,
and failure-to-train-or-supervise claims to proceed on the
theory that Renown violated Esche’s right to substantive due
process when it allowed her to leave the hospital in fragile
condition. The court also denied Renown summary
judgment on the general negligence claim. None of the
parties moved for summary judgment on the medical
negligence claim, which remains pending.
Before the surviving claims could go to trial, Renown
appealed the district court’s denial of its good-faith defense. 2
The Estate responded by cross-appealing its losses on the
merits of most of its constitutional claims. We consolidated
the appeals and ordered the parties to brief (1) whether we
There are two Renown appeals, identical in substance, because Renown
Regional Medical Center and the employee defendants filed separate
notices of appeal.

2

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

9

have jurisdiction over Renown’s appeals under the collateral
order doctrine and (2) whether we have pendent jurisdiction
over the Estate’s cross-appeal.
II. DISCUSSION
A. The Collateral Order Doctrine
With several exceptions not relevant here, federal courts
of appeals only “have jurisdiction of appeals from all final
decisions of the district courts.” 28 U.S.C. § 1291 (emphasis
added). A final decision is, ordinarily, one that “ends the
litigation on the merits and leaves nothing for the court to do
but execute the judgment.” Firestone Tire & Rubber Co. v.
Risjord, 449 U.S. 368, 373 (1981) (citation modified). Under
the collateral order doctrine, however, the Supreme Court
has construed “final decisions” to include “a narrow class of
decisions that do not terminate the litigation, but are
sufficiently important and collateral to the merits that they
should nonetheless be treated as final.” Will v. Hallock, 546
U.S. 345, 347 (2006) (citation modified).
To fall within the collateral order doctrine, first
recognized in Cohen v. Beneficial Industrial Loan Corp.,
337 U.S. 541 (1949), an order must satisfy three “stringent”
requirements: It must “[1] conclusively determine the
disputed question, [2] resolve an important issue completely
separate from the merits of the action, and [3] be effectively
unreviewable on appeal from a final judgment.” Will, 546
U.S. at 349 (citation modified) (first quoting Digit. Equip.
Corp. v. Desktop Direct, Inc., 511 U.S. 863, 868 (1994); and
then quoting P.R. Aqueduct & Sewer Auth. v. Metcalf &
Eddy, Inc., 506 U.S. 139, 144 (1993)). Judicial application
of the doctrine must remain “narrow and selective,” so as not
to undermine “the general rule that a party is entitled to a
single appeal, to be deferred until final judgment has been

10

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

entered,” id. at 350, or Congress’s choice of “rulemaking,
not expansion by court decision, as the preferred means for
determining whether and when prejudgment orders should
be immediately appealable,” Mohawk Indus., Inc. v.
Carpenter, 558 U.S. 100, 113 (2009) (citation modified).
Moreover, not every “order denying a claim of right to
prevail without trial satisfies the third condition.” Will, 546
U.S. at 351. An order is “effectively unreviewable” after
final judgment only if requiring the defendant to stand trial
“would imperil a substantial public interest” beyond the
defendant’s desire to avoid the burden of further
proceedings. Id. at 353. 3
The determination whether this last condition is met is
not case-by-case but instead looks at “the entire category to
which a claim belongs.” Digit. Equip., 511 U.S. at 868. For
example, orders denying absolute presidential immunity are
immediately appealable to honor the “compelling” interest
in maintaining the separation of powers. Will, 546 U.S. at
352 (quoting Nixon v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 731, 758 (1982)).
Orders denying qualified immunity to public officials are
immediately appealable to avoid “the threatened disruption
of governmental functions, and fear of inhibiting able people
from exercising discretion in public service.” Id. (citing
Mitchell v. Forsyth, 472 U.S. 511, 526 (1985)). Orders
denying Eleventh Amendment immunity are immediately
appealable “to ensure vindication of a State’s dignitary
interests.” Id. (citing P.R. Aqueduct, 506 U.S. at 146). And
orders refusing to dismiss an indictment on double jeopardy
We do not address whether orders denying the good-faith defense meet
the collateral order doctrine’s first two conditions—that they be
conclusive and collateral—because we hold that the third condition is
not met. See Digit. Equip., 511 U.S. at 868–69 & n.3.
3

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

11

grounds are immediately appealable to prevent the
government from using its “enormous prosecutorial power”
to undermine defendants’ Fifth Amendment guarantee
against the “embarrassment, expense and ordeal” of a repeat
prosecution. Id. (quoting Abney v. United States, 431 U.S.
651, 661–62 (1977)). For each of these categories, “some
particular value of a high order was marshaled in support of
the interest in avoiding trial.” Id.
Conversely, a defendant’s run-of-the-mill interest in
“limiting exposure to liability . . . is fully vindicable on
appeal from final judgment.” Digit. Equip., 511 U.S. at 882.
An order denying a defense to liability is therefore not
immediately appealable, even though the erroneous denial of
a liability defense may unnecessarily subject the defendant
to trial. See, e.g., Nunag-Tanedo v. E. Baton Rouge Par. Sch.
Bd., 711 F.3d 1136, 1140 (9th Cir. 2013). “That a ruling may
burden litigants in ways that are only imperfectly reparable
by appellate reversal of a final district court judgment has
never sufficed” to qualify for immediate appeal under the
collateral order doctrine. Mohawk Indus., 558 U.S. at 107
(citation modified) (quoting Digit. Equip., 511 U.S. at 872).
B. Renown’s Appeals of the Denial of Its Good-Faith
Defense
The district court’s summary judgment order did not end
the litigation on the merits. So we have jurisdiction over
Renown’s appeals only if they fall under the collateral order
doctrine. 4
Whether the collateral order doctrine applies to
Renown’s appeals hinges first on whether the good-faith
The district court was not asked to and did not certify its order for
interlocutory appeal under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b).

4

12

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

defense is a defense to liability or an immunity from suit.
See, e.g., Nunag-Tanedo, 711 F.3d at 1140 (citing Swint v.
Chambers Cnty. Comm’n, 514 U.S. 35, 43 (1995)). If the
good-faith defense is simply a defense to liability, decisions
denying the defense can be adequately reviewed after final
judgment. Id. If the good-faith defense is instead an
immunity from suit, we must determine whether delaying
appellate review of rulings on such a defense would imperil
a substantial public interest. See, e.g., Childs v. San Diego
Fam. Hous. LLC, 22 F.4th 1092, 1098 (9th Cir. 2022). We
proceed keeping in mind the Supreme Court’s instruction to
“view claims of a ‘right not to be tried’ with skepticism, if
not a jaundiced eye.” Digit. Equip., 511 U.S. at 873. 5
The causes of action Renown seeks to appeal under the
collateral order doctrine all are alleged to arise under 42
U.S.C. § 1983. Section 1983 provides a private right of
action against any “person who, under color of any [state]
statute, . . . subjects, or causes to be subjected, any citizen of
the United States or other person within the jurisdiction
thereof to the deprivation of any rights, privileges, or
immunities secured by the Constitution.” 42 U.S.C. § 1983.
Although § 1983 claims are most often brought against
government officials and entities, they may also be brought
against private parties whose conduct is “fairly attributable
to the State.” Filarsky v. Delia, 566 U.S. 377, 383 (2012)
(quoting Lugar v. Edmondson Oil Co., 457 U.S. 922, 937
Renown asserted the good-faith defense against both the federal and
state constitutional claims, but its briefs in both the district court and on
appeal focused entirely on the defense as it applies to § 1983 claims.
Renown points to no authority recognizing a good-faith defense to
claims brought under the Nevada Constitution, so we confine our
analysis to § 1983. See, e.g., Padgett v. Wright, 587 F.3d 983, 986 n.2
(9th Cir. 2009).
5

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

13

(1982)). Renown did not contest in the district court and does
not contest here that it was a “state actor” with regard to the
Estate’s § 1983 claims. See Cummings v. Charter Hosp. of
Las Vegas, Inc., 896 P.2d 1137, 1144 (Nev. 1995) (holding
that private parties are state actors when detaining
individuals against their will under Nevada’s involuntarycommitment statutes); cf. Jensen v. Lane County, 222 F.3d
570, 574–76 (9th Cir. 2000) (holding that a private physician
was a state actor when he signed an order under Oregon law
to involuntarily commit the plaintiff); Rawson v. Recovery
Innovations, Inc., 975 F.3d 742, 751–56 (9th Cir. 2020)
(holding that private health-care providers were state actors
when they obtained court orders under Washington law to
involuntarily commit the plaintiff and forcibly treated him).
That both public and private parties may be state actors
under § 1983 does not mean the law treats them equivalently
in every respect. Most pertinent here, the Supreme Court has
granted to public-official defendants a qualified immunity
from suit under § 1983, but has refused to extend this
qualified immunity to most private-party defendants.
Qualified immunity “protects government officials
‘from liability for civil damages insofar as their conduct does
not violate clearly established statutory or constitutional
rights of which a reasonable person would have known.’”
Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223, 231 (2009) (quoting
Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818 (1982)). The
Supreme Court has explained that it is rooted not only in the
common law, see Richardson v. McKnight, 521 U.S. 399,
403–04 (1997), 6 but also in “the special policy concerns
That qualified immunity as it has developed under § 1983 has commonlaw roots has been questioned in recent years. See, e.g., Anderson v.
Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 645 (1987); Ziglar v. Abbasi, 582 U.S. 120,

6

14

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

involved in suing government officials,” including the needs
“to preserve their ability to serve the public good” and “to
ensure that talented candidates [a]re not deterred by the
threat of damages suits from entering public service,” Wyatt
v. Cole, 504 U.S. 158, 167 (1992). Qualified immunity thus
serves “to safeguard government, and thereby to protect the
public at large, not to benefit its agents.” Id. at 168. To
mitigate the “costs of subjecting officials to the risks of
trial—distraction of officials from their governmental duties,
inhibition of discretionary action, and deterrence of able
people from public service”—qualified immunity provides
“an immunity from suit rather than a mere defense to
liability.” Mitchell, 472 U.S. at 526 (citation omitted).
The historical basis and policy rationales for qualified
immunity usually do not apply when the defendant is a
private party not serving at the government’s behest. In
Wyatt, which concerned the use by a private party of a statelaw replevin procedure to recover seized goods, the Court
explained that “unlike with government officials performing
discretionary functions, the public interest will not be unduly
impaired if private individuals are required to proceed to trial
to resolve their legal disputes.” 504 U.S. at 168. Because
“private parties hold no office requiring them to exercise
discretion; nor are they principally concerned with
enhancing the public good,” granting them qualified
immunity “would have no bearing on whether public
officials are able to act forcefully and decisively in their jobs
or on whether qualified applicants enter public service.” Id.
Similarly, in Richardson, the Court held that qualified
159 (2017) (Thomas, J., concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment); William Baude, Is Qualified Immunity Unlawful?, 106 CAL.
L. REV. 45, 55–61 (2018).

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

15

immunity was not available to private prison guards,
reasoning that there was neither historical support nor
anything “special enough about the job or about its
organizational structure that would warrant providing these
private prison guards with a governmental immunity.” 521
U.S. at 412. Richardson expressly rejected the notion that
qualified immunity could be justified by the “mere
performance of a governmental function . . . , especially for
a private person who performs a job without government
supervision or direction.” Id. at 408–09 (citation omitted).
Consistent with these decisions, we have concluded that a
variety of private § 1983 defendants who meet the stateactor criteria are nonetheless ineligible for qualified
immunity. See, e.g., Clement v. City of Glendale, 518 F.3d
1090, 1096 (9th Cir. 2008) (private towing company);
Jensen, 222 F.3d at 576–79 (9th Cir. 2000) (private
physician); Ace Beverage Co. v. Lockheed Info. Mgmt.
Servs., 144 F.3d 1218, 1219–20 (9th Cir. 1998) (private
parking-ticket processing firm); Halvorsen v. Baird, 146
F.3d 680, 685 (9th Cir. 1998) (private firm operating detox
facility).
A private party may, to be sure, properly assert qualified
immunity when “hired by the government to assist in
carrying out its work,” whether as an independent contractor
or as an employee. Filarsky, 566 U.S. at 393. But Renown
does not assert immunity as an independent contractor acting
on behalf of the government, and there is no evidence in the
record that would support such a characterization.
Section 1983 immunity from suit does not attach simply
because a private defendant performs a task that can be
characterized as a “governmental function.” Richardson,
521 U.S. at 408–09. Rather, the historical and policy
rationales for qualified immunity apply to independent

16

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

contractors because the government often “must look
outside its permanent work force to secure the services of
private individuals” to carry out its work directly on its
behalf. Filarsky, 566 U.S. at 390.
The Supreme Court did leave open in Wyatt and
Richardson the possibility that private parties sued under
§ 1983 could raise “an affirmative defense based on good
faith and/or probable cause.” Richardson, 521 U.S. at 413
(quoting Wyatt, 504 U.S. at 169). The Supreme Court has
not decided whether private § 1983 defendants may raise
such a defense, but we have recognized a good-faith defense
to § 1983 claims in a handful of cases.
In Clement, we held that a private towing firm accused
of violating the plaintiff’s due process right could raise a
good-faith defense when “[t]he company did its best to
follow the law and had no reason to suspect that there would
be a constitutional challenge to its actions.” 518 F.3d at
1097. Although the plaintiff never received the
constitutionally required notice before her car was
impounded, “[t]he tow was authorized by the police
department, conducted under close police supervision and
appeared to be permissible under both local ordinance and
state law.” Id. Further, the company could not have known
whether the police had provided the plaintiff sufficient
notice before instructing the company to tow her car. Id.
Under those circumstances, the company could invoke a
good-faith defense. Id.
After the Supreme Court overturned decades of
precedent and held that public-sector unions could no longer
collect compulsory “agency fees” from nonmembers, see
Janus v. Am. Fed’n of State, Cnty., & Mun. Emps., 585 U.S.
878 (2018), we applied the good-faith defense to a union

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

17

sued by state workers seeking to recoup money that (under
Janus but not the pre-Janus case law) had been
unconstitutionally collected from them, Danielson v. Inslee,
945 F.3d 1096, 1099 (9th Cir. 2019). We held the defense
barred retrospective liability for conduct that, when it
occurred, “was sanctioned not only by state law, but also by
directly on-point Supreme Court precedent.” Id. at 1104. As
a matter of “equality and fairness,” we reasoned, “private
parties should be entitled to rely on binding judicial
pronouncements and state law without concern that they will
be held retroactively liable for changing precedents.” Id. at
1100–01. In a similar agency-fee case, we extended the
defense in Danielson to municipal defendants. Allen v. Santa
Clara Cnty. Corr. Peace Officers Ass’n, 38 F.4th 68, 71–75
(9th Cir. 2022).
Relying on Clement and Danielson, Renown contends
that it was entitled to summary judgment on the Estate’s
§ 1983 claims because it “complied with [Nevada Revised
Statutes] Chapter 433A’s involuntary commitment process”
and “had no reason to know [its] actions would be subject to
constitutional challenge.” According to Renown, this goodfaith defense operates as an immunity from suit akin to
qualified immunity.
Without addressing whether Renown is entitled to a
good-faith defense here, 7 we conclude that under our
Likewise, as we conclude that we do not have jurisdiction over these
appeals, we do not address whether the district court was correct in
limiting the good-faith defense to the factual paradigms of Clement and
Danielson. We do note that even if, as Renown urges, the good-faith
defense applies to conduct authorized or directed by statute, the defense
would not necessarily cover all the factual bases underlying the Estate’s
constitutional claims. We are skeptical that the Nevada statutory scheme
can be read as directing a health-care provider to administer medical or
7

18

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

precedents, the good-faith defense is a defense to § 1983
liability and not an immunity from suit. In Danielson, we
distinguished “between an ‘immunity from suit’ and other
kinds of legal defenses,” explaining that although most
“private parties cannot assert an immunity to suit” under
§ 1983, the defense recognized in Clement was a “good faith
defense to liability.” Danielson, 945 F.3d at 1099–1100
(quoting Richardson, 521 U.S. at 403). As a result, we held
that the defense “shield[ed] the Union from retrospective
monetary liability.” Id. at 1104. Allen emphasized the same
distinction, contrasting the municipality’s good-faith
defense with an immunity from suit. 38 F.4th at 73.
Although the municipality did not have any special
governmental immunity from suit, we concluded that it was
entitled to a “good faith defense to retrospective § 1983
liability.” Id. at 75. Our case law thus forecloses Renown’s
effort to frame the good-faith defense as an immunity from
suit.
Despite conceding that Danielson and Allen
characterized the defense as one against liability, Renown
protests that these cases “do not address appellate
jurisdiction or engage in the public interest analysis the
jurisdiction cases
require.” Renown’s
argument
misapprehends the relevant inquiry. Under the collateral
order doctrine, delaying review of an order denying a
liability defense does not imperil a substantial public
interest, because “immunity from liability can be protected
by a post-judgment appeal.” SolarCity Corp. v. Salt River
psychiatric treatment against a patient’s will and without any judicial or
neutral administrative due process. See NEV. REV. STAT. § 433A.165
(2019). And there is no statutory provision empowering or compelling a
provider to restrict patients’ visitors or phone use or allowing a provider
to hinder patients from contacting counsel.

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

19

Project Agric. Improvement & Power Dist., 859 F.3d 720,
725 (9th Cir. 2017) (citing Nunag-Tanedo, 711 F.3d at
1139–40). Only if we had held in Danielson and Allen that
the good-faith defense conferred an immunity from suit
would we also need to analyze the public interest in
permitting immediate appeals. See, e.g., Childs, 22 F.4th at
1096; SolarCity, 859 F.3d at 727 n.3; DC Comics v. Pac.
Pictures Corp., 706 F.3d 1009, 1015–16 (9th Cir. 2013).
Renown also tries to sidestep our earlier decisions by
suggesting that a defense becomes an immunity from suit if
it implicates sufficiently important policy considerations.
Analogizing to qualified-immunity cases, Renown contends
that the good-faith defense serves the same interests of
“help[ing] to avoid unwarranted timidity in performance of
public duties, ensuring that talented candidates are not
deterred from public service, and preventing the harmful
distractions from carrying out the work of government that
can often accompany damages suit.” As a result, Renown
believes, it deserves the same immunity that would be
available to government officials engaged in the same
conduct.
Renown’s argument is a misguided attempt to transmute
the good-faith defense into qualified immunity under a
different name. “The rationales behind the two doctrines,
and their limitations, are not interchangeable.” Danielson,
945 F.3d at 1101. So, putting aside whether a health-care
provider’s conduct under Nevada’s involuntarycommitment statutes is accurately described as a public duty,
public service, or work of government, the policy interests
undergirding qualified immunity—centering on protecting
distinctly governmental interests—are not relevant here.
Renown could not have and did not invoke qualified
immunity. Instead, it invoked the good-faith defense.

20

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

While qualified immunity seeks to ensure the effective
operation of government, the good-faith defense “arises out
of general principles of equality and fairness”—in other
words, “the innocence of [the defendant’s] actions.”
Danielson, 945 F.3d at 1101. Wyatt held that “principles of
equality and fairness” could justify “some protection from
liability” but “are not sufficiently similar to the traditional
purposes of qualified immunity” to warrant a comparable
immunity from suit for “private citizens who rely
unsuspectingly on state laws they did not create and may
have no reason to believe are invalid.” 504 U.S. at 168.
Renown seeks just that: immunity from suit, based on
“principles of equality and fairness,” for private defendants
who “rel[y] on presumptively-valid state law.” Renown does
not explain why the same interests rejected as insufficient to
merit immunity in Wyatt suffice here. We thus adhere to
Wyatt’s recognition that even if private defendants “acted
with probable cause and in good faith . . . under a statute they
reasonably believed was valid,” their entitlement to such a
“good faith defense” would not justify granting them an
“immediately appealable immunity” from suit. Id. at 165–66
& n.2.
In addition, an asserted immunity from § 1983 suit must
also be “firmly rooted in the common law.” Richardson, 521
U.S. at 403 (quoting Wyatt, 504 U.S. at 164). Although
historical tradition does not define an immunity’s “precise
contours,” Danielson, 945 F.3d at 1101 (quoting Anderson,
483 U.S. at 645), we previously found scant evidence of a
common-law tradition of immunity for doctors acting under
involuntary-commitment statutes, see Jensen, 222 F.3d at
576–77. We reject Renown’s suggestion that Filarsky casts
doubt on our conclusion that immunity from suit is
inapplicable here. Filarsky addressed only the history of

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

21

immunity for private individuals “working for” the
government, whether as employees or as independent
contractors. 566 U.S. at 384–89.
Because the good-faith defense is a defense to liability,
Renown’s interest in collateral review is ultimately its
interest—shared by every defendant—in “limiting exposure
to liability.” Digit. Equip., 511 U.S. at 882. “An erroneous
ruling on liability may be reviewed effectively on appeal
from final judgment.” Swint, 514 U.S. at 43. Thus, the
collateral order doctrine does not apply, and we must dismiss
Renown’s appeals for lack of jurisdiction.
C. The Estate’s Cross-Appeal of the Merits of Its
Constitutional Claims
Our conclusion above also disposes of the Estate’s crossappeal concerning the Fourth and Fourteenth Amendment
claims. The only basis for our jurisdiction asserted by the
Estate is the doctrine of pendent appellate jurisdiction, under
which “we may review an otherwise non-appealable ruling
when it is inextricably intertwined with or necessary to
ensure meaningful review of the order properly before us.”
Doe v. Regents of the Univ. of Cal., 891 F.3d 1147, 1154 (9th
Cir. 2018) (citation modified). Because no “independently
reviewable issue” is properly before us today, we do not
have pendent jurisdiction over the Estate’s cross-appeal.
Cunningham v. Gates, 229 F.3d 1271, 1284 (9th Cir. 2000).
So we dismiss the cross-appeal as well.
CONCLUSION
The district court’s summary judgment order did not
fully resolve this case on the merits, and neither the collateral
order doctrine nor pendent appellate jurisdiction applies. We
therefore dismiss the parties’ appeals for lack of jurisdiction

22

ESTATE OF ESCHE V. BUNUEL-JORDANA

under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Any further appeals in this matter
shall be assigned to this panel. See 9th Cir. G.O. 3.6(d).
DISMISSED.

