FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
DANIEL TOCHUKWU ANI,
Petitioner,
v.
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney General,

No. 24-2339
Agency No.
A096-819-136
OPINION

Respondent.
On Petition for Review of an Order of the
Board of Immigration Appeals
Argued and Submitted May 16, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed October 16, 2025
Before: Milan D. Smith, Jr. and Daniel A. Bress, Circuit
Judges, and Brian M. Morris, Chief District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Bress

The Honorable Brian M. Morris, United States Chief District Judge for
the District of Montana, sitting by designation.

*

2

ANI V. BONDI

SUMMARY **
Immigration
The panel denied Daniel Ani’s petition for review of the
Board of Immigration Appeals’ decision denying asylum
and related relief on adverse credibility grounds.
The panel considered the interaction of Alam v. Garland,
11 F.4th 1133 (9th Cir. 2021) (en banc), with longstanding
case law permitting an immigration judge to find an asylum
applicant not credible based on the applicant’s material and
conscious deception of immigration authorities, even when
the deception is not central to the basis for the asylum
claim. In Alam, the court interpreted the Real ID Act of 2005
to mean that there is no bright-line rule under which some
number of inconsistencies requires sustaining or rejecting an
adverse credibility determination. Rather, the court’s review
requires assessing the totality of the circumstances. The
panel concluded that this court’s jurisprudence regarding the
maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus—false in one thing,
false in everything—survived both the REAL ID Act and the
en banc court’s decision in Alam.
The panel held that substantial evidence supported the
immigration judge’s adverse credibility determination,
which was founded on Ani having committed marriage fraud
to secure immigration status. Although that fraud did not
directly relate to Ani’s account of persecution, it provided a

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

ANI V. BONDI

3

sufficient basis in this case for the immigration judge to find
him not credible and thus deny his application for relief.

COUNSEL
Emmanuel E. Enyinwa (argued), Law Office of Emmanuel
Enyinwa, San Francisco, California, for Petitioner.
Aaron Henricks (argued), Counsel to the Deputy Attorney
General; Sarah A. Byrd, Trial Attorney; Jennifer Levings,
Assistant Director; Office of Immigration Litigation; Brian
M. Boynton, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General;
Civil Division, United States Department of Justice,
Washington, D.C.; for Respondent.

4

ANI V. BONDI

OPINION
BRESS, Circuit Judge:
We have long held that when an asylum applicant has
lied to immigration authorities, an immigration judge can
find the applicant not credible, even when the falsehood is
not directly related to the basis for the asylum claim. In Alam
v. Garland, 11 F.4th 1133, 1137 (9th Cir. 2021) (en banc), we
interpreted the Real ID Act of 2005 to mean that “[t]here is
no bright-line rule under which some number of
inconsistencies requires sustaining or rejecting an adverse
credibility determination.” Rather, our review of an adverse
credibility finding “will always require assessing the totality
of the circumstances.” Id.
We consider here the interaction of Alam’s rule of
decision with our longstanding case law permitting an
immigration judge to find an asylum applicant not credible
based on the applicant’s material and conscious deception of
immigration authorities, even when the deception is not
central to the basis for the asylum claim. In this case, we
hold that substantial evidence supports the immigration
judge’s adverse credibility determination, which was
founded on the petitioner committing marriage fraud to
secure immigration status. Although that fraud did not
directly relate to the petitioner’s account of persecution, it
provided a sufficient basis for the immigration judge to find
petitioner not credible.
We deny the petition for review.

ANI V. BONDI

5

I
A
The immigration judge (IJ) found the petitioner, Daniel
Tochukwu Ani, not credible. Nevertheless, Ani’s account of
events is as follows.
Ani is a native and citizen of Nigeria. In Nigeria, he was
a member of a separatist political organization, Movement
for the Actualization of the Sovereign State of Biafra
(MASSOB), described as “a non-violent organization that
advocates for the formation of a separate state called Biafra
in the Eastern part of Nigeria.” Ani joined MASSOB in
2000, after his father died. His father was a senator and
member of MASSOB, and Ani participated in MASSOB
meetings and supported the organization financially.
In removal proceedings, Ani testified to several violent
incidents perpetrated by Nigerian police. In February or
March 2001, armed men came to his house late at night. Ani
heard them ask, “Where is that MASSOB guy?” Ani fled to
a neighbor’s house. Following this episode, Ani stopped
hosting MASSOB meetings in his home but continued to
attend meetings at MASSOB’s headquarters.
In January 2002, Ani was attending a MASSOB meeting
when thirty armed men surrounded the building. Some
MASSOB members who tried to escape were killed, and
other attendees, including Ani, were arrested. Ani was held
for ten days. During his detention, the attackers made him
take off his clothes and they penetrated his anus with a stick.
Ani further testified that in 2003, he was traveling to a
MASSOB meeting on a bus with other MASSOB members
when the police stopped his bus and other buses heading to
the meeting. The police demanded that the MASSOB

6

ANI V. BONDI

members get off the bus, at which point some people started
to run. The police shot and killed around forty of them. Ani
and others escaped by hiding in bushes for more than two
hours.
Ani also testified that in May or June of 2004, the police
interrupted a MASSOB meeting that he was attending. The
police told the MASSOB members that they were under
arrest because they were attending an illegal meeting. Ani
was able to escape unharmed.
In November 2004, Ani was driving home from a
MASSOB meeting when a car forced him to pull over. Four
armed men put Ani in the trunk of their car. The men held
Ani in a cage for a day and planned to kill him until their
boss intervened. Ani testified that because his brother had
previously given the boss money, the boss let Ani go free.
After this incident, Ani decided to leave Nigeria until it was
safe to return.
In September 2005, Ani enrolled in a master’s program
at London Metropolitan University. After completing his
first semester, Ani came to the United States in December
2005 for his niece’s christening, securing a six-month visitor
visa. In February 2006, while still in the United States, Ani
met L.B. at a friend’s house. According to Ani, L.B.
proposed to him in April. In May 2006, they married.
B
Ani applied for adjustment of status to lawful permanent
resident based on his marriage to L.B. But indications
emerged that the marriage was a sham. In an interview with
U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS), L.B.
told the USCIS officer, Rebecca Cataldo, that Ani had paid
her $6,000 to marry him and that she had agreed to marry

ANI V. BONDI

7

Ani for immigration purposes. Ani also filled out and signed
a sworn affidavit witnessed by Cataldo, in which Ani
admitted to marriage fraud. Ani’s affidavit stated: “[S]he
agreed to help me and we got married. . . . She agreed to
marry me for money, that is if I paid her. We agreed on
$7,000. She has collected up to $6,000. . . . We have not
had sex.” Ani’s statement also indicated that it was given
“freely and voluntarily.”
In March 2007, USCIS denied Ani’s application for
adjustment of status. Soon thereafter, the Department of
Homeland Security (DHS) initiated removal proceedings
against Ani. In the Notice to Appear, DHS charged Ani with
removability as an alien who overstayed his visa under 8
U.S.C. § 1227(a)(1)(B) and who committed marriage fraud
under 8 U.S.C. § 1227(a)(1)(G)(ii).
In late 2007, Ani filed with USCIS a request for a visa as
a battered spouse under the Violence Against Women Act
(VAWA). That request, if approved, would have allowed
him to apply for adjustment of status on this basis. 8 U.S.C.
§ 1255(a). In October 2009, USCIS denied the VAWA
petition, finding that Ani failed to establish that he resided
with L.B. and that he entered into a good-faith marriage with
L.B.
Ani appealed the denial of his VAWA petition, but the
USCIS Administrative Appeals Office dismissed the appeal
in April 2010, agreeing that Ani did not demonstrate either
joint residence or a good-faith marriage. The Appeals
Office’s “independent review of the record” demonstrated
that Ani’s marriage to L.B. “was entered into for the purpose
of evading the immigration laws,” citing among other things
Ani’s “sworn, willful[,] and voluntary admission that his
marriage to [L.B.] was fraudulent.” This decision also cited

8

ANI V. BONDI

the “numerous inconsistencies and deficiencies regarding
the petitioner and [L.B.’s] claimed joint residence.”
C
In August 2010, Ani’s brother sent him a news article
from a Nigerian newspaper (Vanguard) that referenced the
May or June 2004 incident when Ani had escaped from the
police. The article identified Ani by name as having
“allegedly escaped” in 2004. In November 2010, Ani filed
an application for asylum, withholding of removal, and
protection under the Convention Against Torture (CAT).
Before the IJ, Ani testified that he is a member of the
Igbo ethnic group and MASSOB. Ani also testified at length
that his marriage to L.B. was valid (though they had since
divorced), that the two were romantically involved, and that
he did not commit marriage fraud.
Addressing his signed statement in which he admitted to
marriage fraud, Ani claimed he signed it under duress after
Cataldo, the USCIS officer, threatened him with immediate
detention and deportation if he did not sign. According to
Ani, Cataldo “told him that he could either admit to the
accusations and be released to find a lawyer or face detention
and removal.” In a sworn affidavit, Cataldo rejected these
accusations, stating: “I have never threatened an alien with
arrest by one of the armed guards.” Although she had “no
independent memory” of Ani’s case, Cataldo recognized her
“signature on the sworn statements as witness to the
confessions of [Ani and his] prior spouse concerning their
marriage fraud.”
The IJ denied Ani’s application for asylum, withholding
of removal, and CAT relief. The IJ first found Ani not
credible based on his marriage fraud and his testimony

ANI V. BONDI

9

regarding his marriage.
The IJ acknowledged that
“[r]egarding much of his asylum claim, [Ani] testified in a
believable and forthright manner, and his testimony was
largely consistent throughout direct and cross-examination.”
However, the IJ could not “ignore evidence that [Ani]
previously attempted to circumvent the immigration system
through marriage fraud.” The IJ found the USCIS decision
to be “well-reasoned” and “persuasive evidence that [Ani]
committed marriage fraud.” And “[t]he fact that [Ani]
continued to misrepresent the nature of his marriage to
[L.B.] throughout these proceedings further increases the
Court’s skepticism about the validity of [his] asylum claim.”
As the IJ explained, “that [Ani] previously deceived
immigration officials cuts against his credibility in the
current matter.” Relying on Singh v. Holder, 643 F.3d 1178
(9th Cir. 2011), the IJ reasoned that “intentional deception of
immigration authorities is an indication of dishonesty that
casts doubt on the applicant’s entire story,” even if “the
deception was not central to [the] asylum claim.” Although
Ani’s marriage fraud was “unrelated to the substance of his
asylum claim,” his “willingness to lie to immigration
officials to gain an immigration benefit makes the Court
question his overall credibility.”
The IJ further grounded her adverse credibility
determination in Ani’s testimony before the IJ about his
marriage to L.B. The IJ was “troubled by [Ani’s] in-court
testimony regarding his marriage to [L.B.] because it
conflicts with his previous statement to USCIS.” Though
Ani denied marriage fraud before the IJ, this testimony
“directly conflict[ed] with [Ani’s] sworn statement about the
marriage that he submitted to USCIS.” Although Ani’s
testimony about past persecution in Nigeria was internally
consistent, so was his account of his marriage to L.B.—until

10

ANI V. BONDI

“outside documentation” such as his signed statement
confirmed that his testimony was inaccurate.
The IJ rejected as “unconvincing” Ani’s explanation that
he signed the statement admitting to marriage fraud because
USCIS officer Cataldo coerced him to sign. The IJ credited
Cataldo’s statement that she had never threatened an
applicant in this way. The IJ also found Ani’s story of
coercion implausible because it was unlikely that Cataldo
had threatened Ani with detention when she lacked that
authority, and because Cataldo did not need Ani’s sworn
statement when she already had L.B.’s admission of
marriage fraud.
After finding Ani not credible, the IJ then considered
whether other evidence in the record, besides Ani’s
discredited testimony, provided a basis for relief. The IJ
found that Ani’s asylum claim was not untimely because the
August 2010 Vanguard article mentioning him in connection
with MASSOB constituted changed circumstances. See 8
U.S.C. § 1158(a)(2)(D). However, on the merits, Ani was
ineligible for asylum and withholding of removal. The 2010
news article substantiated Ani’s claim that he was almost
arrested in 2004, but there was no evidence of physical
injury from the incident. Thus, Ani did not establish past
persecution. As to a well-founded fear of future persecution,
the IJ first concluded that because Ani was not credible, he
“has not established that he has a subjective fear of returning
to Nigeria.” But even assuming Ani established a subjective
fear, “the evidence in the record is insufficient to establish
that he has an objectively reasonable fear of persecution.”
Regarding Ani’s CAT claim, the IJ found that there was no
evidence of past torture or a particularized risk of future
torture.

ANI V. BONDI

11

D
Ani appealed to the BIA, which affirmed in part but
remanded to the IJ for further proceedings on Ani’s fear of
future persecution. The BIA first found no clear error in the
IJ’s adverse credibility determination because Ani
committed marriage fraud and “his explanations for this
. . . were not adequately supported by the evidence.” The
BIA concluded that the IJ “was permitted to draw a negative
inference as to [Ani’s] credibility” based on the marriage
fraud, “despite the fact that it has no direct relation to the
facts underlying his claim.” The BIA next agreed with the
IJ that without credible testimony, Ani did not establish past
persecution.
However, the BIA concluded that “the record contains
evidence that [Ani] is a supporter of the MASSOB, and that
in Nigeria, such supporters bear some risk of harm given the
evidence of the government’s occasionally aggressive
opposition to the stated goals of the organization.” Thus, the
BIA remanded for further analysis of Ani’s asserted fear of
future persecution.
On remand, Ani submitted additional documents
regarding his fear of future harm, but the IJ again denied his
applications for asylum, withholding of removal, and
protection under CAT. Because the BIA affirmed the IJ’s
previous adverse credibility and past persecution
determinations, the IJ incorporated the analysis on those
issues from the prior IJ decision.
Regarding a well-founded fear of future persecution, the
IJ first found that “the documentary evidence does not
corroborate [Ani’s] testimony regarding his individualized
fear of future persecution.” Thus, Ani did not establish a
subjective fear of future persecution. Here the IJ again

12

ANI V. BONDI

analyzed the 2010 Vanguard article, explaining that it is
speculative whether anyone in the Nigerian government
would still be pursuing someone who attended a MASSOB
meeting in 2004. The IJ next found that Ani did not
demonstrate an objectively reasonable fear of future
persecution.
The IJ also concluded that even assuming Ani was
eligible for asylum, the IJ would deny his application as a
matter of discretion, largely due to his immigration fraud.
And because Ani failed to demonstrate a well-founded fear
of persecution for purposes of asylum, he necessarily failed
to make the greater showing required for withholding of
removal. Lastly, the IJ determined that Ani was ineligible
for protection under CAT because he did not establish that
he would more likely than not be tortured in Nigeria.
Ani again appealed to the BIA. This time, the BIA
dismissed Ani’s appeal in full. The BIA first found that Ani
failed to meaningfully challenge the IJ’s denial of his claim
for CAT relief and thus deemed Ani’s CAT claim waived.
The BIA then rejected Ani’s challenge to the IJ’s adverse
credibility determination, citing the BIA’s previous decision.
The BIA further agreed that absent credible testimony, Ani
had not established an objectively reasonable fear of future
persecution. According to the BIA, the IJ did not err in
giving limited weight to new articles because they either
concerned events from decades ago or because they
discussed Ani’s father, not Ani. The BIA likewise affirmed
the IJ’s denial of withholding of removal.
Finally, the BIA denied Ani’s motion to remand. In
support of his motion, Ani submitted news articles about the
arrest and extradition to Nigeria of a prominent leader of a
separatist organization. The BIA found this evidence

ANI V. BONDI

13

insufficiently material because Ani did not explain how the
treatment of this “charismatic leader” establishes that Ani
had an objectively reasonable fear of future persecution.
Ani now petitions for review. We have jurisdiction under
8 U.S.C. § 1252.
II
We review denials of asylum, withholding of removal,
and CAT relief for substantial evidence. Sharma v. Garland,
9 F.4th 1052, 1060, 1066 (9th Cir. 2021). We also review
adverse credibility determinations for substantial evidence.
Ruiz-Colmenares v. Garland, 25 F.4th 742, 748 (9th Cir.
2022).
“Under the substantial evidence standard,
administrative findings of fact are conclusive unless any
reasonable adjudicator would be compelled to conclude to
the contrary.” Id. (quoting Zehatye v. Gonzales, 453 F.3d
1182, 1185 (9th Cir. 2006)). We review the BIA’s denial of
a motion to remand for abuse of discretion. Taggar v.
Holder, 736 F.3d 886, 889 (9th Cir. 2013). When the BIA
agrees with the IJ’s decision, we consider both decisions.
Garcia-Martinez v. Sessions, 886 F.3d 1291, 1293 (9th Cir.
2018).
A
The IJ denied Ani asylum and withholding of removal
after first finding him not credible. The IJ’s adverse
credibility finding was based largely on Ani lying to
immigration authorities about his marriage to L.B. That
fraud was not germane to Ani’s claim for asylum, which
concerned his asserted past persecution and fear of future
persecution in Nigeria due to his ethnicity and membership
in MASSOB. To explain why substantial evidence supports

14

ANI V. BONDI

the IJ’s adverse credibility determination, we must address
several strands of our case law in this area.
The REAL ID Act of 2005 created new standards for
adverse credibility determinations. See Ruiz-Colmenares,
25 F.4th at 749. The statute provides:
Considering the totality of the circumstances,
and all relevant factors, a trier of fact may
base a credibility determination on the
demeanor, candor, or responsiveness of the
applicant or witness, the inherent plausibility
of the applicant’s or witness’s account, the
consistency between the applicant’s or
witness’s written and oral statements
(whenever made and whether or not under
oath, and considering the circumstances
under which the statements were made), the
internal consistency of each such statement,
the consistency of such statements with other
evidence of record (including the reports of
the Department of State on country
conditions), and any inaccuracies or
falsehoods in such statements, without regard
to whether an inconsistency, inaccuracy, or
falsehood goes to the heart of the applicant’s
claim, or any other relevant factor. There is
no presumption of credibility, however, if no
adverse credibility determination is explicitly
made, the applicant or witness shall have a

ANI V. BONDI

15

rebuttable presumption of credibility on
appeal.
8 U.S.C. § 1158(b)(1)(B)(iii). This standard “gives wide
latitude to the trier of fact in making credibility
determinations, considering the totality of circumstances and
all relevant factors.” Ruiz-Colmenares, 25 F.4th at 749.
Prior to the REAL ID Act, under our circuit’s case law
“the outcome of a petitioner’s challenge to the agency’s
adverse credibility finding depended entirely on whether the
agency had cited at least one valid, individual ground going
to the heart of the claim.” Alam, 11 F.4th at 1135. But as
evident from the statutory language, “[t]he REAL ID Act
eliminated the ‘heart of the claim’ requirement.” Id.
Nevertheless, following the enactment of the REAL ID Act,
we had retained our pre-REAL ID Act case law holding that
courts must uphold adverse credibility determinations if
“substantial evidence supports a single factor in the adverse
credibility analysis.” Id. at 1136.
Our en banc decision in Alam overruled this “single
factor” rule. Id. at 1134. Now “[t]here is no bright-line rule
under which some number of inconsistencies requires
sustaining or rejecting an adverse credibility determination.”
Id. at 1137. Rather, our “review will always require
assessing the totality of the circumstances” to determine
whether an IJ’s credibility finding is supported by substantial
evidence. Id.
Of course, even under the REAL ID Act, “an utterly
trivial inconsistency, such as a typographical error, will not
by itself form a sufficient basis for an adverse credibility
determination.” Shrestha v. Holder, 590 F.3d 1034, 1043
(9th Cir. 2010). And “an applicant’s careless error about

16

ANI V. BONDI

peripheral details” does not support an inference that the
applicant is “lying about the facts that do matter.” Singh,
643 F.3d at 1180–81. At the same time, an inconsistency
need not be “material in the sense of important to the
petitioner’s well-founded fear of persecution,” because
“such a requirement would contradict the REAL ID Act’s
plain text.” Shrestha, 590 F.3d at 1043 n.4. Indeed, “even
minor inconsistencies that have a bearing on a petitioner’s
veracity may constitute the basis for an adverse credibility
determination.” Li v. Garland, 13 F.4th 954, 959 (9th Cir.
2021) (quoting Ren v. Holder, 648 F.3d 1079, 1089 (9th Cir.
2011)).
Both prior to the REAL ID Act and after its enactment,
our cases have allowed IJs to make adverse credibility
determinations based on the maxim falsus in uno, falsus in
omnibus—false in one thing, false in everything. See, e.g.,
Singh v. Garland, 124 F.4th 690, 697 (9th Cir. 2024); Li v.
Holder, 738 F.3d 1160, 1163 (9th Cir. 2013)). As one of our
cases explains it, “[o]ur law has long recognized that a
person who is deemed unbelievable as to one material fact
may be disbelieved in all other respects.” Lopez-Umanzor v.
Gonzales, 405 F.3d 1049, 1059 (9th Cir. 2005). This
principle extends to immigration cases. We have thus
“granted IJs the power to invoke the falsus maxim,” allowing
them to “discredit an alien’s ‘entire testimony’ in removal
proceedings if the alien ‘makes a material and conscious
falsehood in one aspect of his testimony.’” Singh, 124 F.4th
at 697 (quoting Li, 738 F.3d at 1163 (emphasis in original));
see also Yang v. Lynch, 822 F.3d 504, 508 (9th Cir. 2016)
(“Under this court’s precedent, an immigration judge may
apply the falsus maxim to find that a witness who testified
falsely about one thing is also not credible about other
things.”); Li, 738 F.3d at 1163 (“The law of this circuit

ANI V. BONDI

17

permits the use of the maxim falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus
in the immigration context.”).
Li, a pre-REAL ID Act case, is representative. In that
case, Li claimed she feared persecution in China based on
her religion and because she was forced to have an abortion
under China’s population control measures. Li, 738 F.3d at
1162. The IJ found that Li was not credible with respect to
her religious persecution claim. Id. at 1163. Because of this,
the IJ found her entire testimony not credible, including as
to her forced abortion claim. Id.
In upholding the IJ’s adverse credibility determination,
we rejected Li’s argument that the BIA could not discredit
her testimony concerning her abortion just because it
disbelieved her account of religious persecution. Id. Citing
falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus, we concluded that “if the
witness makes a material and conscious falsehood in one
aspect of his testimony,” then an IJ can “disbelieve a
witness’s entire testimony.” Id. (emphasis in original). We
acknowledged that while Li’s “inconsistencies concern
material aspects of her religious persecution claim for
asylum, they do not touch upon her forced abortion claim.”
Id. at 1166. But the falsus maxim is premised on the logic
that “if a person testifies falsely, willfully, and materially on
one matter, then his ‘oath’ or word is not ‘worth anything’
and he is likely to be lying in other respects.” Id. at 1163
(quoting Cvitkovic v. United States, 41 F.2d 682, 684 (9th
Cir. 1930)). Because “Li is the same person who testified
about both her claims[,] . . . [h]er credibility goes to the heart
of either and both claims.” Id. at 1166.
Although we did not cite the falsus maxim, we relied on
its rationale to reach a similar conclusion in a pair of preREAL ID Act cases involving the intentional deception of

18

ANI V. BONDI

immigration authorities: Singh v. Holder, 638 F.3d 1264 (9th
Cir. 2011) (Harminder Singh), and Singh v. Holder, 643 F.3d
1178, 1181 (9th Cir. 2011) (Nirmal Singh). In Harminder
Singh, the petitioner submitted an application for asylum
based on an account of events that he later admitted was
fabricated. 638 F.3d at 1265. Before the IJ, the petitioner
then offered a different account of feared persecution. Id. at
1266. We upheld the IJ’s adverse credibility finding even
though “the IJ found [Harminder Singh’s] testimony to be
internally consistent on direct and cross and consistent with
his second application for asylum.” Id. at 1269. In doing so,
we rejected the “proposition that testimony both internally
consistent and consistent with the asylum application must
be deemed credible.” Id. at 1270. Instead, the IJ was
permitted to disbelieve Harminder Singh’s second account
because he admitted he had lied in his first asylum
application. Id. at 1272–73. While “[a] past falsehood, even
an intentional one, does not necessarily defeat credibility,”
an IJ at the same time “cannot be required to accept as true
any internally consistent story from the asylum seeker.” Id.
at 1273.
We upheld an IJ’s adverse credibility determination
under similar circumstances in Nirmal Singh. See 643 F.3d
at 1180–81. In that case, petitioner Kaur lied in an asylum
application and interview about whether she was living with
her husband and if she knew his whereabouts. Id. at 1179.
We upheld the IJ’s adverse credibility finding because “[a]n
asylum applicant who lies to immigration authorities casts
doubt on his credibility and the rest of his story.” Id. at 1181.
Kaur “made a conscious decision to lie to the asylum office
about a fact she believed was crucial to her claim for
permanent relief,” and “[i]t doesn’t matter that the fact
turned out to be irrelevant.” Id.

ANI V. BONDI

19

Properly considered, Harminder Singh and Nirmal Singh
are cases in which the falsus maxim applied to the
maximum.
When applicants for immigration relief
deliberately lie to immigration authorities to secure an
immigration benefit, “it’s entirely reasonable for the
immigration authorities to disbelieve their stories and deny
their claims.” Id. at 1182. It is one thing for a petitioner to
testify falsely before an IJ as to one aspect of his account.
Although that circumstance permits the IJ to discredit the
petitioner’s testimony if the falsehood is material, see Li, 738
F.3d at 1163, it is arguably even more problematic for a
petitioner to deliberately deceive immigration authorities on
a sustained and calculated basis, such as through a falsified
asylum application.
Although we have not directly so held, our cases
recognizing and applying the falsus maxim in the
immigration context, as well as our decisions in Harminder
Singh and Nirmal Singh, survive both the REAL ID Act and
our en banc decision in Alam. Cf. Shrestha, 590 F.3d at 1042
(“The REAL ID Act did not strip us of our ability to rely on
the institutional tools that we have developed . . . to aid our
review.”). Under Alam, “[t]here is no bright-line rule under
which some number of inconsistencies requires sustaining or
rejecting an adverse credibility determination,” as “our
review will always require assessing the totality of the
circumstances.” 11 F.4th at 1137. Still, deliberate deception
of immigration authorities will surely reflect an important
factor in the totality of circumstances, regardless of whether
the deception relates to the eventual claimed basis for
asylum.
If a petitioner has deliberately deceived
immigration authorities in the past when seeking
immigration relief, it remains a permissible inference that
the petitioner may be deceiving authorities in the present

20

ANI V. BONDI

proceedings. See Nirmal Singh, 643 F.3d at 1181–82; Li, 738
F.3d at 1163.
To be sure, the reasoning of Alam confirms that
materially false testimony on one aspect of testimony, or a
petitioner’s deliberate deception of immigration authorities,
does not make an IJ’s adverse credibility determination on
these grounds impervious to review. But if an IJ supportably
relies on those circumstances in finding a petitioner not
credible, for the petitioner to prevail, his testimony and the
other evidence in the record will need to compel the
conclusion that the adverse credibility finding is either
infirm or an inadequate basis for denying relief. And
petitioner’s otherwise “internally consistent” testimony,
standing alone, will not be sufficient to overcome an adverse
credibility determination. See Harminder Singh, 638 F.3d at
1270. Instead, the evidence must not only support the
petitioner’s entitlement to relief but override his intentional
deception of immigration authorities, to the point that the
record compels us to disregard the petitioner’s conscious
efforts to secure an immigration benefit through fraud.
Although that showing is theoretically available, the
governing legal standards dictate that it will be difficult to
meet. See Shrestha, 590 F.3d at 1041 (noting that under the
REAL ID Act, “only the most extraordinary circumstances
will justify overturning an adverse credibility
determination”) (quoting Jibril v. Gonzales, 423 F.3d 1129,
1138 n.1 (9th Cir. 2005)). Indeed, Ani identifies no case in
which we have rejected an adverse credibility determination
based on a petitioner’s intentional deception of immigration
authorities.
Our decision in Nirmal Singh stated that a “conscious
decision to lie to the asylum office” about a fact that the
petitioner deems crucial will “always counts as substantial

ANI V. BONDI

21

evidence supporting an adverse credibility finding.” 643
F.3d at 1181. If taken literally, that statement could suggest
tension with Alam. See Alam, 11 F.4th at 1138 (Bennett, J.,
concurring). But we do not take the “always” language in
Nirmal Singh to mean anything more than “always,” in the
absence of evidence compelling a contrary conclusion. That
explains why we went on to explain in Nirmal Singh that
Kaur “knowingly deceiv[ing] our government for years was
a perfectly good reason” for the IJ to find her not credible,
“and we cannot conclude that the evidence compels a
contrary finding.” 643 F.3d at 1182 (emphasis added). That
reasoning would make little sense if “always” meant “always
no matter what.”
In sum, after the REAL ID Act, the falsus maxim still
allows IJs to make adverse credibility findings based on
material falsehoods, even when they are not central to the
basis for the present claim for immigration relief. Li, 738
F.3d at 1168. A particularly concerning category of
intentional falsehoods involves “deliberate deception” of
immigration authorities. Nirmal Singh, 643 F.3d at 1181.
Such deception standing alone can support an adverse
credibility finding under the totality of the circumstances,
even if the deception is not directly relevant to an underlying
claim for relief. Id. Although these findings do not
automatically require courts to uphold the adverse credibility
determination, see Alam, 11 F.4th at 1137; Harminder Singh,
638 F.3d at 1273, evidence that compels a contrary
conclusion will need to be so strong as to overcome the
inherent credibility concerns associated with any petitioner
who deliberately deceives immigration authorities to gain an
immigration benefit.

22

ANI V. BONDI

B
Turning back to Ani’s case, we have little difficulty
concluding that substantial evidence supports the IJ’s
adverse credibility determination and denial of relief.
The record supports the conclusion that Ani lied to
immigration authorities about his marriage to L.B. in
attempting to secure immigration status through her. There
were significant inconsistencies concerning Ani’s account of
his cohabitation with L.B., as set forth in the USCIS decision
on which the IJ and BIA permissibly relied. L.B. also
admitted the marriage was fraudulent and so did Ani, in a
written statement no less, which represented that it was made
“freely and voluntarily.” The IJ was well within her
discretion in rejecting Ani’s unsupported assertion that he
signed this statement because he was coerced by Cataldo.
And the IJ could further doubt Ani’s credibility after he
continued to maintain before the IJ that his marriage to L.B.
was legitimate, testimony that “directly conflict[ed] with
[Ani’s] sworn statement about the marriage that he submitted
to USCIS.”
As in Nirmal Singh, Ani’s “intentional deception toward
the immigration authorities” supported an adverse
credibility determination even though Ani’s marriage fraud
was “irrelevant” to his substantive claim for asylum. 643
F.3d at 1180–81. And Ani’s continued denial of marriage
fraud before the IJ raised legitimate questions about his
ability to testify honestly.
Ani’s intentional effort to defraud immigration
authorities was also hardly a trivial matter. See Shrestha, 590
F.3d at 1043. It instead reflected an orchestrated effort to
secure immigration status through fraudulent means, which
included paying L.B. to lie. As the IJ recounted, Ani in fact

ANI V. BONDI

23

made the “conscious choice” to pursue this fraudulent path
to remaining in the United States rather than seeking asylum
on the basis of political persecution or his Igbo ethnicity,
which he only did years later. Ani’s behavior and testimony
justified the IJ in disbelieving Ani’s account of persecution.
The IJ was not required to credit that account in the face of
extensive evidence of Ani’s fraud on the immigration
system. When an applicant for immigration relief has
attempted to defraud immigration authorities in seeking one
form of relief, an IJ can disbelieve the applicant’s account
when he is seeking a different form of relief.
To be sure, the BIA acknowledged Ani’s “consistent
testimony of past harm, his credible demeanor, and objective
evidence corroborating his claim, including a newspaper
article identifying him as having escaped a police attack on
supporters of the MASSOB.” But these circumstances do
not compel the conclusion that Ani was credible. See
Harminder Singh, 638 F.3d at 1270 (“But just because the
asylum seeker does tell the story consistently, that does not
establish that it is true.”). “By necessity,” we have
explained, “much of the immigration system depends on
aliens telling the truth when they seek relief.” Nirmal Singh,
643 F.3d at 1182. But “[w]hen applicants deliberately lie,”
as the IJ found that Ani did here, the “trust is broken and it’s
entirely reasonable for the immigration authorities to
disbelieve their stories and deny their claims.” Id. That
principle governs this case, and the record does not compel
a contrary conclusion.
In the absence of credible testimony, substantial
evidence supports the denial of asylum and withholding of
removal. To establish eligibility for asylum, Ani must
“demonstrate a likelihood of ‘persecution or a well-founded
fear of persecution on account of race, religion, nationality,

24

ANI V. BONDI

membership in a particular social group, or political
opinion.’” Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1059 (quoting 8 U.S.C.
§ 1101(a)(42)(A)). To establish eligibility for withholding
of removal, Ani must “prove that it is more likely than not”
that he will be persecuted in Nigeria “because of”
membership in a particular social group or other protected
ground. Barajas-Romero v. Lynch, 846 F.3d 351, 357, 360
(9th Cir. 2017); see 8 U.S.C. § 1231(b)(3)(A). A petitioner
can demonstrate that he is eligible for asylum and
withholding of removal “by showing past persecution,
which gives rise to a rebuttable presumption of future
persecution.” Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1060.
In this case, and without credible testimony, Ani could
not show past persecution. Nor does the record otherwise
compel a finding of past persecution or an objectively
reasonable fear of future persecution based on Ani’s Igbo
ethnicity or his membership in MASSOB. See BringasRodriguez v. Sessions, 850 F.3d 1051, 1062 (9th Cir. 2017)
(en banc) (legal standards). Ani points to newspaper articles
describing the arrests of MASSOB members, articles
concerning his father, and the Vanguard News article
identifying Ani as having escaped arrest in 2004. But as the
IJ explained, much of this evidence is not specific to Ani,
and the Vanguard article, while notable, still describes events
of many years ago. These materials do not compel the
conclusion that anyone in the Nigerian government would
still pursue Ani. Because Ani fails to show that he is entitled
to asylum, he likewise fails to meet the “more stringent”

ANI V. BONDI

25

showing for withholding of removal. Sharma, 9 F.4th at
1066. 1
Finally, the BIA did not abuse its discretion in denying
Ani’s motion to remand this matter back to the IJ. To prevail
on a motion to remand, a petitioner must, among other
things, “proffer evidence that ‘is material.’” AlcarezRodriguez v. Garland, 89 F.4th 754, 760 (9th Cir. 2023)
(quoting 8 C.F.R. § 1003.2(c)(1)). The BIA did not abuse its
discretion in finding that Ani’s new evidence was not
material. The news articles that Ani provided concerned the
arrest and extradition to Nigeria of the separatist leader
Nnamdi Kanu to face trial on charges of treason. The BIA
did not abuse its discretion in concluding that alleged
persecution against Kanu, “a prominent charismatic leader”
of a separatist group, did not demonstrate an individualized
risk of persecution as to Ani, who lacks such notoriety.
*

*

*

For the foregoing reasons, the petition for review is
DENIED.

Ani did not raise his CAT claim before either the BIA or this court. The
claim is thus unexhausted and forfeited. 8 U.S.C. § 1252(d)(1); UmanaEscobar v. Garland, 69 F.4th 544, 550 (9th Cir. 2023).

1

