FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
MICHELE RODRIGUEZ, AKA
Michelle Rodriguez,

No. 24-593
D.C. No.
2:22-cr-00522SPG-1

OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Sherilyn Peace Garnett, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 10, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed December 22, 2025
Before: Consuelo M. Callahan, Roopali H. Desai, and Ana
de Alba, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Desai

2

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed a sentence imposed on Michelle
Rodriguez, who pled guilty to possession of at least 15
unauthorized access devices under 18 U.S.C. § 1029(a)(3).
Rodriguez argued that the district court erred when it
applied a four-level enhancement for possession of two
California
driver’s
licenses
under
U.S.S.G.
§ 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)(ii), which applies if “the offense involved
[] the possession or use of any . . . authentication feature.”
The panel held that § 2B1.1(b)(11)(A) applies to the
simple possession of an authentication feature and does not
require proof of a particular mens rea. Because Rodriguez
conceded that she possessed two California driver’s licenses
and that the driver’s licenses bore “authentication features,”
the district court did not abuse its discretion by applying the
enhancement to her sentence.

COUNSEL
Suria M. Bahadue (argued), Assistant United States
Attorney, Deputy Chief, General Crimes Section; Alix L.
McKenna, Assistant United States Attorney; Mack E.
Jenkins, Assistant United States Attorney, Chief, Criminal
Division; E. Martin Estrada, United States Attorney; Office
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

3

of the United States Attorney, United States Department of
Justice, Los Angeles, California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Kathryn A. Young (argued), Deputy Federal Public
Defender; Cuauhtemoc Ortega, Federal Public Defender;
Office of the Federal Public Defender; Los Angeles,
California; for Defendant-Appellant.

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
Michelle Rodriguez pled guilty to possession of at least
15 unauthorized access devices under 18 U.S.C.
§ 1029(a)(3), which makes it a crime to “knowingly and with
intent to defraud” possess at least 15 lost, stolen, or
fraudulently obtained “card[s], plate[s], code[s], account
number[s], . . . or other means of account access that can be
used . . . to obtain money, goods, services . . . [or] to initiate
a transfer of funds.” 18 U.S.C. § 1029(a)(3), (e)(1), (e)(3).
The district court sentenced Rodriguez to 20 months’
imprisonment and three years of supervised release.
Rodriguez appeals her sentence, arguing that the district
court erred when it applied a four-level sentence
enhancement for possession of two California driver’s
licenses under section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)(ii) of the United
States Sentencing Guidelines (“the Sentencing Guidelines”).
Section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)(ii) applies if “the offense involved
[] the possession or use of any . . . authentication feature.”
Rodriguez concedes that the driver’s licenses contained
“authentication features” under the Guidelines, and that
police found the driver’s licenses in the same bag of stolen

4

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

mail containing the bank account and social security
numbers. See 18 U.S.C. § 1028(d)(1); U.S.S.G. § 2B1.1 cmt.
n.10(A). But she claims that the enhancement does not apply
because the prosecution did not prove that she had the
requisite mens rea—that is, that she knowingly possessed the
authentication features with the intent to defraud.
We hold that section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)(ii) does not
include a mens rea requirement, and thus the district court
properly applied the authentication feature enhancement to
Rodriguez’s sentence. We affirm.
BACKGROUND
On May 8, 2021, South Pasadena police officers arrested
Rodriguez for stealing mail from mailboxes in South
Pasadena and La Cañada, California. Early that morning,
officers stopped a Ford Escape in which Rodriguez was a
passenger. Rodriguez told the officers that the driver was
taking her to “get mail.” In her backpack, Rodriguez had
mail belonging to various South Pasadena and La Cañada
residents, and she explained to the officers that she had more
mail in a white plastic bag in the car. In total, the backpack
and bag contained 140 pieces of mail from 110 victims. This
included 19 checks, three of which were blank; 33 pieces of
open mail with full bank account numbers; a ledger with five
handwritten social security numbers and 24 handwritten
account numbers; a printout of names, account information,
and passwords; nine credit and debit cards; and two
California driver’s licenses.
The government charged Rodriguez with three crimes:
(1) possession of stolen mail under 18 U.S.C. § 1708;
(2) possession of at least 15 unauthorized access devices
under 18 U.S.C. § 1029(a)(3); and (3) aggravated identity
theft under 18 U.S.C. § 1028A(a)(1). In October 2023,

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

5

Rodriguez pled guilty to possession of unauthorized access
devices, including 26 bank account numbers and five social
security numbers issued to persons other than Rodriguez. In
exchange, the government agreed to dismiss the other
charges. Rodriguez’s plea agreement also noted that the bag
of stolen mail contained two California driver’s licenses.
At sentencing, the Probation Office recommended a
Sentencing Guidelines range of 24 to 30 months. The range
was based on an offense level of ten and a criminal history
category of six. To reach the offense level of ten, the
Probation Office began with the base offense level of six.
The Probation Office added a two-level enhancement
because the offense involved ten or more victims, as
established by Rodriguez’s plea agreement. U.S.S.G.
§ 2B1.1(b)(2)(A)(i). The Probation Office next added a twolevel enhancement under U.S.S.G. § 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)(ii),
which increases the offense level if “the offense involved []
possession or use of any . . . authentication feature.” The
Probation Office explained that the enhancement was
warranted because Rodriguez “possessed two California
Driver’s Licenses which bore the seal of the State of
California.” Because the resulting offense level was less than
12, the authentication feature enhancement further increased
Rodriguez’s offense level to 12. 1 The Probation Office then
applied a two-level reduction for acceptance of
responsibility.
Rodriguez objected to the application of the
authentication feature enhancement. She argued that the
enhancement applies only when the defendant knowingly
The authentication feature enhancement applies a two-level increase
unless the resulting offense level is less than 12, in which case the offense
level is increased to 12. U.S.S.G. § 2B1.1(b)(11).

1

6

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

possesses the authentication features with the intent to
defraud. And because the prosecution did not show that she
was aware the driver’s licenses were among the 140 pieces
of mail in her backpack and bag, or that she intended to use
the driver’s licenses to defraud, the prosecution failed to
prove the requisite mens rea for the enhancement. Without
the authentication feature enhancement, Rodriguez’s offense
level would have been six, making her Guidelines range 12
to 18 months, rather than 24 to 30 months. The district court
overruled Rodriguez’s objection and imposed a belowGuidelines sentence of 20 months’ imprisonment, followed
by three years’ supervised release.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review the district court’s interpretation of the
Sentencing Guidelines de novo, United States v. Scott, 83
F.4th 796, 799 (9th Cir. 2023), its application of the
Guidelines to the facts for abuse of discretion, and its factual
findings for clear error, United States v. Gasca-Ruiz, 852
F.3d 1167, 1170 (9th Cir. 2017) (en banc). We may affirm
Rodriguez’s sentence on any ground supported by the
record. United States v. Nichols, 464 F.3d 1117, 1122 (9th
Cir. 2006).
DISCUSSION
Although we have addressed other issues related to the
authentication feature enhancement, see United States v.
Barrogo, 59 F.4th 440, 444–47 (9th Cir. 2023) (addressing
whether a PIN number for a food stamp program is an
“authentication
feature”
under
U.S.S.G.
§ 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)(ii)), we have not considered whether the
prosecution must show that the defendant possessed the
authentication features with a culpable state of mind.

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

7

To determine whether the enhancement includes a mens
rea requirement, we begin with the text of the Sentencing
Guidelines. United States v. Kirilyuk, 29 F.4th 1128, 1137
(9th Cir. 2022) (holding that we apply “the ordinary tools of
statutory interpretation” when interpreting the Sentencing
Guidelines). Unless a guideline provision is ambiguous, the
plain meaning of the Guidelines controls. United States v.
Calderon Espinosa, 569 F.3d 1005, 1007 (9th Cir. 2009).
On its face, section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A) does not include a
mens rea requirement. The enhancement increases a
defendant’s offense level if “the offense involved [] the
possession or use of any . . . authentication feature.”
U.S.S.G. § 2B1.1(b)(11)(A). It does not say that the offense
must involve the knowing possession of an authentication
feature, or that the offense must involve the possession of an
authentication feature with the intent to defraud. See id. The
plain text of the enhancement requires only that the offense
involve “possession,” unqualified by any descriptor of the
defendant’s state of mind.
Indeed, the absence of any reference to the defendant’s
state of mind is notable given that Section
2B1.1(b)(10)(C)—the guideline immediately preceding the
authentication feature enhancement—includes a mens rea
element. Section 2B1.1(b)(10)(C) applies a two-level
enhancement if “the offense . . . involved sophisticated
means and the defendant intentionally engaged in or caused
the conduct constituting sophisticated means.” U.S.S.G.
§ 2B1.1(b)(10)(C) (emphasis added). When particular
language is included in one section of a statute, but omitted
in another, we presume that the omission is intentional and
give the silence its full meaning. City & Cnty. of San
Francisco v. EPA, 604 U.S. 334, 344 (2025). As section
2B1.1(b)(10)(C) demonstrates, the Sentencing Commission

8

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

is capable of including a scienter requirement in an
enhancement provision. When drafting the authentication
feature enhancement, the Sentencing Commission chose not
to do so. We decline to supersede its decision by reading
scienter language into the guideline.
To overcome the plain language of the enhancement,
Rodriguez argues that the phrase “offense involved” imputes
the elements of the offense of conviction—“knowingly and
with the intent to defraud” possessing at least 15
unauthorized access devices—onto the authentication
feature enhancement. Rodriguez also argues that the
presumption in favor of scienter that generally applies to
criminal statutes also applies to the Sentencing Guidelines.
Both arguments fail.
First, the phrase “offense involved” does not transfer the
elements of the crime of conviction onto the authentication
feature enhancement. The Guidelines define “offense” as
“the offense of conviction and all relevant conduct.” See
U.S.S.G. § 1B1.1 cmt. n.1(I) (emphasis added). And
“relevant conduct” includes “all acts and omissions
committed . . . by the defendant . . . that occurred during the
commission of the offense of conviction, in preparation for
that offense, or in the course of attempting to avoid detection
. . . for that offense.” U.S.S.G. § 1B1.3(a)(1). Further,
“involved” is an expansive term that “should be defined
broadly,” United States v. Soto, 915 F.3d 675, 678 (9th Cir.
2019), to mean “to relate to or affect,” United States v.
Lozoya, 982 F.3d 648, 653 (9th Cir. 2020) (citation
modified). Paired together, “offense involved” is just as
broad: it refers to both the offense of conviction and lesser
acts that, while related to the crime committed, do not
necessarily carry all the elements required to sustain a
conviction. Cf. United States v. Lavender, 224 F.3d 939, 941

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

9

(9th Cir. 2000) (“Sentencing factors . . . are not separate
criminal offenses and as such are not normally required to
carry their own mens rea requirements.”). Thus, “offense
involved” does not incorporate the elements of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1029(a)(3)—or any other crime—into the authentication
feature enhancement.
Because the phrase “offense involved” does not transfer
the elements of the underlying offense or impose a separate
mens rea requirement, we have little difficulty finding that
the “offense” in this case “involved . . . the possession or use
of any . . . authentication feature.” The name on at least one
of the driver’s licenses found in Rodriguez’s possession
matched the name on at least one of the access devices—a
Capital One card—found in her possession. This is sufficient
to determine that the offense of possession of unauthorized
access devices involved the possession of an authentication
feature.
Second, Rodriguez’s argument that the presumption in
favor of scienter requires that the prosecution prove she
knew of the driver’s licenses fares no better. It is true that
when a criminal statute omits an express mens rea element,
we typically presume that one exists despite the statute’s
silence. United States v. Goodell, 990 F.2d 497, 498–99 (9th
Cir. 1993) (“[T]he existence of a mens rea is the rule of,
rather than the exception to, the principles of AngloAmerican criminal jurisprudence.” (quoting United States v.
U.S. Gypsum Co., 438 U.S. 422, 436 (1978)). But we have
long held that the presumption in favor of scienter does not
apply to the Sentencing Guidelines. See United States v.
Gonzalez, 262 F.3d 867, 870 (9th Cir. 2001) (per curiam). In
short, “because the plain language of the guideline does not
require that [Rodriguez] have knowledge” of the
authentication features, “[w]e decline [her] invitation to read

10

USA V. RODRIGUEZ

a scienter requirement into” the authentication feature
enhancement. Id.
In the end, the plain text of section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)
requires that the offense at issue involved “the possession”
of an “authentication feature.” Whether Rodriguez knew she
possessed the driver’s licenses bearing the authentication
features or not, the authentication feature enhancement
applies. 2
CONCLUSION
We hold that section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A) applies to the
simple possession of an authentication feature and does not
require proof of a particular mens rea. Because Rodriguez
concedes that she possessed two California driver’s licenses
and that the driver’s licenses bore “authentication features,”
the district court did not abuse its discretion by applying the
enhancement to her sentence.
AFFIRMED.

2
As noted above, the question when applying section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A)
is not whether the defendant knew about the authentication feature, but
whether the offense involved the possession of one. If the offense
involved the possession of an authentication feature, then that is enough
under section 2B1.1(b)(11)(A), regardless of whether the defendant had
knowledge of the authentication feature.

