FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
KARI LAKE; MARK FINCHEM,
and

Plaintiffs,

ANDREW D. PARKER; PARKER
DANIELS KIBORT, LLC; KURT B.
OLSEN; OLSEN LAW, PC, Counsel
for Plaintiffs,
v.

Appellants,

BILL GATES, as a member of the
Maricopa County Board of
Supervisors; CLINT HICKMAN, as a
member of the Maricopa County
Board of Supervisors; JACK
SELLERS, as a member of the
Maricopa County Board of
Supervisors; THOMAS GALVIN, as a
member of the Maricopa County
Board of Supervisors; STEVE
GALLARDO, as a member of the
Maricopa County Board of
Supervisors,
Defendants-Appellees,

No. 23-16022
D.C. No. 2:22-cv00677-JJT
ORDER

2

LAKE V. GATES

and
ADRIAN FONTES, Arizona Secretary
of State; MARICOPA COUNTY
BOARD OF SUPERVISORS; REX
SCOTT, as a member of the Pima
County Board of Supervisors; MATT
HEINZ, as a member of the Pima
County Board of Supervisors;
SHARON BRONSON, as a member
of the Pima County Board of
Supervisors; STEVE CHRISTY, as a
member of the Pima County Board of
Supervisors; ADELITA GRIJALVA,
as a member of the Pima County
Board of Supervisors; PIMA
COUNTY BOARD OF
SUPERVISORS,
Defendants.
Filed August 21, 2025
Before: Kim McLane Wardlaw, Ronald M. Gould, and
Patrick J. Bumatay, Circuit Judges.
Order;
Dissent by Judge VanDyke

LAKE V. GATES

3

SUMMARY *
Sanctions
The panel denied a petition for panel rehearing and
denied a petition for rehearing en banc in a case concerning
Arizona’s voting system in which the panel affirmed the
district court’s sanctions order under Rule 11 of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure and 28 U.S.C. § 1927 against
plaintiffs’ lead attorneys.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
VanDyke, joined by Judges Callahan, R. Nelson, Collins,
Lee and Bumatay, wrote that two reasons independently
made this case worthy of en banc review. First, the district
court and the panel badly misapplied the standards for
finding the attorneys’ conduct sanctionable by reading the
complaint out of context and in the light least favorable to
plaintiffs. Second, this court’s refusal to grant en banc
review will be construed as implicitly blessing the district
court’s weaponization of sanctions to chill politically
disfavored litigation.
ORDER
Judge Wardlaw and Judge Gould voted to deny the
petition for panel rehearing and the petition for rehearing en
banc. Judge Bumatay voted to grant both the petition for
panel rehearing and the petition for rehearing en banc. A
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

4

LAKE V. GATES

judge of the court requested a vote on whether to rehear the
matter en banc. The matter failed to receive a majority of
votes of the active judges in favor of en banc rehearing. Fed.
R. App. P. 40. Judge Desai was recused from the vote. The
petition for panel rehearing and rehearing en banc, Dkt. 38,
is DENIED.
VANDYKE, Circuit Judge, joined by CALLAHAN, R.
NELSON, COLLINS, LEE, and BUMATAY, Circuit Judges,
dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc:
The panel decision in this case upheld a sanctions order
under Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure and
28 U.S.C. § 1927 against attorneys Andrew Parker and Kurt
Olsen. Parker and Olsen (collectively, “Lead Attorneys”)
represented plaintiffs Kari Lake and Mark Finchem in
election-related litigation. As the district court candidly
acknowledged, the sanctions were intended to “send a
message” to similar litigants in election-based lawsuits and
to discourage litigation disfavored by the court. Zealous to
safeguard the “public trust,” the district court read plaintiffs’
complaint out of context and in the light least favorable to
plaintiffs; imposed a heightened requirement that Lead
Attorneys conduct “significant” pre-filing inquiries on the
basis of their clients and their cause; levied sanctions on the
ground that plaintiffs made claims that, as even the district
court itself recognized, the complaint never actually stated;
and badly misapplied the governing legal standards. Lake v.
Hobbs, 643 F. Supp. 3d 989, 998, 1013 (D. Ariz. 2022), aff’d
in part, rev’d in part sub nom., Lake v. Gates, 130 F.4th 1054
(9th Cir. 2025), and aff’d sub nom., Lake v. Gates, 130 F.4th
1064 (9th Cir. 2025).

LAKE V. GATES

5

This case involved legal claims that might charitably be
characterized as aggressive. It was a Hail Mary legal theory,
especially as to standing. But we encounter Hail Mary legal
theories regularly in our court in a variety of contexts, and
while they almost always lose, they don’t get sanctioned just
because they are longshots. Cf. Nuclear Regul. Comm’n v.
Texas, 145 S. Ct. 1762, 1776 (2025) (characterizing a
particular legal claim as “essentially a Hail Mary pass—and
in court as in football, the attempt rarely succeeds” (quoting
Nyunt v. Chairman, Broad. Bd. of Governors, 589 F.3d 445,
449 (D.C. Cir. 2009))). Many cases are dismissed because
the asserted injuries are too speculative to support Article III
standing. A great many more are dismissed for failure to
state a claim on which relief can be granted. The law has no
lack of tools short of sanctions to deal with speculative
claims, adventurous legal theories, and imprecisely drafted
complaints. Again, our circuit entertains cases with
exceedingly improbable claims on a routine basis, which are
usually (but not inevitably, which is probably why hope
springs eternal) dispatched using any of the panoply of
available mechanisms. If the run-of-the-mill Hail-Mary
claims we routinely encounter are not sanctionable, neither
were the claims in this case. 1
Other courts across the country agree that even longshot and
improbable claims are not subject to sanctions, including in the election
law context. See, e.g., Moss v. Bush, 105 Ohio St. 3d 458, 458–60 (2005)
(declining sanctions despite allegations that were deemed “highly
improbable and potentially defamatory, inflammatory, and devoid of
logic,” including claims of “alleged fraud in the casting and counting of
absentee ballots and alleged individual election incidents occurring
throughout the state”); Donald J. Trump for President, Inc. v. Boockvar,
502 F. Supp. 3d 899, 906–10 (M.D. Pa. 2020) (declining to impose
sanctions for a complaint characterized by the court as “Frankenstein’s
Monster” due to it being “haphazardly stitched together from two distinct

1

6

LAKE V. GATES

Two reasons independently made this case worthy of en
banc review. First, the district court and the panel badly
misapplied the standards for finding attorney conduct
sanctionable. The district court flatly misread the allegations
in plaintiffs’ complaint. While the complaint never actually
said that Arizona did not use paper ballots—a fact that the
district court even acknowledged in its sanctions order—the
district court nevertheless found such a claim implied in the
complaint (and thus sanctionable). But the context of the
complaint confirms what its plain language makes clear: The
attorneys never argued that Arizona did not use paper
ballots. Although the complaint may not have been drafted
with perfect precision, the district court reached the
alternative conclusion only by repeatedly going out of its
way to construe the complaint in the light least favorable to
plaintiffs. Read in context, the complaint cannot be
plausibly construed as asserting what it never said.
Penumbras, emanations, and acontextual implications
should be insufficient to warrant sanctions under Rule 11,
and the district court abused its discretion in concluding
otherwise. The panel majority ratified those errors, and in
doing so reinforced the district court’s departure from the
Rule 11 standard and our case law interpreting that Rule.
Second, the district court boldly proclaimed that it levied
sanctions on Lead Attorneys with the hope that doing so
would “send a message” to deter future litigants with similar
theories in an attempt to avoid controlling precedent,” and said to be
seeking a “drastic remedy in the contest of an election” based on
“strained legal arguments without merit and speculative accusations”);
Hunter v. Earthgrains Co. Bakery, 281 F.3d 144, 153 (4th Cir. 2002)
(reversing a sanctions order as unwarranted despite the district court’s
characterization of the complaint as “utter nonsense” against an attorney
with a prior sanctions history).

LAKE V. GATES

7

claims—or, put bluntly, to deter a specific type of election
litigation. Setting aside the myriad legal problems posed by
this action—not the least of which is making a hash of the
Rule 11 standard—that just looks bad. And even if the
inference is unwarranted, this court’s refusal to grant en banc
review will be construed by many as implicitly blessing the
district court’s weaponization of sanctions to chill politically
disfavored litigation.
Who could blame them? Cudgeling attorneys into
abandoning unpopular claims and clients is not what
sanctions are for. While not authoritative here, see Snead v.
Metro. Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co., 237 F.3d 1080, 1091 (9th Cir.
2001), the Arizona Supreme Court astutely observed that
“[b]y sanctioning parties and their lawyers for bringing
debatable, long-shot complaints, courts risk chilling legal
advocacy and citizens raising ‘questions’ under the guise of
defending the rule of law,” Ariz. Republican Party v. Richer,
547 P.3d 356, 370 (Ariz. 2024). “Even if done inadvertently
and with the best of intentions, such sanctions present a real
and present danger to the rule of law.” Id. And that “danger
to the rule of law” is all the more present when the judge
issuing the sanctions boldly proclaimed that such a chilling
effect is an intended feature, not a bug. Id.
We should have taken this case en banc to rectify these
abuses and make clear that Article III judges are to
adjudicate cases without fear or favor, remaining
scrupulously neutral toward all litigants—especially in
politically charged cases where the public is watching. I
respectfully dissent from our failure to do so.
I.
The underlying dispute in this case concerns the use of
electronic voting systems in Arizona elections and the

8

LAKE V. GATES

potential for manipulation of those systems. Lake v. Gates,
130 F.4th at 1067. Plaintiffs Kari Lake and Mark Finchem,
candidates in Arizona’s 2022 general election, filed a
complaint in federal district court alleging that Arizona’s
voting infrastructure insufficiently protected the rights of
voters—specifically, that Arizona’s electronic tabulation
systems were susceptible to hacking. Id. They also sought
a preliminary injunction prohibiting the use of electronic
voting systems in Arizona elections. Id. Their claims failed.
The district court dismissed the complaint for lack of Article
III standing in August 2022, and this court affirmed in a
unanimous opinion. Lake v. Fontes, 83 F.4th 1199, 1204
(9th Cir. 2023) (per curiam).
But the district court did not stop there. On December 1,
2022, it granted defendants’ motion for sanctions under
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 11(c) and 28 U.S.C. § 1927
against Lead Attorneys, ordered Lead Attorneys to pay
defendants’ attorneys’ fees, and ordered the parties to file
memoranda regarding the proper amount of attorneys’ fees.
Lake, 643 F. Supp. 3d at 1012–13. After oral argument, the
district court issued an order holding Lead Attorneys (and
their respective law firms) jointly and severally liable for
$122,200 in attorneys’ fees.
On March 14, 2025, a divided panel of this court
affirmed the district court’s sanctions order. Lake, 130 F.4th
at 1067. Plaintiffs sought en banc review, which a majority
of our court has now declined to grant. In refusing to correct
the panel’s opinion, our court has left in place a decision that
openly weaponizes sanctions to chill disfavored litigants and
litigation.

LAKE V. GATES

9

II.
An award of Rule 11 sanctions is reviewed for abuse of
discretion. Montrose Chem. Corp. of Cal. v. Amer.
Motorists Ins. Co., 117 F.3d 1128, 1133 (9th Cir. 1997). A
district court “abuse[s] its discretion if it base[s] its ruling on
an erroneous view of the law or on a clearly erroneous
assessment of the evidence.” Cooter & Gell v. Hartmarx
Corp., 496 U.S. 384, 405 (1990). To impose sanctions under
Rule 11, a district court must determine that a pleading is
“both baseless and made without a reasonable and
competent inquiry.” In re Keegan Mgmt. Co., Sec. Litig., 78
F.3d 431, 434 (9th Cir. 1996) (quoting Townsend v. Holman
Consulting Corp., 929 F.2d 1358, 1362 (9th Cir. 1990)).
Sanctions under 28 U.S.C. § 1927 “must be supported by
a finding of subjective bad faith.” Blixseth v. Yellowstone
Mountain Club, LLC, 796 F.3d 1004, 1007 (9th Cir. 2015)
(citation omitted). “[B]ad faith is present when an attorney
knowingly or recklessly raises a frivolous argument or
argues a meritorious claim for the purpose of harassing an
opponent.” Id. (citation omitted). Whether an attorney acted
recklessly or in bad faith is a factual finding that is reviewed
for clear error. See Pac. Harbor Cap., Inc. v. Carnival Air
Lines, Inc., 210 F.3d 1112, 1117 (9th Cir. 2000).
III.
Plaintiffs’ ultimate inability to establish standing
necessarily doomed their election claims from the start. “But
asserting an unpersuasive claim is different from asserting a
sanctionable one.” Lake, 130 F.4th at 1071 (Bumatay, J.,
dissenting). It is true the complaint in this case (like perhaps
the complaints in many of our cases) may not have been a
paragon of clarity and incisive analysis. And it is also true
that Lead Attorneys may have “played hardball” with the

10

LAKE V. GATES

state (again, an apt metaphor for many of the advocates who
practice before us). Id. Yet “nothing they did was deceptive,
intentionally false, or beyond the bounds of zealous
advocacy.” Id.
Read with a modicum of context and an ounce of charity,
the complaint challenges the reliability of Arizona’s use of
electronic systems to count ballots. The district court’s
sanctions order was premised on its conclusion that the
complaint said that Arizona did not use paper ballots. But
the complaint never said that. And as Judge Bumatay’s
dissent explains, “no party to the litigation was fooled.
Arizona’s attorneys fully understood the nature of the
claims.” Id. Undaunted, the district court pressed on,
ostensibly “concerned that the public might misconstrue
[plaintiffs’] claims.” Id. But whether some unnamed
member of the public might misunderstand technicalities
and legalese in a complaint is obviously not the standard for
imposing sanctions under Rule 11.
Yet perhaps the most disquieting aspect of this case
remains the district court’s express declaration that it was
sanctioning Lead Attorneys to “send a message” to other
litigants who may raise similar election-law disputes. Lake,
643 F. Supp. 3d at 1013. Sanctions are not a tool for
punishing disfavored litigants bringing disfavored claims or
their attorneys. To the contrary, this court has already
warned of the dangers posed by the abuse of Rule 11
sanctions—including, presciently, warning that such
sanctions might be used to “chill vigorous advocacy.”
Townsend v. Holman Consulting Corp., 929 F.2d 1358, 1364
(9th Cir. 1990) (en banc). And now this prediction is
manifest. The panel opinion’s message is “loud and clear:
challenge an election, and judges stand with sanctions at the

LAKE V. GATES

11

ready if they disapprove of your claim.” Lake, 130 F.4th at
1071 (Bumatay, J., dissenting).
A.
Rule 11 sets a “low bar” for attorneys to clear and should
only be utilized in unusual situations. See Strom v. United
States, 641 F.3d 1051, 1059 (9th Cir. 2011). As we’ve
emphasized before, “Rule 11 is an extraordinary remedy,
one to be exercised with extreme caution.” Operating
Eng’rs Pension Tr. v. A-C Co., 859 F.2d 1336, 1345 (9th Cir.
1988).
In this instance the district court based its erroneous
imposition of sanctions on four categories of conduct by
Lead Attorneys: (1) allegations in the complaint about the
use of paper ballots; (2) allegations in the complaint about
the testing of Arizona’s election equipment; (3) reliance on
speculation and conjecture; and (4) failure to conduct a
reasonable pre-filing inquiry. None of this conduct was
sanctionable, and the district court abused its discretion in
concluding otherwise.
1.
The district court’s sanctions order was premised on the
idea that the complaint falsely stated that Arizona voters do
not cast paper ballots. But the complaint never said that.
The thrust of plaintiffs’ challenge was aimed at the alleged
infirmities in the security of Arizona’s system for counting
votes and the desire “to have their ballots, and all ballots cast
together with theirs, counted accurately and transparently.”
In the process of making their argument, plaintiffs
alleged that electronic vote-counting machines presented
greater risks from hacking and, accordingly, that using
electronic vote-counting systems made the electoral process

12

LAKE V. GATES

vulnerable to manipulation. Plaintiffs then argued that
Arizona’s current electronic vote-counting systems should
be replaced by one in which the votes are counted by
humans. To be sure, plaintiffs certainly argued that hand
ballots must also be part of an accurate and transparent
voting system, but their emphasis on vote tabulation (not
vote casting) belies any conclusion that their argument
implies that Arizona does not use paper ballots.
The district court reached the alternative conclusion only
by twisting and contorting plaintiffs’ arguments and drawing
all inferences against Lead Attorneys. For example, the
district court claimed that Lead Attorneys’ request for
injunctive relief was “entirely frivolous because [Arizona is]
already doing what [they] want the [State] to do.” Lake, 643
F. Supp. 3d at 998. But as just explained, the complaint
argued for replacing the electronic-tabulating system with
one in which votes are tabulated by humans. Everyone
agrees that Arizona has not adopted the system plaintiffs
sought and continues to rely on electronic tabulation. So the
district court’s characterization of plaintiffs’ request for
injunctive relief as requesting things that Arizona is “already
doing” is transparently wrong.
Given the district court’s imposition of sanctions on
Lead Attorneys for supposedly arguing that Arizona did not
use paper ballots, it might come as a surprise that the district
court could not identify a single instance in the complaint
where plaintiffs expressly make this allegation. Lake, 643
F. Supp. 3d at 998 (“Plaintiffs argue that ‘none of these
paragraphs say that Arizona does not use paper
ballots.’ … That is true only in the most facile sense.”).
This alone is sufficient to demonstrate that the district court
abused its discretion. Despite explicitly recognizing that
plaintiffs were correct to argue that the complaint did not say

LAKE V. GATES

13

that “Arizona does not use paper ballots,” the district court
eschewed reliance on clear language from the complaint and
instead cherry-picked isolated snippets and contorted logic
to conclude that “Plaintiffs requested that the Court order
Arizona to do something that they contend it is not currently
doing: to use paper ballots.” Id.
Consider some examples of the district court’s creative
reading of the complaint. First, it faulted paragraph 153 of
the complaint for stating that “Plaintiffs seek for the Court
to Order, an election conducted by paper ballot, as an
alternative to the current framework” and construed that
statement as affirmatively asserting that Arizona elections
do not use paper ballots. Id. That is wrong as a matter of
both context and logic. The district court apparently
disregarded the header that immediately preceded the
statement: “Voting on Paper Ballots and Counting Those
Votes by Hand Is the Most Effective and Presently the Only
Secure Election Method.” Immediately after that statement,
the complaint included nine bullet points detailing how votes
cast on paper ballots should be counted by hand. Read in
context, the complaint was again advocating both paper
ballots and human tabulation.
At bottom, plaintiffs wanted the entire election to be
conducted by hand-counted paper ballots. It is undisputed
that Arizona does not conduct elections entirely with paper
ballots, nor does Arizona hand-count all the ballots that are
done with paper, so plaintiffs were clearly not requesting
procedures that the state was already following. The district
court committed a classic part-to-whole fallacy by taking
plaintiffs’ (true) belief that Arizona employed a voting
system relying on some non-paper ballots to mean that
plaintiffs were asserting Arizona employed a system with no
paper ballots. Finally, the district court also improperly

14

LAKE V. GATES

assumed that the “alternative” system referred to in
paragraph 153 must mean a different system in all respects
from the current system. But an “alternative” framework
need not be different in every respect. The fact that the
proposed “alternative” framework includes votes cast on
paper ballots—just like part of the current practice—does
not even suggest, let alone assert, that paper ballots are not
already used for some voters.
Next, the district court took aim at paragraph 7 of the
complaint. That paragraph reads, in full:
Through this Action, Plaintiffs seek an Order
that Defendants collect and count votes
through a constitutionally acceptable process,
which relies on tried and true precepts that
mandate[] integrity and transparency. This
includes votes cast by hand on verifiable
paper ballots that maintains voter anonymity;
votes counted by human beings, not by
machines; and votes counted with
transparency, and in a fashion observable to
the public.
From this paragraph the district court plucked a single
phrase—“[t]his includes votes cast by hand on verifiable
paper ballots that maintains voter anonymity”—to suggest
that Lead Attorneys claimed Arizona voters do not currently
use paper ballots. Once again, that is wrong as a matter of
logic. Read in context, the paragraph is advocating two
things in conjunction: (1) voting by paper ballot and (2) vote
counting by humans. It is “undisputed that Arizona did not
hand count votes.” Lake, 130 F.4th at 1073 (Bumatay, J.,
dissenting). So plaintiffs were proposing a different voting

LAKE V. GATES

15

system—one with both paper ballots and human
tabulation—which did not then exist. Id. This does not
mean paper ballots were not already partially in use.
Lastly, the district court found fault with paragraphs 58
through 60 of the complaint. To start, the complaint alleged
that “[b]illions of federal dollars were spent to move states,
including Arizona, from paper-based voting systems to
electronic, computer-based systems.” The district court took
issue with these paragraphs because they described
Arizona’s shift from an “auditable paper-based system” to a
“computer-based system.” Lake, 643 F. Supp. 3d at 998. In
the district court’s reading, these allegations were not merely
imprecise, they were actually false because they “more than
impl[y] a transition away from paper ballots.” Id. at 999.
Once again, the district court disregarded the relevant
context and went out of its way to construe the allegations in
the complaint in the light least favorable to Lead Attorneys.
Paragraph 57 of the complaint itself states that “Arizona
intends to rely on electronic voting systems to record some
votes and to tabulate all votes cast in the State of Arizona in
the 2022 Midterm Election.” So once again, the complaint
never alleged that no paper ballots will be used in Arizona—
it instead alleged that some votes will be recorded
electronically, and all votes will be tabulated electronically.
All of this was inarguably true. In fact, the complaint had
already explained why at least some voters must vote by
electronic means: “[v]oters who may have hearing or visual
impairments may cast their votes with the aid of electronic
ballot marking devices.” Thus, the complaint unequivocally
recognized that Arizona uses electronic voting systems to
record only “some” votes (i.e., those cast by voters with
disabilities). The clear implication then is that the rest of the
votes are cast in another way (i.e., on paper ballots).

16

LAKE V. GATES

Regardless, although the complaint plainly contemplates
that some ballots are cast on paper, the gravamen of the
complaint was not about how votes are cast at all. Rather,
the thrust of the complaint concerned allegations regarding
how votes are counted.
It alleged—correctly and
uncontested—that “all” votes in Arizona are tabulated by
“electronic voting systems.” Lake, 130 F.4th at 1073–74
(Bumatay, J., dissenting). Indeed, the complaint explicitly
stated that “[e]very county in Arizona intends to tabulate
votes cast … through optical scanners.” And to state the
obvious, “optical scanners” scan paper ballots. The
complaint also recognized this fact of how optical scanners
work in arguing against their use, directly stating that
“[e]very county in Arizona … can simply and securely count
votes cast on paper ballots without using centralized
machine-counting or computerized optical scanners.” Once
again, the complaint’s focus was on opposing the use of
optical scanners—not disputing the existence of paper
ballots. It is thus irrelevant whether the complaint
mentioned “paper ballots.” Sanctions should be reserved for
false statements; not for situations where judges simply wish
the parties had said more.
The upshot is that optical scanners necessarily require
the use of paper ballots. The complaint recognized as much.
So “any confusion on this point was entirely of the district
court’s own making.” Lake, 130 F.4th at 1074 (Bumatay, J.,
dissenting). And, consequently, the district court abused its
discretion in ripping the allegations out of context, reading
the arguments in the light least favorable to Lead Attorneys,
and contorting the complaint to find that the use of the terms
“computerized voting” and “electronic voting systems” must
be construed to mean a complete lack of paper ballots. See
Lake, 643 F. Supp. 3d at 999, 1001. The district court’s

LAKE V. GATES

17

handling of the paper-ballot allegations was grievously
wrong, and the panel opinion’s ratification of those errors
and deviation from the Rule 11 standard on this basis alone
warranted this court’s en banc review.
I cannot emphasize this enough: The district court was
transparently wrong in its characterization of the Lead
Attorneys’ allegations regarding how Arizona used and
counted paper ballots. The district court sanctioned Lead
Attorneys based on its own blatant misreading of their
complaint. This is egregious. After all, if sanctioning Lead
Attorneys on the grounds that their complaint alleged
something that—by the district court’s own admission—
cannot actually be found in the text of the complaint does not
qualify as abusing one’s discretion, what does? For better or
worse, we live in a time when many citizens believe (rightly
or wrongly) that there is rampant election fraud and abuse.
We cannot afford the perception that our federal courts are
anything but scrupulously impartial in those partisan (and
often heated) disputes. Our refusal to correct this error will
generate precisely the opposite perception.
2.
The district court also found the complaint’s allegations
that Arizona’s tabulation machines are not subjected to
“objective evaluation” or “neutral, expert analysis” as
sanctionable. But in doing so the court plainly misapplied
the Rule 11 standard. Id. at 1002 (quoting paragraphs 20 and
57 of the complaint). Under Rule 11, a complaint does not
have to be entirely uncontradicted. Rather, it merely
requires that the allegations “have” or “will likely have
evidentiary support.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 11(b)(3).
Eschewing the Rule 11 standard, the district court found
the complaint’s allegations that Arizona’s tabulation

18

LAKE V. GATES

machines are not subject to “objective evaluation” or
“neutral, expert analysis” were false on the ground that the
Arizona Secretary of State—a defendant in the case—had
tested the equipment and because a company accredited by
a federal election commission had also conducted testing.
Lake, 643 F. Supp. 3d at 1002–03.
To state the obvious, the fact that a defendant in a case
disputes the allegations in a complaint does not demonstrate
that those allegations are false. If it did, every complaint
would be found riddled with false allegations and practically
every plaintiff’s attorney would be subject to sanctions. And
the fact that the Secretary of State—again, a defendant in this
case—had tested the equipment does not facially disprove
the complaint’s allegations, since “the whole point of the
complaint was to request ‘objective’ and ‘neutral’ testing—
not simply relying on the defendant’s assurances.” Lake,
130 F.4th at 1074 (Bumatay, J., dissenting). The Rule 11
standard does not require one party to take their adversary’s
word at face value. Id.
The complaint did not claim no testing was done; it
challenged whether the testing was sufficiently “objective”
and “neutral.” In support, plaintiffs adduced allegations that
the company that manufactures the optical scanners has
steadfastly “refused to disclose its software and other parts
of its electronic voting system in order to subject it to neutral
expert evaluation.”
Of course, whether testing is
appropriately “neutral” and “objective” is necessarily a
question of judgment and prudence, “not easily reduced to
binary determinations of truth or falsity.” Id. Perhaps
unsurprisingly then, even the district court could not bring
itself to find these allegations false; rather, it merely weighed
the evidence and found the evidence that Arizona had its
equipment tested by an accredited laboratory more

LAKE V. GATES

19

compelling. But a complaint does not leave an attorney
subject to Rule 11 sanctions just because it is contradicted.
Rule 11 likewise does not permit a district court to weigh
evidence, find one party’s evidence more compelling, and
conclude that the less compelling argument is therefore
sanctionable. Rule 11 merely requires that the attorneys
have conducted “an inquiry reasonable under the
circumstances” to permit them to certify that, “to the best of
[their] knowledge, information, and belief,” the allegations
“have” or “will likely have evidentiary support after a
reasonable opportunity for further investigation or
discovery.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 11(b). The complaint here
satisfied that modest requirement.
3.
Next, the district court found Lead Attorneys’ conduct
sanctionable because it held that plaintiffs “lacked an
adequate factual or legal basis to support the wide-ranging
constitutional claims they raised or the extraordinary relief
they requested.” Lake, 643 F. Supp. 3d at 1008. This would
be a good reason for the district court to find that plaintiffs
lack standing to pursue their lawsuit. And indeed, a panel of
this court unanimously did so, agreeing that plaintiffs’
alleged injuries were too speculative to meet the strictures of
Article III standing. See Lake, 83 F.4th at 1201.
But a legal theory that is too speculative to support
standing does not connote a legal theory that is sanctionable.
It is as unsurprising as it is well-established that “the pleader
need not be correct in his view of the law.” Zaldivar v. City
of Los Angeles, 780 F.2d 823, 830 (9th Cir. 1986), abrogated
on other grounds by Cooter & Gell, 496 U.S. 384. As Judge
Bumatay’s dissent from the panel decision persuasively
explained, “Rule 11 sanctions don’t apply when the

20

LAKE V. GATES

‘pleader’ has ‘a good faith argument for his or her view of
what the law is, or should be.’” Lake, 130 F.4th at 1075
(Bumatay, J., dissenting) (quoting Zaldivar, 780 F.2d at
831). Dismissing a complaint for lack of Article III standing
“is not dispositive of the issue of sanctions.” Zaldivar, 780
F.2d at 830.
On the contrary, a filing only warrants sanctions when it
is “both baseless and made without a reasonable and
competent inquiry.” Strom, 641 F.3d at 1059 (cleaned up).
“[T]o constitute a frivolous legal position for purposes of
Rule 11 sanction, it must be clear under existing precedents
that there is no chance of success and no reasonable
argument to extend, modify or reverse the law as it stands.”
Id. (cleaned up). The upshot is that when “a suit rais[es] a
novel issue of law as to which there is no caselaw to the
contrary,” Rule 11 sanctions are inappropriate. Id.
4.
Finally, the district court found Lead Attorneys’ conduct
sanctionable on the grounds that they neglected to conduct a
reasonable pre-filing inquiry. But the proper analysis of this
final ground follows from the foregoing analysis. Because
the complaint did not present clearly false statements or
blatantly frivolous arguments, the district court also abused
its discretion in making this determination.
Another abuse of discretion, however, is not the most
worrisome of the district court’s errors on this score.
Instead, the more significant of the district court’s errors was
its choice to impose a heightened pre-filing inquiry
requirement on Lead Attorneys based on the nature of the
complaint and the clients that they represented. Indeed, the
district court was quite explicit that because Lead Attorneys’
clients were candidates for office and the relief they

LAKE V. GATES

21

requested was related to state elections, they were “required”
to conduct a “significant pre-filing inquiry.” Lake, 643 F.
Supp. 3d at 1009 (emphasis added).
The upshot is that the district court deliberately departed
from the proper Rule 11 factors to impose additional
requirements upon Lead Attorneys unknown to them when
they filed their complaint, all in the name of the district
court’s alleged “concern” for the “dangers posed by making
wide-ranging allegations of vote manipulation in the current
volatile political atmosphere.” Id. This kind of selective
targeting of certain claims is exactly what our en banc court
already warned about in Townsend:
Were vigorous advocacy to be chilled by the
excessive use of sanctions, wrongs would go
uncompensated. Attorneys, because of fear
of sanctions, might turn down cases on behalf
of individuals seeking to have the courts
recognize new rights. They might also refuse
to represent persons whose rights have been
violated but whose claims are not likely to
produce large damage awards. This is
because attorneys would have to figure into
their costs of doing business the risk of
unjustified awards of sanctions.
929 F.2d at 1363–64.
As the foregoing reasons demonstrate, the district court
erred repeatedly and egregiously in its interpretation and
application of Rule 11, and it abused its discretion by reading
the complaint out of context and in the light least favorable
to plaintiffs, and by imposing additional pleading

22

LAKE V. GATES

requirements on plaintiffs because of who they are and what
they believe.
B.
The district court’s additional sanctioning of Lead
Attorneys under 28 U.S.C. § 1927 for filing a motion for a
preliminary injunction was clear error. An attorney may be
sanctioned under § 1927 for “multipl[ying] the proceedings
in any case unreasonably and vexatiously.” 28 U.S.C.
§ 1927. Sanctions under § 1927, like sanctions under Rule
11, are “extraordinary” and must be “exercised with extreme
caution.” Keegan Mgmt. Co., 78 F.3d at 437 (cleaned up).
Section 1927 also requires a finding of “subjective bad faith”
such that the attorney must have “knowingly or recklessly
raise[d] a frivolous argument.” Id. at 436 (cleaned up).
On what grounds did the district court find that Lead
Attorneys had acted recklessly in filing their motion for a
preliminary injunction? Timing. The district court found
that Lead Attorneys acted “recklessly” because they
(1) waited seven weeks after filing the complaint to seek a
preliminary injunction, and (2) they filed the motion fewer
than four months before an election.
Those timing factors arguably bear on whether relief was
appropriate in the lead-up to an election. See Purcell v.
Gonzalez, 549 U.S. 1 (2006). But they certainly do not
support a finding of recklessness. Purcell notwithstanding,
parties have frequently sought and won relief in election law
cases in the months before an election, both before this court
and the Supreme Court. See generally, e.g., Republican
Nat’l Comm. v. Mi Familia Vota, 145 S. Ct. 108 (2024)
(granting in part motion to stay district court’s injunction);
see also Mi Familia Vota v. Petersen, 111 F.4th 976 (9th Cir.

LAKE V. GATES

23

2024) (vacating motion panel’s stay of district court’s
injunction).
Finally, it is also important to note that “the district court
made no finding that the attorneys here subjectively filed the
motion for a preliminary injunction seven weeks after the
complaint recklessly or with vexatious intent.” Lake, 130
F.4th at 1076 (Bumatay, J., dissenting). Perhaps intending
to patch this hole, the district court offered some impromptu
theorizing (in a footnote) that Lead Attorneys’ failure to seek
“emergency relief” in this court after the 2022 election
“raises questions about the good faith basis for their request
for immediate relief.” Lake, 643 F. Supp. 3d at 1011 n.11.
But as Judge Bumatay pointed out in dissent, that reasoning
completely glosses over the fact that an emergency appeal to
our court is reviewed deferentially—not de novo. Lake, 130
F.4th at 1076 (Bumatay, J., dissenting) (citing Int’l
Franchise Ass’n, Inc. v. City of Seattle, 803 F.3d 389, 399
(9th Cir. 2015) (“The court does not review the underlying
merits of the case, but rather whether the district court relied
on an erroneous legal premise or abused its discretion in
denying [a party’s] motion for preliminary injunctive
relief.”)). Accordingly, there is little that can be gleaned
from plaintiffs’ failure to seek an emergency appeal.
C.
For the foregoing reasons, the district court erred clearly
and egregiously by imposing sanctions on Lead Attorneys.
But that is not what makes this case truly remarkable. What
makes this case most remarkable is that the district court
acknowledged that it was imposing sanctions to “send a
message” to attorneys who might file a particular type of
lawsuit that the court viewed with disfavor. Specifically, the
court stated that it wanted to “send a message to those who

24

LAKE V. GATES

might file similarly baseless suits in the future”—suits that,
in the court’s view, “further[] false narratives that baselessly
undermine public trust at a time of increasing disinformation
about, and distrust in, the democratic process.” Lake, 643 F.
Supp. 3d at 1013. The district court proclaimed that it would
“not condone litigants ignoring the steps that Arizona has
already taken toward” the goal of “ensur[ing] that our
elections are secure and reliable.” Id. There is thus no
meaningful debate that the district court imposed sanctions,
based on a clearly misconstrued complaint, after noting its
desire to chill litigation that the district court simply
disfavored.
The district court’s desire to impose sanctions to chill
litigation that it disfavors flagrantly violates both the text and
purpose of Rule 11. Not one word in the text of Rule 11
empowers judges to “make an example of litigants to
reassure the public.” Lake, 130 F.4th at 1076–77 (Bumatay,
J., dissenting). Nor, as Judge Bumatay explained in dissent,
“does Rule 11 permit monetary sanctions to serve as a
message to the public at large.” Id. at 1077. And the
Supreme Court has accordingly explained that any sanctions
fees awarded must have a “causal link” to a litigant’s
misbehavior. Goodyear Tire & Rubber Co. v. Haeger, 581
U.S. 101, 108 (2017) (“[A] court, when using its inherent
sanctioning authority (and civil procedures), [needs] to
establish a causal link—between the litigant’s misbehavior
and legal fees paid by the opposing party.”). Sanctioning
attorneys to highlight a district judge’s disagreement with
discrete positions on a politically charged issue cannot be
squared with the “extreme caution” required under Rule 11.
See Operating Eng’rs Pension Tr., 859 F.2d at 1345; Lake,
130 F.4th at 1077 (Bumatay, J., dissenting). Yet that is
exactly what the district court did here.

LAKE V. GATES

25

IV.
Plaintiffs in this case sought to advance aggressive, longshot legal claims. That is far from unusual. But the district
court’s response was far from usual: it imposed sanctions on
Lead Attorneys based on an acontextual reading of the
complaint; it imposed a heightened requirement that Lead
Attorneys conduct “significant” pre-filing inquiries on the
basis of their clients and their cause; it concluded that
plaintiffs made claims that, as even the district court itself
recognized, the complaint never expressly stated; and it
significantly departed from the governing legal standards
under Rule 11 and 28 U.S.C. § 1927. Worse still, while
doing so the district court openly acknowledged its desire
that its sanctions order would “send a message” to chill
litigants from bringing disfavored political claims. Lake,
643 F. Supp. 3d at 1013. On this score, the Arizona Supreme
Court—no stranger to aggressive election litigation—issued
a prescient warning:
By sanctioning parties and their lawyers for
bringing debatable, long-shot complaints,
courts risk chilling legal advocacy and
citizens raising “questions” under the guise
of defending the rule of law. Even if done
inadvertently and with the best of intentions,
such sanctions present a real and present
danger to the rule of law.
Richer, 547 P.3d at 370. We should have heeded its wisdom.
Unfortunately, the panel majority ratified the district
court’s many abuses of discretion, and in doing so departed
from the Rule 11 standard while implicitly blessing the
district court’s weaponization of sanctions against unpopular

26

LAKE V. GATES

claims and disfavored clients. Because I believe that Rule
11 demands more, and the integrity of our judicial system as
an impartial arbiter deserves more, I respectfully dissent
from the denial of rehearing en banc.

