FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
MICHAEL MCNEIL,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
Warden WILLIAM L. GITTERE;
Sgt. MATTHEW ROMAN; Sgt.
DENNIS HOMAN; SARAH
O'DONNELL, C/O; AMANDA
ALLRED, Caseworker; Deputy
Director HAROLD WICKHAM,

No. 23-3080
D.C. No.
3:20-cv-00668APG-CSD
OPINION

Defendants - Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Andrew P. Gordon, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 6, 2025
Las Vegas, Nevada
Filed September 2, 2025
Before: Johnnie B. Rawlinson, Eric D. Miller, and Roopali
H. Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Desai

2

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

SUMMARY *
Jurisdiction
Dismissing for lack of jurisdiction, the panel held that
prison officials’ notice of appeal was untimely where they
filed a notice of appeal 150 days after the district court
entered an order denying their motion for summary
judgment based on qualified immunity in a 42 U.S.C. § 1983
action.
The panel held that 28 U.S.C. § 2107(a) controls, and
under the statute’s plain language, defendants must file a
notice of appeal within 30 days after entry of an order
denying qualified immunity.
The panel rejected defendants’ contention that the
Federal Rules of Civil and Appellate Procedure gave them
an extra 150 days to appeal because the district court did not
enter judgment denying qualified immunity in a separate
document. Where (as here) a federal statute unambiguously
circumscribes the court’s jurisdiction, courts must follow the
statute. Under Section 2107(a)’s plain language, “entry” of
an immediately appealable collateral order occurs when the
district court files the order on the civil docket. To the extent
the Rules allow more time to appeal collateral orders with no
corresponding separate document, the Rules conflict with
the statute and are thus invalid. Because defendants’ appeal
was untimely, the panel lacked jurisdiction to review the
case.
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

3

COUNSEL
Rebecca Steinberg (argued), Brian Wolfman, and Regina
Wang, Supervising Attorneys; Jonathan Corn, Morgan F.
Flitt, and Payton S. Gannon, Certified Law Students;
Georgetown University Law Center, Appellate Courts
Immersion Clinic, Washington, D.C.; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Chris Davis (argued), Senior Deputy Attorney General;
Aaron D. Ford, Nevada Attorney General; Office of the
Nevada Attorney General, Las Vegas, Nevada; for
Defendants-Appellants.

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
A timely notice of appeal in a civil case must be filed
“within thirty days after the entry of [a] judgment, order or
decree.” 28 U.S.C. § 2107(a). Defendants William Gittere,
Matthew Roman, and Harold Wickham (collectively,
“defendants”) filed a notice of appeal 150 days after the
district court entered an order denying their motion for
summary judgment based on qualified immunity. Casting
aside § 2107(a), defendants insist that the Federal Rules of
Civil and Appellate Procedure gave them 180 days to appeal.
We disagree. Section 2107(a) controls here, and under
the statute’s plain language, defendants must file a notice of
appeal within 30 days after entry of an order denying
qualified immunity. Because defendants’ appeal is untimely,
we dismiss it for lack of jurisdiction.

4

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

BACKGROUND
In April 2020, Michael McNeil, an incarcerated person
at Ely State Prison, was charged with smuggling drugs into
the prison using the mail system. At his preliminary
disciplinary hearing, McNeil asked to view the evidence
against him, including mail addressed to him and a positive
drug test result from the envelopes’ address labels. Roman,
who presided over the hearing, denied McNeil’s request.
At a formal hearing a few days later, a disciplinary
committee found McNeil guilty and sanctioned him by
deducting 60 days of statutory good time credits and 90 days
of canteen privileges, and by referring him to the Nevada
Attorney General for criminal prosecution. McNeil twice
appealed using the prison’s grievance process, but Gittere
and Wickham denied his appeals.
McNeil sued defendants under 42 U.S.C. § 1983,
claiming they violated his Fourteenth Amendment right to
due process. The parties cross-moved for summary
judgment. The district court granted in part and denied in
part McNeil’s motion for summary judgment. It held that
defendants violated McNeil’s due process right when they
denied him access to the mail and positive drug test result
but that there was a genuine dispute of fact regarding
whether McNeil clearly requested access to other evidence.
The district court denied defendants’ motion for summary
judgment on qualified immunity, holding that it was clearly
established that McNeil had a constitutional right to access
the evidence against him.
The district court entered its order on the civil docket on
May 22, 2023. Defendants filed their notice of appeal of the
district court’s order 150 days later, on October 19, 2023.

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

5

DISCUSSION
Federal courts “are courts of limited jurisdiction, defined
(within constitutional bounds) by federal statute.” Badgerow
v. Walters, 596 U.S. 1, 7 (2022). We thus have an “obligation
to investigate and ensure our own jurisdiction.” United
States v. Ceja-Prado, 333 F.3d 1046, 1049 (9th Cir. 2003).
Timeliness of an appeal in a civil case is jurisdictional,
Bowles v. Russell, 551 U.S. 205, 209–10 (2007), and is
defined by 28 U.S.C. § 2107(a).
Ignoring § 2107(a)’s clear 30-day appeal deadline,
defendants argue that their appeal is timely under the Federal
Rules of Appellate and Civil Procedure. Defendants
maintain that the Rules gave them an extra 150 days to
appeal because the district court did not enter judgment
denying qualified immunity in a separate document. But to
prevail in their argument, defendants must show that
§ 2107(a)’s plain language does not control the time to
appeal here. They fail to do so.
Because our jurisdiction is defined by federal statute, we
begin with the “language of the statute itself.” United States
v. Ron Pair Enters., Inc., 489 U.S. 235, 241 (1989). And
here, too, is where the inquiry should end. When “the
statute’s language is plain, the sole function of the courts is
to enforce it according to its terms.” Id. (quotation omitted).
Under § 2107(a), “no appeal shall bring any judgment,
order or decree in an action, suit or proceeding of a civil
nature before a court of appeals for review unless notice of
appeal is filed[] within thirty days after the entry of such
judgment, order or decree.” To determine when the 30-day
clock to file a notice of appeal begins to run, we must answer
two questions: First, what “judgment, order or decree” is

6

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

being appealed? Second, when did “entry” of the judgment,
order, or decree occur?
Here, the answer to the first question is clear: Defendants
appeal the district court’s order denying qualified immunity.
The parties agree that an order denying summary judgment
based on qualified immunity is immediately appealable
under the collateral order doctrine. See Mitchell v. Forsyth,
472 U.S. 511, 525–29 (1985); Plumhoff v. Rickard, 572 U.S.
765, 771 (2014) (“An order denying a motion for summary
judgment is generally not a final decision within the meaning
of [28 U.S.C.] § 1291 and is thus generally not immediately
appealable. But that general rule does not apply when the
summary judgment motion is based on a claim of qualified
immunity . . . [because] pretrial orders denying qualified
immunity generally fall within the collateral order doctrine.”
(citations omitted)).
Next, we must decide when “entry” of the order
occurred. See 28 U.S.C. § 2107(a). The answer is again clear
from the statute’s text because “entry” has a plain meaning.
When Congress first enacted § 2107(a) in 1948, 1 Black’s
Law Dictionary defined “entry” as a “formal inscription
upon the rolls or records of a court of a note or minute of any
of the proceedings in an action.” Black’s Law Dictionary
667 (3d ed. 1933); see also Ballentine’s Law Dictionary 487
(1948) (defining “entry” as “[r]ecordation” and “noting in a
record”). Today, Black’s Law Dictionary defines “entry” as
“[a]n item written in a record” or a “notation.” Black’s Law
Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). Simply put, “entry” of an order
occurs when the district court notes or records its order. And,
in terms of this case, the district court enters a collateral
1

June 25, 1948, c. 646, 62 Stat. 963.

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

7

order denying qualified immunity when the order is filed on
the civil docket. We need look no further to define when an
order is entered for purposes of filing a timely appeal.
Defendants read the Federal Rules to give them extra
time that the statute does not. Federal Rule of Appellate
Procedure 4(a)(1)(A) requires that litigants file a notice of
appeal “within 30 days after entry of the judgment or order
appealed from.” Rule 4(a)(7)(A) explains that “[e]ntry”
occurs “when the judgment or order is entered in the civil
docket,” unless “Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58(a)
requires a separate document.” In that case, “[e]ntry” occurs
when the district court issues the separate document or, if no
separate document is filed, 150 days after the entry of a
judgment or order on the civil docket, whichever is earlier.
Fed. R. App. P. 4(a)(7)(A)(ii).
Under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58(a), “[e]very
judgment . . . must be set out in a separate document.”
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(a) defines “‘[j]udgment’
as used in these rules” to “include[] . . . any order from
which an appeal lies.” And as we have explained, appeals lie
from collateral orders like those denying summary judgment
on qualified immunity. Defendants therefore argue that
orders denying qualified immunity are subject to the
separate-document rule, and when the district court does not
enter a separate document, entry occurs 150 days after the
order was entered on the docket.
Based on this reasoning, defendants claim that because
the district court did not issue a separate document, the time
to appeal the denial of qualified immunity was 180 days (30
days after the 150 days granted by the Federal Rules of
Appellate Procedure).

8

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

If we were considering the Rules in isolation,
defendants’ argument might have merit. But “[o]ur
jurisdiction is grounded in Article III and in the statutes, not
in the Federal Rules promulgated by the Supreme Court
under the Rules Enabling Act.” United States v. Jacobo
Castillo, 496 F.3d 947, 954 (9th Cir. 2007). Section 2107(a)
sets the deadline to appeal an order at 30 days after the entry
of the order on the civil docket. To the extent the Rules allow
more time to appeal collateral orders with no corresponding
separate document, the Rules conflict with the statute and
are thus invalid. What is more, defendants’ construction of
the Rules would dramatically expand our jurisdiction,
allowing us to hear appeals of collateral orders for up to six
months after their entry on the civil docket. This is not only
contrary to judicial economy and this circuit’s practice, but
it also defies the law. The Rules Enabling Act authorizes the
Supreme Court “to prescribe general rules of practice and
procedure,” so long as the rules do “not abridge, enlarge or
modify any substantive right.” 28 U.S.C. § 2072. Neither the
Federal Rules of Civil Procedure nor the Federal Rules of
Appellate Procedure may “expand or diminish the
jurisdiction conferred by Congress.” Jacobo, 496 F.3d at
954; see also Venner v. Great N. Ry. Co., 209 U.S. 24, 35
(1908). At bottom, where (as here) a federal statute
unambiguously circumscribes our jurisdiction, we must
follow the statute.
Defendants argue that “§ 2107 does not define
‘[judgment]’ or ‘entry,’ and therefore gives no indication as
to when the thirty-day deadline for filing notice of appeals
commences.” But we do not need the Rules to define when
“the entry of [an] . . . order” occurs because the timing of
that event is clear. 28 U.S.C. § 2107(a). A court enters an
order when the order appears on the docket.

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

9

Unlike entry of an order, entry of a “judgment” lacks the
same clarity. A judgment is the “final determination of the
rights and obligations of the parties in a case.” Black’s Law
Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). Because the finality of a court’s
determination of the rights and obligations of the parties is
not always apparent, § 2107 alone does not dictate when a
judgment is entered. Indeed, before Rule 58(a)’s enactment,
there was “considerable uncertainty” over whether certain
actions taken by a district court constituted entry of a final
judgment. United States v. Indrelunas, 411 U.S. 216, 220–
21 (1973) (explaining that entry of final judgment “has a
most important bearing . . . on the time for appeal and the
making of post-judgment motions that go to the finality of
the judgment for purposes of appeal” (quotation omitted)).
As the Advisory Committee explained:
[S]ome difficulty has arisen, chiefly where
the court has written an opinion or
memorandum containing some apparently
directive or dispositive words, e.g., “the
plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment is
granted.” Clerks on occasion have viewed
these opinions or memoranda as being in
themselves a sufficient basis for entering
judgment in the civil docket . . . . However,
where the opinion or memorandum has not
contained all the elements of a judgment, or
where the judge has later signed a formal
judgment, it has become a matter of doubt
whether the purported entry of judgment was
effective, starting the time running for post-

10

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

verdict motions and for the purpose of
appeal.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 58 advisory committee’s notes to 1963
amendment (citation modified); see Bankers Tr. Co. v.
Mallis, 435 U.S. 381, 384–85 (1978).
Because § 2107 does not dictate when a judgment is
entered, the Rules can define the timing of that event.
Indeed, the “sole purpose” of the separate document
requirement was to eliminate uncertainty by requiring that
an entry of final judgment be “set out on a separate
document—distinct from any opinion or memorandum.”
Bankers Tr. Co., 435 U.S. at 384–85 (quotation omitted).
Rule 58(a) “was thus intended to avoid the inequities that
were inherent when a party appealed from a document or
docket entry that appeared to be a final judgment of the
district court only to have the appellate court announce later
that an earlier document or entry had been the judgment and
dismiss the appeal as untimely.” 2 Id. at 385.
Collateral orders do not raise the same concerns. “[T]he
essence of a ‘collateral’ order is the absence of a final
2
That Rule 58(a)’s separate document requirement was intended to
clarify entry of final judgment is further demonstrated by its exclusion
of certain post-judgment orders. See, e.g., Fed. R. Civ. P. 58(a)(1)
(excluding judgments on renewed motions for judgment as a matter of
law); see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 58 advisory committee’s notes to 2002
amendment (“Rule 58 is amended, however, to address a problem that
arises under Appellate Rule 4(a). Some courts treat such orders as those
that deny a motion for new trial as a ‘judgment,’ so that appeal time does
not start to run until the order is entered on a separate document. Without
attempting to address the question whether such orders are appealable,
and thus judgments as defined by Rule 54(a), the amendment provides
that entry on a separate document is not required for an order disposing
of the motions listed in Appellate Rule 4(a).”).

MCNEIL V. GITTERE

11

judgment.” Carson v. Block, 790 F.2d 562, 564 (7th Cir.
1986). Unlike final judgments, where a separate document
“signal[s]” to litigants that “the court is done with their case”
and “the time to appeal has begun to run,” Fed. R. App. P. 4
advisory committee’s note to 2002 amendments, collateral
orders are prejudgment decisions that can be appealed
immediately and, if unsuccessful on interlocutory appeal,
after final judgment. See, e.g., Est. of Aguirre v. Cnty. of
Riverside, 131 F.4th 702, 705–06 (9th Cir. 2025). There is
thus no risk that a litigant’s uncertainty about the finality of
a collateral order will jeopardize their right of appeal.
CONCLUSION
Under 28 U.S.C. § 2107(a)’s plain language, “entry” of
an immediately appealable collateral order occurs when the
district court files the order on the civil docket. Defendants’
appeal is untimely, and we lack jurisdiction to review the
case.
The appeal is DISMISSED.

