FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
MUSSIE E. WELDEYOHANNES,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
STATE OF WASHINGTON; JOHN
LEE, Sergeant, Washington
Corrections Center; OLSON-WARD,
Nurse, Washington Corrections
Center; STEPHEN VERES, AKA
Veres; UNKNOWN OFFICERS,
Correctional Officer, Washington
Corrections Center; KYLE
GONTHIER, WCC - Sgt; KEITH
MALONE, WCC - C/O; JEFFREY
HOWARD, WCC - C/O; JORDAN
BALETO, WCC - C/O; ADAM LEE,
WCC - C/O; WASHINGTON
CORRECTIONS CENTER,
Department of Corrections Agency,

No. 24-3821
D.C. No.
3:23-cv-05526JCC-BAT

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
John C. Coughenour, District Judge, Presiding

2

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

Argued and Submitted September 17, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed December 19, 2025
Before: William A. Fletcher, Ronald M. Gould, and Ana de
Alba, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Gould
SUMMARY *
Prisoner Civil Rights
The panel reversed the district court’s summary
judgment for prison officials based on qualified immunity,
and remanded, in an action brought by a Washington state
prisoner regarding a use of force incident that occurred
during a scheduled transport between prison facilities.
Plaintiff has a documented history of medical
accommodation, including the use of a wheelchair as a result
of his mobility problems. During the transport, he was not
provided with a wheelchair van or special transport vehicle
that would accommodate his wheelchair. Instead,
defendants used physical force to move him and allegedly
dropped him and dragged him onto the floor of a regular bus,
resulting in injuries. Plaintiff alleged violations of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”) and
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

3

Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (“RA”) and brought claims under
42 U.S.C. § 1983 for deliberate indifference to a substantial
risk of serious harm and the use of excessive force in
violation of his Eighth Amendment rights.
The panel held that the district court erred in granting
summary judgment in favor of the State on plaintiff’s ADA
and RA claims. There was conflicting evidence in the record
regarding (1) whether plaintiff told prison officials that he
could not walk up the steps of the normal transport bus and
instead needed a wheelchair-accessible vehicle; (2) whether
prison officials checked his transportation code; and
(3) what officials saw on the day in question. These disputes
over the extent of the prison officials’ notice and
investigation were sufficient for plaintiff’s ADA and RA
claims to survive a motion for summary judgment.
The panel held that material disputes of fact similarly
precluded summary judgment in favor of prison officials on
plaintiff’s Eighth Amendment claims for deliberate
indifference and excessive force. Because the district
court’s grant of qualified immunity was premised on a
finding that the prison officials had not violated plaintiff’s
rights, and because factual disputes remained about the
officials’ conduct that could impact whether the
unlawfulness was clearly established at the time, the panel
reversed the district court’s determinations of qualified
immunity and remanded for further proceedings.
COUNSEL
Athul K. Acharya (argued) and Sara K. Rosenburg, Public
Accountability, Portland, Oregon, for Plaintiff-Appellant.

4

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

Sarah C. Brisbin (argued), Assistant Attorney General,
Corrections Division; Nicholas W. Brown, Attorney
General; Office of the Washington Attorney General,
Olympia, Washington; Candie M. Dibble, Senior Counsel,
Corrections Division, Office of the Washington Attorney
General, Spokane, Washington; for Defendants-Appellees.

OPINION
GOULD, Circuit Judge:
Mussie Weldeyohannes (“Weldeyohannes”), an inmate
in the custody of the Washington State Department of
Corrections, brought a pro se civil rights action against the
State of Washington and several prison officials regarding a
use of force incident that occurred during a scheduled
transport between prison facilities. Weldeyohannes alleged
violations of the Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”)
and Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (“RA”) and brought claims
under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 for deliberate indifference to a
substantial risk of serious harm and the use of excessive
force in violation of his Eighth Amendment rights.
A magistrate judge issued a report and recommendation
(“R&R”) recommending that the district court deny the State
and individual prison officials’ request for summary
judgment on all claims because of genuine disputes of
material facts. The magistrate judge recommended denying
qualified immunity for the individual prison officials for the
same reasons. The district court declined to adopt these
recommendations and instead granted summary judgment
for the State and the prison officials, and concluded that

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

5

qualified immunity should be given to the individual
officials.
Weldeyohannes appeals, contending that the district
court erred when it resolved factual disputes in favor of the
moving party on summary judgment. We have jurisdiction
under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Because we conclude that genuine
disputes of material fact preclude summary judgment in
favor of the State and prison officials, we reverse and
remand the district court’s grant of summary judgment.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A
Weldeyohannes has a documented history of medical
accommodations from the prison system as a result of his
mobility problems.
Dating back to at least 2017,
Weldeyohannes has received Health Status Reports
(“HSRs”) from the prison that document his
accommodations.
At the time of the transfer,
Weldeyohannes had active HSRs for “lower tier” housing
and specialized gloves when using a walker or wheelchair
without a pusher. His past HSRs reflected his need for lower
tier or “no upper bunk” housing, a wheelchair and
wheelchair pusher, specialized compression stockings, a
cane, and a walker, and his requirement for taking the
“shortest route” when moving him. Similarly, his HSRs
issued after the transfer reflect his need for a wheelchair and
wheelchair pusher, specialized shoes and socks, gloves for
using a walker or wheelchair without a pusher, and an ADAcompliant cell.
In addition to HSRs, prison medical providers also
assign inmates transportation codes (“T-codes”) that reflect
the accommodations needed for the transport of an inmate.

6

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

T-codes range from “1,” which indicates that a medical
provider believes an inmate can get themselves onto the
regular transport bus without assistance, to “5,” which
indicates that an inmate requires a wheelchair van or other
special transport vehicle. Only a medical provider can
change the code for an inmate’s transport. The prison here
had issued Weldeyohannes a T-code of 5, meaning that he
requires a wheelchair van or other special transport vehicle
for all transports.
On February 15, 2023, Weldeyohannes was transferred
from the Washington Corrections Center in Shelton,
Washington, to the Washington State Penitentiary in Walla
Walla, Washington. Weldeyohannes arrived at the loading
area for the transport bus in his wheelchair. Upon his arrival,
Weldeyohannes was not provided with a wheelchair van or
special transport vehicle that would accommodate his
wheelchair. Although many underlying facts of this incident
are disputed by the parties, it is not disputed that on February
15, 2023, Weldeyohannes told at least one prison official
involved in his transport that he was unable to board the
regular transport bus and needed special transportation to
accommodate his wheelchair. Weldeyohannes contends that
he told many prison officials that he needed this
accommodation. Surprisingly, in light of his presence in a
wheelchair, the prison officials treated the incident as a
refusal of transport, called in a crisis negotiator, and after
negotiations failed, received authorization from a supervisor
to use physical force to move Weldeyohannes onto the
normal transport bus.
Again, the parties dispute the extent of force used and
resulting injuries, but Weldeyohannes contends that he was
dropped and dragged onto the floor of the bus and that, as a

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

7

result, he suffered an injured shoulder and post-traumatic
stress, among other injuries.
An internal prison investigation after the incident
revealed that Weldeyohannes in fact had a T-code of 5 on
the day of the incident, but that this code was incorrectly
entered into the prison records as a T-code of 1.
B
On May 1, 2024, a magistrate judge issued an R&R
recommending denying the State’s and prison officials’
motion for summary judgment on all claims because the
record was either unclear or conflicting on what T-code was
in fact in place on February 15, 2023, what T-code was
reflected in the prison’s records and viewable to the prison
officials at the time of the transfer, which officials checked
the T-code, what steps they took to check it, whether any
officials were aware that Weldeyohannes had a T-code of 5,
and whether Weldeyohannes had voiced a request for
specialized transport. The R&R further found that the record
was unclear and that there was conflicting evidence on the
extent of any injury and the need for physical force. 1
The district court declined to adopt the magistrate
judge’s recommendations, concluding that the R&R was
fundamentally flawed because it failed “to engage with the
source of the alleged violation — [the State’s] erroneous
coding of [Weldeyohannes’s] transportation status (T-5 vs.
T-1), which the individual defendants then relied on.” The
The R&R recommended finding qualified immunity for one official,
Sergeant John Lee, who provided evidence that he spoke with medical
personnel and relied on their statement that Weldeyohannes would have
no issues with transport in a regular bus. Thus, the R&R recommended
granting summary judgment only as to John Lee on the claim of
deliberate indifference under the Eighth Amendment.
1

8

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

district court concluded that although Weldeyohannes
presented in a wheelchair, that did not mean Weldeyohannes
was unable to self-ambulate for a short distance and the
individual prison officials’ conclusions to this effect did not
amount to deliberate indifference. For this reason, the
district court granted summary judgment in favor of the State
on the ADA/RA claims, and in favor of the individual
officials on the Eighth Amendment claim for deliberate
indifference to a substantial risk of serious harm. As for the
excessive force claim under the Eighth Amendment, the
district court found that qualified immunity applied to the
individual officials and granted summary judgment.
Weldeyohannes appeals, and we reverse and remand.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review de novo the district court’s grant of summary
judgment and its determinations of qualified immunity.
Furnace v. Sullivan, 705 F.3d 1021, 1026 (9th Cir. 2013). In
doing so, we construe Weldeyohannes’s pro se filings
liberally. Thomas v. Ponder, 611 F.3d 1144, 1150 (9th Cir.
2010) (“We have . . . held consistently that courts should
construe liberally motion papers and pleadings filed by pro
se inmates and should avoid applying summary judgment
rules strictly.”).
We also construe all evidence in
Weldeyohannes’s favor. Id. at 1149.
III. DISCUSSION
A. THE ADA AND RA CLAIMS
The district court erred in granting summary judgment in
favor of the State on Weldeyohannes’s ADA and RA claims
because the erroneous coding of Weldeyohannes’s
transportation status did not preclude a finding of deliberate
indifference.

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

9

Under the ADA and RA, the “failure to provide
reasonable accommodation can constitute discrimination.” 2
Vinson v. Thomas, 288 F.3d 1145, 1154 (9th Cir. 2002). We
have recognized that the need for reasonable
accommodation applies to inmate transportation. See Bell v.
Williams, 108 F.4th 809, 826 (9th Cir. 2024).
After
receiving a request for an accommodation, a public entity
must “undertake a fact-specific investigation to determine
what constitutes a reasonable accommodation.” Duvall v.
Cnty. of Kitsap, 260 F.3d 1124, 1139 (9th Cir. 2001). To
receive money damages, Weldeyohannes must show that the
officials acted with “deliberate indifference” to his need for
accommodation. Id. at 1138.
Numerous genuine disputes of material fact preclude the
district court’s grant of summary judgment to the State.
There is conflicting evidence in the record regarding whether
Weldeyohannes told prison officials that he could not walk
up the steps of the normal transport bus and instead needed
a wheelchair-accessible vehicle, whether prison officials
checked his transportation code, and what officials saw on
the day in question. Ninth Circuit precedent supports our
holding that these disputes over the extent of the prison
officials’ notice and investigation are sufficient for
Weldeyohannes’s ADA and RA claims to survive a motion
for summary judgment. See Updike v. Multnomah Cnty.,
870 F.3d 939, 954 (9th Cir. 2017) (“A denial of a request
without investigation is sufficient to survive summary
judgment on the question of deliberate indifference.”); see
We analyze Weldeyohannes’s ADA and RA claims together because
they do not differ in any relevant way for this appeal, and because Title
II of the ADA was modeled after § 504 of the RA. See Duvall v. Cnty.
of Kitsap, 260 F.3d 1124, 1135–36 (9th Cir. 2001).
2

10

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

also Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1140 (“[Plaintiff] provided
sufficient evidence to create a triable issue as to whether
[Defendants] . . . had notice of his need for the
accommodation involved and that they failed despite
repeated requests to take the necessary action.”). In Updike,
we reversed summary judgment on some of the plaintiff’s
ADA and RA claims because factual disputes existed as to
the extent of Multnomah County’s investigation into a
needed accommodation. We held that a reasonable jury
could find that the County’s actions were more than mere
“bureaucratic slippage.” Updike, 870 F.3d at 954–57.
Similarly, in Duvall we reversed summary judgment in favor
of Kitsap County when, viewing the facts in the light most
favorable to the plaintiff, we determined that genuine issues
of material fact existed about the County’s investigation into
an accommodation. Duvall, 260 F.3d at 1139 (“When the
plaintiff has alerted the public entity to his need for
accommodation (or where the need for accommodation is
obvious . . .), the public entity is on notice that an
accommodation is required, and the plaintiff has satisfied the
first element of the deliberate indifference test.”). Here, too,
as in Duvall, questions of fact exist about what records the
prison officials checked, what those records showed, and any
other steps the prison officials took to investigate
Weldeyohannes’s need for a special transport van to
accommodate his wheelchair.
B. THE EIGHTH AMENDMENT CLAIMS
Material disputes of fact similarly preclude summary
judgment in favor of the prison officials on
Weldeyohannes’s Eighth Amendment claims for deliberate

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

11

indifference and excessive force. 3 To prove liability for
deliberate indifference in this context, a plaintiff must meet
an objective standard — that the plaintiff was subject to a
“substantial risk of serious harm,” — and a subjective
standard — that a prison official subjectively knew of this
substantial risk and yet failed to take “reasonable measures
to abate it.” See Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 834, 845–
47 (1994); see also Lemire v. Cal. Dep’t of Corr. & Rehab.,
726 F.3d 1062, 1074–76 (9th Cir. 2013) (an Eighth
Amendment claim requires an objective showing of a serious
deprivation and a subjective showing of deliberate

Weldeyohannes’s pro se amended complaint and his response to the
State’s motion for summary judgment frames his Eighth Amendment
claims as based on both excessive force and “deliberate indifference to
his serious medical needs.” The magistrate judge also framed one of his
Eighth Amendment claims as “deliberate indifference to a serious
medical need,” though the district court frames it only as a “deliberate
indifference” claim. We recognize that Weldeyohannes is not arguing
on appeal that the prison officials failed to provide him adequate medical
care, as is typical in an Eighth Amendment claim based on disregard for
an inmate’s medical needs. See, e.g., Norsworthy v. Beard, 87 F.Supp.3d
1164, 1185–90 (N.D. Cal. 2015) (bringing Eighth Amendment claim
based on denial of medical care for gender dysphoria). Instead,
Weldeyohannes is asserting a theory of deliberate indifference to his
safety or well-being because he alleges the prison officials knew of a
substantial risk of serious harm, yet disregarded that risk and ultimately
caused him harm. See, e.g., Wilk v. Neven, 956 F.3d 1143, 1147–48 (9th
Cir. 2020); see also Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 832–33 (1994).
Because it is clear from the framing of the claim throughout the pleadings
that Weldeyohannes was not alleging inadequate medical treatment, we
do not hold Weldeyohannes’s framing of his “serious medical need” to
his detriment on appeal. See, e.g., Jackson v. Carey, 353 F.3d 750, 757
(9th Cir. 2003) (when construing pleadings, we provide a pro se plaintiff
the “benefit of any doubt”) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted).
3

12

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

indifference); Wilk v. Neven, 956 F.3d 1143, 1147–48 (9th
Cir. 2020).
At summary judgment, the following factual disputes
must be resolved in Weldeyohannes’s favor: First, that
Weldeyohannes was sitting in a prison-issued wheelchair
was plain and obvious to the prison officials involved in the
transport. What was plain and obvious to their eyes and
reinforced by Weldeyohannes’s protests asking for special
transport raises at least a factual question. Second,
Weldeyohannes’s presence in a prison-issued wheelchair
also raised an issue of fact as to whether it was reasonable
for the prison officials to believe that he could walk a few
feet up the stairs of the regular transport bus. Third,
Weldeyohannes’s documented history of wheelchair use and
his official medical accommodations at the prison similarly
provide a triable issue of fact as to whether the prison
officials knew of and ignored an obvious risk to
Weldeyohannes when they used force to transport him, a
wheel-chair bound individual, up the stairs to a regular
transport bus. 4 Farmer, 511 U.S. at 842 (“[A] factfinder
may conclude that a prison official knew of a substantial risk
from the very fact that the risk was obvious.”).
Whether this use of force was justified under the
circumstances similarly turns on disputed facts that preclude
summary judgment. See Bearchild v. Cobban, 947 F.3d
We note that obtaining an accommodation for a prison-issued
wheelchair or other medical equipment requires a showing of a disability
and proving a need for an accommodation. See Wash. State Dep’t of
Corr., DOC 690.400, Individuals with Disabilities § IV (2022) (outlining
the accommodation process). Therefore, we are not persuaded by the
prison officials’ mistaken belief that Weldeyohannes could “selfambulate up a few steps,” even though he arrived in a wheelchair and do
not give that mistaken belief weight at summary judgment.
4

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

13

1130, 1141 (9th Cir. 2020) (listing factors for an Eighth
Amendment excessive force claim). Here, we have sharply
conflicting evidence in the record. Weldeyohannes, on the
one hand, alleges that he was dragged and dropped onto the
floor of the regular transport bus, while by contrast the
prison officials say his body went limp, and the officials then
employed de minimis force to lift him into the bus. Only a
trier of fact can determine which of these characterizations
is closest to the truth; that cannot be determined conclusively
on a summary judgment motion. 5
C. QUALIFIED IMMUNITY
Qualified immunity protects government officials from
liability for civil damages unless their conduct objectively
violates clearly established rights. Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457
U.S. 800, 815–18 (1982). In our Circuit, “[q]ualified
immunity protects government officials from liability under
The parties acknowledge that a video of the incident exists, as is
required by the State’s policies for pre-planned uses of force.
Weldeyohannes requested the video recording in his complaint and again
noted in his response to the State’s motion for summary judgment that
“no photos [of the incident] have been provided.” Interpreting
Weldeyohannes’s pro se pleadings liberally, we construe these
statements as a request under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 56(d) for
further discovery prior to judgment. See Thomas, 611 F.3d at 1150
(declining to apply strict summary judgment rules to pro se inmates).
The magistrate judge recognized the existence of this video, and said that
it “could, potentially, be dispositive” to Weldeyohannes’s excessive
force claims. But the district court did not mention the video recording
in its grant of summary judgment in favor of the State and prison
officials. It was error for the district court to grant summary judgment
without first addressing this implicit request for discovery concerning
the video recording. See Jones v. Blanas, 393 F.3d 918, 930 (9th Cir.
2004) (“[S]ummary judgment in the face of requests for additional
discovery is appropriate only where such discovery would be ‘fruitless’
with respect to the proof of a viable claim.”).
5

14

WELDEYOHANNES V. STATE OF WA

§ 1983 unless (1) they violated a federal statutory or
constitutional right, and (2) the unlawfulness of their
conduct was clearly established at the time.” Cuevas v. City
of Tulare, 107 F.4th 894, 898 (9th Cir. 2024) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). Because the district
court’s grant of qualified immunity was premised on a
finding that the prison officials had not violated
Weldeyohannes’s rights, and because factual disputes
remain about the officials’ conduct that may impact whether
the “unlawfulness . . . was clearly established at the time,”
we reverse and remand the determinations of qualified
immunity. 6 Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted).
IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated herein, we reverse the district
court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of the State and
the prison officials and its determination of qualified
immunity and remand for further proceedings.
REVERSED and REMANDED.

We recognize that not all prison officials in this lawsuit had the same
level of involvement in the use of force incident. We decline to decide
in the first instance whether some individual officials may be entitled to
qualified immunity based on the scope of their individual actions when
the parties have not directly made this argument and the district court has
not first decided this specific question.
6

