FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
PACIFIC COAST FEDERATION OF
FISHERMEN'S ASSOCIATIONS,
INC.; CALIFORNIA
SPORTFISHING PROTECTION
ALLIANCE; FRIENDS OF THE
RIVER; SAN FRANCISCO CRAB
BOAT OWNERS ASSOCIATION,
INC.; THE INSTITUTE FOR
FISHERIES RESOURCES; FELIX
SMITH,

No. 23-15599
D.C. No.
2:11-cv-02980DAD-CKD
OPINION

Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
ADAM NICKELS*, Acting Regional
Director of the U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation; UNITED STATES
BUREAU OF RECLAMATION; SAN
LUIS & DELTA MENDOTA
WATER AUTHORITY,
Defendants-Appellees,

*

Under Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 43(c)(2), Acting Regional
Director Adam Nickels is substituted for Ernest Conant as his successor.

2

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

and
GRASSLAND WATER DISTRICT,
Intervenor-DefendantAppellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of California
Dale A. Drozd, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 21, 2024
San Francisco, California
Filed September 5, 2025
Before: Richard R. Clifton, Jennifer Sung, and Gabriel P.
Sanchez, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Sanchez
SUMMARY**
Clean Water Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s partial grant of
summary judgment in favor of the U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation, its Acting Regional Director, the San Luis &
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

3

Delta-Mendota Water Authority, and the Grassland Water
District (collectively “Defendants”), and the district court’s
conclusion that Defendants met their burden of establishing
that the irrigation flow exemption under 33 U.S.C. §
1342(l)(1) of the Clean Water Act (“CWA”) applied to the
Grassland Bypass Project (the “Project”) in California’s
Central Valley, which comprises an expansive drainage
system that takes in water used for irrigation.
The CWA generally prohibits the discharge of pollutants
into navigable waters of the United States without a permit
under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(“NPDES”) program. Congress carved out an exemption to
the permit requirement for “discharges composed entirely of
return flows from irrigated agriculture” and entrusted the
regulation of such discharges to the States. Under this
exemption, the Project has operated without an NPDES
permit since 1997.
Plaintiffs sought to undo the exempted status on the
ground that the Project’s discharge contained pollutants that
were not related to irrigated agriculture. The panel held that
plaintiffs’ theory did not follow from the statutory text and
was inconsistent with the purpose and structure of the CWA,
and as a practical matter would render the irrigated
agriculture exemption a dead letter.
The panel agreed with the district court that plaintiffs failed
to raise a genuine dispute of material fact as to whether the
irrigated agriculture return flow exemption applied to the
Project. The panel concluded that the exemption applied
because the alleged pollutants were either added to the
Project via nonpoint sources or via a point source related to
crop production.

4

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

COUNSEL
Stephan C. Volker (argued), Stephanie L. Clarke, and Jamey
M.B. Volker, Law Offices of Stephan C. Volker, Berkeley,
California, for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
David S. Frankel (argued), Paul Cirino, Martha Mann, Brian
C. Toth, Martin F. McDermott, and Michael T. Gray,
Attorneys; Environment & Natural Resources Division;
Todd Kim, Assistant Attorney General; United States
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Amy L.
Aufdemberge, Office of the Solicitor, United States
Department of the Interior, Sacramento, California; for
Defendants-Appellees.
Julie L. Fieber (argued), Joseph W. Cotchett, and Andrew
Kirtley, Cotchett Pitre & McCarthy LLP, Burlingame,
California; Diane V. Rathmann, Linneman Law LLP, Los
Banos, California; Ellen L. Wehr, Grassland Water District,
Los Banos, California; for Defendant-Appellee and
Intervenor-Defendant-Appellee.
Theresa A. Dunham, Kahn Soares & Conway LLP,
Sacramento, California, for Amici Curiae Association of
California Water Agencies, California Cotton Ginners and
Growers Association, California Farm Bureau Federation,
California Fresh Fruit Association, California Rice
Commission, East San Joaquin Water Quality Coalition,
California Rice Commission, East San Joaquin Water
Quality Coalition, Family Farms Alliance, Kern River
Watershed Coalition Authority, Kings River Conservation
District, Kings River Water Quality Coalition, Western

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

5

Agricultural Processers Association, Western Growers
Association, and Westside Water Quality Coalition.
OPINION
SANCHEZ, Circuit Judge:
The Clean Water Act (“CWA”) generally prohibits the
discharge of pollutants into navigable waters of the United
States without a permit under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (“NPDES”) program. See
33 U.S.C. §§ 1311(a), 1342(a)(1). In 1977, Congress carved
out an exemption to this permit requirement for “discharges
composed entirely of return flows from irrigated agriculture”
and entrusted the regulation of such discharges to the States.
Id. § 1342(l)(1). Under this exemption, the Grassland
Bypass Project (“Project”) in California’s Central Valley has
operated without an NPDES permit since 1997. The Project
comprises an expansive drainage system that takes in water
used for irrigation from across 97,400 acres of land and
transports that “return flow” over 28 miles through a canal
before its ultimate discharge into the Mud Slough wetland.
At issue in this appeal is whether the statutory exemption
for irrigation return flows has been wrongly applied to the
Project because diffuse “nonpoint source” pollution—such
as pollution from rainwater runoff or windblown dust and
algae—commingles with the Project’s return flows prior to
discharge into waters of the United States. We agree with
the district court that the Project’s exempt status should be
upheld and reject Plaintiffs’ contention that the commingling
of any amount of nonpoint source pollution from a nonagricultural source forecloses the exemption. To adopt

6

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

Plaintiffs’ position would contravene the text, purpose, and
structure of the Clean Water Act and render the exemption
for irrigated agriculture a dead letter. Accordingly, we
affirm the district court’s partial grant of summary judgment.
I. BACKGROUND
A. Clean Water Act
In 1972, Congress passed the Clean Water Act to
“restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological
integrity of the Nation’s waters.” 33 U.S.C. § 1251(a). One
“central provision” of the Act is that “individuals,
corporations, and governments secure National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permits before
discharging pollution from any point source into the
navigable waters of the United States.” Decker v. Nw. Env’t
Def. Ctr., 568 U.S. 597, 602 (2013) (citing id. §§ 1311(a),
1362(12)). While the CWA “banned . . . discharges from
point sources” without NPDES permits, the “discharge of
pollutants from nonpoint sources—for example, the runoff
of pesticides from farmlands—was not directly prohibited.”
Or. Nat. Desert Ass’n v. Dombeck, 172 F.3d 1092, 1096 (9th
Cir. 1998) (quoting Nat. Res. Def. Council v. EPA, 915 F.2d
1314, 1316 (9th Cir. 1990)). This differential treatment of
“point sources and nonpoint sources is an organizational
paradigm of the [CWA].” Or. Nat. Desert Ass’n v. U.S.
Forest Serv., 550 F.3d 778, 780 (9th Cir. 2008).
The CWA defines key terms such as “point source,”
“pollutant,” “discharge of a pollutant,” and “discharge” in
service of that regulatory distinction. A “point source” is
defined in the statute as:
[A]ny discernible, confined and discrete
conveyance, including but not limited to any

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

7

pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation, or
vessel or other floating craft, from which
pollutants are or may be discharged. This
term does not include agricultural stormwater
discharges and return flows from irrigated
agriculture.
33 U.S.C. § 1362(14). The term “pollutant” is defined as:
[D]redged spoil, solid waste, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat,
wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
Id. § 1362(6). “[D]ischarge of a pollutant” and “discharge”
are defined as:
(12) The term “discharge of a pollutant”
[means] any addition of any pollutant to
navigable waters from any point source . . . .
(16) The term “discharge” when used without
qualification includes a discharge of a
pollutant . . . .
Id. § 1362. Because “discharge of a pollutant” is necessarily
“from any point source,” id. § 1362(12), the term
“discharge” refers specifically to a point source discharge of
a pollutant. See Dombeck, 172 F.3d at 1096.

8

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

The CWA does not define “nonpoint source pollution,”
but “it is widely understood to be the type of pollution that
arises from many dispersed activities over large areas, and is
not traceable to any single discrete source.” League of
Wilderness Defs./Blue Mountains Biodiversity Project v.
Forsgren, 309 F.3d 1181, 1184 (9th Cir. 2002). “The most
common example of nonpoint source pollution is the residue
left on roadways by automobiles,” such as “[s]mall amounts
of rubber” that are “worn off of the tires of millions of cars”
or the “minute particles of copper dust from brake linings”
that eventually “wash off of the streets and are carried along
by runoff in a polluted soup, winding up in creeks, rivers,
bays, and the ocean.” Id.; see also Dombeck, 172 F.3d at
1095 (“Other pollution sources, such as runoff from
agriculture or in this case, animal grazing, are nonpoint
sources.”). Because nonpoint source pollution “arises in
such a diffuse way, it is very difficult to regulate through
individual permits.” Forsgren, 309 F.3d at 1184.
Nonpoint source pollution lies outside the federal
NPDES permit scheme and is “not regulated directly by the
[CWA].” Dombeck, 172 F.3d at 1096. Rather, the CWA
indirectly regulates nonpoint source pollution through
“federal grants for state wastewater treatment plans” under
Section 208, codified under 33 U.S.C. § 1288. Id. The
CWA “envisions EPA’s role in managing nonpoint source
pollution . . . as limited to studying the issue, sharing
information with and collecting information from the States,
and issuing monetary grants.” Cnty. of Maui v. Haw.
Wildlife Fund, 590 U.S. 165, 175 (2020). As the Supreme
Court explained in Maui, “the structure of the [CWA]
indicates that, as to groundwater pollution and nonpoint
source pollution, Congress intended to leave substantial
responsibility and autonomy to the States.” Id. at 174.

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

9

Indeed, the regulation of nonpoint source pollution falls
within States’ “traditional regulatory authority.” Id. at 175.
Although the CWA’s direct regulation of pollution is
limited to point source discharges, the Environmental
Protection Agency (“EPA”) nevertheless “found it difficult
to process permit applications from countless owners and
operators of point sources throughout the country.” Decker,
568 U.S. at 602. One year after the passage of the CWA, the
EPA promulgated regulations to exempt several kinds of
point source discharges from the NPDES permit system,
including discharges from irrigated agriculture. Nw. Env’t
Def. Ctr. v. Brown, 640 F.3d 1063, 1073 (9th Cir. 2011),
rev’d and remanded sub nom. Decker, 586 U.S. 597. The
EPA acknowledged “that the exempted categories of sources
are ones which fall within the definition of point source,” but
concluded that these sources “[were] ill-suited for inclusion
in a permit program.” Id. at 1073-74 (citation omitted). The
agency explained that “while some point sources within the
excluded categories may be significant contributors of
pollution . . . , it would be administratively difficult if not
impossible, given Federal and State resource levels, to issue
individual permits to all such point sources.” Id. at 1074
(quoting 40 Fed. Reg. 56932 (Dec. 5, 1975)).
The EPA’s attempt to exempt certain categories of point
source discharges from NPDES permitting was rejected in
Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Costle, 568 F.2d
1369 (D.C. Cir. 1977). The D.C. Circuit held that the EPA
“does not have authority to exempt categories of point
sources from the permit requirements” and that “[e]ven
when infeasibility arguments were squarely raised, the
legislature declined to abandon the permit requirement”
because the CWA was designed to be a “tough law.” Id. at
1375-77. What the EPA could not do by regulation,

10

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

Congress accomplished through legislation. In 1977,
Congress amended the CWA to establish a statutory
exemption for irrigated agriculture from NPDES permit
requirements. Brown, 640 F.3d at 1073. The exemption
provides:
(l) Limitation on permit requirement
(1) Agricultural return flows
The Administrator shall not require a
permit under this section for discharges
composed entirely of return flows from
irrigated agriculture, nor shall the
Administrator directly or indirectly,
require any State to require such a permit.
33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1). While “return flows from irrigated
agriculture” was not defined by statute, Congress relied on
the EPA’s definition at the time of the amendment, which
was “conveyances carrying surface irrigation return as a
result of the controlled application of water by any person to
land used primarily for crops.” S. Rep. No. 95-370, 35
(1977), as reprinted in 1977 U.S.C.C.A.N. 4326, 4360.
In establishing the irrigated agriculture exemption,
Congress sought to accomplish three aims. First, Congress
intended “to alleviate EPA’s burden in having to issue
permits for every agricultural point source.” Pac. Coast
Fed’n of Fishermen’s Ass’ns v. Glaser, 945 F.3d 1076, 1084
(9th Cir. 2019) (quoting Brown, 640 F.3d at 1073). As one
member of Congress explained, “[t]he problems of
permitting every discrete source or conduit returning water
to the streams from irrigated lands is simply too burdensome
to place on the resources of [the] EPA.” 123 Cong. Rec.
38956 (Dec. 15, 1977) (statement of Rep. Roberts). Second,

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

11

the exemption “promote[d] equity of treatment among
farmers who depend on rainfall to irrigate their crops and
those who depend on surface irrigation which is returned to
a stream in discreet [sic] conveyances.” Glaser, 945 F.3d at
1084 (quoting 123 Cong. Rec. 26702 (Aug. 4, 1977)
(statement of Sen. Stafford)); see Forsgren, 309 F.3d at 1189
(explaining that the “statutory exemption for agricultural
return flows” reflected “the need for parity of regulation
between irrigated and non-irrigated agriculture”). As one
Congressman explained, the exemption “correct[ed] what
has been a discrimination against irrigated agriculture . . . .
Farmers in areas of the country which were blessed with
adequate rainfall were not subject to permit requirements on
their rainwater run-off, which in effect . . . contained the
same pollutants.” 123 Cong. Rec. 39210 (Dec. 15, 1977)
(statement of Sen. Wallop).
Finally, the irrigated agriculture exemption was
prompted because of the technological difficulties in
determining whether pollutants commingled within an
irrigation return flow could be traced to particular upstream
sources. As the Senate Committee Report on the 1977
amendments to the CWA explained:
Testimony in field hearings suggested that
effluent limits based on technological
methods may not be appropriate for control
of return flow pollutants and the committee
determined that these sources were
practically indistinguishable from any other
agricultural runoff, which may or may not
involve a similar discrete point of entry into
a watercourse. All such sources, regardless
of the manner in which the flow was applied

12

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

to the agricultural lands, and regardless of the
discrete nature of the entry point, are more
appropriately treated under the requirements
of section 208(b)(2)(F).
S. Rep. No. 95-370, 35. In other words, Congress
determined that return flows from irrigated agriculture were
best managed under Section 208 as nonpoint source
pollution because it proved difficult, if not impossible, to
determine whether a given pollutant entered the waterway
through a point or nonpoint source. Pollutants from irrigated
agriculture “were practically indistinguishable” from
nonpoint sources such as agricultural runoff. Id. As one
Congressman described in a previously failed attempt to
adopt the exemption, it is “virtually impossible to trace
pollutants to specific irrigation lands, making these
pollutants a nonpoint source in most cases.” 118 Cong. Rec.
10765 (Mar. 29, 1972) (statement of Rep. Roncalio); see
Brown, 640 F.3d at 1072.
Congress thus chose to regulate return flows from
irrigated agriculture under Section 208 as though they were
nonpoint sources of pollution. S. Rep. No. 95-370, 9. Statemanaged treatment plans under Section 208 involve
procedures to “(i) identify, if appropriate, agriculturally and
silviculturally related nonpoint sources of pollution,
including return flows from irrigated agriculture, and their
cumulative effects . . . and (ii) set forth procedures and
methods . . . to control to the extent feasible such sources.”
33 U.S.C. § 1288(b)(2)(F).
Consistent with this
understanding, the definition of “point source” under the
CWA provides that “[t]his term does not include agricultural
stormwater discharges and return flows from irrigated

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

13

agriculture.” Id. § 1362(14). With this background in mind,
we turn to the facts of this case.
B. Factual Background
The Grassland Bypass Project (“Project”) in California’s
Central Valley is jointly administered by DefendantsAppellees Adam Nickels (Acting Regional Director of the
U.S. Bureau of Reclamation), the U.S. Bureau of
Reclamation, the San Luis & Delta-Mendota Water
Authority (“SLDMWA”), and the Grassland Water District.
Implemented in 1996, the Project comprises an extensive
underground tile drainage system beneath the Grassland
Drainage Area (“Drainage Area”), serving 97,400 acres of
land within the Delta-Mendota sub-basin of the San Joaquin
Valley.

14

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

This Drainage Area is composed of active, fallow, and
retired farmland as well as non-irrigable land used for public
infrastructure, residences, and businesses. On part of the
retired land is the Vega Solar Project, an array of solar panels
that occupies 178.3 acres of formerly irrigated land. The
Drainage Area is designed to remove the contaminated
irrigation water delivered by the Central Valley Project and

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

15

used by farmers. Glaser, 945 F.3d at 1080. “Irrigation and
drainage are inherently linked” because “[a]ny water project
that brings fresh water to an agricultural area must take the
salty water remaining after the crops have been irrigated
away from the service area.” Firebaugh Canal Co. v. United
States, 203 F.3d 568, 571 (9th Cir. 2000).
After the water leaves the Drainage Area, it enters the
Grassland Bypass Channel (“Bypass”) that conveys it
further into the San Luis Drain (“Drain”). The Drain is
owned by the Bureau of Reclamation and operated by
SLDMWA. The Drain spans approximately 28 miles and
was built with expansion joints and weep valves to prevent
damage to its concrete lining from the pressure of
surrounding groundwater. Nonetheless, the Drain has
accrued some damage over time. Due to its perforated
design and accumulated damage, surrounding groundwater
seeps into the Drain.
Sediments containing concentrations of pollutants like
selenium have also accumulated in the Drain, requiring
monitoring, occasional physical removal, and certain
reductions in flow rates. At its terminus, the Drain
discharges its contents into the Mud Slough wetland, a
navigable water of the United States, which feeds into the
San Joaquin River and lies adjacent to numerous nationaland state-protected wildlife areas.
Since 1997, Defendants have operated the Project as a
nonpoint source without an NPDES permit under the
exemption for “discharges composed entirely of return flows
from irrigated agriculture.” 33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1). In place
of NPDES permit requirements, the Project’s discharges
have been subject to state and local environmental
regulations that set water quality standards for pollutants,

16

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

require certain monitoring practices, and establish best
practices requirements.
C. Procedural History
Plaintiffs initiated this action in 2011 alleging that
Defendants’ operation of the Project violated the CWA by
discharging pollutants unrelated to irrigated agriculture into
navigable waters without an NPDES permit.1 After years of
litigation, the district court in 2016 granted in part
Defendants’ motion for summary judgment. Plaintiffs then
brought their first appeal to this court. We resolved that
appeal in Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen’s
Associations v. Glaser, concluding that the district court
erred in three respects. 945 F.3d 1076 (9th Cir. 2019).
First, the district court erred by placing the burden on
Plaintiffs to demonstrate that the statutory exemption to
NPDES permitting for irrigated agriculture return flows did
not apply, rather than on Defendants to establish that it did
apply. Id. at 1083. Second, we concluded that the district
court erred in its interpretation of the exemption “for
discharges composed entirely of return flows from irrigated
agriculture” under 33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1), by construing
“entirely” to mean “majority.” Id. at 1085. Third, we
disagreed with the district court’s decision to strike certain
theories of liability on pleading grounds and remanded those
stricken claims to be reconsidered under the correct
interpretation of § 1342(l)(1). Id. at 1086-87. However, we
upheld the district court’s broad interpretation of the term

1

Plaintiffs are Pacific Coast Federation of Fishermen’s Associations,
California Sportfishing Protection Alliance, Friends of the River, San
Francisco Crab Boat Owners Association, Inc., Institute for Fisheries
Resources, and Felix Smith.

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

17

“irrigated agriculture” to encompass “all activities related to
crop production.” Id. at 1083-85.
On remand, and following cross-motions for summary
judgment, the district court reconsidered Plaintiffs’ claims
predicated on four alleged sources of pollutants:
“(1) groundwater originating from beneath ‘non-irrigated’
land adjacent to the Drain which seeps into the Drain through
cracks and weep holes; (2) sediment that has settled out over
time in the Drain from the waters it carries and which is
purportedly discharged into Mud Slough ‘when it is scoured
and reworked by flows in the Drain’; (3) water transported
into tile drains underneath the retired agricultural land
occupied by the Vega Solar Project; and (4) flows of
polluted water in the Drainage Area that allegedly stem from
‘highways, residences and other non-irrigated lands.’”
The district court began by reconsidering “the scope of
the agricultural return flows exception provided by
§ 1342(l)(1)” following our decision in Glaser. The district
court first concluded that the exemption covered “discharges
that ‘do not contain additional discharges from activities
unrelated to crop production.’” The district court reasoned
that “additional discharges” must mean discharges that are
“[a]dded, extra, or supplementary to what is already present
or available.” Consequently, “to qualify for the exception[,]
defendants must establish that plaintiffs’ alleged four
sources of pollutants are not added to the Project from an
extra or supplementary point source.” Next, the district
court concluded that an activity is “related to crop
production” so long as it “is related to the function and
operation of the overall drainage plan.”
Putting these pieces together, the district court concluded
that, to qualify for the irrigated agriculture exemption,

18

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

“defendants must establish that plaintiffs’ alleged sources of
pollutants . . . are not added from an extra or supplementary
point source that is unrelated to the Project’s overall
drainage function.” The district court concluded that
Defendants carried their burden of establishing that the
irrigated return flow exemption applied because each alleged
pollutant was either added from a nonpoint source or was
added from a point source that related to the Project’s overall
drainage function. The district court granted in part
Defendant’s motion for summary judgment.2 This appeal
followed.
II. DISCUSSION
We review the district court’s grant of summary
judgment and its interpretations of the CWA de novo. Karuk
Tribe of Cal. v. U.S. Forest Serv., 681 F.3d 1006, 1017 (9th
Cir. 2012) (en banc) (summary judgment); Olympic Forest
Coal. v. Coast Seafoods Co., 884 F.3d 901, 905 (9th Cir.
2018) (CWA). We agree with the district court that
Plaintiffs failed to raise a genuine dispute of material fact as
to whether the irrigated agriculture return flow exemption
applies to the Project. We conclude that the exemption
applies because the alleged pollutants are either added to the
Project via nonpoint sources or via a point source related to
crop production.
A.
Although Defendants have operated the Project without
an NPDES permit since 1997, Plaintiffs seek to undo the
2

The district court denied Defendants’ motion for summary judgment
challenging Plaintiffs’ Article III standing and declined to reach
Defendants’ argument that the so-called water transfer rule (40 C.F.R.
§ 122.3(i)) exempted the Project from permitting requirements.

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

19

Project’s exempted status on the ground that the Project’s
discharge into the Mud Slough contains pollutants that are
not related to irrigated agriculture. To that end, Plaintiffs
interpret the language of the exemption in 33 U.S.C.
§ 1342(l)(1) to require that the exemption “appl[ies] only to
pollutants that originated ‘entirely’ from irrigated
agriculture.” In Plaintiffs’ reading, if an irrigation return
flow commingles to any degree with pollutants unrelated to
irrigated agriculture, then an NPDES permit is required for
its discharge. To hold otherwise, according to Plaintiffs,
would “effectively repeal[] the term ‘entirely,’ and
preclude[] permit regulation of commingled discharges.”
We disagree.
Plaintiffs’ theory does not follow from the text and is
inconsistent with the purpose and structure of the CWA, and
as a practical matter would render the irrigated agriculture
exemption a dead letter. One of “our longstanding canons
of statutory construction” is that “we must normally seek to
construe Congress’s work ‘so that effect is given to all
provisions, so that no part will be inoperative or superfluous,
void or insignificant.’” Ysleta del Sur Pueblo v. Texas, 596
U.S. 685, 698-99 (2022) (quoting Corley v. United States,
556 U.S. 303, 314 (2009)).
We begin with the text of the statute. The irrigation
return flow exemption applies to “discharges composed
entirely of return flows from irrigated agriculture.”
33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1). This is not the first time we address
the meaning of this provision. In Glaser, we approached the
text in two pieces. We began by noting that the “plain
meaning of the statutory text” did not resolve “whether the
discharges at issue [were] exempt from the CWA’s
permitting requirement.” Glaser, 945 F.3d at 1084.
Accordingly, we relied on the legislative history of

20

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

§ 1342(l)(1) to broadly interpret the term “irrigated
agriculture” as encompassing “all activities related to crop
production.” Id. at 1084-85. Turning next to the word
“entirely,” we observed that it was not defined by the statute
and considered its ordinary meaning to conclude that
“‘[e]ntirely’ is defined as ‘wholly, completely, fully.’” Id.
at 1085 (quoting Webster’s Third New International
Dictionary 758 (2002)).
The text does not dictate, however—and we did not
decide in Glaser—whether “entirely” requires every
pollutant within a return flow to be from irrigated agriculture
or every discharge within a return flow to be from irrigated
agriculture. In other words, the statute’s use of the word
“entirely” is ambiguous because the statute does not clarify
the category of objects that “entirely” is meant to exclude.
Consider the following analogy illustrating this ambiguity:
If someone were to say, “My wallet is filled entirely with
twenties,” we might accept that statement as true even if the
wallet also contained, say, a family photo, because the
person presumably meant only that the wallet does not
contain other denominations of money. Similarly, the text
of § 1342(l)(1) can be read as applying to discharges
composed entirely of return flows as opposed to nonagricultural discharges.
Given the ambiguity in the text, we turn to a highly
probative piece of legislative history for guidance, as we did
in Glaser. See In re HP Inkjet Printer Litig., 716 F.3d 1173,
1180-81 (9th Cir. 2013) (“Where the statutory text is
ambiguous . . . we may ‘look to other interpretive tools,
including the legislative history’ in order to determine the
statute’s best meaning.” (quoting Exxon Mobil Corp. v.
Allapattah Servs., Inc., 545 U.S. 546, 567 (2005))).
Specifically, we quoted the Senate Committee Report’s

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

21

explanation that “[t]he word ‘entirely’ was intended to limit
the exception to only those flows which do not contain
additional discharges from activities unrelated to crop
production.”3 S. Rep. No. 95-370, 35; see Glaser, 945 F.3d
at 1084 (quoting this language). It is fair to presume that the
Report, which was “written by the same legislators that
authored the exemption and which accompanied the
proposed language in an effort to explain the language’s
meaning to the other members of the Senate and House,”
Pac. Coast Fed’n of Fishermen’s Assn’s v. Glaser, No. CIV
S-2:11-2980-KJM, 2013 WL 5230266, at *11 (E.D. Cal.
Sept. 16, 2013), rev’d and remanded on other grounds, 945
F.3d 1076 (9th Cir. 2019), used key statutory terms as they
were defined by the statute. Cf. Garcia v. United States, 469
U.S. 70, 76 (1984) (“In surveying legislative history we have
repeatedly stated that the authoritative source for finding the
Legislature’s intent lies in the Committee Reports on the
bill . . . .”).
Under the CWA, the term “discharge”
necessarily presumes a point source. See 33 U.S.C.
§ 1362(12), (16); see also Dombeck, 172 F.3d at 1097
(holding that “[t]he term ‘discharge’ in § 1341 is limited to
discharges from point sources”). Applying the statutory
definitions in the context of the exemption’s legislative
history, we agree with the district court in concluding that
the exemption applies to irrigation return flows that do not
contain additional point source discharges from activities
unrelated to crop production.
Such a reading is consistent with the purpose and
structure of the CWA and Congress’s enactment of the
3

Plaintiffs concede that Glaser stated that the text of § 1342(l)(1) “meant
discharges that ‘do not contain additional discharges from activities
unrelated to crop production.’”

22

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

irrigated agriculture exemption. As discussed above,
“[n]onpoint source pollution is not regulated directly by the
[CWA].” Dombeck, 172 F.3d at 1096. Indeed, the CWA
“uses the ‘threat and promise’ of federal grants to the states
to accomplish this task.” Id. at 1097 (quoting Shanty Town
Assocs. Ltd. P’ship v. EPA, 843 F.2d 782, 791 (4th Cir.
1988)). Leaving nonpoint source pollution to the States, the
CWA’s NPDES permitting scheme focuses on pollution
from point sources, “presumably because they could be
identified and regulated more easily tha[n] nonpoint source
polluters.” Id. at 1096 (quoting Nat. Res. Def. Council v.
EPA, 915 F.2d at 1316 ); see also U.S. Forest Serv., 550 F.3d
at 780 (“Congress primarily focused its regulation under the
[CWA] on point sources, which tended to be more notorious
and more easily targeted . . . .”).
As we explained above, Congress established the
irrigated agriculture exemption to address three primary
concerns. Congress sought to lessen the EPA’s burden in
having to issue permits to an excessive number of point
source discharges related to irrigated agriculture. See 123
Cong. Rec. 38956 (Dec. 15, 1977) (statement of Rep.
Roberts). The exemption was also designed to address the
unequal treatment between farmers who depend upon
rainfall to irrigate their crops and were not subject to federal
permitting requirements, and other farmers who relied on
surface irrigation and were subject to NPDES permitting.
See 123 Cong. Rec. 39210 (Dec. 15, 1977) (statement of
Sen. Wallop); see also Glaser, 945 F.3d at 1084. Finally,
the irrigated agriculture exemption reflected the technical
difficulties of regulating return flow pollutants through the
permitting scheme because it was practically impossible to
determine whether agricultural pollutants were originally
from point or nonpoint sources. See S. Rep. No. 95-370, 35.

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

23

In enacting the exemption, Congress determined that return
flows from irrigated agriculture were best managed under
Section 208 as nonpoint sources of pollution, through direct
regulation by the States. Id.
If Plaintiffs’ theory were correct that for the exemption
to apply, irrigation return flows cannot contain any amount
of nonpoint source pollution unrelated to irrigated
agriculture, then all three of Congress’s aims would be
thwarted. The EPA would again face the heavy burden of
issuing permits for an inordinate amount of irrigation return
flows. See Glaser, 945 F.3d at 1084. Farmers reliant on
surface irrigation for their crops would be disproportionately
burdened with NPDES permit requirements relative to
farmers blessed with abundant rainfall for their crops. Id.
And the EPA would be saddled with the “virtually
impossible” task of disentangling commingled pollutants,
tracing them back to specific irrigated lands, and imposing
permit requirements for point source discharges on those
farms. 118 Cong. Rec. 10765 (Mar. 29, 1972) (statement of
Rep. Roncalio).
Plaintiffs’ interpretation of the CWA would also render
the irrigation return flow exemption a dead letter. As
Plaintiffs’ counsel conceded at oral argument, some amount
of nonpoint source pollution unrelated to irrigated
agriculture will inevitably commingle with irrigation return
flows. For example, one nonpoint source pollutant Plaintiffs
seek to regulate through the NPDES permit is “windblown
dust.” Under Plaintiffs’ reading of the statute, an irrigation
system would have to ensure that no windblown dust ever
enters the return flow conveyance for the return flow to
qualify under the statutory exemption—a scientific
impossibility. We cannot adopt a statutory reading which

24

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

we know will sap the interpreted provision of all practical
significance.
The same would apply for other nonpoint sources of
pollution within an agricultural district such as runoff from
highways and roads, groundwater seepage containing
pollutants, or sediment that encroaches upon return flow
conveyances. See Forsgren, 309 F.3d at 1184. Setting aside
the difficult question of determining when a nonpoint source
pollutant is “related to crop production,” Plaintiffs have not
been able to explain how any irrigated agriculture system
would ever qualify for the exemption under their
interpretation of § 1342(l)(1).
B.
Plaintiffs contend that their reading of the CWA is
mandated by Supreme Court and Ninth Circuit precedents,
which hold that an NPDES permit is required whenever
nonpoint source pollutants are “ultimately discharged
through a point source.” Because the record here establishes
a point source discharge of pollutants into navigable
waters—effluent flows from the Drain into the Mud
Slough—that is sufficient to require a permit under the CWA
and to foreclose the irrigated agriculture exemption.
Plaintiffs primarily rely on two cases, South Florida Water
Management District v. Miccosukee Tribe of Indians, 541
U.S. 95 (2004) and Committee to Save Mokelumne River v.
East Bay Municipal Utility District, 13 F.3d 305 (9th Cir.
1993).
In Miccosukee, the defendants operated a water pump—
a point source—that pumped polluted water from a canal
into a navigable water. 541 U.S. at 100-01. The defendants
argued that the pump’s operation did not require an NPDES
permit because the pollutants it discharged did not originate

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

25

from the pump itself. Id. at 104. The Supreme Court
rejected this argument and explained that “a point source
need not be the original source of the pollutant; it need only
convey the pollutant to ‘navigable waters.’” Id. at 105. Put
differently, “a point source is not exempt from the [NPDES]
permit requirement merely because it does not itself add
pollutants to the water it pumps.” Id. at 112 (Scalia, J.,
concurring in part and dissenting in part).
In Mokelumne, the defendants operated a dam that
discharged water into the Mokelumne River, a navigable
water. 13 F.3d at 306-07. Commingled within this
discharged water was surface runoff from an abandoned
mining site that was channeled and then collected in the dam
reservoir prior to discharge. Id. at 307. Similar to the
defendants in Miccosukee, the defendants argued that the
dam’s discharges were not subject to NPDES permit
requirements because the dam did not itself “add” any
pollutants to a navigable water. Id. at 308. We disagreed
and found the dam’s discharge to be a point source discharge
of pollutants because “the source of pollution added to the
Mokelumne River is ‘surface runoff that is collected or
channelled by’ defendants from the abandoned mine site.”
Id. Mokelumne thus held that a point source that channels
“surface runoff” is subject to the permit requirement because
the CWA “categorically prohibits any discharge of a
pollutant from a point source without a permit.” Id. at 309.
Miccosukee and Mokelumne are inapposite because
neither case involved the statutory exemption for irrigated
agriculture under 33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1). In the absence of
the exemption, Plaintiffs are correct that a point source that
conveys a pollutant—even if it does not generate that
pollutant—is subject to the NPDES permitting scheme.
Miccosukee, 541 U.S. at 105. But Congress carved out an

26

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

exemption to the NPDES permit requirement for certain
discrete conveyances, including “discharges composed
entirely of return flows from irrigated agriculture.”
33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1). The fact that irrigation return flows
are ordinarily point source discharges is precisely why
Congress carved out the exemption in the first place. See
Brown, 640 F.3d at 1073-74. Therefore, the analysis in
Miccosukee and Mokelumne about the kinds of discharges
that are subject to NPDES permitting provides no answer to
the distinct question here—how we should interpret and
apply the statutory exemption for return flows from irrigated
agriculture.4
In conclusion, we hold that the exemption for
“discharges composed entirely of return flows from irrigated
agriculture” under 33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1) applies so long as
the return flow does not contain additional point source
discharges from activities unrelated to crop production.
C.
Having established the scope of the irrigation return flow
exemption, we now turn to Plaintiffs’ four alleged sources of
pollution commingled in the Project’s return flow:
4

We reject Plaintiffs’ contention that “it is impossible to have two
separate point sources in sequence, because by definition, a ‘point
source’ discharges to a water of the United States.” In Maui, the
Supreme Court rejected the view that a point source must be the
“immediate” source of a pollutant’s addition into navigable waters. 590
U.S. at 172, 181 (holding that “pollution that reaches navigable waters
only through groundwater” may still constitute “pollution that is ‘from’
a point source”). The Court reasoned that “[t]here is nothing unnatural
about such a construction” of the CWA, as it “does not say ‘directly’
from or ‘immediately’ from.” Id. at 182. “Indeed, the expansive
language of the provision—any addition from any point source—
strongly suggests its scope is not so limited.” Id.

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

27

(1) seepage into the Drain from groundwater beneath nonirrigated land adjacent to the Drain; (2) groundwater seepage
and runoff from “highways, residences and other nonirrigated lands” in the Drainage Area; (3) sediment that the
Drain carries and discharges into the Mud Slough; and
(4) runoff and groundwater from retired agricultural land
occupied by the Vega Solar Project in the Drainage Area.
Plaintiffs contend that each of these sources of pollutants
invalidates the Project’s exempt status. We disagree. To
reiterate, the irrigated agriculture exemption applies to
discharges that do not contain additional point source
discharges from activities unrelated to crop production. This
means that for the exemption to apply here, Defendants bear
the burden of demonstrating that the Project’s discharged
pollutants are either from a nonpoint source or from an
additional point source that is related to crop production. See
Glaser, 945 F.3d at 1083-85. Here, the district court
correctly concluded that no genuine dispute of material fact
exists as to whether any of these alleged pollutants
originated from an additional point source that was unrelated
to crop production.5
First, groundwater seepage into the Drain from adjacent
non-irrigated and unfarmed lands is not a point source
discharge. It is well-established that groundwater seepage is
a type of nonpoint source pollution. Unlike a point source
that is a “confined and discrete conveyance” like a “pipe,
ditch, [or] channel,” 33 U.S.C. § 1362(14), groundwater
seepage is diffuse. See also Maui, 590 U.S. at 169
5

Plaintiffs’ counsel conceded at oral argument: “In this case, we
identified four categories of pollutants that were nonpoint source in
nature but were contributing to the pollutants in the waste stream
discharged by the Drain.”

28

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

(indicating without explanation that groundwater is a
nonpoint source). Because groundwater seepage is not a
point source discharge, Plaintiffs’ evidence that
“contaminated groundwater . . . seeps into the Drain” fails to
create a genuine dispute of material fact.
Second, groundwater seepage and runoff from
“highways, residences, and other non-irrigated lands” in the
Drainage Area do not constitute point source discharges.
Runoff is another quintessential example of nonpoint source
pollution. We have explained that “the term ‘runoff’
describes pollution flowing from nonpoint sources.”
Dombeck, 172 F.3d at 1098 (“‘Congress had classified
nonpoint source pollution as runoff caused primarily by
rainfall around activities that employ or create pollutants.’”
(citation omitted)). Accordingly, the runoff and seepage
here do not constitute additional point source discharges that
would potentially foreclose application of the statutory
exemption.
Third, accumulated and remobilized sediment in the
Drain is not an additional point source discharge from
activities unrelated to crop production. According to
Plaintiffs, sediment in the Drain comes from either “dust,
wind-blown plant debris, algae, and cattails” or from the
return flow from the Bypass discharged into the Drain. Dust
and other wind-blown particles do not originate from a
discrete conveyance and thus do not constitute point source
discharges. The discharge from the Bypass into the Drain is
a discrete point source discharge, but the Bypass’s
conveyance of the Project’s irrigation return flow to the
Drain is clearly part of the Project’s overall function and
operation and is related to crop production. Therefore,
pollution from sediment accumulated and remobilized in the
Drain does not raise a genuine dispute of material fact

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

29

because it originates from nonpoint sources or from a point
source related to crop production.
Lastly, runoff and groundwater from the land occupied
by the Vega Solar Project do not constitute point source
discharges. The alleged runoff is based on rainwater falling
onto the site and water from solar panel washing. The
alleged groundwater seepage involves natural upwelling of
“older and deeper groundwater” into the tile drain system
underneath the Vega site.6 As discussed, both runoff and
groundwater seepage are nonpoint sources of pollution. In
addition, runoff from the Vega site does not create a genuine
dispute of material fact because Defendants’ uncontroverted
evidence establishes that the runoff could not have
penetrated eight feet into the ground to reach the Project’s
subsurface tile drains. Defendants’ expert testified that
between the Vega solar panel washings and rainfall, runoff
flows penetrated less than an inch into the soil. Defendants
also presented evidence of model simulations demonstrating
that during the relevant period—that is, after the Vega site
was converted from its previous agricultural use to its solar
use—rainwater and surface runoff would not have
percolated deep enough. Plaintiffs’ expert failed to rebut this
evidence. In short, Plaintiffs failed to dispute Defendants’
evidence that there was no point source discharge of a
pollutant from the Vega Solar Project.
We agree with the district court that no genuine dispute
of material fact exists as to whether the four sources of
pollutants “constitute nonpoint sources or whether they stem
from ‘activities related to crop production.’”

6

The tile drain system underneath the Vega site long predates the Vega
Solar Project and continues to serve adjacent farmland.

30

P.C.F.F.A. V. NICKELS

III. CONCLUSION
The CWA exempts “discharges composed entirely of
return flows from irrigated agriculture” from the NPDES
permitting scheme. 33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1). We hold that
the irrigated agriculture exemption applies when return
flows do not contain additional point source discharges from
activities unrelated to crop production. In the absence of a
genuine dispute of material fact, we affirm the district
court’s conclusion that Defendants have met their burden of
establishing that the irrigation return flow exemption under
33 U.S.C. § 1342(l)(1) of the CWA applies to the Project.
AFFIRMED.

