FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
TARA GILBERT; CYNTHIA
KEMPLIN; DARYL GILBERT;
STEVEN GILBERT, Successors in
Interest,

No. 23-4045
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-01984WBS-KJN

Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.

OPINION

7-ELEVEN, INC., Doing business as
7-Eleven #23615; JATINDER
BRAR, Doing business as 7-Eleven
#23615; JATINDER SINGH BRAR,
Doing business as 7-Eleven
#23615; MIN-CHING HO, Trustee
of the HO LIVING TRUST dated
October 26, 1991; KATHLEEN A.
HO; I-CHUNG HO, Trustee of the
HO LIVING TRUST dated October
26, 1991,
Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of California
William B. Shubb, District Judge, Presiding

2

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

Argued and Submitted October 23, 2024
San Francisco, California
Filed October 24, 2025
Before: Richard R. Clifton, Jennifer Sung, and Gabriel P.
Sanchez, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Sung
SUMMARY*
California Unruh Civil Rights Act / Americans with
Disabilities Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment after a
bench trial awarding statutory damages to Darren Gilbert on
his claim under California’s Unruh Civil Rights Act against
7-Eleven, Inc.
Gilbert, who uses a prosthetic leg and a wheelchair for
mobility, brought claims under the Unruh Act and Title III
of the Americans with Disabilities Act. He asserted that 7Eleven discriminated against him in violation of the ADA by
failing to remove architectural barriers where such removal
was readily achievable and by denying him full and equal
enjoyment of its store based on his disability. After Gilbert
filed this lawsuit, 7-Eleven remodeled the store’s parking lot
and entryway, resulting in an ADA-compliant van*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

3

accessible parking stall, access aisle, curb ramp, and entry
walkway. After a bench trial, the district court concluded
that during Gilbert’s visits to the store, he personally
encountered a lack of accessible route of travel from the
designated accessible parking to the store’s entrance because
of several different violations of the ADA Accessibility
Guidelines. The district court concluded that, due to 7Eleven’s voluntary removal of the challenged barriers,
Gilbert’s claim for injunctive relief under the ADA was
moot. But, because a violation of the ADA constitutes a
violation of the Unruh Act, the district court awarded Gilbert
$4,000 in statutory damages under the Unruh Act.
The panel held that Title III of the ADA requires removal
of an architectural barrier where such removal is readily
achievable. The plaintiff bears the initial burden of
articulating a plausible proposal for barrier removal, the
costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its
benefits. But the defendant bears the ultimate burden of
persuasion, that is, of proving that barrier removal is not
readily achievable. The panel held that, even though Gilbert
did not provide evidence to satisfy his initial burden, 7Eleven’s voluntary remodeling demonstrated that barrier
removal was readily achievable.
7-Eleven did not dispute the district court’s conclusion
that Gilbert personally encountered barriers, but it contended
that he was further required to prove that his experience at
the store while ambulating with a prosthetic leg was different
than that of any other able-bodied person in order to
demonstrate that the barriers related to his particular
disability. The panel held that no such evidentiary burden
exists.

4

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

Rejecting 7-Eleven’s argument that Gilbert lacked
standing to bring an Unruh Act claim, the panel held that,
under California law, an individual who personally
encounters an ADA violation while transacting with a brickand-mortar business has standing under the Unruh
Act. Under California law, Gilbert’s motivation in visiting
the 7-Eleven store in order to file suit was irrelevant to his
ability to recover under the Unruh Act. The panel rejected
7-Eleven’s argument that Gilbert lacked standing because he
lacked a bona fide intent to be a customer.
The panel remanded to the district court to address any
issues raised by the substitution of Gilbert’s successors
during the pendency of the appeal.

COUNSEL
Tanya E. Moore (argued), Moore Law Firm PC, San Jose,
California, for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Michael S. Orr (argued) and Julie R. Trotter, Call & Jensen
APC, Newport Beach, California, for Defendants-Appellees.

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

5

OPINION
SUNG, Circuit Judge:
Darren Gilbert lost his lower left leg and two right-foot
toes to amputation, and he used a prosthetic leg and
wheelchair for mobility. Gilbert sued 7-Eleven, Inc., under
the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) and
California’s Unruh Civil Rights Act (Unruh Act) after he
personally encountered physical barriers to access when
purchasing items at one of its stores. Following a bench trial,
the district court ruled for Gilbert solely on the Unruh Act
claim and awarded him $4,000 in statutory damages. For the
reasons below, we affirm and remand.1
I.

BACKGROUND

In August 2021, Gilbert drove his wheelchair-accessible
van to a 7-Eleven convenience store in Rio Linda,
California. 2 During this visit, the van-accessible parking
space was occupied, so Gilbert parked in an adjacent regular
parking space. Using his prosthetic leg, Gilbert walked
behind the vehicle parked in the van-accessible space and up
the sidewalk curb ramp from the stall access aisle to the
sidewalk in front of the store. Because of his balance issues,
Gilbert had some trouble walking up the sidewalk curb ramp,
which had an “excessive and uneven slope.” He was also
“tired because of the ‘energy’ he had to expend to get into
1

After Gilbert’s death in July 2024, his successors in interest were
substituted as the relevant parties on appeal. We remand to the district
court to address any issues raised by the substitution.
2

We summarize the district court’s factual findings, which are
undisputed on appeal.

6

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

the store.” Once inside, Gilbert purchased items from the
store.
Gilbert sued 7-Eleven under the ADA and Unruh Act
two months later.3 In relevant part, he asserted that 7-Eleven
discriminated against him in violation of the ADA by failing
to remove architectural barriers where such removal was
readily achievable, and by denying him “full and equal
enjoyment” of its store based on his disability. Gilbert sought
injunctive relief under the ADA to remove these barriers. He
also alleged that this ADA violation violated the Unruh Act,
under which he sought statutory damages. After Gilbert filed
this lawsuit, 7-Eleven remodeled the parking lot and
entryway. As a result, the store now has an ADA-compliant
van-accessible parking stall, access aisle, curb ramp, and
entry walkway.
The district court held a two-day bench trial and
concluded that “[d]uring his visits to the [s]tore, Gilbert
personally encountered a lack of accessible route of travel
from the designated accessible parking to the [s]tore
entrance” because of several different violations of the ADA
Accessibility Guidelines. The district court further
concluded that although 7-Eleven’s voluntary removal of the
challenged barriers mooted Gilbert’s claim for injunctive
relief under the ADA, Gilbert “established that 7-Eleven
violated the ADA with regard to the route of travel from the
designated accessible parking to the [s]tore.” Because a
violation of the ADA constitutes a violation of the Unruh
Act, see Cal. Civ. Code § 51(f), the district court awarded

3

Gilbert also asserted a violation of California’s Health and Safety Code,
but the district court ruled for 7-Eleven on that claim. Because Gilbert
does not appeal that ruling, we do not discuss it.

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

7

Gilbert $4,000 in statutory damages, see Cal. Civ. Code
§§ 52(a), 55.56. 7-Eleven timely appealed.
II.

DISCUSSION

After a bench trial, we review a district court’s factual
findings for clear error and its legal conclusions de novo. See
Langer v. Kiser, 57 F.4th 1085, 1100 (9th Cir. 2023). “A
district court’s interpretation, construction, and application
of the ADA” present a question of law that is reviewed de
novo. Id.
A. ADA Violation
California’s Unruh Act generally prohibits the denial of
“the full and equal accommodations, advantages, facilities,
privileges, or services in [any] business establishment[]”
based on “disability” (among other enumerated grounds).
Cal. Civ. Code § 51(b). The Unruh Act also provides that
“[a] violation of the right of any individual under the federal
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 . . . shall also
constitute a violation of this section.” Id. § 51(f). “Under the
plain language of California Civil Code § 51(f), a violation
of the ADA is automatically, without more, a violation of the
Unruh Act.” Arroyo v. Rosas, 19 F.4th 1202, 1214 (9th Cir.
2021); see Munson v. Del Taco, Inc., 208 P.3d 623, 630 (Cal.
2009). 7-Eleven argues that Gilbert failed to establish a
violation of the ADA—and thus, failed to establish a
violation of the Unruh Act—because he did not show that
barrier removal was “readily achievable,” and he did not
show that each challenged barrier impacted his ability to
ambulate with a prosthetic leg. We address each argument in
turn.

8

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

1. “Readily Achievable”
Title III of the ADA requires removal of an architectural
barrier “where such removal is readily achievable.” 42
U.S.C. § 12182(b)(2)(A)(iv). In Lopez v. Catalina Channel
Express, Inc., 974 F.3d 1030 (9th Cir. 2020), we adopted a
burden-shifting framework for evaluating barrier removal
claims. See id. at 1040. The plaintiff bears the initial burden
of “articulat[ing] a plausible proposal for barrier removal,
the costs of which, facially, do not clearly exceed its
benefits.” Id. at 1038 (quoting Roberts v. Royal Atl. Corp.,
542 F.3d 363, 373 (2d Cir. 2008)). But the defendant bears
the “ultimate burden of persuasion,” that is, of proving that
“barrier removal is not readily achievable.” Id. at 1040.
The district court concluded that 7-Eleven’s voluntary
removal of the challenged barriers established that removal
was “readily achievable” under the ADA. On appeal, 7Eleven argues that this was error because Gilbert did not
present any evidence to satisfy his initial burden of showing
that the costs of barrier removal do not outweigh its benefits.
We disagree.
7-Eleven is correct that Gilbert did not present any
evidence to demonstrate that barrier removal was readily
achievable. But 7-Eleven concedes that it voluntarily altered
its premises to comply with the ADA after Gilbert filed this
action. And it is undisputed that 7-Eleven failed to present
any competing evidence to meet its burden of persuasion.
See Snapp v. United Transp. Union, 889 F.3d 1088, 1102
(9th Cir. 2018) (“burden-shifting frameworks . . . are merely
analytical tools for focusing arguments” and do not lessen or
shift “the ultimate burden of proof (the burden of
persuasion)” at trial). Because 7-Eleven’s voluntary
remodeling demonstrates that barrier removal was readily

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

9

achievable, nothing further was required of Gilbert. Under
these circumstances, it does not matter that Gilbert did not
provide evidence to satisfy his initial burden. We do not
apply the burden-shifting framework formalistically, as 7Eleven suggests. See, e.g., Lopez, 974 F.3d at 1038
(declining to require plaintiff to provide “precise cost
estimates” or “specific design[s]” (quoting Colo. Cross
Disability Coal. v. Hermanson Fam. Ltd. P’ship I, 264 F.3d
999, 1009 (10th Cir. 2001))).
Accordingly, we agree with the district court that barrier
removal was readily achievable, and we reject 7-Eleven’s
argument that Gilbert failed to satisfy his burden.
2. Barriers to Access
To assert an ADA violation, a plaintiff must show they
encountered an accessibility barrier that “affects [their] full
and equal enjoyment of the facility on account of [their]
particular disability.” Chapman v. Pier 1 Imports (U.S.) Inc.,
631 F.3d 939, 947 (9th Cir. 2011) (en banc) (quoting 42
U.S.C. § 12182(a)). Because the ADA Accessibility
Guidelines outline the “technical standards required for ‘full
and equal enjoyment,’ if a barrier violating these standards
relates to a plaintiff’s disability, it will impair the plaintiff’s
full and equal access, which constitutes ‘discrimination’
under the ADA.” Id.
The district court concluded that Gilbert “personally
encountered a lack of accessible route of travel from the
designated accessible parking to the [s]tore” because the
location of the van-accessible parking space, the slope of the
curb ramp, and the depth of the ramp’s top landing violated
the applicable ADA Accessibility Guidelines. On appeal, 7Eleven does not dispute that Gilbert personally encountered
these barriers. 7-Eleven instead contends that Gilbert was

10

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

further required to prove that his experience at the store
while ambulating with a prosthetic leg was “different” than
that of “any other able-bodied person” in order to
demonstrate that such barriers related to his particular
disability.
Under our precedent, however, no such evidentiary
burden exists. We have made clear that where a “barrier is
related to [a] particular plaintiff’s disability, . . . an encounter
with the barrier necessarily injures the plaintiff by depriving
him of full and equal enjoyment of the facility.” Id. at 947
n.4. Along these lines, we have explained that a plaintiff who
uses a wheelchair for mobility can challenge any “barrier[]
that might reasonably affect a wheelchair user’s full
enjoyment of the store.” Doran v. 7-Eleven, Inc., 524 F.3d
1034, 1044 n.7 (9th Cir. 2008). Likewise, a plaintiff who is
blind may challenge any barrier that could injure a blind
person. See Chapman, 631 F.3d at 947 n.4; accord Steger v.
Franco, Inc., 228 F.3d 889, 893–94 (8th Cir. 2000).
Because the record plainly shows that Gilbert personally
encountered barriers that relate to his disability as a
mobility-impaired individual who uses a prosthetic leg and
wheelchair to ambulate, we agree with the district court that
Gilbert properly established an ADA violation.
B. Unruh Act Violation
We next consider 7-Eleven’s argument that, even if
Gilbert established an ADA violation, he lacked standing to
bring an Unruh Act claim. Under California law, a plaintiff
must have “standing” to assert a statutory violation. 4 “In
4

The term “standing” means different things in different contexts. To
remain consistent with the usage of California courts, we use the term
“standing” as a shorthand for whether the plaintiff has adequately alleged

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

11

general terms, in order to have standing, the plaintiff must
be able to allege injury—that is, some invasion of the
plaintiff’s legally protected interests.” Angelucci v. Century
Supper Club, 158 P.3d 718, 726–27 (Cal. 2007) (internal
quotation marks omitted). Whether a plaintiff has suffered
injury under a given statute, in turn, may vary depending on
“the intent of the Legislature and the purpose of the
enactment.” Id. at 727.
The Unruh Act was designed to “create and preserve a
nondiscriminatory environment in California business
establishments by banishing or eradicating arbitrary,
invidious discrimination.” Id. at 721 (internal quotation
marks omitted). To carry out this “overarching goal of
deterring discriminatory practices by businesses,” California
courts construe the Unruh Act liberally. White v. Square,
Inc., 446 P.3d 276, 279 (Cal. 2019). For that same reason,
“[s]tanding under the Unruh . . . Act is broad.” Osborne v.
Yasmeh, 205 Cal. Rptr. 3d 656, 663 (Ct. App. 2016). A
plaintiff suffers injury—and therefore has standing—under
the Unruh Act if he is “the victim of [a] defendant’s
discriminatory act.” Angelucci, 158 P.3d at 727.
California courts have long held that an individual who
personally encounters an ADA violation while transacting
with a brick-and-mortar business has standing to bring an
Unruh Act claim. See White, 446 P.3d at 279 (“Our cases . . .
involv[ing] brick-and-mortar establishments . . . make clear
injury under the Unruh Act. This discussion of statutory standing under
California law, however, should not be confused with constitutional
standing under Article III. See, e.g., Weatherford v. City of San Rafael,
395 P.3d 274, 278 (Cal. 2017) (explaining that the statutory standing
inquiry concerning a particular state statute “differs somewhat from the
standing analysis employed in the federal courts” with regard to Article
III).

12

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

that a plaintiff who has transacted with a defendant and who
has been subject to discrimination has standing under the
Act.”); see also Midpeninsula Citizens for Fair Hous. v.
Westwood Invs., 271 Cal. Rptr. 99, 102 (Ct. App. 1990)
(standing under the Unruh Act encompasses “individuals
actually denied full and equal treatment by a business
establishment”).
As explained above, the district court found, and 7Eleven does not dispute on appeal, that Gilbert personally
encountered a construction-related ADA violation while
purchasing items from 7-Eleven’s store. That was all that
Gilbert needed to establish standing under the Unruh Act. 7Eleven raises two related arguments to resist this
straightforward conclusion, but both are unavailing.
1. Motivation
The district court found—and Gilbert did not dispute—
that he filed approximately 70 lawsuits under the ADA, and
his “primary motivation in visiting the [s]tore was to obtain
a settlement or damages from 7-Eleven.” 7-Eleven argues
that, because Gilbert’s purchase was “pre-textual,” he lacks
standing under the Unruh Act. But nothing in the Unruh Act
nor any case interpreting it bars a claim by a plaintiff who
can show injury—e.g., that they encountered alleged
discrimination when they transacted with the defendant
business—just because they were motivated by a desire to
initiate litigation.
Moreover, the California Supreme Court has made clear
that a plaintiff’s motivation is irrelevant to his ability to
recover under the Unruh Act. In Angelucci, the plaintiffs
alleged that they “patronized the [defendant’s] club on
several occasions . . . and were charged an admission fee
higher than that charged to women . . . because they are

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

13

men.” 158 P.3d at 719–20. The defendant asserted that the
plaintiffs did not suffer injury under the Unruh Act because,
among other reasons, “Angelucci and the other men
involved in the present case are professional plaintiffs who
‘shake down’ business entities on the basis of assertedly
technical violations . . . unmotivated by any desire to
eliminate discrimination or to redress any actual injury.” Id.
at 728. The California Supreme Court soundly rejected this
argument, explaining that the plaintiffs had standing to bring
an Unruh Act claim because they were “subjected to, and
paid, [the] defendant’s gender-based price differential.” Id.
at 727.
The California Supreme Court further explained:
“Although
we
share
to
some
degree
the
concerns . . . regarding the potential for abusive litigation
being brought under the Act, these concerns do not supply a
justification for our inserting additional elements of proof
into the cause of action defined by the statute.” Id. at 729.
Rather, “[i]t is for the Legislature (or the People through the
initiative process) to determine whether to alter the statutory
elements of proof to afford business establishments
protection against abusive private legal actions and
settlement tactics.” Id. “It is for the Legislature, too, to
consider whether limitations on the current statutory private
cause of action might unduly weaken enforcement of the Act
or place unwarranted barriers in the way of those persons
who suffer discrimination and whose interests were intended
to be served by the Act.” Id. The California Supreme Court
reiterated these statements in White, citing Angelucci to
reject a “similar argument concerning abusive litigation,
boundless statutory damages, and extortionate settlements.”
446 P.3d at 283.

14

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

Notwithstanding these decisions, the California
Legislature has not amended the Unruh Act to make a
plaintiff’s motivation relevant to his standing to pursue a
claim, and “we are bound to interpret the Unruh Civil Rights
Act in accordance with the legislative intent.” Munson, 208
P.3d at 633.5 We agree with the district court that Gilbert’s
motivation in initiating litigation has no bearing on his
standing under the Unruh Act.
2. Bona Fide Intent
7-Eleven also argues that to have standing under the
Unruh Act, a plaintiff must have a “bona fide intent to be a
customer.” And 7-Eleven contends that the district court’s
finding that Gilbert’s “sole motivation for visiting the [s]tore
was for the purpose of litigation and his purchase was to
further his litigation efforts” necessarily means that Gilbert
lacked “bona fide intent.” 7-Eleven’s argument fails for
several reasons.
First, we disagree with 7-Eleven’s assertion that
Gilbert’s litigation motive necessarily means he lacked bona
fide intent to purchase an item from 7-Eleven. Motivation
and intent are not synonymous. That Gilbert was motivated
5

In 2012 and 2015, after Angelucci but before White, “the California
Legislature enacted new provisions to address what it perceived to be
abuse of the Unruh Act[’s damages remedy for construction-related
accessibility violations] by ‘a very small number of plaintiffs’
attorneys.’” Rosas, 19 F.4th at 1206 (quoting Act of Sept. 19, 2012, ch.
383, § 24, 2012 Cal. Stat. 3843, 3871). “The Legislature could have
chosen to eliminate the damages remedy in whole or in part, but it instead
imposed a set of special procedural limitations designed to balance its
objectives of allowing monetary relief, avoiding undue burdens on
businesses, and realigning undesirable incentives for plaintiffs.” Id. at
1213. None of those limitations make the plaintiff’s litigation motive
relevant to their standing to bring such claims.

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

15

by a desire to initiate litigation does not undermine the fact
that he purchased items from 7-Eleven’s store. And so, even
if the Unruh Act did impose a bona fide intent requirement
under these circumstances, Gilbert’s litigation-related
motivation would not negate his intent to use (or actual use
of) 7-Eleven’s services.
Second, 7-Eleven incorrectly contends that a showing of
bona fide intent to use a defendant’s services is a standing
requirement for all Unruh Act claims under the California
Supreme Court’s decision in White v. Square, Inc., 446 P.3d
276. As we explain below, the California Supreme Court in
White never stated, much less implied, that bona fide intent
is a requirement to establish standing for all Unruh Act
claims. Rather, the Supreme Court made clear that it was
adopting a fact- and claim-specific standing rule that does
not apply here.
The plaintiff in White was a bankruptcy attorney who
claimed that an electronic payments processor’s service
agreement, which required users to certify they would not
accept payments in connection with bankruptcy attorneys,
discriminated against bankruptcy attorneys in violation of
§ 51(b) of the Unruh Act. 446 P.3d at 278–79. White alleged
that he visited the website of the defendant’s online business
intending to use its services, encountered terms and
conditions that allegedly denied him full and equal access,
and then left the website without using the services. See id.
at 278. Unlike Gilbert, White did not complete a transaction
with the defendant’s business. And, unlike Gilbert, White
did not allege a violation of § 51(f) based on a constructionrelated accessibility violation of the ADA. The defendant
argued that White lacked standing because he neither signed
up for its services nor was actually subject to its terms and

16

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

conditions of service and “therefore suffered no actual or
personal injury from any alleged discrimination.” Id. at 282.
Because White’s claims were litigated in federal court,
we certified the following question to the California
Supreme Court:
Does a plaintiff have standing to bring a
claim under the Unruh Civil Rights Act when
the plaintiff visits a business’s website with
the intent of using its services, encounters
terms and conditions that allegedly deny the
plaintiff full and equal access to its services,
and then leaves the website without entering
into an agreement with the service provider?
Id. at 277.
In explaining its decision, the California Supreme Court
reframed the issue presented as follows:
Our cases addressing related issues under the
Unruh Civil Rights Act have involved brickand-mortar establishments, not online
businesses, and those cases make clear that a
plaintiff who has transacted with a defendant
and who has been subject to discrimination
has standing under the Act. The question here
is whether standing under the Act extends to
a plaintiff who intends to transact, but has not
yet transacted, with an online business.
Id. at 279 (citation omitted).
Thus, both this court and the California Supreme Court
defined the standing question presented by referring to at

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

17

least two factual circumstances: (1) the defendant was an
online business, not a brick-and-mortar store, and (2) the
plaintiff did not actually transact with the online business.
And, when the California Supreme Court answered the
standing question presented, it cabined its holding by
referencing those two factual circumstances:
The answer is yes. When a plaintiff has
visited a business’s website with intent to use
its services and alleges that the business’s
terms and conditions exclude him or her from
full and equal access to its services, the
plaintiff need not enter into an agreement
with the business to establish standing under
the Unruh Civil Rights Act.
Id. at 277.
The California Supreme Court’s analysis in White also
shows that the standing rule it adopted is claim specific.
After the Court explained that “[s]tanding rules for statutes
must be viewed in light of the intent of the Legislature and
the purpose of the enactment,” the Court specifically
discussed only § 51(b) and the enforcement provisions
related to that subdivision. See id. at 278–79. Likewise,
when deciding the standing question presented, the Court
considered only cases in which the plaintiffs brought claims
alleging violations of § 51(b), namely Koire v. Metro Car
Wash, 707 P.2d 195, 195–97 (Cal. 1985), and Angelucci, 159
P.3d at 719–23, 726–27. See White, 446 P.3d at 279–80. The
Court never discussed cases involving derivative ADA
claims under § 51(f) or construction-related accessibility
claims. Nor did the Court state that it was adopting a broad
rule applicable to all Unruh Act claims, regardless of the

18

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

factual circumstances or the claim presented. Accordingly,
we conclude that the California Supreme Court did not, as 7Eleven contends, create a “bona fide intent” standing
requirement that applies to all Unruh Act claims.6
Third, to the extent 7-Eleven contends that we should
extend the standing rule adopted in White to the
circumstances of this case, we decline that invitation. As
noted, White adopted a fact- and claim-specific rule: “an
individual bringing an Unruh Civil Rights Act claim against
an online business must allege, for purposes of standing, that
he or she visited the business’s website, encountered
discriminatory terms, and intended to make use of the
business’s services[,] . . . with no further requirement that
the person enter into an agreement or transaction with the
business.” Id. at 283–84. Because the California Supreme
Court has not yet addressed whether that standing rule
should be extended to other types of Unruh Act claims, we
must “predict how the state high court would resolve” that
question, including by applying state principles of statutory
interpretation. Slidewaters LLC v. Wash. State Dep’t of Lab.
& Indus., 4 F.4th 747, 755 (9th Cir. 2021) (internal quotation
marks omitted).

6

7-Eleven also asserts that a Court of Appeal decision, Thurston v. Omni
Hotels Mgmt. Corp., 284 Cal. Rptr. 3d 341 (Ct. App. 2021), shows that
California courts have interpreted White to require all plaintiffs to prove
bona fide intent for standing under the Unruh Act. We disagree. The
factual circumstances in Thurston were essentially the same as those
presented in White: the plaintiff visited a website but did not complete a
transaction. Id. at 343–46. Additionally, the Court of Appeal concluded
that the plaintiff “had standing to assert an Unruh Civil Rights Act claim
against [the defendant]” even though a jury determined that the plaintiff
visited the defendant’s website without intent to complete a transaction.
Id. at 349.

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

19

The California Supreme Court’s reasoning in White
makes clear that it would not require a plaintiff to show they
had a bona fide intent to use the defendant’s services where,
as here, the plaintiff actually transacted with the defendant’s
business. The Court expressly reaffirmed “that a plaintiff
who has transacted with a defendant and who has been
subject to discrimination has standing under the Act.” White,
446 P.3d at 279. The Court determined that White needed to
show he intended to use the defendant’s services to establish
standing only because he merely visited the defendant’s
website and “neither paid a fee nor requested equal treatment
before leaving the business establishment.” Id. at 280–83.
Further, in rejecting the defendant’s argument that White
lacked standing because he did not actually transact with the
defendant’s business, the Court explained that “visiting a
website with intent to use its services is, for purposes of
standing, equivalent to presenting oneself for services at a
brick-and-mortar store.” Id. at 277–78. Thus, in the standing
rule adopted by the Court, the intent element is a substitute
for either completing a transaction or presenting oneself for
services at a brick-and-mortar store—not an additional
requirement.
We are also confident that the California Supreme Court
would not extend the standing rule adopted in White to a
plaintiff who, like Gilbert, brings a construction-related
accessibility claim for statutory damages and shows that they
personally encountered a construction-related violation at a
place of public accommodation and experienced difficulty
due to that violation.
Requiring such a plaintiff to also show they visited the
business “with intent to use its services” to establish standing
would be manifestly inconsistent with the plain text of the
Unruh Act, Cal. Civ. Code § 55.56(c). When a plaintiff

20

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

brings a construction-related accessibility claim and seeks
the statutory minimum damages award under § 52(a),
§ 55.56 specifies the showing that the plaintiff must make:
The plaintiff may recover statutory damages “if a violation
or violations of one or more construction-related
accessibility standards denied the plaintiff full and equal
access to the place of public accommodation on a particular
occasion.” Cal. Civ. Code § 55.56(a). A “plaintiff is denied
full and equal access” in two circumstances under the
statute: “if the plaintiff personally encountered the violation
on a particular occasion, or the plaintiff was deterred from
accessing a place of public accommodation on a particular
occasion.” Id. § 55.56(b) (emphasis added).
If the plaintiff personally encountered the violation, the
Unruh Act requires the plaintiff to show that they
“experienced difficulty, discomfort, or embarrassment
because of the violation,” but it does not require the plaintiff
to make any showing of intent. Id. § 55.56(c). By contrast, if
the plaintiff seeks statutory damages because they were
“deterred from accessing” the place of public
accommodation, the Unruh Act expressly requires the
plaintiff to show they “had actual knowledge of a violation
or violations that prevented or reasonably dissuaded the
plaintiff from accessing a place of public accommodation
that the plaintiff intended to use on a particular occasion,”
and that the violation “would have actually denied the
plaintiff full and equal access if the plaintiff had accessed the
place of public accommodation.” Id. § 55.56(d)(1)–(2)
(emphasis added). Thus, if the plaintiff personally
encountered the construction-related accessibility violation,
they need to show they were affected by the violation, but
they do not need to show they intended to use the

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

21

defendant’s services on a particular occasion. See Rosas, 19
F.4th at 1214 (discussing and applying § 55.56).7
Because the state legislature plainly chose not to include
an intent requirement in § 55.56(c), courts may not add such
a requirement without contravening the broad deterrent and
remedial purposes of the Unruh Act and California’s
separation-of-power principles, which mandate that courts
refrain from creating extra-statutory barriers to statutory
remedies. See Angelucci, 158 P.3d at 729; see also White,
446 P.3d at 282 (approving Court of Appeal’s conclusion in
Osborne, 205 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 668–69, that “[t]o hold that
plaintiffs . . . lacked standing” because they did not “tender
the purchase price for a business’s services or products”
“would contradict both the language and the intent of the
Unruh Civil Rights Act”).
Further, it is unnecessary to add a bona fide intent
requirement to § 55.56(c) to fulfill the purpose of standing
requirements. As White explained, courts must impose
standing requirements that are sufficient to ensure that the
plaintiff has a “concrete and actual interest that is not merely
hypothetical or conjectural.” 446 P.3d at 283. See also
7

Our decision in Rosas supports our conclusion here that § 55.56(d)
requires a showing of intent-to-use for construction-related statutory
damages claims but § 55.56(c) does not. See Rosas, 19 F.4th at 1214–
15. There, we concluded that the plaintiff was entitled to statutory
damages under § 55.56(c) “based on his actual encounter with the store’s
barriers” and his undisputed showing that he suffered “difficulty,
discomfort[,] inconvenience, embarrassment, anxiety and frustration”—
“without more.” Id. at 1215 (alteration in original). But the plaintiff in
Rosas was not “entitled to a second award of statutory damages [under
§ 55.56(d)] based on his claim that he was also deterred from visiting the
store in the future” because he did not show that he intended to use the
store on a particular occasion, as § 55.56(d) expressly requires. Id.

22

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

Angelucci, 158 P.3d at 727 (explaining plaintiffs had
standing because they “adequately alleged they had suffered
an ‘invasion of legally protected interests’ sufficient to
afford them an interest in pursuing their action vigorously”
(citation omitted)). At the same time, however, courts may
not impose standing requirements that undermine the Unruh
Act’s “broad preventive and remedial purposes.” White, 446
P.3d at 279.
In White, the Court balanced these countervailing
principles and concluded that requiring a plaintiff “bringing
an Unruh Civil Rights Act claim against an online business
[to] allege, for purposes of standing, that he or she visited the
business’s website, encountered discriminatory terms, and
intended to make use of the business’s services” was
“sufficient to limit standing under the Unruh Civil Rights
Act to persons with a concrete and actual interest that is not
merely hypothetical or conjectural”—even if the plaintiff
neither transacted with the business nor was subject to the
allegedly discriminatory policy. Id. at 283. The Court
rejected the defendant’s more onerous proposed rule—under
which the plaintiff would need to show they transacted with
the defendant’s business—because that rule “would not
adequately serve the Act’s broad purpose of eradicating
discriminatory business practices.” Id.
Considering how the California Supreme Court balanced
the purpose of standing requirements with the deterrent and
remedial purposes reflected in the Unruh Act, we are
confident that it would not require a plaintiff who satisfies
§ 55.56(c)’s requirements to also show they had a bona fide
intent to use the defendant’s services. By requiring a plaintiff
who personally encountered a construction-related
accessibility violation to show they experienced some
difficulty, discomfort, or embarrassment as a result,

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

23

§ 55.56(c) adequately ensures the plaintiff was personally
injured by the violation and thus has a concrete interest in
pursuing their claim. In such cases, the Court does not need
to impose an intent requirement to ensure the plaintiff’s
interest in remedying the construction-related accessibility
violation is “not merely hypothetical or conjectural.” And,
as explained, imposing an extra-statutory intent requirement
would contradict both the language and purposes of the
Unruh Act.8
Finally, 7-Eleven asserts that Antoninetti v. Chipotle
Mexican Grill, Inc., 643 F.3d 1165 (9th Cir. 2010), supports
its contention that Gilbert was required to show bona fide
intent to have standing to bring his Unruh Act claim.9 Again,
we disagree. Antoninetti, who used a wheelchair, visited two
of Chipotle’s restaurants a total of eight times, five times as
a customer and three times to gather evidence or in
connection with discovery proceedings. 643 F.3d at 1169.
8

7-Eleven’s reliance on Arroyo v. Golbahar, No. 22-55182, 2023 WL
2064588 (9th Cir. Feb. 17, 2023) (unpublished), is also unavailing. The
plaintiff there sued a business whose services he had never used. See id.
at *2–3. By contrast, Gilbert visited the 7-Eleven store and purchased
items. Under California caselaw, nothing more is required. See White,
446 P.3d at 279 (“[A] plaintiff who has transacted with a defendant and
who has been subject to discrimination has standing under the [Unruh]
Act.”). To the extent Golbahar suggests that White and Thurston
established a broad rule requiring all plaintiffs to show bona fide intent
to establish standing for all Unruh Act claims, regardless of the factual
circumstances, we disagree for the reasons stated above, and as an
unpublished decision, Golbahar does not bind this panel. See 9th Cir. R.
36-3(a).
9

Although Antoninetti addressed claims brought under the California
Disabled Persons Act, not the Unruh Act, 643 F.3d at 1177, both acts
permit state law claims premised on violations of the ADA, see Jankey
v. Lee, 290 P.3d 187, 190–91 (Cal. 2012).

24

Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc.

We held that Chipotle violated the ADA because, in each
restaurant, a “wall conceal[ed] the food preparation counter
from wheelchair-bound customers and thus prevent[ed]
those customers from having the experience of non-disabled
customers of fully participating in the selection and
preparation of their order” at the counter. Id. at 1173.
Chipotle thus violated the ADA each time it prevented
Antoninetti from enjoying the “Chipotle experience.” Id. at
1177. Antoninetti argued that he was entitled to damages
under California law based on those ADA violations. Id. But
because those ADA violations occurred only when
Antoninetti “was unable to enjoy the ‘Chipotle experience,’”
they also “necessarily occurred only when he visited the
restaurants to purchase food and sat in line in his
wheelchair.” Id. “On those visits when he was not seeking to
purchase food or to have the ‘Chipotle experience,’
Antoninetti [could ]not recover money damages under the
California Act” because no ADA violation occurred. Id.
Thus, in Antoninetti, we held that intent was relevant only
for visits in which the plaintiff did not transact with the
defendant, and only as a matter of the ADA. Contrary to 7Eleven’s argument, we did not hold that intent was required
for standing under California law. Id.
*

*

*

For all these reasons, we affirm the district court’s award
of statutory damages for Gilbert’s claim that 7-Eleven
violated § 51(f) of the Unruh Act. We remand to the district
court to address any issues raised by the substitution of
Gilbert’s successors during the pendency of this appeal.
AFFIRMED AND REMANDED.
7-Eleven shall pay costs on appeal.

