FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
PETER ENGILIS, Jr.; CATHY
ENGILIS,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,

No. 23-4201
D.C. No.
3:19-cv-07859VC

v.
MONSANTO COMPANY,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Vince Chhabria, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 7, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed August 12, 2025
Before: Richard C. Tallman, Richard R. Clifton, and
Morgan B. Christen, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Christen

2

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

SUMMARY*
Expert Testimony
Affirming the district court’s summary judgment in
favor of Monsanto Company in multidistrict litigation
concerning Monsanto’s glyphosate-based herbicide
Roundup, the panel held that the district court did not abuse
its discretion in excluding the opinion of an expert witness
that exposure to Roundup likely caused Peter Engilis’s blood
cancer.
To establish causation, expert witness Dr. Andrew
Schneider conducted a differential etiology, which is an
established scientific technique for establishing the cause of
a medical condition. The district court concluded that the
expert’s differential etiology was unreliable pursuant to Fed.
R. Evid. 702 because the expert failed to reliably rule out
obesity as a potential cause of Engilis’s cancer.
A proponent of expert testimony must always establish
the admissibility criteria of Rule 702 by a preponderance of
the evidence. There is no presumption in favor of admission.
The panel rejected Engilis’s contention that Dr.
Schneider adequately supported his assertion that Engilis
was not obese. Aside from the reference to Engilis’s fact
sheet, Dr. Schneider’s expert report provided no support for
his conclusion that Engilis was not obese. At the Daubert
hearing, Dr. Schneider conceded that he could not say
whether Engilis was obese or not.
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

3

The panel also rejected Engilis’s contention that the
district court erred by discounting Dr. Schneider’s clinical
experience and overlooking that the weight of scientific
literature had found no positive association between obesity
and non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL). Contrary to the body
of scientific literature, Dr. Schneider testified on crossexamination, that, in his view, obesity was not a risk factor
for NHL or chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Without
articulating a reasoned basis for his opinion, Dr. Schneider
failed to establish that his testimony was “based on sufficient
facts or data.” Fed. R. Evid. 702(b).
Because Dr. Schneider’s excluded opinion was the sole
evidence upon which Engilis relied to establish causation,
the panel affirmed the district court’s order granting
summary judgment in favor of Monsanto.

COUNSEL
Thomas A. Burns (argued), Burns PA, Tampa, Florida;
Jeffrey L. Haberman, Schlesinger Law Offices PA, Fort
Lauderdale, Florida; Bryan S. Gowdy, Creed & Gowdy,
Jacksonville, Florida; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Nicole Antoine (argued), David M. Zionts, Madison L.
Ferris, and Michael X. Imbroscio, Covington & Burling
LLP, Washington, D.C.; Brian L. Stekloff, Wilkinson
Stekloff LLP, Washington, D.C.; Jed P. White, Bryan Cave
Leighton Paisner LLP, Santa Monica, California; K. Lee
Marshall, Bryan Cave Leighton Paisner LLP, San Francisco,
California; Kathryn Podsiadlo, Arnold & Porter Kaye
Scholer LLP, Los Angeles, California; for DefendantAppellee.

4

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

OPINION
CHRISTEN, Circuit Judge:
This appeal arises from the long-running multidistrict
litigation concerning Monsanto’s glyphosate-based
herbicide called Roundup. Plaintiffs Peter Engilis, Jr. and
Cathy Engilis challenge the district court’s order excluding
their expert witness’s opinion that exposure to Roundup
likely caused Peter Engilis’s blood cancer. To establish
causation, the expert conducted a differential etiology.
A differential etiology is an established scientific
technique for establishing the cause of a medical condition.1
This technique is generally accomplished by first
determining (or, “ruling in”) “all of the potential hypotheses
that might explain a patient’s symptoms,” and then
eliminating (or, “ruling out”) potential hypotheses “on the
basis of a continuing examination of the evidence so as to
reach a conclusion as to the most likely cause of the findings
in that particular case.” Clausen v. M/V New Carissa, 339
F.3d 1049, 1057–58 (9th Cir. 2003). Courts, including our
own, have generally recognized that a sufficiently reliable
1

Although some cases have used the terms “differential etiology” and
“differential diagnosis” interchangeably, the methodology is “more
accurately referred to as differential etiology.” Fed. Jud. Ctr., Reference
Manual on Scientific Evidence 617 (3d ed. 2011). In the clinical context,
“differential diagnosis” refers to a process for “identifying a set of
diseases or illnesses responsible for the patient’s symptoms,” whereas
“‘differential etiology’ refers to identifying the causal factors involved
in an individual’s disease or illness.” Id. at 617 n.211. Put another way,
“differential diagnosis actually refers to a method of diagnosing an
ailment, not determining its cause,” and “differential etiology . . . is a
causation-determining methodology.” Higgins v. Koch Dev. Corp., 794
F.3d 697, 705 (7th Cir. 2015) (citation modified).

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

5

differential etiology “may form the basis of an expert’s
causation testimony.” Messick v. Novartis Pharm. Corp.,
747 F.3d 1193, 1197 (9th Cir. 2014).
Here, the district court concluded the expert’s
differential etiology was unreliable pursuant to Federal Rule
of Evidence 702 because the expert failed to reliably rule out
obesity as a potential cause of Peter Engilis’s cancer. We
affirm.
I
From 1990 to 2015, Peter Engilis, Jr. 2 routinely handsprayed Roundup several times per month at each of his
three homes in Florida. In 2014, he was diagnosed with a
blood cancer known as chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL), which is a type of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL).
In November 2019, Engilis filed a lawsuit against
Roundup manufacturer Monsanto in the Middle District of
Florida, invoking the court’s diversity jurisdiction and
asserting claims under Florida state law that were premised
on the allegation that exposure to Roundup caused him to
develop CLL. The case was subsequently transferred to a
multidistrict litigation proceeding in the Northern District of
California, in which thousands of cancer victims have
alleged that Roundup caused their NHL. See In re Roundup
Prod. Liab. Litig., No. 3:16-md-02741-VC (N.D. Cal.);
Hardeman v. Monsanto Co., 997 F.3d 941, 950 (9th Cir.
2021).3

2

Cathy Engilis is also a plaintiff in this action, but for present purposes,
we need refer only to Peter Engilis.
3

In Hardeman, we affirmed a judgment in favor of the plaintiff in the
first bellwether trial from the multidistrict litigation.

6

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

In a “toxic tort claim for physical injuries,” a plaintiff
must “show that he was exposed to chemicals that could
have caused the physical injuries he complains about
(general causation), and that his exposure did in fact result
in those injuries (specific causation).” Golden v. CH2M Hill
Hanford Grp., 528 F.3d 681, 683 (9th Cir. 2008). To
demonstrate that Roundup caused Engilis’s cancer, Engilis
relied on the expert opinion of board-certified oncologist Dr.
Andrew Schneider. Dr. Schneider submitted an expert
report offering opinions on both general causation and
specific causation, only the latter of which is at issue in this
appeal. To show specific causation—i.e., that exposure to
Roundup caused Engilis’s cancer—Dr. Schneider conducted
a differential etiology.
First, Dr. Schneider “ruled in” all potential causes of
Engilis’s cancer. To rule in Roundup as a possible cause, he
relied upon general causation experts who opined that
Roundup is capable of causing NHL and noted that Engilis
had extensive exposure to Roundup. He also ruled in other
risk factors, such as age, gender, ethnicity, geographic
location, family history, occupational and environmental
exposures, and various medical conditions. Second, he
“ruled out” numerous risk factors based on his examination
of the evidence. He ruled out, for example, other pesticides,
insecticides, and asbestos, because no evidence suggested
that Engilis was exposed to them.
Importantly, Dr. Schneider purported to rule out
numerous medical conditions, including obesity. Dr.
Schneider noted that, according to Engilis’s “Plaintiff Fact
Sheet,” Engilis was “negative” for obesity, along with nearly

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

7

twenty other medical conditions. 4 Dr. Schneider did not
discuss whether obesity or any of the other identified
conditions were capable of contributing to the development
of NHL. But because Engilis was “negative” for the listed
conditions, Dr. Schneider concluded that those conditions
were not “suggested as related to or as causative factors to
the onset of different types of cancers in Mr. Engilis’s case.”
Ultimately, Dr. Schneider opined that exposure to Roundup
caused or was a substantial factor in causing or contributing
to Engilis’s cancer.
Monsanto moved to exclude Dr. Schneider’s opinion.
The district court initially granted the motion in a brief order
without a hearing. Engilis sought reconsideration, and the
district court vacated its prior order to the extent it concerned
Dr. Schneider’s specific causation opinion and scheduled a
hearing.5
At the hearing on the motion to exclude, Monsanto’s
counsel extensively cross-examined Dr. Schneider about his
basis for ruling out Engilis’s obesity as a potential cause of
Engilis’s cancer. In response, Dr. Schneider sought to
defend his assertion that Engilis was not obese. But after
conceding that he had not examined Engilis and could not
say whether Engilis was obese or not, Dr. Schneider testified
4

The provenance of this fact sheet, including the identity of the person
who prepared it, is not clear from the record.
5

The district court has “broad latitude” to determine “the appropriate
form of the inquiry” under Rule 702. Est. of Barabin v. AstenJohnson,
Inc., 740 F.3d 457, 463 (9th Cir. 2014) (en banc), overruled in part on
other grounds by United States v. Bacon, 979 F.3d 766 (9th Cir. 2020)
(en banc). Although “pretrial ‘Daubert hearings’ are commonly
used, . . . they are certainly not required.” Id. (citation omitted); accord
United States v. Holguin, 51 F.4th 841, 852 (9th Cir. 2022).

8

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

that, regardless of whether Engilis was obese, he did not
view obesity as a potential cause of NHL. During follow-on
questioning, he stated that although some medical literature
reports an association between obesity and the development
of NHL, his clinical experience led him to believe that
obesity does not contribute to NHL.
After the hearing, the district court issued an order
excluding Dr. Schneider’s specific causation opinion. The
district court reasoned that Dr. Schneider did not reliably
rule out obesity as a potential cause of Engilis’s cancer, and
that this rendered his differential etiology unreliable.
Because the exclusion of Dr. Schneider’s testimony left
Engilis without evidence of specific causation, the district
court granted summary judgment in favor of Monsanto.
Engilis timely appealed.
II
We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291. “We
review a district court’s decision to exclude expert testimony
for abuse of discretion.” Tekoh v. County of Los Angeles, 75
F.4th 1264, 1265 (9th Cir. 2023). We review an order
granting summary judgment de novo. Sonner v. Schwabe N.
Am., Inc., 911 F.3d 989, 992 (9th Cir. 2018).
III
A
The parties agree that the admissibility of expert
testimony is controlled by Federal Rule of Evidence 702.
See Elosu v. Middlefork Ranch Inc., 26 F.4th 1017, 1023 (9th
Cir. 2022). That Rule provides that, “before admitting
expert testimony, the district court must perform a
gatekeeping role to ensure that the [proffered] testimony is
both relevant and reliable.” United States v. Valencia-Lopez,

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

9

971 F.3d 891, 897–98 (9th Cir. 2020) (citation modified).
Generally, “[e]xpert opinion testimony is relevant if the
knowledge underlying it has a valid connection to the
pertinent inquiry” and “reliable if the knowledge underlying
it has a reliable basis in the knowledge and experience of the
relevant discipline.” Alaska Rent-A-Car, Inc. v. Avis Budget
Grp., Inc., 738 F.3d 960, 969 (9th Cir. 2013) (citation
omitted); see also Est. of Barabin v. AstenJohnson, Inc., 740
F.3d 457, 463 (9th Cir. 2014) (en banc), overruled in part on
other grounds by United States v. Bacon, 979 F.3d 766 (9th
Cir. 2020) (en banc).
However, the parties dispute the significance of the 2023
amendment to Rule 702 and the effect of that amendment on
our existing precedent. To address this issue, we briefly
recount the history of the Daubert trilogy, the amendments
to Rule 702, and our interpretation of that Rule in caselaw.
In Daubert v. Merrell Dow Pharmaceuticals, Inc., the
Supreme Court held that Rule 702 governs the admissibility
of expert testimony. 509 U.S. 579, 597 (1993). In so doing,
the Supreme Court firmly rejected the Frye “general
acceptance” test,6 which the Court described as inconsistent
“with the liberal thrust of the Federal Rules and their general
approach of relaxing the traditional barriers to opinion
testimony.” Id. at 588 (citation modified); see also Primiano
v. Cook, 598 F.3d 558, 564 (9th Cir. 2010).

6

In Frye v. United States, the D.C. Circuit excluded expert testimony
because the methodology at issue was not “sufficiently established to
have gained general acceptance in the particular field in which it
belong[ed].” 293 F. 1013, 1014 (D.C. Cir. 1923).

10

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

Rule 702 was first adopted in 1975 as part of the original
enactment of the Federal Rules of Evidence.7 At the time of
Daubert, Rule 702 provided that “[i]f scientific, technical, or
other specialized knowledge will assist the trier of fact to
understand the evidence or to determine a fact in issue, a
witness qualified as an expert by knowledge, skill,
experience, training, or education, may testify thereto in the
form of an opinion or otherwise.” Fed. R. Evid. 702 (1975).
Interpreting Rule 702, Daubert held that a district court
“[f]aced with a proffer of expert scientific testimony” must
“determine at the outset” by a preponderance of the
evidence, Fed. R. Evid. 104(a), that “the expert is proposing
to testify to (1) scientific knowledge that (2) will assist the
trier of fact to understand or determine a fact in issue.”
Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592 & n.10. As Daubert explained, the
Rule’s requirement that opinion testimony “assist the trier of
fact” “goes primarily to relevance,” and the Rule’s reference
to scientific “knowledge” demands a showing of reliability.
Id. at 590–91 (quoting Fed. R. Evid. 702). Thus, a district
court discharges its “gatekeeping role” under Rule 702 by
“ensur[ing] that any and all scientific testimony or evidence
admitted is not only relevant, but reliable.” Id. at 589, 597;
accord United States v. Ruvalcaba-Garcia, 923 F.3d 1183,
1188 (9th Cir. 2019).
After Daubert, the Supreme Court continued to refine its
interpretation of Rule 702 in General Electric Co. v. Joiner,
522 U.S. 136 (1997), and Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael,
526 U.S. 137 (1999). Joiner confirmed that in applying
abuse-of-discretion review to a district court’s ruling on the
admissibility of expert testimony, a court of appeals “may
7

See Act to Establish Rules of Evidence for Certain Courts and
Proceedings, Pub. L. No. 93-595, 88 Stat. 1926, 1937 (1975).

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

11

not categorically distinguish between rulings allowing
expert testimony and rulings disallowing it.” Joiner, 522
U.S. at 142. The Court also held that the reliability test may
be applied to an expert’s reasoning process. See id. at 146
(stating that “nothing . . . requires a district court to admit
opinion evidence that is connected to existing data only by
the ipse dixit of the expert” and that “[a] court may conclude
that there is simply too great an analytical gap between the
data and the opinion proffered”). In Kumho, the Court
clarified that the district court’s gatekeeper function applies
to all expert testimony, not just scientific expert testimony.
See Kumho, 526 U.S. at 141. Kumho also explained that the
reliability standard is applied flexibly, depending on the
relevant field of expertise. See id. at 149–50. Together,
these three decisions—Daubert, Joiner, and Kumho—
comprise the “Daubert trilogy.” Truck Ins. Exch. v.
MagneTek, Inc., 360 F.3d 1206, 1209 (10th Cir. 2004).
In 2000, Rule 702 was amended for the first time to
codify the holdings of the Daubert trilogy, and to resolve
conflicts that had arisen within the courts about the meaning
of that trilogy. Fed. R. Evid. 702 advisory committee’s note
to 2000 amendment; Fern M. Smith, Report of the Advisory
Committee on Evidence Rules 6–7 (1999) [hereinafter May
1, 1999 Report], https://perma.cc/LH3V-5GBB.
The
amendment “clearly envision[ed] a more rigorous and
structured approach” to Rule 702 than some courts were then
employing. May 1, 1999 Report at 7. It “affirm[ed] the trial
court’s role as gatekeeper and provide[d] some general
standards that the trial court must use to assess the reliability
and helpfulness of proffered expert testimony.” Fed. R.
Evid. 702 advisory committee’s note to 2000 amendment.
To this end, the 2000 amendment added three reliabilitybased requirements, now found in subsections (b), (c), and

12

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

(d). Thus, after a minor restyling amendment in 2011,8 Rule
702 provided that a qualified expert witness may testify if:
(a) the expert’s scientific, technical, or other
specialized knowledge will help the trier of
fact to understand the evidence or to
determine a fact in issue; (b) the testimony is
based on sufficient facts or data; (c) the
testimony is the product of reliable principles
and methods; and (d) the expert has reliably
applied the principles and methods to the
facts of the case.
Fed. R. Evid. 702 (2011). The Advisory Committee’s note
explained that the proponent of expert testimony “has the
burden of establishing that the pertinent admissibility
requirements are met by a preponderance of the evidence.”
Fed. R. Evid. 702 advisory committee’s note to 2000
amendment (citing Fed. R. Evid. 104(a)).
The 2000 amendment to Rule 702 did not eliminate
confusion and establish uniformity. Patrick J. Schiltz,
Report of the Advisory Committee on Evidence Rules, in
Comm. on Rules of Prac. & Proc., June 7, 2022 Agenda
Book 866, 871 (2022), https://perma.cc/AY5J-GAZA; see
also Thomas D. Schroeder, Toward A More Apparent
Approach to Considering the Admission of Expert
Testimony, 95 Notre Dame L. Rev. 2039, 2039–59 (2020).
The Rule was therefore amended again in December 2023 to
expressly require a proponent of expert testimony to
8

The 2011 amendment to Rule 702 sought “to make [it] more easily
understood and to make style and terminology consistent throughout the
rules,” and was not intended to implement any substantive changes. Fed.
R. Evid. 702 advisory committee’s note to 2011 amendment.

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

13

“demonstrate[] to the court that it is more likely than not
that” the four admissibility requirements are satisfied. Fed.
R. Evid. 702 (2023). The amendment also modified
subsection (d), which now requires that “the expert’s opinion
reflects a reliable application of the principles and methods
to the facts of the case.” Id.
This amendment sought to “clarify and emphasize” that
proffered expert testimony must meet the admissibility
requirements of Rule 702 by a preponderance of the
evidence. Fed. R. Evid. 702 advisory committee’s note to
2023 amendment. Before the amendment, “many courts”
had erroneously held “that the critical questions of the
sufficiency of an expert’s basis, and the application of the
expert’s methodology, are questions of weight and not
admissibility.” Id. Properly applied, Rule 702 requires that
challenges to an expert’s opinion go to the weight of the
evidence only if a court first finds it more likely than not that
an expert has a sufficient basis to support an opinion. Id.
The amendment also aimed “to emphasize that each expert
opinion must stay within the bounds of what can be
concluded from a reliable application of the expert’s basis
and methodology.” Id. “Judicial gatekeeping is essential”
to ensure that an expert’s conclusions do not “go beyond
what the expert’s basis and methodology may reliably
support.” Id. As the Advisory Committee’s note explains,
the amendment did not “impose[] any new, specific
procedures,” and was “simply intended to clarify” existing
law. Id.
For present purposes, we need not undertake an
exhaustive examination of the effects, if any, of the 2023

14

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

amendment on our caselaw.9 But insofar as the parties argue
about the degree to which the amendments establish, or
refute, that Rule 702 is a “liberal” standard that favors
admission as “the rule, not the exception,” we confirm that a
proponent of expert testimony must always establish the
admissibility criteria of Rule 702 by a preponderance of the
evidence and that there is no presumption in favor of
admission.
Our precedent has long recognized the burden-of-proof
principles that the amendment sought to clarify. We have
expressly held that the “preliminary questions” of Rule 702
“must be established by a preponderance of proof.” See
United States v. Rincon, 28 F.3d 921, 923 (9th Cir. 1994);
see also United States v. Evans, 728 F.3d 953, 960 n.6 (9th
Cir. 2013). This is unsurprising, as Daubert itself held that
the requirements of relevance and reliability must be
“established by a preponderance of proof” pursuant to Rule
104(a). Daubert, 509 U.S. at 592 n.10.
Several of our cases have stated that “Rule 702 should
be applied with a ‘liberal thrust’ favoring admission.”
Messick, 747 F.3d at 1196 (quoting Daubert, 509 U.S. at
588); Wendell v. GlaxoSmithKline LLC, 858 F.3d 1227,
1232 (9th Cir. 2017). Rule 702 liberalized the admission of
expert testimony as compared to the Frye test, but it did not
9

Because the district court resolved the motion to exclude two weeks
before the 2023 amendment went into effect on December 1, 2023, it
applied the prior version of Rule 702. On appeal, we apply the version
of Rule 702 in effect at the time of the district court’s ruling. See
Barabin, 740 F.3d at 463 & n.4; see also D’Pergo Custom Guitars, Inc.
v. Sweetwater Sound, Inc., 111 F.4th 125, 140 n.11 (1st Cir. 2024); In re
Onglyza (Saxagliptin) & Kombiglyze (Saxagliptin & Metformin) Prods.
Liab. Litig., 93 F.4th 339, 345 n.4 (6th Cir. 2024). But we note that our
decision would be the same under either version of the Rule.

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

15

establish a categorical preference for admitting expert
testimony. See Joiner, 522 U.S. at 142 (emphasizing a
district court’s “gatekeeper” role and holding that a court of
appeals “may not categorically distinguish between rulings
allowing expert testimony and rulings disallowing it”); see
also Daubert, 509 U.S. at 588. Although Rule 702 “allow[s]
district courts to admit a somewhat broader range of
scientific testimony than would have been admissible under
Frye, [it] leave[s] in place the ‘gatekeeper’ role of the trial
judge in screening such evidence.” Joiner, 522 U.S. at 142;
see also Weisgram v. Marley Co., 528 U.S. 440, 455 (2000)
(noting that parties seeking to introduce expert testimony
must meet “exacting standards of reliability”). Our caselaw
should not be understood to suggest a presumption of
admission. There is no such presumption, as a proponent of
expert testimony must always establish the admissibility
requirements of Rule 702 by a preponderance of the
evidence. See Fed. R. Evid. 702 (2023).
We have also stated that, where experts’ opinions “are
not the ‘junk science’ Rule 702 was meant to exclude,”
Wendell, 858 F.3d at 1237 (citation omitted), “the interests
of justice favor leaving difficult issues in the hands of the
jury and relying on the safeguards of the adversary
system . . . to ‘attack[] shaky but admissible evidence,’” id.
(quoting Daubert, 509 U.S. at 596). To be sure, Rule 702 is
concerned with “the soundness of [the expert’s]
methodology,” rather than “the correctness of the expert’s
conclusions.” Primiano, 598 F.3d at 564 (citation omitted).
But “shaky” expert testimony, like any expert testimony,
must still be “admissible,” and this requires a determination
by the trial court that it satisfies the threshold requirements
established by Rule 702. See Wendell, 858 F.3d at 1237
(citation omitted); accord Messick, 747 F.3d at 1196. Only

16

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

“[i]f the proposed testimony meets the thresholds of
relevance and reliability” is its proponent “entitled to have
the jury decide upon its credibility.” Elosu, 26 F.4th at 1024
(citation modified). The district court “cannot abdicate its
role as gatekeeper,” nor “delegat[e] that role to the jury.”
Hardeman, 997 F.3d at 960 n.11 (citation omitted).
Consistent with the 2023 amendment, our precedent
establishes that Rule 702 requires a proponent of expert
testimony to demonstrate each of the requirements of Rule
702 by a preponderance of the evidence.
B
With that historical background, we now turn to the case
before us. The district court excluded Dr. Schneider’s
causation opinion as unreliable pursuant to Rule 702 because
Dr. Schneider failed to follow the differential etiology
methodology his report purported to employ and failed to
reliably rule out obesity as a potential cause of Engilis’s
cancer. In the district court’s view, Dr. Schneider’s
testimony was flawed in two ways. First, Dr. Schneider
asserted that Engilis was not obese and relied on this
assertion of fact in his analysis, but failed to justify it.
Second, Dr. Schneider pivoted on cross-examination and
attempted to argue that obesity is not actually a risk factor
for NHL, but he also failed to justify that position. We
address each of these issues in turn.
1
Engilis argues Dr. Schneider adequately supported his
assertion that Engilis was not obese. In Engilis’s view, the
district court erred because it overlooked genuine disputes of
material fact about Engilis’s weight and supposed obesity.
We disagree.

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

17

The district court’s “responsibility to screen expert
testimony,” Elosu, 26 F.4th at 1020, encompasses the
requirement that expert testimony be “based on sufficient
facts or data,” Fed. R. Evid. 702(b). This element “requires
foundation.” Elosu, 26 F.4th at 1025. The “key inquiry” is
“whether an expert had sufficient factual grounds on which
to draw conclusions.” Hyer v. City & County of Honolulu,
118 F.4th 1044, 1056 (9th Cir. 2024) (citation omitted).
Dr. Schneider expressly asserted in his expert report that
Engilis was not obese and relied on this proposition to form
his differential etiology opinion. The report states that
Engilis’s “Plaintiff Fact Sheet” indicates Engilis is
“negative” for several medical conditions, including obesity.
At the outset of his analysis, Dr. Schneider therefore ruled
out obesity as a causative factor in the onset of Engilis’s
cancer.
Aside from the reference to Engilis’s fact sheet, Dr.
Schneider’s expert report provides no support for his
conclusion that Engilis was not obese. The expert report
does not cite any of Engilis’s medical records to support the
conclusion that he was not obese. It does not reference
Engilis’s weight, BMI,10 or body shape. And it does not cite
or rely on any testimony from Engilis.
At the Daubert hearing, counsel for Monsanto crossexamined Dr. Schneider about the basis for his opinion that
Engilis was not obese. Counsel presented Dr. Schneider
10

“BMI” is an acronym for “body mass index” and is a measure of
weight in relation to height. Nat’l Heart, Lung, & Blood Inst., Clinical
Guidelines on the Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of
Overweight and Obesity in Adults: The Evidence Report xiv (1998). As
Dr. Schneider acknowledged at the Daubert hearing, a BMI over 30
qualifies as obese.

18

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

with medical records suggesting that, contrary to Dr.
Schneider’s assertion in his report, Engilis may have been
obese. For instance, one record from December 2000
showed Engilis then had a BMI of 32.9. And according to
another record, Engilis had a BMI of 33 in November 2014.
Confronted with these records, Dr. Schneider countered that
a diagnosis of obesity is more complex than merely
measuring BMI, as BMI does not account for the distribution
of fat on a person’s body, which he regarded as the most
salient consideration in determining obesity. But Dr.
Schneider admitted that he did not know how Engilis’s
weight was distributed, and that he had not ever spoken to
Engilis or seen a photo of him. Ultimately, Dr. Schneider
conceded that he “certainly can’t say whether [Engilis is]
obese or not.”
To the extent Dr. Schneider testified on crossexamination about the shortcomings of BMI as a measure of
obesity, this opinion was inadmissible for a separate reason:
it was not disclosed in his expert report. See Fed. R. Civ. P.
26(a)(2)(B). An expert’s written report must contain, among
other things, “a complete statement of all opinions the
witness will express and the basis and reasons for them,” and
“the facts or data considered by the witness in forming
them.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2)(B)(i)-(ii). The federal rules
generally “forbid[] the use of any information not properly
disclosed.” Key v. Qualcomm Inc., 129 F.4th 1129, 1143
(9th Cir. 2025). Thus, “when a party fails to provide
information required by Rule 26, such party ‘is not allowed
to use that information or witness to supply evidence on a
motion, at a hearing, or at a trial, unless the failure was
substantially justified or is harmless.’” Id. (quoting Fed. R.
Civ. P. 37(c)(1)).

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

19

Dr. Schneider’s report does not mention BMI at all, let
alone describe its limitations. Moreover, although Dr.
Schneider testified that fat distribution is the proper measure
of obesity, he did not make that assertion—or even mention
fat distribution—in his report. 11 And even if he had, Dr.
Schneider admitted at the Daubert hearing that he had not
undertaken any evaluation of Engilis’s weight—using BMI,
fat distribution, or any other metric. Indeed, in contravention
of the assertion made in his report, Dr. Schneider conceded
that he could not say whether Engilis was obese or not.
Ultimately, the critical question for purposes of the
court’s gatekeeping function is not whether Engilis was
actually obese or what inferences about obesity the record
might support. Instead, the issue is whether Dr. Schneider’s
opinion that Engilis was not obese is “based on sufficient
facts or data.” See Fed. R. Evid. 702(b). For that inquiry,
what matters is the evidence Dr. Schneider actually
considered and the conclusions he actually drew from that
evidence in the process of forming his opinion as disclosed
in his expert report. Here, the district court properly
concluded that Engilis failed to establish by a preponderance
of the evidence that Dr. Schneider’s conclusion was based
on sufficient facts or data.
11

Engilis also seeks to support Dr. Schneider’s conclusion that Engilis
was not obese with his own deposition testimony about his weight.
Engilis notes that he testified he was roughly 170 pounds in 1990, and
slowly put on weight over the years until he was roughly 195 pounds at
the time of his deposition in 2021. Engilis argues that “simple
arithmetic” suggests a linear weight gain of about 0.8 pounds per year,
and that under this rate, he would not have become obese until 2010. But
Dr. Schneider did not conduct any of this analysis in his report.
Moreover, even if the analysis was proper and disclosed, it suggests that
Engilis was obese before his CLL diagnosis in 2014.

20

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

2
Engilis next argues the district erred by concluding that
Dr. Schneider failed to reliably support his conclusion that,
even if Engilis was obese, he properly ruled out obesity
because it is not a risk factor for NHL. More specifically,
Engilis contends that the district court erred by discounting
Dr. Schneider’s clinical experience and overlooking that the
weight of scientific literature has found no positive
association between obesity and NHL. We reject Engilis’s
position.
As explained, a differential etiology “starts with ruling
in all potential causes, then ruling out the ones as to which
there is no plausible evidence of causation, and then
determining the most likely cause among those that cannot
be excluded.” Hardeman, 997 F.3d at 965 (citation
modified). Dr. Schneider’s expert report did not discuss
whether obesity is properly recognized as a potential cause
of NHL. Instead, Dr. Schneider simply concluded that
obesity could be ruled out as a potential cause because,
according to Engilis’s “fact sheet,” Engilis was “negative”
for obesity. Because Dr. Schneider’s report did not grapple
with the relationship between obesity and NHL, it did not
cite or describe any medical literature or studies on that
relationship.
At the Daubert hearing, after counsel cross-examined
Dr. Schneider about his basis for asserting that Engilis was
not obese, Dr. Schneider pivoted to contesting that obesity is
capable of causing NHL. During questioning, Dr. Schneider
conceded that obesity is recognized in medical literature as
a possible risk factor for NHL and testified that he had seen
articles on the association between obesity and NHL
throughout his career. He further stated that he had reviewed

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

21

papers on the topic and accepted that at least some of them
reported a positive association between obesity and the
development of NHL.
Contrary to this body of scientific literature, Dr.
Schneider testified on cross-examination that, in his view,
obesity is not a specific risk factor for NHL or CLL. Based
on his 34 years of practicing oncology, he stated that he
personally saw no association between weight and CLL and
that he saw “fat people get CLL” and saw “skinny people get
CLL.” Dr. Schneider also referred to an article he found on
Google the night before the Daubert hearing, which
purportedly showed that, of forty studies that examined the
relationship between obesity and NHL, only three showed a
positive association. As to Engilis specifically, Dr.
Schneider explained that he considered his BMI as a
potential cause, but “rejected it.”
Engilis insists that the article Dr. Schneider mentioned at
the Daubert hearing shows that Dr. Schneider properly ruled
out obesity as a risk factor. But this article cannot salvage
Dr. Schneider’s opinion because, irrespective of that
article’s conclusions, Dr. Schneider did not cite it or any
other relevant literature in his report. Without a citation to
scientific literature in Dr. Schneider’s report, Engilis cannot
now claim that scientific literature is the basis for Dr.
Schneider’s opinion. See Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2)(B).
Engilis also argues that, by excluding Dr. Schneider’s
opinion, the district court improperly dismissed Dr.
Schneider’s decades of education, training, and clinical
experience with NHL and CLL as a board-certified
oncologist. To be sure, an expert’s specialized knowledge
and experience is of critical significance when the district
court determines whether a witness is “qualified as an

22

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

expert.” Fed. R. Evid. 702. Importantly, such knowledge
and experience can also “serve as the requisite ‘facts or data’
on which they render an opinion.” Elosu, 26 F.4th at 1024.
Because “‘medical knowledge is often uncertain’ due to the
complexity of the human body and the novelty of emerging
medical issues,” we have noted that “‘physicians must use
their knowledge and experience as a basis for weighing
known factors along with the inevitable uncertainties’ to
make ‘a sound judgment’ in each case.” Id. at 1025 (quoting
Primiano, 598 F.3d at 565–66). Accordingly, “when an
expert establishes causation based on a differential
[etiology], the expert may rely on his or her extensive
clinical experience as a basis for ruling out a potential cause
of the disease.” Wendell, 858 F.3d at 1237.
But when ruling out potential causes, an expert “must
provide reasons for rejecting alternative hypotheses ‘using
scientific methods and procedures’” and must rely on “more
than ‘subjective beliefs or unsupported speculation.” See
Clausen, 339 F.3d at 1058 (quoting Claar v. Burlington N.
R.R. Co., 29 F.3d 499, 502 (9th Cir. 1994)); accord Messick,
747 F.3d at 1198. And the expert must do so in their expert
report. Fed. R. Civ. P. 26(a)(2)(B)(i)-(ii). Here, aside from
Dr. Schneider’s conclusory assertion of his subjective
opinion at the Daubert hearing, he provided no explanation
for ruling out obesity as a possible risk factor. Without
articulating a reasoned basis for his opinion, Dr. Schneider
failed to establish that his testimony was “based on sufficient
facts or data.” Fed. R. Evid. 702(b).
Our decisions in Messick, Wendell, and Hardeman, upon
which Engilis relies, do not hold otherwise. In each of these
cases, experts grounded their opinion in existing scientific
literature and studies, however limited, as well as their
clinical experience. In Messick, we noted “there is nothing

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

23

wrong with a doctor relying on extensive clinical experience
when making a differential [etiology],” but the expert there
also relied on existing medical literature to form his opinion.
Messick, 747 F.3d at 1198. Moreover, the expert described
his clinical experience in detail, opining that—based on his
extensive experience diagnosing and treating patients with
osteonecrosis of the jaw (ONJ)—a patient without cancer or
radiation exposure would not develop long-term ONJ unless
they received intravenous bisphosphonate treatments. Id. In
Wendell, we considered opinions from doctors “at or near
the top of their field” who had “extensive clinical
experience” with the rare disease at issue in that case.
Wendell, 858 F.3d at 1237. The relative dearth of medical
literature addressing causation for the exceedingly rare
cancer at issue demanded some reliance on clinical
experience, but the doctors nevertheless also consulted and
relied upon the studies and literature that did exist. See id.
at 1236. Hardeman concluded that, like the experts in
Messick who “relied on clinical experience as well as an
examination of medical literature and plaintiff’s records,”
the plaintiff’s experts relied on “epidemiological, animal,
and cell studies.” Hardeman, 997 F.3d at 963.
None of these cases stands for the proposition that an
expert’s mere talismanic invocation of “clinical experience”
suffices to establish that a differential etiology passes muster
under Rule 702. Instead, they establish that clinical
experience may be one basis on which an expert supports
their analysis. See Wendell, 858 F.3d at 1237; Elosu, 26
F.4th at 1024. We also note that, given the flexibility of the
reliability inquiry, Valencia-Lopez, 971 F.3d at 898, clinical
experience that might constitute “sufficient facts or data” in
one case, Fed. R. Evid. 702(b), might not suffice in another.
For example, reliance on extensive clinical experience might

24

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

be particularly informative—and perhaps necessary—in the
context of a rare disease. But it might be less probative in
the context of a more common disease for which there exists
a substantial body of established literature.
Unlike in Messick, Wendell, and Hardeman, the expert
report in this case does not describe the details of its author’s
clinical experience, nor does it include an assessment of the
existing literature. The opinion lacks the required reasoned
explanation for the assertion that obesity is not a risk factor
for NHL, and for Dr. Schneider’s decision to set aside, sub
silentio, the corpus of medical literature addressing a
relationship between obesity and NHL.
Engilis also contends that Dr. Schneider was not required
to rule out obesity as a possible cause because he need only
have ruled out “obvious” causes. For support, Engilis notes
that, to assess whether an expert’s testimony is sufficiently
reliable, courts may consider “[w]hether the expert has
adequately accounted for obvious alternative explanations.”
Fed. R. Evid. 702 advisory committee’s note to 2000
amendment. We are not persuaded.
Engilis is correct that “we have consistently recognized
the difficulties in establishing certainty in the medical
sciences.” Messick, 747 F.3d at 1198; see also Daubert, 509
U.S. at 590 (noting “there are no certainties in science”).
Given this uncertainty, “[w]e do not require experts to
eliminate all other possible causes of a condition for the
expert’s testimony to be reliable.” Wendell, 858 F.3d at
1237. To meet the threshold of reliability, the expert need
not purport to conclusively “identify the sole cause of a
medical condition.” Messick, 747 F.3d at 1199. But where
an expert rules out a potential cause, the expert “must
provide scientifically sound reasons” for doing so. Id. at

ENGILIS V. MONSANTO COMPANY

25

1198; accord Clausen, 339 F.3d at 1058. Here, Dr.
Schneider did not assert that he was unable to rule out
obesity or other possible causes. See Wendell, 858 F.3d at
1237 (describing “the alleged inability of the experts to rule
out an idiopathic origin” or another possible cause). Nor did
Dr. Schneider opine that he could not determine which of
multiple risk factors caused the condition at issue. See
Messick, 747 F.3d at 1199. Instead, Dr. Schneider rejected
obesity as a possible cause, but inadequately explained his
reasons for doing so. Accordingly, the district court properly
concluded that Engilis failed to establish by a preponderance
of the evidence that Dr. Schneider’s conclusion was based
on sufficient facts or data. See Fed. R. Evid. 702(b). In
doing so, the court properly exercised its gatekeeping
function.
IV
The district court did not abuse its discretion by granting
Monsanto’s motion to exclude.12 Because Dr. Schneider’s
excluded opinion was the sole evidence upon which Engilis
relied to establish causation, we affirm the district court’s
order granting summary judgment in favor of Monsanto.
AFFIRMED.

12

Because we affirm the district court’s exclusion of Dr. Schneider’s
opinion, we need not consider Monsanto’s alternative argument that
Engilis’s claims are preempted by federal law.

