FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
AZADEH KHATIBI, M.D., an
individual; DO NO HARM, a
Virginia nonprofit corporation,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.

No. 24-3108
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-06195MRA-E
OPINION

RANDY HAWKINS, in his official
capacity as President of the Medical
Board of California; LAURIE ROSE
LUBIANO, in her official capacity as
Vice President of the Medical Board
of California; REJI VARGHESE, in
his official capacity as Executive
Director of the Medical Board of
California; MARINA O’CONNOR,
in her official capacity as Chief of
Licensing, Medical Board of
California; RYAN BROOKS, in his
official capacity as Secretary of the
Medical Board of California,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Monica Ramirez Almadani, District Judge, Presiding

2

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Argued and Submitted March 27, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed July 25, 2025
Before: A. Wallace Tashima, Jacqueline H. Nguyen, and
Salvador Mendoza, Jr., Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Nguyen
SUMMARY *
First Amendment/Government Speech
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal of an
action, brought by a physician instructor of continuing
medical education (CME) courses and a nonprofit comprised
of healthcare professionals and policymakers, alleging that
the Medical Board of California’s requirement that CME
courses eligible for credit include information about implicit
bias violates the Free Speech Clause of the First
Amendment.
Applying the factors set forth in Shurtleff v. City of
Boston, 596 U.S. 243 (2022), the panel held that under
California’s scheme, CME courses eligible for credit by the
Medical Board of California are government speech. First,
California has a longstanding tradition of regulating the
medical profession. Second, the public would tend to
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

3

attribute CME speech to the government rather than to CME
instructors. Finally, California controls the content of CME
courses and imposes several restrictions on their form and
delivery.
Because CME courses eligible for credit are government
speech, they are immune from the strictures of the Free
Speech Clause.

COUNSEL
Joshua P. Thompson (argued) and Caleb R. Trotter, Pacific
Legal Foundation, Sacramento, California; Cameron T.
Norris, Consovoy McCarthy PLLC, Arlington, Virginia; for
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Kristin Liska (argued) and Stephanie Albrecht, Deputy
Attorneys General; Lara Haddad, Supervising Deputy
Attorney General; Thomas S. Patterson, Senior Assistant
Attorney General; Rob Bonta, California Attorney General;
Office of the California Attorney General, San Francisco,
California; for Defendants-Appellees.
Andrew L. Schlafly, Attorney at Law, Far Hills, New Jersey,
for Amicus Curiae Association of American Physicians and
Surgeons.
Thomas A. Berry and Alexander R. Khoury, Cato Institute,
Washington, D.C., for Amicus Curiae the Cato Institute.
Madison Hahn, Young America's Foundation, Reston,
Virginia;
Brooks
E.
Harlow,
Technology
&
Communications Law PLLC, Herndon, Virginia; for
Amicus Curiae Young America's Foundation.

4

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Stanley J. Brown, Benjamin A. Fleming, and Shannon
Zhang, Hogan Lovells US LLP, New York, New York;
David S. Tatel, Amanda N. Allen, and Ashley Ifeadike,
Hogan Lovells US LLP, Washington, D.C.; Dariely
Rodriguez, Adria Bonillas, and Kathryn Youker, Lawyers'
Committee for Civil Rights Under the Law, Washington,
D.C.; for Amici Curiae the NAACP California Hawaii State
Conference, the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under
Law, and the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights of the San
Francisco Bay Area.

OPINION
NGUYEN, Circuit Judge:
California’s regulation of the medical profession dates
back to the late 1800s when, following the Gold Rush, it
suffered an epidemic of “cults and fads and a great deal of
quackery.” See Linda A. McCready & Billie Harris, FROM
QUACKERY TO QUALITY ASSURANCE: THE FIRST TWELVE
DECADES OF THE MEDICAL BOARD OF CALIFORNIA 2–4
(MED. BD. CA. 1995). In response to this crisis, the State
adopted the Medical Practice Act of 1876. Id. at 3. The Act
created the Board of Medical Examiners, which sought to
impose basic regulations on the practice of medicine. Id.
Today, the Medical Board of California, as the Board of
Medical Examiners is now known, aims to ensure “the
continuing competence of licensed physicians and
surgeons.” CAL. BUS. & PROF. CODE § 2190. 1 It “adopt[s]
1

All undesignated statutory references are to this code.

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

5

and administer[s] standards for the continuing education of
those licensees,” obligating them to complete at least 50
hours of accredited continuing medical education (“CME”)
every two years. Id.; Cal. Code Regs. (CCR) tit. 16,
§ 1336(a). Not just any CME, however, qualifies for credit.
Only classes that meet various state requirements are
eligible. See id. at § 1337(b). For instance, CME courses
must at least “increase the knowledge, skills, and
professional performance that a physician and surgeon uses
to provide care,” address “cultural and linguistic competency
in the practice of medicine,” and include information about
“the understanding of implicit bias.” See §§ 2190.1(a),
(b)(1), (d)(1).
This case challenges one of these CME requirements,
namely section 2190.1(d)(1)’s mandate to include
information about implicit bias. Plaintiffs Dr. Khatibi and
Do No Harm (collectively, “Dr. Khatibi” or “Plaintiffs”)
claim that the implicit bias requirement violates the First
Amendment. 2 The district court dismissed their suit. It held
that CMEs eligible for credit constitute government speech
and are therefore “‘not subject to scrutiny under the Free
Speech Clause.’” See Khatibi v. Hawkins, No. 2:23-cv06195, 2024 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 81485, *9 (C.D. Cal. May 2,
2024) (Khatibi II) (quoting Pleasant Grove City v. Summum,
555 U.S. 460, 464 (2009); see also Shurtleff v. City of
Boston, 596 U.S. 243, 247–48 (2022) (“[W]hen the
Our opinion does not address the allegations of Dr. Marilyn Singleton,
who was originally another plaintiff in this case. She passed away after
the notice of appeal was filed, and we construe and grant Plaintiffs’
notice as a motion to dismiss Dr. Singleton as a party in this appeal under
Federal Rule Civil Procedure 25(a)(1)–(2). See Bordallo v. Reyes, 763
F.2d 1098, 1101 (9th Cir. 1985) (construing “whether a motion, however
styled, is appropriate for the relief requested”).

2

6

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

government speaks for itself, the First Amendment does not
demand airtime for all views. After all, the government must
be able to promote a program . . . in order to function.”).
Plaintiffs appealed. We affirm.
“[W]hether the government intends to speak for itself” is
determined by a “holistic inquiry” that considers “the history
of the expression at issue; the public’s likely perception as
to who (the government or a private person) is speaking; and
the extent to which the government has actively shaped or
controlled the expression.” Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 252. On
balance, these factors weigh in favor of California. We
therefore hold that under the State’s scheme, CMEs eligible
for credit by the Medical Board of California are government
speech.
Our holding is narrow. It recognizes that when
California—from beginning to end—dictates, controls, and
approves the provider, form, purpose, and content of CMEs,
it is in fact the State that “speaks” or expresses its views.
California does so consistent with its tradition, “from time
immemorial,” of protecting its populace from the
“consequences of ignorance and incapacity” in medicine, a
profession “upon which health and life depend” and requires
the most careful preparation—propositions that have been
“too well settled to require discussion.” See Dent v. West
Virginia, 129 U.S. 114, 122 (1889); Watson v. Maryland,
218 U.S. 173, 176 (1910).
I.
California law sets forth various CME requirements “to
ensure the continuing competence of licensed physicians and
surgeons.” § 2190. CMEs must “(1) have a scientific or
clinical content with a direct bearing on the quality or costeffective provision of patient care, community or public

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

7

health, or preventive medicine, (2) concern quality
assurance or improvement, risk management, health facility
standards, or the legal aspects of clinical medicine,
(3) concern bioethics or professional ethics, (4) are designed
to improve the physician-patient relationship and quality of
physician-patient communication,” or otherwise “serve to
maintain, develop, or increase the knowledge, skills, and
professional performance that a physician and surgeon uses
to provide care, or to improve the quality of care provided to
patients.” Id. § 2190.1(a) (cleaned up).
The State charges its Medical Board to “adopt and
administer standards for the continuing education of those
licensees.” Id. § 2190. The Board, in turn, requires that all
licensed physicians complete at least 50 hours of approved
CME every two years. CCR tit. 16, § 1336(a). Only
programs the Board deems “acceptable” are approved for
CME credit. Id. §§ 1337(b), 1300.4(e). Courses are
“acceptable” if they meet the express criteria of section
2190.1 and accompanying regulations. See id. § 1337.5.
“The content of the course or program shall be directly
related to patient care, community health or public health,
preventive medicine, quality assurance or improvement, risk
management, health facility standards, the legal aspects of
clinical medicine, bioethics, professional ethics, or
improvement of the physician-patient relationship.”
Id.§ 1337.5(a)(3); see also id. § 1337.5(a)(1)–(7) (imposing
requirements on faculty, course rationale and content,
methodology of instruction, evaluation, and attendance).
Certain programs by the California Medical Association,
American Medical Association, and American Academy of
Family Physicians are preapproved for CME credit. Id.
§ 1337(a)–(b). The Board does “not give prior approval to
individual courses or programs; however, the division will

8

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

randomly audit courses or programs submitted for credit in
addition to any course or program for which a complaint is
received.” Id. § 1337.5(b). In addition, no credit is awarded
for “any course deemed unacceptable by the division after
an audit.” Id. § 1337.5(c).
In 2019, the Legislature enacted Assembly Bill (A.B.)
241. A.B. 241 amended section 2190.1 to require that “all
continuing medical education courses … contain curriculum
that includes the understanding of implicit bias.” See
§ 2190.1(d)(1). Under A.B. 241, CMEs approved for credit
must contain “(1) Examples of how implicit bias affects
perceptions and treatment decisions of physicians and
surgeons, leading to disparities in health outcomes” or
“(2) Strategies to address how unintended biases in
decisionmaking may contribute to health care disparities by
shaping behavior and producing differences in medical
treatment along lines of race, ethnicity, gender identity,
sexual orientation, age, socioeconomic status, or other
characteristics.” Id. at § 2190.1(e). CMEs by out-of-state
providers or “dedicated solely to research or other issues that
does not include a direct patient care component” are exempt
from the requirement. Id. at § 2190.1(d)(2). A.B. 241
supplements section 2190.1(b)(1)’s separate cultural and
linguistic competence requirement, which the Legislature
enacted in 2005. See 2005 Cal. Stat. ch. 514 § 2; see also
§ 2190.1(c)(1)–(3) (mandating all CMEs to incorporate
content such as about the use of proper names and pronouns
in therapeutic relationships and application of “culturally,
ethnically, and sociologically inclusive data to the process of
clinical care”).
The Legislature passed A.B. 241 because it had found
that implicit bias, “meaning the attitudes or internalized
stereotypes that affect our perceptions, actions, and

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

9

decisions in an unconscious manner, exists, and often
contributes to unequal treatment of people based on race,
ethnicity, gender identity, sexual orientation, age, disability,
and other characteristics.” 2019 Cal. Stat. ch. 417 § 1(a).
“Implicit bias,” in the Legislature’s view, “contributes to
health disparities by affecting the behavior of physicians and
surgeons, nurses, physician assistants, and other healing arts
licensees.” Id. § 1(b); see also id. § 1(c)–(e) (citing
“remarkably consistent” evidence of disparities based on
race, ethnicity, gender, and sexual orientation, “even after
adjusting for” other factors).
Plaintiffs disagree. Dr. Khatibi is a California-licensed
physician and Board-certified ophthalmologist. She is a
frequent organizer and instructor of CMEs, and her past
courses have been approved by state-authorized providers.
Her courses have also complied with all state requirements
apart from the implicit bias one. Do No Harm is a Virginiabased nonprofit comprised of healthcare professionals and
policymakers. It has at least one member who teaches CMEs
in California who believes implicit bias trainings “risk
infecting healthcare decisions.”
Contesting the efficacy of any training on the matter 3
and alleging that the implicit bias requirement violates free
Plaintiffs also appear to doubt the existence of implicit bias in medicine
generally; they allege that section 2190.1(d)(1) “is unlikely to address
the problem of implicit bias in healthcare, if any.” (emphasis added).
Meanwhile, the Board explains that the requirement is essential to the
practice of medicine, as deemed by the Legislature, and is “closely
related” to that purpose. Some amici echo the Board’s points,
contending that “[v]irtually every major organization focused on the
science of medicine has recognized the existence and impact of implicit
bias in the medical sphere” and that its existence is not “subject to
3

10

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

speech rights, Plaintiffs sued the Medical Board of
California. The district court dismissed the operative First
Amended Complaint, holding that “CME courses in
California constitutes government speech.” Khatibi II, 2024
U.S. Dist. LEXIS 81485, at *23. The district court noted that
Plaintiffs may “choose to no longer instruct CME courses
for credit, as is their right, or err their grievances at the ballot
box because ‘it is the democratic electoral process that first
and foremost provides a check on government speech.’” Id.
at *25 (quoting Walker v. Texas Div., Sons of Confederate
Veterans, Inc., 576 U.S. 200, 207 (2015)). Plaintiffs timely
appealed.
II.
“We review de novo a district court order granting a
motion to dismiss for failure to state a claim.” Olson v.
California, 104 F.4th 66, 76 (9th Cir. 2024) (en banc). “To
survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint must contain
sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to state a claim to
relief that is plausible on its face.” Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556
U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (cleaned up). This is “a contextspecific task that requires the reviewing court to draw on its
judicial experience and common sense.” Id. at 679.
A.
“The Free Speech Clause restricts government
regulation of private speech; it does not regulate government
reasonable dispute.” Still, other amici agree with Plaintiffs and find
implicit bias controversial, even divisive.
Like the district court, we express no view on the issue, which is
immaterial to whether CMEs are government speech. See also Khatibi
v. Hawkins, No. 2:23-cv-06195, 2023 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 221328, at *4,
n.1 (C.D. Cal. Dec. 11, 2023).

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

11

speech.” Summum, 555 U.S. at 467–68 (collecting cases);
accord Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 251. “A government entity has
the right to speak for itself . . . and to select the views that it
wants to express.” Summum, 555 U.S. at 467–68 (cleaned
up). “Indeed, it is not easy to imagine how government
could function if it lacked this freedom.” Id. at 468. After
all, “[w]hen the government … formulate[s] policies” or
“implement[s] programs, it naturally chooses what to say
and what not to say.” Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 251; see also
Summum, 555 U.S. at 468 (“‘It is the very business of
government to favor and disfavor points of view.’” (quoting
Nat’l Endowment for Arts v. Finley, 524 U.S. 569, 598
(1998) (Scalia, J., concurring in judgment))).
“A government entity may exercise this same freedom to
express its views when it receives assistance from private
sources for the purpose of delivering a governmentcontrolled message.” Summum, 555 U.S. at 468. “This does
not mean that there are no restraints on government speech.
For example, government speech must comport with
the Establishment Clause. The involvement of public
officials in advocacy may be limited by law, regulation, or
practice. And of course, a government entity is ultimately
accountable to the electorate and the political process for its
advocacy. If the citizenry objects, newly elected officials
later could espouse some different or contrary position.” Id.
at 468–69 (cleaned up).
Additionally, “while the
government-speech doctrine is important—indeed,
essential—it is a doctrine that is susceptible to dangerous
misuse. If private speech could be passed off as government
speech by simply affixing a government seal of approval,
government could silence or muffle the expression of
disfavored viewpoints. For this reason, we must exercise

12

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

great caution before extending our government-speech
precedents.” Matal v. Tam, 582 U.S. 218, 235 (2017).
B.
The “boundary between government speech and private
expression can blur when, as here, a government invites the
people to participate in a program.” Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at
252; see also Summum, 555 U.S. at 470. “In those situations,
when does government-public engagement transmit the
government’s own message? And when does it instead
create a forum for the expression of private speakers’ views?
In answering these questions, we conduct a holistic inquiry
designed to determine whether the government intends to
speak for itself or to regulate private expression.” 4 Shurtleff,
596 U.S. at 252. Among the factors to consider in this
analysis are “the history of the expression at issue; the
public’s likely perception as to who (the government or a
private person) is speaking; and the extent to which the
government has actively shaped or controlled the
expression.” Id. (collecting cases).
Take, for example, Johanns v. Livestock Marketing
Association, 544 U.S. 550, 560 (2005), which upheld the
The government speech analysis thus sometimes interfaces with the
public forum doctrine. See, e.g., Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 248–55 (noting
that City Hall was a “public forum”); Walker, 576 U.S. at 214
(considering how “license plates are not a traditional public forum for
private speech”). See also Cong. Rsch. Serv., Government Speech and
Government as Speaker, CONSTITUTION ANNOTATED. Critical to the
public forum doctrine is that “[t]he government does not create a public
forum by inaction or by permitting limited discourse, but only by
intentionally opening a nontraditional forum for public discourse.” See
Cornelius v. NAACP Legal Def. & Educ. Fund, 473 U.S. 788, 802 (1985)
(citing Perry Educ. Ass’n v. Perry Local Educators’ Ass’n, 460 U.S. 37,
46 (1983)).
4

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

13

mandatory funding of beef commercials by private cattle
merchants. The Supreme Court held that the commercials in
question were government speech, not compelled private
speech, because the government “effectively controlled”
their message. Id. This was so, the Supreme Court reasoned,
because “the message set out in the beef promotions is from
beginning to end the message established by the Federal
Government.” Id. at 560–61. “Thus, Congress and the
Secretary have set out the overarching message and some of
its elements, and they have left the development of the
remaining details to an entity whose members are
answerable to the Secretary.” Id. at 561.
Similarly, in Summum, the Supreme Court held that
monuments in public parks, even those financed or donated
by private parties, constituted government speech because
the government has always exercised control and “final
approval authority” over the selection of which monuments
to place in a park. 555 U.S. at 472–73. The Court
emphasized how governments “have long used monuments
to speak to the public,” in fact “[s]ince ancient times.” Id. at
470. And in Walker, the Court applied Summum to specialty
license plates in Texas and held that they, too, were
government speech.
Walker, 576 U.S. at 209–10.
According to the Court, states, including Texas, have
historically used plates for messaging, the public identifies
them with the state, and Texas maintains “direct control”
over their content. Id. at 210–13. It did not matter much that
“private parties take part in the design” of the specialty plates
or that they convey countless messages. See id. at 217
(“Texas’s desire to communicate numerous messages does
not mean that the messages conveyed are not Texas’s
own.”); id. (stressing that the “holding in Summum was not
dependent on the precise number of monuments found

14

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

within the park”); see also id. at 221 (Alito, J., dissenting)
(noting over 350 specialty plates with distinct messages
ranging from sports teams to religious organizations).
In contrast, in Matal, the Supreme Court held that
trademarks were private and not government speech. 582
U.S. at 239. The Patent and Trademark Office (“PTO”) had
rejected Tam’s trademark application related to his band,
“THE SLANTS,” which was intended to “reclaim” a
“derogatory term for persons of Asian descent.” Id. at 223,
228. The Court held that the state’s rejection constituted
viewpoint discrimination, not government speech because
trademarks “have not traditionally been used to convey a
Government message;” the government “does not dream
up,” edit, or meaningfully review trademarks; and the public
does not associate trademarks with the government. Id. at
223, 235–38. The Court also noted how the PTO “made it
clear that registration does not constitute approval of a
mark.” Id. at 237. Matal thus distinguished trademarks from
the license plates in Walker, stating that Walker “likely
marks the outer bounds of the government-speech doctrine.”
Matal, 582 U.S. at 238.
The Supreme Court likewise weighed the same factors
to find private speech in Shurtleff. Boston had allowed
private groups to raise flags outside its City Hall without
denial or any control of flags’ contents—that is, until 2017,
when it rejected a group’s “Christian flag.” Shurtleff, 596
U.S. at 248. Like the PTO’s rejection of the trademark in
Matal, Boston’s rejection of the flag constituted viewpointbased discrimination. Id. Acknowledging that while the
history of flying flags generally weighed toward finding
government speech, the Court found that the history of
Boston’s specific flag-flying program was ambiguous, just
like the public perception of who speaks through the city’s

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

15

flagpole. Id. at 254–55. While Boston did fly its own flags
outside City Hall, it had also allowed private groups to use
the flagpole without reviewing or controlling those groups’
flags. Id. The key issue was therefore government control.
And because Boston never regulated any other flag’s
contents, the Court ruled that flag-flying outside the City
Hall constituted private speech. Boston’s control over the
physical premises or over flag-raisings’ schedule was
insufficient. Id. at 256. Boston “could easily have done
more to make clear it wished to speak for itself by raising
flags,” the Court observed, and it simply did not. Id. at 257–
58.
Accordingly, while “[t]here may be situations in which
it is difficult to tell whether a government entity is speaking
on its own behalf or is providing a forum for private speech,”
see Summum, 555 U.S. at 470, the Supreme Court is clear
that the test to determine government speech is a “holistic”
one. Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 252. The “review is not
mechanical; it is driven by a case’s context rather than the
rote application of rigid factors.” Id. Factors that are
typically considered are the history of expression at issue,
the perception of who is speaking, and the extent of
governmental control over the expression. Id. If these
factors show that the government is “engaging in [its] own
expressive conduct, then the Free Speech Clause has no
application.” Summum, 555 U.S. at 467–68 (collecting
cases).
III.
Applying these principles with “great caution,” see
Matal, 582 U.S. at 235, we consider whether, under
circumstances specific to California, CMEs eligible for
Board credit constitute government speech. We hold that the

16

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Shurtleff factors of history, public perception, and control
weigh in favor of concluding that they are.
A.
“The health professions differ from other licensed
professions because they treat other humans, and their
treatment can result in physical and psychological harm to
their patients. This is why there is a historical tradition of
states restricting the medical practices health care providers
can use, while not, for instance . . . preventing [lawyers] from
discussing legal tax avoidance techniques.” See Tingley v.
Ferguson, 47 F.4th 1055, 1083 (9th Cir. 2022) (emphasis in
original) (cleaned up). Indeed, “it has been the practice of
different States, from time immemorial, to exact in” the
medical profession “a certain degree of skill and learning
upon which the community may confidently rely.” Dent,
129 U.S. at 122 (emphasis added); see also Hawker v. New
York, 170 U.S. 189, 192–93 (1898) (upholding this authority
as a “clear . . . proper exercise” of a state’s police powers).
So rooted in tradition is this practice that the Supreme Court
deemed it—in 1910—“too well settled to require
discussion.” Watson, 218 U.S. at 176.
California, for its part, “has long regulated the practice
of medicine as an exercise of the police power.” Arnett v.
Dal Cielo, 923 P.2d 1, 2 (Cal. 1996) (recapping the history
of the Board and the Medical Practice Act of 1876).
California’s Medical Board has generally been “charged
with the duty to protect the public against incompetent,
impaired, or negligent physicians” since the 1870s. See id;
Ex parte Gerino, 77 P. 166, 168–69 (Cal. 1904) (upholding
the Board’s primordial requirements for practicing
medicine). And the Board has specifically and continually
“adopt[ed] and administer[ed]” CME requirements since

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

17

1980. See, e.g., § 2190; 1980 Cal. Stat. ch. 1313 § 2
(ordering the Board to establish CME requirements); 2011
Cal. Stat. ch. 236 § 2 (authorizing the Board to set standards
for CMEs related to chronic diseases and lifestyle
behaviors); CCR tit. 16, § 1337.5 (1990) (outlining
standards); id. (2025) (same). The Legislature, too, has
conceived of its own content requirements since 1992,
requiring that all credit-eligible CMEs at least (1) focus on
“scientific or clinical content” tied to patient care, costeffectiveness, public health, or preventative medicine;
(2) address quality assurance, risk management, facility
standards, or legal aspects of clinical practice; (3) relate to
bioethics or professional ethics; or (4) improve physicianpatient relationship. See § 2190.1; 1992 Cal. Stat. ch. 331
§ 1.
The Legislature has since continued to expand CME
requirements. Compare Walker, 576 U.S. at 211–12
(considering Texas’s authorization of various plates’
messages over the past several decades). Beginning 2001,
for example, the Legislature has ordered all physicians to
complete CMEs in pain management and the treatment of
the terminally ill, see §§ 2190.5–2190.6; 2001 Cal. Stat. ch.
518. It has also required all general internists and family
physicians who treat a specific percentage of elderly patients
to complete training in geriatric medicine around the same
time. See § 2190.3; 2000 Cal Stat. ch. 440. All CMEs, since
2006, must also address cultural and linguistic competence
to be eligible for credit. See § 2190.1(b)(1); 2005 Cal Stat.
ch. 514.
Conversely, the Legislature has excluded certain CMEs
from credit from 1992 to 2021. During that time, licensees
could not earn credit for CMEs on medical office
management, billing, coding, and marketing, though the

18

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Legislature now permits up to 30 percent of credit for these
topics.
See § 2190.15(i); 2021 Cal. Stat. ch. 612.
Accordingly, California has not only long designated which
CME courses qualify for credit, but also which courses do
not.
The first factor of history therefore weighs decisively in
favor of the State. There is no question that California has
actively regulated the medical profession since the late
nineteenth century, and the Board, in one way or another,
has imposed qualifications on the practice of medicine ever
since. It has also specifically adopted, updated, and enforced
CME standards for almost half a century. Dr. Khatibi makes
no particularized allegation to the contrary. She instead
advances several arguments that either misunderstand the
nature of the government speech inquiry or raise false
alarms. None is availing.
Dr. Khatibi insists that CMEs have never been used to
convey messages to the public. “At most,” she argues, the
CME scheme merely “shows that the government is
communicating the importance of certain subjects to medical
professionals,” not the public. Dr. Khatibi also likens
California with the PTO in Matal; both, in her view, have no
history of “‘dream[ing] up’” content for the speech at issue.
See 582 U.S. at 235–39. Lastly, she says that looking to the
lengthy regulatory history is “myopic” and improper
because “the results would be sweeping” and susceptible to
“‘dangerous misuse.’” See id. at 235.
Dr. Khatibi’s concerns are misplaced. It would be a
serious affront to the Constitution if regulatory history alone
were sufficient to immunize speech from First Amendment
scrutiny. However, as the Supreme Court explained, history
is but one factor in the context-driven, “holistic inquiry

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

19

designed to determine whether the government intends to
speak for itself.” See Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 252; Summum,
555 U.S. at 484 (Breyer, J., concurring) (“[T]he ‘government
speech’ doctrine is a rule of thumb, not a rigid category”).
Indeed, it is precisely this “holistic inquiry” that serves as a
bulwark against abuse. It is also why Dr. Khatibi’s
arguments fail. Just as we cannot equate something to
monuments and conclude it is government speech, we
cannot simply deem CMEs distinct from monuments and
license plates, conclude they are nontraditional forms for
government expression, and then terminate the inquiry. To
do so would begin and end the analysis at the mere “starting
point.” See Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 255.
It bears repeating that our analysis “is driven by a case’s
context rather than the rote application of rigid factors.” Id.
at 252. And the historical context of the implicit bias and
other CME requirements is California’s longstanding
tradition of regulating the medical profession since the
1870s. See, e.g., Arnett, 923 P.2d at 2–3. California created
the Board to combat the problem of quack doctors in the
decades following the Gold Rush. See Gerino, 77 P. at 167;
FROM QUACKERY TO QUALITY ASSURANCE 2–4. The Board
imposed basic qualifications on the practice of medicine
since, and consistent with that history, eventually
implemented and enforced the CME scheme in place for the
past several decades. See, e.g., Gerino, 77 P. at 167; 1980
Cal. Stat. ch. 1313 § 2. If Shurtleff’s historical analysis
examined flags’ contents, materials, symbolism, location,
and how frequently they were raised (including those of
England’s Windsor Castle), see 596 U.S. at 254, then
looking to California’s history of regulating the medical
profession is not, as Dr. Khatibi contends, “myopic.”
Rather, it is the crystal-clear consideration compelled by the

20

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

“holistic inquiry designed to determine whether the
government intends to speak for itself.” See id. at 252;
compare Summum, 555 U.S. at 470–72 (broadly considering
the histories of various public parks and monuments,
including pyramids). 5
Moreover, Dr. Khatibi’s claim that the CME
requirements do not express the State’s views rests on a
fundamental misunderstanding of how government works.
“‘When a government entity embarks on a course of action,
it necessarily takes a particular viewpoint and rejects
others.’” See Nat’l Rifle Ass’n of Am. v. Vullo, 602 U.S. 175,
187 (2024) (quoting Matal, 582 U.S. at 234); see also
Walker, 576 U.S. at 207–08 (exemplifying how a public
vaccination program necessarily promotes vaccines while
discouraging opposing perspectives). This is precisely why
the government speech doctrine exists. For without it,
government would cease to function. See Summum, 555
U.S. at 468; accord Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 251. See also
Walker, 576 U.S. at 207 (“How could a city government
create a successful recycling program if officials . . . had to
include . . . a long plea from the local trash disposal
enterprise demanding the contrary?”).
In other words, California’s CME requirements
necessarily reflect, as Dr. Khatibi effectively concedes, “the
importance of certain subjects to medical professionals.”
The same holds true for California’s lengthy history of
Not all states share California’s history or requirements. Colorado, for
example, only began imposing CME requirements in 2024. See COLO.
REV. STAT. § 12-240-130.5 (2024). It had expressly barred them until
2023. See COLO. REV. STAT. ANN. § 12-240-130(3) (2023). Montana
and South Dakota, meanwhile, impose no CME requirements on
physician-licensees. See MONT. CODE ANN. § 37-1-141 (2023); S.D.
CODIFIED LAWS § 36-4-24.1 (2025).
5

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

21

regulation. That history reflects the State’s evolving
judgment of what subjects it has deemed essential to “ensure
the continuing competence of licensed physicians and
surgeons,” of which implicit bias is one. 6 §§ 2190,
2190.1(d)(1).
Dr. Khatibi’s assertion that there is no history of
California “dreaming up” content for CMEs therefore has no
footing in law or logic. As discussed, the Legislature has
specified CME content requirements—i.e., what it believes
are vital for the continued competence of licensees—for
decades. See, e.g., 1992 Cal. Stat. ch 331 § 1 (requiring, for
example, that CMEs “[c]oncern bioethics”); 2005 Cal. Stat.
ch. 514 § 2 (requiring all CMEs to address cultural and
linguistic competence). And the Board itself has long set
requirements for CME faculty qualifications, course
rationale, course content, course methodology, and even
what must be on evaluation forms. See, e.g., CCR tit. 16,
§ 1337.5 (1990); id. (2002); id. (2025).
California thus sharply differs from the PTO in Matal.
The PTO has no comparable history of telling companies
like Sony to pick “‘make.believe’” as its slogan from a list
of qualified slogans. See Matal, 582 U.S. at 235–37. Nor
has it ever commanded Apple how to, or who in its team
Implicit bias certainly appears important to California beyond the CME
context. See, e.g., 2020 Cal. Stats. ch. 317 § 2 (criticizing “[c]urrent law,
as interpreted by courts” that tolerates “negative implicit biases” in
criminal proceedings and creating the Racial Justice Act); CAL. HEALTH
& SAF. CODE §§ 123630.1–123630.3 (identifying implicit bias as a
driver of “health disparities in communities of color” and requiring
perinatal hospitals to “implement evidence-based implicit bias
programs). Regardless of its merit, the implicit bias CME requirement
thus aligns with California’s other priorities and judgment—shaped by
its electorate’s “informed opinion.” See Walker, 576 U.S. at 207.
6

22

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

could, come up with “‘Think different.’” Id. The PTO has
also not ordered the noble patrons of Burger King to rate its
motto of “‘Have it your way.’” Id. Also, unlike the PTO,
which long “made it clear that [trademark] registration does
not constitute approval of a mark,” id. at 237, the Board has
never disclaimed approval of accredited CMEs. To the
contrary, approved CMEs, like the grant or renewal of a
medical license, has always reflected the Board’s judgment
of “the requisite skills and qualifications necessary to
provide safe and effective services to the public”—
something Dr. Khatibi does not contest. 7 Rich Vision Ctrs.
v. Bd. of Med. Exam’rs, 192 Cal. Rptr. 455, 457 (Ct. App.
1983); Shea v. Bd. of Med. Exam’rs, 146 Cal. Rptr. 653,
659–60 (Ct. App. 1978). History thus squarely weighs in
favor of finding government speech in this case.

Dr. Khatibi’s clarifies that her qualm with the implicit bias requirement
is not “the subject matter mandated by the state in its regulatory
capacity.” Rather, it is that she is “being compelled to include irrelevant,
controversial, and unhelpful speech” in the courses she teaches in her
own “personal expressive capacity.” But that puts the cart before the
horse. Such reasoning short-circuits the government speech inquiry and
assumes that CMEs are private speech from the get-go. Indeed, as
counsel for Dr. Khatibi clarified and emphasized at oral argument, the
“thorny issues” of compelled speech and viewpoint discrimination are
actually “not before this court.”
7

Setting aside that Dr. Khatibi is free to teach whatever she wishes in
her own “expressive capacity,” implicit bias is a “subject matter
mandated by the state in its regulatory capacity.” It is just like cultural
competence or geriatric care topics the Legislature has required and
content mandates with which Dr. Khatibi has admittedly complied. See
§§ 2190.3, 2190.1(c)(1). As the Board explains, Dr. Khatibi’s
disagreement “with the particular subject of implicit bias does not
change the nature of the expression.”

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

23

B.
“Next, then, we consider whether the public would tend
to view the speech at issue as the government’s.” Shurtleff,
596 U.S. at 255. Unlike history, this factor presents a much
closer call. Dr. Khatibi alleges that “attendees treat her as
the person responsible for the content discussed.” She is the
sole organizer of her CMEs. Attendees often ask her
questions during and after class; they even debate with her.
They evaluate her as well, giving written feedback “about
the effectiveness of the course and whether the course
instructor possessed any bias.”
Section 2190.1(e)’s
requirement that instructors provide examples or strategies
relating to implicit bias, as Dr. Khatibi claims, could also
lead attendees to further attribute CME content to her and
not the State.
On the other hand, the Board asserts that the entire CME
scheme exists for licensed medical professionals, not the
public. It is apparent that licensees know that their
profession is heavily regulated since they must comply with
myriad requirements, including various CME mandates, to
maintain their licenses. Dr. Khatibi’s own allegation that
“‘physicians are unlikely to take’ CMEs if they are not
eligible for credit” bolsters this conclusion. All this, in the
Board’s view, means that licensees perceive CMEs’ content
as coming from the State.
Dr. Khatibi counters that “just because individuals
understand that a CME course meets state requirements”
does not mean that they perceive the CME as coming from
the State. To so conclude, she cautions, risks equating
accreditation or a mere “government seal of approval” with
government speech, something deemed insufficient in
Matal. Dr. Khatibi also details how CMEs can meet

24

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

requirements “so long as an individual course is first
approved by certain private organizations,” and how CMEs
are “largely unsupervised by the government except for the
broad standards and a few mandated inclusions.”
Both sides’ arguments have some merit. Though some
of Dr. Khatibi’s allegations border on conclusory, she has
plausibly alleged facts suggesting that attendees treat her as
the person responsible for CME content. She is also correct
that the State certainly expects, if not relies, on the
participation of private parties in executing the CME
scheme. See, e.g., CCR tit. 16, § 1337.5(a). At the same
time, however, “the fact that private parties take part in the
design and propagation of a message does not extinguish the
governmental nature of the message.” Walker, 276 U.S. at
217; see Johanns, 544 U.S. at 562. And private parties’
involvement alone, contrary to her contention, does not
resolve the government speech inquiry.
Otherwise,
Shurtleff’s holistic inquiry would be a futile exercise, not a
vital mode of analysis designed to clarify the very “boundary
between government speech and private expression [that]
can blur.” 596 U.S. at 252. Moreover, “[t]hat Plaintiffs are
evaluated and asked questions by course attendees—like
most educators—and must come up with ‘examples’ and
‘strategies’ related to implicit bias—a pedagogical technique
applicable to virtually any educational topic—does not alter
the reasonable inference that CME curriculum itself, when
approved for credit, is ‘conveying some message on the
government’s behalf.’” Khatibi II, 2024 U.S. Dist. LEXIS
81485, at *18 (citation omitted).
It also does not seem unreasonable to infer that licensees
perceive the content of accredited CMEs as coming from the
State based on Dr. Khatibi’s own allegations. If physicians
are cognizant that their profession is heavily regulated (in

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

25

light of Dr. Khatibi’s recognition of the multifaceted legal
and regulatory scheme in place); that they attend CMEs,
primarily to secure credits to maintain their licenses (given
Dr. Khatibi’s allegation that licensees will not attend her
courses if they do not comply with state requirements); that
the Board requires licensees to take certain classes with
specific content (like about implicit bias); and only
compliant CMEs get credit (the very concern of
Dr. Khatibi’s lawsuit), then “common sense” commands that
licensees could attribute approved CMEs’ content to
California. See Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 679 (“Determining
whether a complaint states a plausible claim for relief . . .
requires . . . judicial experience and common sense.”).
The Board’s argument that the entire CME scheme was
created for licensees also has considerable force. As we
explained in the historical analysis, California created the
CME scheme “to ensure the continuing competence of
licensed physicians and surgeons.” § 2190. This is far from
an effort to “intentionally open[] a nontraditional forum for
public discourse.” Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 802. It is also a
far cry from Shurtleff, for example, where Boston generously
offered its flagpole “to the public for events” and
“accommodate[d] all applicants seeking to take advantage.”
See 596 U.S. at 249. 8 Nor does the participation of private
That only CMEs on qualifying topics and by approved providers can
receive credit is also evidence that they are not a traditional public
forum. See Summum, 555 U.S. at 478 (“The forum doctrine has been
applied in situations in which … government program was capable of
accommodating a large number of public speakers without defeating the
essential function of the … program.”). “The obvious truth of the matter
is that if [CMEs] were considered to be traditional public forums,” then
California would have to accommodate and accredit any CME taught by
8

26

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

parties change the analysis.
“[P]ermitting limited
discourse,” much like “inaction,” is insufficient to create a
public forum. Cornelius, 473 U.S. at 802.
Considering the above, we conclude that, on balance,
this factor tilts in California’s favor. 9
C.
We next consider “the extent to which the government
has actively shaped or controlled the expression,” which is
fundamental to the government speech inquiry. Shurtleff,
596 U.S. at 252.
Alongside history, California’s
extraordinary control over accredited CMEs is the “most
salient feature of this case.” Id. at 256. Contrary to Dr.
Khatibi’s claims, California not only shapes the content of
CMEs, but it also imposes several restrictions on their form
and delivery. In short, it controls accredited CMEs “from
beginning to end.” See Johanns, 544 U.S. at 560–61.
We begin with the State’s multifaceted CME statutory
and regulatory scheme. See Delano Farms Co. v. Cal. Table
Grape Comm’n, 586 F.3d 1219, 1230 (9th Cir. 2009) (“Our
focus in this case . . . is the statutorily-authorized control the
State has . . . and not the actual level of control evidenced in
the record.” (citing Paramount Land Co. Ltd. P’ship v. Cal.
Pistachio Comm’n, 491 F.3d 1003, 1011 (9th Cir. 2007))).
As discussed, section 2190 orders the Board to set and
anyone. Id. at 480. This would deprive California of the ability to select
which courses are necessary to ensure licensees’ competence, effectively
“defeating the essential function of the … program.” Id. at 478.
Even assuming that the public perception factor favors Dr. Khatibi, our
ultimate conclusion would remain the same. Consideration of the
remaining factors of history and extent of state control decisively
resolves the holistic government speech inquiry in favor of California.

9

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

27

enforce CME requirements on licensees. It also authorizes
the Board to “set content standards for any educational
activity concerning a chronic disease that includes
appropriate information on prevention of the chronic
disease, and on treatment of patients with the chronic
disease, by the application of changes in nutrition and
lifestyle behavior.” Id. Section 2191, meanwhile, orders the
Board to consider a plethora of subjects for accredited
CMEs. These include, for instance, “human sexuality,
defined as the study of a human being as a sexual being and
how they function with respect thereto, and nutrition to be
taken by those licensees whose practices may require
knowledge in those areas;” child and elder abuse; “signs
exhibited by abused women” in health settings; “special care
needs of drug-addicted infants;” and “psychosocial
dynamics of death.” See id. § 2191(a)–(i). Other statutory
provisions order the consideration of additional topics
ranging from HIV prevention, mental health and trauma in
children to chronic diseases, spousal abuse, and COVID-19.
See generally id. §§ 2191.4–2191.6.
Section 2190.1(a), meanwhile, requires that all crediteligible CMEs must “(1) have a scientific or clinical content
with a direct bearing on the quality or cost-effective
provision of patient care, community or public health, or
preventive medicine, (2) concern quality assurance or
improvement, risk management, health facility standards, or
the legal aspects of clinical medicine, (3) concern bioethics
or professional ethics, (4) are designed to improve the
physician-patient relationship and quality of physicianpatient communication,” or otherwise “serve to maintain,
develop, or increase the knowledge, skills, and professional
performance that a physician and surgeon uses to provide
care, or to improve the quality of care provided to patients.”

28

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

See § 2190.1(a) (cleaned up); CCR tit. 16, § 1337.5(a)(3)
(imposing similar content requirements).
All accredited CMEs must also address cultural and
linguistic competence. Section 2190.1(c) meticulously lists
topics that CMEs “shall address at least one or a combination
of:”
(A) Applying
linguistic
skills
to
communicate effectively with the target
population.
(B) Utilizing cultural information to establish
therapeutic relationships.
(C) Eliciting and incorporating pertinent
cultural data in diagnosis and treatment.
(D)(i) Understanding
and
applying
culturally, ethnically, and sociologically
inclusive data to the process of clinical care,
including, as appropriate, information and
evidence-based cultural competency training
pertinent to the treatment of, and provision of
care to, individuals who identify as lesbian,
gay, bisexual, transgender, queer or
questioning, asexual, intersex, or gender
diverse. This includes processes specific to
those seeking gender-affirming care services.
(D)(ii) An
evidence-based
cultural
competency training implemented pursuant
to clause (i) may include all of the following:
(I) Information about the effects,
including, but not limited to, ongoing
personal effects of historical and

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

contemporary exclusion and oppression
of transgender, gender diverse, or
intersex (TGI) communities.
(II) Information about communicating
more effectively across gender identities,
including TGI-inclusive terminology,
using people’s correct names and
pronouns, even when they are not
reflected in records or legal documents,
avoiding language, whether verbal or
nonverbal, that demeans, ridicules, or
condemns TGI individuals, and avoiding
making assumptions about gender
identity by using gender-neutral language
and avoiding language that presumes all
individuals are heterosexual, cisgender,
or gender conforming, or nonintersex.
(III) Discussion on health inequities
within the TGI community, including
family and community acceptance.
(IV) Perspectives of diverse, local
constituency groups and TGI-serving
organizations including, but not limited
to, the California Transgender Advisory
Council.
(V) Recognition of the difference
between personal values and professional
responsibilities with regard to serving
TGI people.

29

30

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

(VI) Recommendations on administrative
changes to make health care facilities
more inclusive.
The Legislature has also designated geriatric care as a
mandatory CME topic for specific licensees. § 2190.3. So,
too, are CMEs for pain management, treatment of terminally
ill patients, and drug dependency. Id. § 2190.5; see also id.
§ 2190.6 (providing alternative means of fulfilling
§ 2190.5’s requirements). Conversely, the statutory scheme
delineates which CMEs are exempt from requirements or
accreditation. See, e.g., id. § 2190.1(b)(2) (excluding CMEs
“dedicated solely to research or other issues that does not
include a direct patient care” and CMEs by out-of-state
providers from cultural and linguistic competency
requirements).
All these content-related requirements are in addition to
the myriad other mandates imposed by the regulations.
Section 1337.5(a)(1) of title 16 of the regulations require
CME instructors to possess specific qualifications, such as
“a faculty appointment . . . directly related to the practice of
medicine” in an approved institution. The regulations
dictate, too, that the “need for the course and how the need
was determined shall be clearly stated and maintained on
file;” that the content of the course address a list of specified
topics; that each program “shall clearly state educational
objectives that can be realistically accomplished within the
framework of the course;” that the “teaching methods” be
“described;” that each course shall include an evaluation;
and that course organizers “maintain a record of attendance
of each participant.” CCR tit. 16, § 1337.5(a)(2)–(5).
The regulations also provide that the “following
programs are approved by the division for continuing

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

31

education credit: (1) Programs which qualify for Category I
credit from the California Medical Association or the
American Medical Association; (2) Programs which qualify
for prescribed credit from the American Academy of Family
Physicians; (3) Programs offered by other organizations and
institutions acceptable to the division.” CCR tit. 16,
§ 1337(a). “Only those courses and other educational
activities that meet the requirements of Section 2190.1 of the
code which are offered by these organizations shall be
acceptable for credit under this section.” Id. § 1337(b); id.
§ 1337(c)–(f) (detailing other limitations related to CMEs
provided by these private organizations).
Additionally, the Board exercises final approval
authority over the entire CME scheme. The Board “shall
audit during each year a random sample of physicians who
have reported compliance with the continuing education
requirement.” CCR tit. 16, § 1338(a); id. § 1338(b)–(e)
(detailing related auditing, recordkeeping, and disciplinary
processes). “When reviewing a physician’s documentation
for completed continuing education,” as Dr. Khatibi notes,
“the Medical Board will randomly audit CME courses to
determine whether the course is approved for credit.”
“[A]ny course deemed unacceptable by” the Board receives
no credit. Id. § 1337.5(c). The Board “in its discretion” may
also waive the CME requirements for various reasons,
including undue hardship. Id. § 1339(a).
What we have catalogued—perhaps painstakingly—
reveals that California has not only provided a “general
description” of CMEs but also “detail[ed] the themes to be
emphasized, the actors to be used, the demographics to be
targeted, and the media to be employed.” Paramount Land,
491 F.3d at 1011 (finding government speech). It has also
provided the starting and endpoint for any CME provider.

32

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

The State dictates who may teach the courses. CCR tit. 16,
§ 1337.5(a)(1); id. § 1337(a). It tells those qualified
instructors to record their courses’ purpose and teaching
methodology as well as ensure that their courses address
specific topics. Id. §§ 1337.5(a)(2)–(4). It also sets
guidelines related to attendance and evaluation. Id.
§§ 1337.5(a)(4)–(6). The Board may then audit, accredit, or
reject the CME; it may also waive licensees’ compliance
obligations. Id. §§ 1337.5–1339. California therefore
controls accredited CMEs “from beginning to end.” 10 See
Johanns, 544 U.S. at 560–61.
Dr. Khatibi resists this conclusion, but none of her
arguments is persuasive. She first disputes California’s
control over the content of CMEs, emphasizing the role of
private parties in the scheme. She also argues that unlike in
Summum, where the city exercised “editorial control” of the
monuments’ messages, 555 U.S. at 472, and Walker, where
Texas had “sole control” over license plates, 576 U.S. at 213,
the Board’s role of accreditation is one of “mere approval.”
But as the Supreme Court explained, California’s
reliance on private organizations “does not extinguish the
governmental nature of the message.” See Walker, 276 U.S.
at 202 (citing Summum, 555 U.S. at 470–471). California is
Just as not all states share California’s longstanding history with CME
regulation, see supra note 5, many also do not appear to exercise a
comparable level of control over CMEs. Compare California’s § 2190–
2190.6; id. §§ 2191–2191.6; id. §§ 2196–2196.9; CCR tit. 16, §§ 1336–
1339.5, with MD. CODE ANN., HEALTH OCC. § 15-307 (imposing no
comparable specific content requirements); MD. CODE REGS.
§ 10.32.01.10 (2025) (same); IND. CODE ANN. § 25-22.5-3-1 (2025)
(imposing no CME requirements on physician-licensees); MONT. CODE
ANN. § 37-1-141 (2023) (same); S.D. CODIFIED LAWS § 36-4-24.1
(2025) (same).
10

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

33

free to “le[ave] the development of the remaining details to
an entity . . . answerable to the” Board, which is precisely
what it has done. See Johanns, 544 U.S at 561. The State
has outlined the topics that CMEs must cover. See, e.g.,
§ 2190.1. It has set who may and how to teach them. See,
e.g., CCR tit. 16, § 1337.5. It has also designated specific
private organizations to deliver accredited CMEs, provided
that the courses meet specific criteria. See, e.g., id. § 1337.
And the Board may ultimately audit and reject any CME as
unacceptable. See id. § 1337.5(c). As in Johanns, this is
sufficient, “effective[] control[].” 544 U.S at 560.
Relatedly, Dr. Khatibi’s role as the “sole organizer” of a
course does not mean that the State has exercised no control
over content. To the contrary, Dr. Khatibi admits that her
courses have complied with all CME requirements apart
from the implicit bias one at issue in this case. Compliance
presupposes a rule; without rules, there can be no
compliance. Put another way, Dr. Khatibi has conceded that
her CMEs have been shaped by California. They have
aligned with the “overarching message” set by the State,
even as California has “left the development of the
remaining details” to her and other private parties. See
Johanns, 544 U.S. at 561. Combined with the Board’s
auditing and ultimate approval authority, this is editorial
control. See id. at 560–62.
For this reason, it is also of no moment that the Board
normally accredits CMEs without an audit, see CCR tit. 16,
§ 1337.5(b), or that it has not yet chosen to audit Dr.
Khatibi’s courses. No one disputes that the Board may audit
any course and deem it ineligible for credit. This, combined
with the State’s requirement that any accredited CME
(which must be provided by specified, qualified providers)
relate to at least a few, if broad, topics, see, e.g., § 2190.1(a),

34

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

means that California shapes or controls CMEs “from
beginning to end.” See Johanns, 544 U.S. at 560–61 (finding
sufficient governmental control where content was
“specified, in general terms” by Congress and where
Secretary had “final approval authority” (emphasis added)).
Neither would California’s “passivity” have precluded a
finding of government speech here, in light of the relevant
expansive history and statutory and regulatory regime. In
Paramount Land, we applied Johanns and found
government speech even where California “ha[d] not
rejected or edited proposals, or taken a particularly active
role.” See 491 F.3d at 1011–12. What is “dispositive” is
“the government’s ability to control speech, even when it
declined to do so.” See Ranchers Cattlemen Action Legal
Fund United Stockgrowers of Am. v. Vilsack, 6 F.4th 983,
990 (9th Cir. 2021) (emphasis in original) (citing Paramount
Land, 491 F.3d at 1011–12).
Dr. Khatibi’s remaining arguments fare no better. Her
claim that the sheer volume of accredited CMEs dilutes
California’s control over them collapses under Walker’s
wisdom. Walker made clear that the “desire to communicate
numerous messages does not mean that the messages
conveyed are not” the government’s. 576 U.S. at 217; see
also id. at 221–22 (Alito, J., dissenting) (noting that there are
over 350 varieties of specialty plates). It is the state’s right,
Walker stressed, to convey “many more messages” if it
wished. Id. at 217. Citing Summum, the Court declared that
the government speech analysis was “not dependent on the
precise number of” expression or messages at issue. Id.
(citing 555 U.S. at 471–72).
Shurtleff reaffirmed this reasoning. There, the court
clarified that it did “not settle [the] dispute by counting

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

35

noses—or, rather, counting flags. That is so for several
reasons,” including the more salient importance of focusing
on Boston’s policies, which were unwritten, and whether
Boston “wished to speak for itself by raising flags.” See 596
U.S. at 256–57. The fact that there may be numerous
accredited CMEs, therefore, “does not mean that the
messages conveyed are not [the government]’s own.”
Walker, 576 U.S. at 217.
More to the point, Dr. Khatibi makes no allegation of
noncompliance. She does not allege that any accredited
CME has somehow deviated from the Board’s “overarching
message,” see Johanns, 544 U.S. at 561, of what is necessary
to “ensure the continuing competence of licensed physicians
and surgeons,” see § 2190. In fact, all the sample CMEs Dr.
Khatibi references align with state-mandated topics. 11 She
accordingly fails to show that California has been “babbling
prodigiously and incoherently” or “expressing contradictory
views” through accredited CMEs—something that could
have counseled toward finding private speech. See Matal,
582 U.S. at 235–36.

Compare Opening Brief (“OB”) 32 (“efficacy of endoscopic
endonasal surgical navigation”), with § 2190.1(a)(2) (CMEs must
“concern quality assurance or improvement … of clinical medicine”);
OB 32 (“sexual orientation and gender identity in cardiovascular care”),
with § 2191 (ordering the Board to consider “human sexuality” in
licensees’ practices) and § 2190.1(c) (listing cultural competency
requirements touching on sexuality and gender); OB 26 (providing
allegedly private speech example of CME called “Association Between
the Relaxation of Public Health and Social Measures and Transmission
of the SARS-CoV-2 Omicron Variant in South Korea”), with
§ 2190.1(a)(1) (CMEs must “have a scientific or clinical content with a
direct bearing on the quality … of patient care, community or public
health).

11

36

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Second, Dr. Khatibi’s comparisons of the Board to the
governmental bodies in Matal, Shurtleff, Summum, and
Walker are unpersuasive. The Board exercises far more
control than the PTO in Matal. Indeed, the Board designates
specific private organizations or qualified faculty to teach
accredited CMEs. See CCR tit. 16, §§ 1337(a), 1337.5(a).
These instructors’ courses must at least adhere to the—in Dr.
Khatibi’s words—“broad parameters” set by California to be
accredited. See, e.g., § 2190.1. By contrast, the PTO
imposes no similar requirements. Any natural or juristic
person may create a mark, and they are able to do so from an
entirely blank canvas. 15 U.S.C. § 1127. The PTO also
“does not dream up” content standards, Matal, 582 U.S. at
235, whereas California has long done so, mandating that
CMEs address topics like the “legal aspects of clinical
medicine” and “health inequities within the TGI community,
including family and community acceptance.”. See, e.g.,
§§ 2190.1(a)(2), (c)(1)(D)(ii)(III)
The PTO normally “does not inquire whether any
viewpoint conveyed by a mark is consistent with
Government policy,” and it lacks authority to remove the
mark absent very specific and limited circumstances. Matal,
582 U.S. at 235. In contrast, the Board may audit and revoke
the accreditation of any CME that fails to comply with its
“acceptability” criteria, including content requirements. See
§ 1337.5(c). Also unlike the PTO, which “has made it clear
that registration does not constitute approval of a mark,”
Matal, 582 U.S. at 237, the Board’s accreditation reflects its
judgment that a CME’s content is essential to “ensure the
continuing competence” of licensees. § 2190.
California’s oversight over CMEs dwarfs the nominal
supervision by the cities in Shurtleff and Summum, too. In
Shurtleff, Boston “hadn’t spent a lot of time really thinking

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

37

about” the flags it permitted to fly and “had nothing—no
written policies or clear internal guidance.” 596 U.S. at 257
(cleaned up). Similarly, in Summum, Pleasant Grove lacked
a written policy on monuments until a year after the plaintiffs
donated the monument at issue. 555 U.S. at 465. And even
then, the city’s eventual policy seemed limited in nature. Id.
(detailing the policy’s focus on historical ties to the
community). California’s CME regime, in contrast, has long
been embedded in and enforced through a complex web of
statute and regulation. See, e.g., § 2190.1; CCR tit. 16,
§ 1337.5. It is also significant that both the monument in
Summum and the flag in Shurtleff were entirely privately
designed, with no government input whatsoever. The
content of accredited CMEs, as we have detailed, is shaped
by the State from their inception.
Walker also undercuts, rather than reinforces, Dr.
Khatibi’s claims. It is true that Walker emphasized how
Texas had “sole control over the design, typeface color, and
alphanumeric pattern for all license plates.” 576 U.S. at 213.
But the Court also highlighted that its analysis—like ours—
was holistic. See id. at 210–13. The Board’s lack of the
same granular control over every element of accredited
CMEs is thus inconsequential. The Board need not
micromanage the drawing board or the classroom for
accredited CMEs to count as government speech. Much like
Texas, the Board, for decades, has “‘effectively controlled,’”
them “by exercising ‘final approval authority,’” id. at 213,
and by dictating content standards, pedagogical frameworks,
and instructor qualifications. See, e.g., § 2190.1; CCR tit.
16, § 1337.5. To otherwise hold “risks micro-managing
legislative and regulatory schemes, a task federal courts are
ill-equipped to undertake.” See Paramount Land, 491 F.3d
at 1012.

38

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

*

*

*

We hold that CMEs eligible for credit under California
law constitute government speech. See Shurtleff, 596 U.S.
at 248. And because they constitute government speech,
CMEs eligible for credit are therefore immune from the
strictures of the Free Speech Clause. See Summum, 555 U.S.
at 464. 12
“If there is any fixed star in our constitutional
constellation, it is that no official, high or petty, can
prescribe what shall be orthodox….” W. Va. State Bd. of
Educ. v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624, 642 (1943). This star yet
shines. Just as California cannot compel Plaintiffs to teach
subjects against their beliefs in their private capacities,
Plaintiffs cannot compel California to speak against its own
in its official capacity as guardian against “quacks and
pretenders and from the mistakes of incapable practitioners.”
Gerino, 77 P. at 167.
AFFIRMED.

Accordingly, we need not reach Plaintiffs’ unconstitutional conditions
claim. See Agency for Int’l Dev. v. All. for Open Soc’y Int’l, Inc., 570
U.S. 205, 214 (2013) (“[T]he Government may not deny a benefit to a
person on a basis that infringes his constitutionally protected freedom of
speech even if he has no entitlement to that benefit.” (cleaned up)); see
also Matal, 582 U.S. at 239–40 (suggesting that the doctrine only applies
to “cash subsidies or their equivalent”).
12

