FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES SECURITIES
AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
BRENDA CHRISTINE
BARRY; ERIC CHRISTOPHER
CANNON; CALEB AUSTIN
MOODY, DBA Sky Stone,
Defendants - Appellants,
and
PACIFIC WEST CAPITAL GROUP,
INC., ANDREW B. CALHOUN
IV, PWCG TRUST, BAK WEST,
INC., ANDREW B. CALHOUN,
Jr., CENTURY POINT,
LLC, MICHAEL WAYNE DOTTA,
Defendants.

No. 23-2699
D.C. No.
2:15-cv-02563DDP-AS
OPINION

2

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Dean D. Pregerson, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted December 6, 2024
Pasadena, California
Filed August 11, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould, Richard R. Clifton, and Gabriel
P. Sanchez, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Clifton
SUMMARY *
Securities Law
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the Securities and Exchange
Commission (SEC) in the SEC’s action alleging that
Defendants, who were sales agents for Pacific West Capital
Group (PWCG), violated federal securities laws by offering
and selling unregistered securities and by not being properly
registered as broker-dealers.
Defendants promoted and sold fractional interests in life
settlements. The district court held that PWCG’s life
settlements were securities under the Securities Act of 1933
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

3

and that Defendants had not established an applicable
exemption from the securities laws’ registration
requirements.
The panel held that fractional interests in life settlements
are investment contracts, and thus securities, under the
federal securities laws. Three features of PWCG’s life
settlements—its selection of specific policies on certain
terms, its construction and operation of its premium reserve
system, and the fractionalized nature of the interests—
together satisfy the Howey test’s requirements that profits
come “from the efforts of others.” SEC v. W.J. Howey Co.,
328 U.S. 293, 301 (1946).
The panel held that PWCG’s issue of fractional interests
in life settlements was not exempt from the federal securities
laws’ registration requirements. PWCG’s life settlements
shared a financing scheme, were the same type of security,
and were offered to at least one out-of-state
resident. Therefore, PWCG’s offerings were part of an
integrated, interstate offering.
Defendants argued that the district court erred in
awarding disgorgement because disgorgement requires
pecuniary harm to victims and no pecuniary harm
existed. The panel affirmed the district court’s finding of
pecuniary harm because buyers of PWCG’s fractional
interests in life settlements suffered pecuniary harm through
the loss of the time value of their money.
Finally, the panel affirmed the district court’s imposition
of an injunction against Defendant Eric Cannon and civil
penalties against all three Defendants.

4

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

COUNSEL
Kerry J. Dingle (argued), Senior Appellate Counsel; Jordan
A. Kennedy, Appellate Counsel; Daniel Staroselsky,
Assistant General Counsel; Tracey A. Hardin and Michael
A. Conley, Solicitors; Megan Barbero, General Counsel;
Securities and Exchange Commission, Washington, D.C.;
Kathryn C. Wanner, Securities and Exchange Commission,
Los Angeles, California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Igor V. Timofeyev (argued), Paul Hastings LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Alyssa K. Tapper and Alexander Sweet,
Paul Hastings LLP, Los Angeles, California; Nicolas
Morgan, Investor Choice Advocates Network, Los Angeles,
California; for Defendants-Appellants.
Gregory Nolan, Kenneth P. White, and Tyler C. Creekmore,
Brown White & Osborn LLP, Los Angeles, California, for
Amicus Curiae Ongkaruck Sripetch.

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

5

OPINION
CLIFTON, Circuit Judge:
Pacific West Capital Group (PWCG), a California
corporation, sold fractional interests in life settlements to
investors. A life settlement is a transaction in which a person
who owns a life insurance policy on his or her own life sells
that policy to investors for a negotiated price. Thereafter, the
investors pay the premiums on the policy until the insured
dies, at which point those investors receive the policy’s death
benefit.
We conclude that the fractional interests in the life
settlements sold by PWCG were “investment contracts” and
thus securities subject to the registration requirements of the
Securities Act of 1933. In our view, as we discuss below,
these investments were securities because the purchasers of
the fractional interests sold by PWCG depended on the
efforts of PWCG to profit through PWCG’s selection of
policies, its determination of prices to be paid for those
policies, and its premium reserve system to maintain
investors’ fractional interests. Other circuits have previously
divided over the question of whether life settlements are
securities subject to registration. In concluding that the
fractional interests were securities, we join the Eleventh and
Fifth Circuits and depart from a conclusion reached by the
D.C. Circuit.
Defendants-Appellants Brenda Barry, Eric Cannon, and
Caleb Moody (collectively Defendants) were sales agents
for PWCG who promoted and sold fractional interests in life
settlements. The Securities and Exchange Commission
(SEC) alleged that Defendants violated federal securities
laws by offering and selling unregistered securities and by

6

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

not being properly registered as broker-dealers. The district
court granted summary judgment to the SEC, concluding
that PWCG’s offerings and sales of fractional interests in life
settlements were offerings of unregistered securities and that
the sales were not exempt from registration under the
intrastate offering exemption. As remedies, it ordered
disgorgement of a portion of the commissions received by
the Defendants, imposed civil penalties against each of the
Defendants, and enjoined Cannon from future violations of
the securities laws. We affirm.
I. Background
Life settlements emerged from “viatical settlements,”
which were transactions that arose during the 1980s AIDS
crisis in which terminally ill patients sold their life insurance
policies to investors. Joy D. Kosiewicz, Death for Sale: A
Call to Regulate the Viatical Settlement Industry, 48 CASE
W. RSRV. L. REV. 701, 701-02 & n.4 (1998). Some people
suffering from the disease needed money because the illness
often made it hard for them to work and imposed heavy
medical costs. See SEC v. Life Partners, Inc., 898 F. Supp.
14, 17 (D.D.C. 1995). An insured could “surrender” their
policy to the issuing life insurance company for a fraction of
the policy’s value. For a larger fraction, however, an insured
could sell the policy to others, such as investors. As PWCG’s
promotional brochure explained, using hypothetical
numbers, “Now, instead of being able to receive only
$100,000 on a $1,000,000 policy [from the life insurance
company], the insured might expect to receive $250,000
from investors.” Life settlements allow insureds to get more
money for their policies from private investors than they
could otherwise receive from their life insurance companies.

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

7

In exchange for paying the insured for their policy and
taking on the responsibility of paying the premiums, the
investor receives the death benefit after the insured dies. The
investor profits if the insured dies early enough to outweigh
the cost of the policy and its premiums. As the Fifth Circuit
explained, “To put it bluntly, a life settlement is a bet on the
length of the insured’s life.” Living Benefits Asset Mgmt. v.
Kestrel Aircraft Co., 916 F.3d 528, 531 (5th Cir. 2019).
PWCG promoted and sold fractional interests in life
settlements and structured the payment of their premiums.
Life settlement brokers and resellers sent medical and policy
information about insureds to PWCG to see if it was
interested in purchasing them to sell to its own investors.
According to one of its promotional brochures, PWCG
reviewed policies every month that were collectively worth
hundreds of millions of dollars for investment opportunity.
PWCG explained it would invest only in those policies
where the insureds were at least 75 years old, the insurance
company was reputable, and the policies were not subject to
loopholes that could restrict payouts. The brochure stated,
“Policies offered by PWCG have a minimum total fixed
return of 100%, meaning investors will double their money.”
PWCG reviewed insureds’ medical records to assess the
likelihood that insureds would die in four to seven years
from the date of purchase, though PWCG did not engage
medical professionals to do so.
PWCG established a trust, PWCG Trust, to be the
policies’ owner and beneficiary, and it appointed as trustee
a company with experience administering life settlements,
Mills, Potoczak & Co. (Mills Potoczak). PWCG and
Calhoun identified policies for PWCG Trust to purchase.
PWCG then offered its investors fractional shares in PWCG
Trust’s beneficiary interests in specific policies. Mills

8

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

Potoczak assigned those fractional shares of a particular
policy’s death benefit to the purchasing investors. As trustee,
Mills Potoczak administered premium payments, monitored
whether the insured died, and distributed the payouts upon
an insured’s death. Paying the insurance policies’ premiums
was essential to the profitability of life settlements because
otherwise the policies risked lapsing and future benefits
would be lost.
To fund its payment of life settlement premiums, PWCG
used investor proceeds to create what it described as a
“three-tiered premium reserve system that is unique in the
industry.” The first tier, the “primary premium reserve,” held
enough money to pay the premiums on a policy for six to
nine years. The second tier, called the “first general reserve,”
comprised “1% of all investor money for all policies.” If
PWCG and Mills Potoczak depleted the money from the first
tier, then the second tier would be drawn upon to make
premium payments. If both the first and second tiers ran out
of money, then the third tier, the “second general reserve,”
would contribute. The third tier was funded by money from
the first tier of other policies whose insureds had died before
their corresponding first tier funds ran out. PWCG could also
make “premium calls” requiring investors to put in more
money to pay policies’ premiums if the premium reserve
system failed.
The system failed. While PWCG intended to buy
policies covering insureds who would die within four to
seven years, too many of the original insureds lived longer
than that. PWCG’s primary reserve system could not make
the required premium payments. PWCG turned to the next
two tiers, drawing down the secondary and tertiary reserves.
When the reserves ran out, PWCG resorted to premium calls
or used proceeds from the sale of new policy interests to pay

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

9

for existing premiums. Around 150 investors received
premium calls, totaling more than $1.7 million. Those who
did not answer premium calls were told they had lost their
investments. A receiver was later appointed by the district
court to take over management of PWCG Trust. The receiver
said that PWCG’s failed bets on insureds’ lifespans, as well
as PWCG’s “failing to engage in the high level of
management required to maintain the Policies,” had
“predestined the shortfalls in reserves amounts for each of
the Policies.”
In April 2015, the SEC sued PWCG, PWCG Trust,
PWCG founder Andrew B. Calhoun IV (Calhoun), Andrew
Calhoun Jr. (Calhoun’s father), Michael Dotta, and the
current Defendants-Appellants: Barry, Cannon, and
Moody. 1 The SEC alleged, in relevant part, that PWCG,
Calhoun, Calhoun Jr., Dotta, and Defendants violated
Sections 5(a) and (c) of the Securities Act of 1933 by
offering and selling unregistered securities, 15 U.S.C.
§§ 77e(a), 77e(c), and Section 15(a) of the Securities and
Exchange Act of 1934 (Exchange Act) by failing to register
as broker-dealers, 15 U.S.C. § 78o(a). The SEC also charged
PWCG and Calhoun with securities fraud and Calhoun with
controlling person liability. All parties other than the three
current Defendants have settled or been dismissed. PWCG
and Calhoun each agreed to millions of dollars in
disgorgement and hundreds of thousands of dollars in
penalties to account for the fraud-based charges. The SEC’s
settlement with PWCG Trust included appointing the
In its complaint, the SEC also named two companies, BAK West and
Century Point, that received Barry’s and Cannon’s commissions from
PWCG. On appeal here are only Defendants-Appellants Barry, Cannon,
and Moody.
1

10

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

receiver over the Trust. The three current Defendants, who
played no managerial role at PWCG and against whom the
SEC alleged only nonfraud violations, are the only
defendants who remain.
The current appeal results from two orders of the district
court from 2023. The first granted the SEC’s renewed
motion for summary judgment and denied Defendants’
cross-motion for summary judgment. The district court held
that PWCG’s life settlements were securities under the
Securities Act of 1933 and that Defendants had not
established an applicable exemption from the securities
laws’ registration requirement. The second order required
Defendants to disgorge one-third of the commissions they
received selling PWCG’s life settlements, pay civil penalties
of $15,000 each, and enjoined Cannon from future violations
of the securities laws. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1291. We affirm.
II. Discussion
We review a district court’s grant of summary judgment
de novo. SEC v. Belmont Reid & Co., Inc., 794 F.2d 1388,
1390 (9th Cir. 1986). We also review de novo a district
court’s “determination whether a transaction is a security.”
Id. We review remedies ordered by the district court under
the Securities Act and the Exchange Act for abuse of
discretion. SEC v. Husain, 70 F.4th 1173, 1180 (9th Cir.
2023).
A. Investment Contract
We start with the question of whether fractional interests
in life settlements are investment contracts, and thus
securities, under the federal securities laws. We conclude
that they are.

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

11

The Securities Act of 1933 defines a security broadly as
including an “investment contract.” 15 U.S.C. § 77b(a)(1).
In SEC v. W.J. Howey Co., 328 U.S. 293 (1946), the
Supreme Court interpreted “investment contract” to mean “a
contract, transaction or scheme whereby a person invests his
money in a common enterprise and is led to expect profits
solely from the efforts of the promoter or a third party.” Id.
at 298-99. The Howey test has three elements: first, an
investment of money in, second, a common enterprise, and
third, the “profits were to come solely from the efforts of
others.” SEC v. Eurobond Exch., Ltd., 13 F.3d 1334, 1338
(9th Cir. 1994). This third element is often described as the
“efforts of others” requirement and is the only element of the
Howey test at issue here.
The Howey test’s broad definition, the Court explained,
“permits the fulfillment of the statutory purpose of
compelling full and fair disclosure relative to the issuance of
the many types of instruments that in our commercial world
fall within the ordinary concept of a security.” Howey, 328
U.S. at 299 (internal quotation marks omitted). The
definition “embodies a flexible rather than a static principle,
one that is capable of adaptation to meet the countless and
variable schemes devised by those who seek the use of the
money of others on the promise of profits.” Id. The Supreme
Court has since commanded that “form should be
disregarded for substance and the emphasis should be on
economic reality.” Tcherepnin v. Knight, 389 U.S. 332, 336
(1967).
Whether an investor’s expectations of profits are “solely
from the efforts of the promoter or a third party” does not
require that the efforts of others be the only factor for profit
but “whether the efforts made by those other than the
investor are the undeniably significant ones, those essential

12

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

managerial efforts which affect the failure or success of the
enterprise.” SEC v. Glenn W. Turner Enters., Inc., 474 F.2d
476, 482 (9th Cir. 1973) (emphasis added). Investors’
expectations can be established through promoters’
representations in materials such as brochures,
advertisements, oral statements, or contracts. See Hocking v.
Dubois, 885 F.2d 1449, 1457 (9th Cir. 1989); Eurobond, 13
F.3d at 1341.
Howey’s “efforts of others” element turns on the source
of an enterprise’s profits. If an enterprise’s profit comes from
developments outside of the promoter’s control, then the
transaction is not an investment contract. For example, in
SEC v. Belmont Reid & Co., Inc., we held that the sale of
gold coins for a fixed price was not an investment contract
because the purchasers’ opportunity to profit came from
increases in the global price for gold and not the efforts of
the promoter who sold gold to the investor. 794 F.2d at 1391.
Similarly, in Noa v. Key Futures Inc., 638 F.2d 77 (9th Cir.
1980), we held that the sale and storage of silver bars for
investors was not an investment contract because the profit
depended on fluctuations in the global market for silver and
not on Key Futures’ managerial or entrepreneurial effort. Id.
at 79-80.
In contrast, if an investor is dependent on a seller to
provide efforts that could lead to profits, then the Howey
“efforts of others” requirement is satisfied. We have
explained that a key factor for satisfying the efforts-of-others
inquiry is when a promoter has “practical,” SEC v. Goldfield
Deep Mines Co. of Nev., 758 F.2d 459, 464 (9th Cir. 1985),
or “complete control,” SEC v. R. G. Reynolds Enters., Inc.,
952 F.2d 1125, 1131 (9th Cir. 1991), over the enterprise and
its profitability. We have held that the efforts of others could
be seen in a promoter’s sale of foreign government bonds,

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

13

financed by foreign currency loans, because “any profits to
investors came from the efforts and expertise of” the
promoter who chose when to purchase the bonds, which
bonds, how many, when to take out a loan, and what
currency the loan should be in, among other factors.
Eurobond, 13 F.3d at 1341; see also Int’l Bhd. of Teamsters,
Chauffeurs, Warehousemen & Helpers of Am. v. Daniel, 439
U.S. 551, 562 (1979) (holding that a pension plan is not an
investment contract because whether an employee profits
“would depend primarily on the employee’s efforts to meet
the vesting requirements, rather than the fund’s investment
success”). 2
The district court here concluded that PWCG’s efforts in
choosing which policies to offer investors using its own
selection criteria, coupled with investors’ lack of control
over which policies PWCG selected, supported the
conclusion that investors were reliant on PWCG’s efforts to
profit. Further, the establishment and operation of the
premium reserve system by PWCG represented “the kind of
‘essential managerial’ efforts that the ‘efforts of others’
element requires.” In concluding that life settlements are
investment contracts under the federal securities laws, the
district court’s decision aligned with opinions of the

An investment contract is distinguishable from an ordinary sale-ofgoods or services contract because investors in investment contracts are
motivated by “financial returns on their investments” and not “a desire
to use or consume the item purchased.” United Hous. Found., Inc. v.
Forman, 421 U.S. 837, 852-53 (1975). If a transaction merely resembles
“any sale-of-goods contract in which the buyer pays in advance of
delivery and the ability of the seller to perform is dependent, in part, on
both his managerial skill and some good fortune,” then the efforts-ofothers test is not met. See Belmont Reid, 794 F.2d at 1391.
2

14

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

Eleventh and Fifth Circuits and departed from a contrary
opinion of the D.C. Circuit.
We agree with the conclusion of the district court that the
fractional interests in life settlements offered and sold by
PWCG were investment contracts and thus securities. As we
discuss below, three features of PWCG’s life settlements—
its selection of specific policies on certain terms, its
construction and operation of its premium reserve system,
and the fractionalized nature of the interests—together
satisfy the Howey test’s requirement that profits come “from
the efforts of others.” Howey, 328 U.S. at 301. 3
1. Selection and Purchase of Policies
PWCG’s selection of life insurance policies, including
the evaluation of insureds and the terms of their policies and
the negotiation of the price paid for the policies,
demonstrates the critical nature of the efforts of PWCG. It is
a given that everyone will die at some time. Whether a
specific life settlement will be profitable depends on
choosing those policies that will pay out death benefits soon
enough to make it worth the negotiated price of purchasing
the life settlement and paying the policy’s premiums until
the insured’s death.
PWCG selected which policies to purchase and
negotiated the prices it paid for those policies. PWCG
reviewed insureds’ ages, medical records, and family
histories, among other data, and bought policies only of the
We do not consider whether any one feature would alone be sufficient
under the test. But see Living Benefits Asset Mgmt., 916 F.3d at 541
(holding that the life settlements there were securities based only on prepurchase selection and no post-purchase efforts and rejecting explicitly
the D.C. Circuit’s Life Partners pre-/post-purchase distinction); see also
below at 13-22.

3

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

15

insureds that it thought would die within four to seven years
of purchase. Company officials necessarily exercised
discretion and judgment in choosing policies because, as
Calhoun explained, “[T]here’s always a policy out there that
we can purchase.” In making offers to investors, PWCG
presented them with policies that had already been selected
by PWCG along with summaries of the insureds’ medical
records—but not the original medical records themselves.
Calhoun said, “There’s no way that we would be able to
redact [a complete set of original medical records] and give
all that information to every potential investor.” Investors
understood PWCG to be recommending policies to them and
found the curation valuable, including the assessment that
the insured would likely die soon enough to make the
purchase profitable.
PWCG emphasized its “efforts and expertise,”
Eurobond, 13 F.3d at 1341, in its promotional materials. In
its brochure, PWCG touted its special ability to choose the
precise policies that would pay out high returns for investors.
PWCG advertised the above-average returns that it would be
able to secure because of its “approach that has been tested
and proven reliable . . . [with] high standards for
investments.” The PWCG brochure also said, “We are proud
of the methodology we have devised for supporting
preservation of principal and capital and maximizing return
potential for our investors.” PWCG assured investors that
“[e]ach policy submitted to us undergoes rigorous scrutiny
using a predetermined set of criteria, and we select the most
desirable from approximately $250+ million worth of
policies per month.” One investor explained that they
understood “the whole foundation” of PWCG’s business is
“to make sure that [investors] get some, you know, good
policies.” PWCG emphasized its special expertise and skill

16

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

in choosing policies that would produce profit for potential
investors.
We placed similar emphasis on expertise in SEC v.
Eurobond Exchange, Ltd., where “it [wa]s beyond dispute
that any profits to investors came from the efforts and
expertise of Eurobond” in selecting when to purchase bonds,
which bonds to purchase, how many bonds to purchase,
which banks to borrow from, what currency to transact in,
and more. Id. Likewise, in SEC v. Rubera, 350 F.3d 1084
(9th Cir. 2003), we held that a pay telephone investment
program was a security because “investors in Mr. Rubera’s
telephone investment program were passive, completely
relying” on the “expertise and care” of Rubera’s company to
do things like “select a suitable location for the telephone,
install the pay telephone, maintain the telephone,” and other
tasks. Id. at 1092.
Defendants suggest that their life settlements were not
investment contracts because investors made the ultimate
decision to invest in any specific policy. But all buyers have
the ultimate prerogative to decide whether to put their money
into a transaction or not. The relevant inquiry under the
Howey test is whether PWCG’s investors were led to expect
profits from the efforts of others. Investors here were so led,
in part, because PWCG presented investors with a curated
subset of policies that PWCG said it had chosen specifically
based on its evaluation of those policies’ financial terms and
the underlying insureds’ health.
Defendants argue that this case is like Noa or Belmont
Reid. Instead of the external market force being the global
demand for precious metals, Defendants argue here that the
relevant external force is the insureds’ date of death. See
Noa, 638 F.2d at 79; Belmont Reid, 794 F.2d at 1391. No

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

17

one, they point out, can predict exactly when an insured will
die. Because the unpredictability of death means that life
settlement policies are unpredictable too, Defendants
contend that profits were not dependent on PWCG but on the
variability of insureds’ deaths.
Defendants confuse “profit” with “payout.” Absent
wrongdoing, nobody can predict exactly when someone else
will die. Thus, no one can predict exactly when to expect a
payout from a life insurance policy. But an investor’s profit,
key to the Howey test, depends not just on an insured’s death
but also on the price that PWCG secured for that policy and
on the number and size of additional premium payments
needed to maintain the policies. The “undeniably
significant” efforts that mattered for the success or failure of
PWCG’s profitability in its life settlements include the
research and evaluation that PWCG conducted in selecting
policies and the price that PWCG paid. See Glenn W. Turner
Enterprises, 474 F.2d at 482.
The speculative aspects of life settlements are analogous
to the fractional land interests in SEC v. Schooler, 905 F.3d
1107 (9th Cir. 2018). In Schooler, we held that the sales of
fractionalized interests in land sold via general partnership
shares were investment contracts. Id. at 1112. Even though
“[a]n investment in land for long-term holding is inherently
speculative, . . . decisions about what property to purchase
and how much to pay for it are among the most important
decisions in determining the success of the investment.” Id.
at 1113 (emphasis added). Life settlements are likewise, in
one respect, “inherently speculative.” Id. Yet which policies
to buy and how much to pay for them are similarly “among
the most important decisions in determining the success of
the investment.” Id.; see also Living Benefits Asset Mgmt.,
916 F.3d at 540 (“[T]he most important factors bearing on

18

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

life settlements’ profitability are the accuracy of the actuarial
estimates and the life settlements’ purchase prices.”).
In concluding that PWCG’s selection of policies helps
establish investors’ dependence on the efforts of others, we
take into account PWCG’s “pre-purchase activities,” that is,
activities PWCG engaged in before transacting with
investors. Pre-purchase activities here included the
evaluation and selection of policies to offer to investors. We
conclude that pre-purchase activities are relevant in
assessing whether an investor is dependent on the efforts of
others because that approach is consistent with the flexible
and remedial purpose of the federal securities laws and with
our precedents. We do not limit our consideration to
PWCG’s “post-purchase activities,” that is, actions taken
after the sale of the fractional interests to investors, such as
paying policy premiums and distributing the benefits when
insureds die.
Three other courts of appeal have considered how to
weigh pre-purchase activities in this context, with the D.C.
Circuit concluding that these activities should be heavily
discounted, if weighed at all, and the Eleventh and Fifth
Circuits concluding that they should be weighed case by
case.
The D.C. Circuit in SEC v. Life Partners, Inc., 87 F.3d
536 (D.C. Cir. 1996), held that the viatical settlements at
issue there were not investment contracts because they did
not meet the efforts-of-others requirement from Howey. Id.
at 538. The majority opinion discounted the pre-purchase
entrepreneurial efforts of the promoters, reasoning,
[I]f the value of the promoter’s efforts has
already been impounded into the promoter’s

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

19

fees or into the purchase price of the
investment, and if neither the promoter nor
anyone else is expected to make further
efforts that will affect the outcome of the
investment, then the need for federal
securities regulation is greatly diminished.
Id. at 547. The majority noted that the only significant postpurchase activities Life Partners engaged in were
“ministerial functions,” as opposed to “entrepreneurial
activities” that could affect profits. Id. at 546, 548. The main
“entrepreneurial activities” occurred before purchase and
thus were “impounded” into the purchase price. Id. at 54748. The D.C. Circuit concluded that the SEC was “unable to
show that the promoter’s efforts have a predominant
influence upon investors’ profits.” Id. at 548. Therefore, the
viatical settlements were not securities. Id.
The Eleventh and Fifth Circuits expressly declined to
adopt the D.C. Circuit’s approach and instead considered
promoters’ pre-purchase efforts in holding that life
settlements are securities. See SEC v. Mut. Benefits Corp.,
408 F.3d 737, 745 (11th Cir. 2005); Living Benefits Asset
Mgmt. v. Kestrel Aircraft Co., 916 F.3d at 540-41. The Fifth
Circuit noted that the Life Partners approach “has been
widely criticized by both courts and commentators” and said
that Life Partners “takes an overly rigid approach
considering the remedial aim of federal securities law.”
Living Benefits Asset Mgmt., 916 F.3d at 541.
We agree with the Eleventh and Fifth Circuits that prepurchase activities can be relevant for evaluating whether
profits can be expected to come from the efforts of others.
Three factors guide our consideration.

20

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

First, a strict distinction between pre- and post-purchase
efforts begs the question of whether pre-purchase efforts
actually become “impounded” into an investment’s purchase
price. The D.C. Circuit majority reasoned that it could
heavily discount pre-purchase entrepreneurial activities in
evaluating the efforts of others because the value of those
activities will have “already been impounded into the
promoter’s fees or into the purchase price of the investment.”
Life Partners, 87 F.3d at 547. Thus, the “need” for the
federal securities laws to mandate disclosure “is greatly
diminished.” Id.
The problem with the logic of “impoundment” is that it
assumes, unrealistically, that information about prepurchase efforts will be appreciated by investors and thus
become “impounded” into the final price. Yet the
“impoundment” of relevant information is why the federal
securities laws “compel[] full and fair disclosure.” See
Howey, 328 U.S. at 299. Full and fair disclosure enables a
transaction and its terms to reflect available information and
to allow investors to make informed decisions. In other
words, the impoundment of relevant information into
investors’ knowledge depends on the very issue at stake in a
failure-to-register case such as this one: whether the
securities laws mandate the information disclosure attendant
to registration in the first place.
Second, a bright line between pre- and post-purchase
activities would be inappropriately formalistic given the
purpose and function of the federal securities laws. The
securities laws contain a “broad definition of ‘security,’
sufficient ‘to encompass virtually any instrument that might
be sold as an investment.’” SEC v. Edwards, 540 U.S. 389,
393 (2004) (quoting Reves v. Ernst & Young, 494 U.S. 56,
61 (1990)). The Supreme Court has said, “We will not read

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

21

into the securities laws a limitation not compelled by the
language that would so undermine the laws’ purposes.” Id.
at 395. We think that Judge Wald was correct to note in her
dissent from the D.C. Circuit’s opinion in Life Partners that
the majority’s “bright-line rule,” and its emphasis on postpurchase entrepreneurial efforts, “elevates a formal element,
timing, over the economic reality of the investors’
dependence on the promoter.” 87 F.3d at 551 (Wald, J.,
dissenting). Judge Wald criticized the pre-/post-purchase
distinction for “undercut[ting] the flexibility and ability to
adapt to ‘the countless and variable schemes’ that are the
hallmarks of the Howey test.” Id. (quoting Howey, 328 U.S.
at 299). The Eleventh Circuit agreed that “there is no basis
for excluding pre-purchase managerial activities from the
analysis.” Mut. Benefits Corp., 408 F.3d at 743 (citing Life
Partners, 87 F.3d at 551 (Wald, J., dissenting)). “Indeed,”
that court explained, “investment schemes may often involve
a combination of both pre- and post-purchase managerial
activities, both of which should be taken into consideration
in determining whether Howey’s test is satisfied.” Id. at 74344.
Third, a disregard of pre-purchase efforts could open
loopholes in the securities laws’ otherwise broad coverage.
If courts discounted pre-purchase entrepreneurial efforts in
assessing whether a transaction was an investment contract,
then promoters could front-load their activities before any
investor provides consideration for a legal interest. The risk
here would include transactions where investors are
dependent on the expertise of the promoter. Judge Wald
warned that the Life Partners majority’s decision risks
“exempting the sale of other risky asset-based interests from
the scope of the securities laws,” such as curated packages
of bonds and financial derivatives, where profits depend on

22

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

“the promoter’s skill in selecting what bonds to purchase” or
on “the dealer’s expertise in balancing positions in different
markets,” respectively. SEC v. Life Partners, 102 F.3d 587,
590 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (Wald, J., dissenting from denial of
rehearing and rehearing en banc).
Our decision in Noa v. Key Futures does not compel us
to draw a bright line between pre-purchase activities that
matter less in an analysis of Howey’s efforts-of-others prong
and post-purchase activities that matter more. The Life
Partners majority cited our decision in Noa v. Key Futures,
638 F.2d at 79, in support of discounting pre-purchase
entrepreneurial activities because there the promoter’s “prepurchase efforts,” such as identifying investments and
finding investors, “were only minimally related to the
profitability of the investment,” which depended primarily
on the global price of silver. Life Partners, 87 F.3d at 546.
We think that a better reading of Noa confirms that the
Howey analysis is more holistic. Key Futures’ sale of silver
bars were not investment contracts because “the profits to
the investor depended upon the fluctuations of the silver
market, not the managerial efforts of Key Futures.” Noa, 638
F.2d at 79. Noa thus confirms that the relevant inquiry into
whether an investment contract exists depends on whether
an investor is led to expect profits from the promoter or a
third party. Noa does not, however, dictate exactly when
such representations must have been made. As the Eleventh
Circuit noted, “While it may be true that the ‘solely on the
efforts of the promoter or a third party’ prong of the Howey
test is more easily satisfied by post-purchase activities, there
is no basis for excluding pre-purchase activities from the
analysis.” Mut. Benefits Corp., 408 F.3d at 743.

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

23

2. Premium Reserve System
PWCG’s system of paying the premiums on insurance
policies is another feature that supports our conclusion that
its actions were “undeniably significant” and “essential
managerial efforts which affect[ed] the failure or success of
the enterprise.” Glenn W. Turner Enters., 474 F.2d at 482.
Calhoun, the head of PWCG, said that “PWCG protects
clients’ investments with a three-tiered premium reserve
system that is unique in the industry.” As noted above, at 56, the first tier, the “primary premium reserve,” contained
enough money to pay premiums for six to nine years. If
PWCG spent all the money in the first tier, meaning that the
insured lived longer than the six to nine years expected by
PWCG, then PWCG could turn to the second tier, financed
by “1% of all investor money for all policies.” If the second
tier ran out of funds, then the tertiary reserve would pay for
premiums. The tertiary reserve was made up of “excess or
unused premium dollars from any primary reserve” whose
insured died before their policy’s primary reserve ran out.
Finally, if PWCG exhausted all three tiers of the premium
reserve system, then PWCG could make “premium calls”
where they invoiced investors for additional money.
The premium reserve system reflects that PWCG’s
investors were dependent on the efforts of PWCG to profit.
The premium reserve system was an essential part of
PWCG’s issuance of life settlements. PWCG emphasized
the system as “proprietary” in its promotional materials.
Investors relied on PWCG to structure premium payments.
Individual investors could not calculate on their own the
premiums necessary to maintain policies. PWCG said that it
“goes the extra mile to assure policies are protected.”
Though investors were warned that premium calls were a
possibility, PWCG also promised, “We have established this

24

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

plan to pay premiums so that every policy is kept in force.”
Together with the selection of the most profitable policies,
the premium reserve system played a significant role in
whether investors would profit from life settlements.
Promoters’ efforts in providing essential ongoing
services for an investment are a relevant factor in Howey’s
efforts-of-others analysis. In Rubera, the promoters were an
individual, Rubera, and his solely owned corporation, Alpha
Telcom, Inc. See Rubera, 350 F.3d at 1086-87. In addition
to depending on Alpha for the selection of sites for pay
telephones in which purchasers invested, investors were also
“completely rel[iant]” on Rubera and Alpha to “install the
pay telephone, maintain the telephone, pay all monthly
telephone and utility bills, as well as obtain all regulatory
certifications.” Id. at 1092. We explained, “These functions
were all crucial to the profitability of the investments in the
pay telephones, and, concomitantly, to the success of the
investment program as a whole.” Id. “The entire scheme
hinged on Alpha’s efforts, managerial skill, and—as became
evident at the time of Alpha’s demise—continued solvency.”
Id.
PWCG’s premium reserve system was more
sophisticated than the maintenance of pay telephones by
Rubera and Alpha. That fact supports an inference that
PWCG investors were dependent on PWCG to profit.
Rubera and Alpha were responsible for the operation,
accounting, and regulatory compliance of their pay
telephones. Id. PWCG did similar tasks and more. PWCG
had to estimate lifespans and payouts in order to structure
and fund the premium reserve system. PWCG chose the
amount of money to direct toward paying premiums for six
to nine years from the date of purchase, based on the
projected cost of insurance, the cash surrender value of the

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

25

policy, and “interest rates, mortality rates, and expense
charges.” If the primary reserve system ran out, then PWCG
would draw on the secondary and tertiary reserves, which
PWCG also structured based on its calculations of
contingent events.
Defendants argue that the premium reserve system was
simply an administrative, “ministerial” function and did not
require managerial or entrepreneurial skill. Defendants
further suggest that PWCG’s ultimately inadequate
financing of the premium reserve system was indicative of a
lack of managerial efforts because insureds’ longevity, not
PWCG’s premium reserve system, was the final determinant
of profit.
The ultimate breakdown of the premium reserve system
demonstrates the opposite. PWCG’s efforts were
“undeniably significant,” see Glenn W. Turner Enters., 474
F.2d at 482, to investors’ realizing profit, because
profitability turned on how skillfully PWCG structured that
system. If PWCG estimated insureds’ lifespans poorly, as it
did, then that would undermine investors’ profits by
increasing the cost investors would have to pay to maintain
the policies.
During PWCG’s operation, the primary reserve system
proved unable to make all premium payments, which
resulted in PWCG having to decide between tapping into the
reserves, paying the post-purchase premiums with its own
profits, not paying the premiums, or asking investors for
more money in a “premium call.” PWCG eventually drew
on its secondary and tertiary reserves and, when those
reserves ran out, made premium calls. To predict how large
premium calls needed to be, PWCG and the trustee of
PWCG Trust, Mills Potoczak, contracted with a third-party

26

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

who specialized in estimating optimal premium payments.
Premium calls often ended up being higher than investors
understood they would be from previous representations. At
least 150 investors received premium calls for a total of
approximately $1.7 million. Those who did not answer were
told that they had lost their investments.
The receiver of PWCG Trust, Thomas C. Hebrank,
explained that operating a successful premium reserve
system required managerial, and not simply ministerial or
clerical, skill. In 2018, the district court appointed Hebrank
to be receiver over the PWCG Trust as part of the SEC’s
consent judgment with PWCG Trust. Hebrank attributed
PWCG’s struggles to its mismanagement and poor judgment
as to insureds’ lifespans. He explained that PWCG and
Calhoun underestimated how long insureds would live
because “Calhoun did not use policyholder life
expectancies . . . in calculating reserves and instead focused
on achieving an immediate return to Pacific West.” As a
result, by the time Hebrank took control of PWCG Trust,
“most . . . reserves ha[d] been exhausted.” Hebrank
explained that from 2012 to 2017, PWCG used the sale of
new policies to pay the outstanding premiums on older
policies so that it could avoid drawing on the secondary and
tertiary reserves and making premium calls. PWCG’s failure
to set aside sufficient money in the premium reserve system
and failure to use actuarial life expectancy estimates
“predestined the shortfalls in reserves amounts for each of
the Policies,” Hebrank explained. “This problem was then
exacerbated by [PWCG’s] fail[ure] to engage in the high
level of management required to maintain the Policies.”
The breakdown of the premium reserve system during
PWCG’s operation indicates that a lack of managerial skill
produced the near failure of PWCG’s life settlement

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

27

investments. By structuring the system initially, maintaining
the system as premiums mounted, choosing whether to make
premium calls or pay out of its founder’s own pocket, and
managing premiums after premium calls were filled, PWCG
exercised “essential managerial” and entrepreneurial
judgment that “affect[ed] the failure or success of the
enterprise.” Glenn W. Turner Enters., 474 F.2d at 482.
3. Fractionalized Interests
Finally, the fractionalized nature of investors’ interests
also supports the conclusion that PWCG’s life settlements
were investment contracts because investors were dependent
on PWCG and their “exercise of control was precluded for
all practical purposes.” See Dubois, 885 F.2d at 1461. While
a nonfractionalized investment might involve the purchase
of entire life insurance policies in which the investor exerts
some measure of control, the fractionalized nature of the life
settlements here created an interdependence among
numerous investors. This interdependence meant that
investors were dependent on PWCG to have properly
structured the premium reserve system and on PWCG Trust
and Mills Potoczak to implement that system. Investors were
particularly dependent on PWCG bringing together
sufficient numbers of creditworthy investors to maintain
policies. Each policy had multiple investors with fractional
interests, sometimes as many as fifty to seventy. Investors
could not calculate premium payments themselves. They
relied on PWCG and Mills Potoczak to decide when to make
premium payments and issue premium calls. If the reserve
system broke down and some investors did not pay premium
calls, PWCG would have to decide whether its own money
would cover any potential shortfalls.

28

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

The fractional nature of investors’ interests also meant
that investors seeking to invest in specific policies had to go
through PWCG, a situation akin to our decision in Goldfield.
There, we held that Goldfield’s ore refining program was
“the undeniably significant effort” for the Howey test.
Goldfield, 758 F.2d at 464. Among other factors, we noted
that Goldfield had “what was represented to be the only
economically feasible dump ore processing technique.” Id.
While the investors in Goldfield were allowed to take ore
purchased from Goldfield to other processors, they had to
pay a $20,000 bond and were told that no other processor
would process that ore in such small quantities. Id. We
explained that “as a practical matter, the investors were
forced to rely exclusively upon the services of Goldfield.”
Id. Here, the fractionalized nature of PWCG’s policies’
beneficiary interests meant that an investor trying to invest
in any one of PWCG’s policies was similarly “forced to rely
exclusively upon” PWCG, both in purchasing their
fractionalized interest as well as in maintaining it. Id.
The workings of PWCG’s whole system—its selection
of policies, its premium reserve system, and its
fractionalization of those policies—demonstrate PWCG’s
“undeniably significant” efforts in securing their investors’
profits. Glenn W. Turner Enters., 474 F.2d at 482. Investors
depended on the entire package of services that PWCG
offered to manage and maintain the life insurance policies.
We therefore conclude that the fractional interests in life
settlements sold by PWCG were investment contracts
subject to the federal securities laws.
B. Intrastate Offering Exemption
The Securities Act of 1933 prohibits the interstate sale of
securities without a registration statement, which discloses

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

29

relevant information “in the public interest or for the
protection of investors.” See 15 U.S.C. §§ 77e(a), 77e(c),
77g(a)(1), 77aa. Some types of securities are exempt from
the Securities Act’s registration requirement. Relevant here,
the intrastate offering exemption excludes from the
Securities Act’s registration requirement “[a]ny security
which is part of an issue offered and sold only to persons
resident within a single State or Territory, where the issuer
of such security is a person resident and doing business
within or, if a corporation, incorporated by and doing
business within, such State or Territory.” Id. § 77c(a)(11). In
other words, if securities are sold entirely within a single
state and not part of an interstate offering, then they are
exempt from federal registration requirements. We have
explained that “[b]ecause registration is so important to the
protection of the investing public, exemptions to registration
requirements are construed narrowly against the parties
claiming their benefits.” World Trade Fin. Corp. v. SEC, 739
F.3d 1243, 1247 (9th Cir. 2014).
We agree with the district court that PWCG’s issue of
fractional interests in life settlements was not exempt from
the federal securities laws’ registration requirements.
PWCG’s life settlements shared a financing scheme, were
the same type of security, and were offered to at least one
out-of-state resident. Therefore, PWCG’s offerings were
part of an integrated, interstate offering.
1. Interstate Offering
Defendants have not shown that they qualify for the
intrastate exemption from registration. PWCG did not sell
life settlements solely within California. The district court
noted that PWCG had offered and sold life settlement
interests to Samuel John Bainbridge, a Nevada resident.

30

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

Bainbridge said that he learned about PWCG from a seminar
PWCG presented in Las Vegas, Nevada. Bainbridge
invested with PWCG through his family trust, which was a
Nevada state trust. Bainbridge said that PWCG founder
Andy Calhoun
knew without any doubt, 100 percent, that I
resided in Las Vegas, Nevada, 100 percent.
There’s no questions about that. Okay? And
there was talk, you know, about, [“]These are
California investments but, you know, if you
can get something, you know, to state that
you’re in California, then this will be just all
fine and dandy. It’s just paperwork.[”]
PWCG, a California corporation, offered life settlements
to Bainbridge, a Nevada resident. PWCG’s offerings do not
qualify for the intrastate exemption because PWCG did not
offer its securities exclusively within one state.
2. Integration
We conclude that the district court correctly rejected
Defendants’ argument that the fractional interests in life
settlements were not an integrated issue. Integration matters
here because many, if not most, of PWCG’s sales were to
fellow California residents. If those sales were not integrated
and instead considered separately from PWCG’s sales to
out-of-state residents, then all of PWCG’s offerings to other
California residents could be exempt from federal
registration requirements and thus not be bases for
Defendants’ liability. Conversely, if PWCG’s offers and
sales were integrated, then PWCG’s offer and sale to a nonCalifornia resident indicates that the issuance did not qualify
for the intrastate exemption.

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

31

The district court properly applied the SEC’s five-factor
inquiry, which we adopted in SEC v. Murphy, 626 F.2d 633
(9th Cir. 1980), to conclude that the offering was integrated.
The five factors ask
(1) are the offerings part of a single plan of
financing;
(2) do the offerings involve issuance of the
same class of security;
(3) are the offerings made at or about the
same time;
(4) is the same type of consideration to be
received; and
(5) are the offerings made for the same
general purpose.
Id. at 645.
At least four of the five factors favor a conclusion that
the offerings were integrated. On the first factor, PWCG’s
life settlements were “part of a single plan of financing”
because, as the district court noted, they were all part of the
premium reserve system. On the second factor, all offerings
were of the “same class” because they were fractionalized
interests in life insurance policies held by PWCG Trust. Cf.
id. at 646 (characterizing limited partnerships as the same
class of security). On the fourth factor, Defendants do not
contest that PWCG received the same “type of
consideration” for the interests. Cf. id. Finally, on the fifth
factor, PWCG’s life settlement offers were all “made for the
same general purpose” of profiting from the deaths of
insureds. The third factor, timing, is a closer question, as the
offerings were made over an eleven-year period and
occasionally showed a lapse of a few months between sales.

32

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

But the other four factors weigh in favor of the district
court’s conclusion that PWCG’s life settlement offerings
were integrated. See id. (concluding that an offering was
integrated because four out of five factors sufficiently
“militate[d] in favor of finding integration”).
Defendants do not contest directly the district court’s
application of the five integration factors. Instead, they argue
that the SEC failed to make its prima facie case that PWCG’s
offering was integrated and that the district court abused its
discretion in excluding their expert witness report on the
legal test for integration. On both arguments, Defendants are
incorrect.
First, on summary judgment, the SEC did not bear the
burden of establishing integration. Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 56(a) mandates summary judgment “if the
movant shows that there is no genuine dispute as to any
material fact and the movant is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law.” Non-integration is an element of Defendants’
affirmative defense because Defendants claim that they are
exempt from federal registration requirements. The burden
of proof to establish an exemption is on the party claiming
it. See SEC v. Ralston Purina Co., 346 U.S. 119, 126 (1953);
World Trade Fin. Corp., 739 F.3d at 1247-48. Accordingly,
Defendants, not the SEC, bore the burden of establishing a
genuine dispute of material fact on the question of
integration. To make its prima facie case at summary
judgment, the SEC only had to point to an absence of a
genuine dispute of material fact on non-integration, not
affirmatively establish that PWCG’s offering was integrated.
The Supreme Court has specifically held that Rule 56 does
not require the movant to “support its motion with affidavits
or other similar materials negating the opponent’s claim.”
Celotex Corp. v. Catrett, 477 U.S. 317, 323 (1986). The

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

33

district court properly put the burden on Defendants to show
a genuine dispute of material fact at summary judgment on
the issue of integration.
Second, the district court properly excluded Defendants’
expert witness’ report on integration. We review a district
court’s exclusion of expert testimony at summary judgment
for abuse of discretion. See Kennedy v. Collagen Corp., 161
F.3d 1226, 1227 (9th Cir. 1998). Rule 702(a) of the Federal
Rules of Evidence requires that an expert witness “may
testify in the form of an opinion” if, among other factors, “it
is more likely than not that . . . the expert’s scientific,
technical, or other specialized knowledge will help the trier
of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact in
issue.” The ultimate question of whether a securities offering
is integrated is a question of law, as Defendants’ expert
witness himself acknowledged. Here, Defendants’ expert
witness was offering a legal interpretation that would not aid
the district court in finding facts. Therefore, the district court
did not abuse its discretion in excluding the report. See
Aguilar v. Int’l Longshoremen’s Union Loc. No. 10, 966
F.2d 443, 447 (9th Cir. 1992) (explaining that “matters of
law for the court’s determination” are “inappropriate
subjects for expert testimony”).
C. Disgorgement
We affirm the district court’s disgorgement award.
A district court’s award of disgorgement for securities
violations is reviewed for abuse of discretion. SEC v. Hui
Feng, 935 F.3d 721, 737 (9th Cir. 2019).
The SEC has the power to seek, and federal courts to
award, “any equitable relief that may be appropriate or
necessary for the benefit of investors,” including

34

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

“disgorgement” specifically. 15 U.S.C. §§ 78u(d)(5),
78u(d)(7); see also Liu v. SEC, 591 U.S. 71, 75-79 (2020)
(upholding 15 U.S.C. § 78u(d)(5)).
The SEC here requested disgorgement of all of the
Defendants’ profits. The district court awarded
disgorgement of one-third of Defendants’ commissions “to
be distributed to investors.” The district court’s
disgorgement order required Barry to pay $227,000, Cannon
to pay $219,333.33, and Moody to pay $180,000, which are
one-third of the ill-gotten gains received by each of them as
identified by the district court. The district court reasoned
that investors were harmed in two ways, in addition to any
loss of their principal investment. First, they suffered defeat
of their expectations of profit based upon PWCG’s
representations. Second, the investors lost the time value of
their money because of the “substantial delay in recouping
the principal amount of their investments.” The district court
declined, however, to order disgorgement of the full amount
of the Defendants’ profits because, the district court
concluded, they were less blameworthy than Calhoun,
whose settlement with the SEC required that he disgorge half
of his profits.
On appeal, Defendants argue that the district court erred
in awarding disgorgement because disgorgement requires
pecuniary harm to victims and no pecuniary harm exists
since investors are projected to recover the money they
invested.
We affirm the district court’s finding of pecuniary harm.
Buyers of PWCG’s fractional interests in life settlements
suffered pecuniary harm through the loss of the time value
of their money. The time value of money refers to the
concept that money is worth more today than the same

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

35

nominal amount in the future because that money could be
put to use by its owner in the meantime. See Cong. Budget
Off., How CBO Uses Discount Rates to Estimate the Present
Value of Future Costs or Savings 2 (2024). The time value
of money relies on the concept of “opportunity cost” or the
cost of one activity measured in relation to the next best,
foregone activity. See Off. of Mgmt. & Budget, Exec. Off.
of the President, Circular No. A-4, at 29 (2023) (“The
opportunity cost of an alternative includes the value of the
benefits forgone as a result of choosing that alternative.”).
Courts routinely recognize the time value of money by
awarding interest on judgments, both post-judgment, to
reflect the value between the dates of judgment and payment,
and sometimes pre-judgment, incorporating within a damage
award the value lost between the date of injury and the date
judgment is entered.
We have also recognized the time value of money as a
pecuniary harm in the context of the Excessive Fines Clause
and Article III standing. See Pimentel v. City of Los Angeles,
115 F.4th 1062, 1069 (9th Cir. 2024) (including the “timevalue of [parking] fees not collected timely” as a type of
“monetary harm” to the city for purposes of an Excessive
Fines Clause analysis); Van v. LLR, Inc., 962 F.3d 1160,
1161 (9th Cir. 2020) (holding that the “temporary
deprivation of money gives rise to an injury in fact for
purposes of Article III standing” because “its rightful owner
loses the time value of the money”) (internal quotation
marks omitted). Our decision in Van illustrates that, like the
pecuniary harm to investors here, the relevant harm is the
loss of “the use of [one’s] money.” Van, 962 F.3d at 1165
(emphasis added). The consumer in Van “received a full
refund, less interest, on the money she was wrongfully
charged.” Id. at 1162. Similarly, PWCG investors will likely

36

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

receive a full refund of, but not interest on, the money they
put into PWCG’s life settlements. Like the consumer in Van,
the investors here lost out on the ability to use their money
for alternate purposes. See id. at 1165 (“Interest is simply a
way of measuring and remedying . . . injury, not the injury
itself.”).
Investors put their money into PWCG’s life settlements.
Net losses across all outstanding policies were
“approximately $69 million” as of the end of 2023,
according to the receiver overseeing those policies. The
receiver reported that “there are now about a dozen Policies
that have gone significantly past their prior projected
maturity dates, meaning it has taken (and will take) longer to
receive the death benefits from those Policies and has
required (and for some time, will require) more premium
payments to keep the Policies in good standing than
previously anticipated.” Like everyone, the insureds will
eventually die, meaning that life settlements will one day pay
out to investors. The receiver has projected that the
outstanding life settlements will eventually return to
investors at least the money that they put in. 4 But even if
investors recover their principal investment in PWCG’s life
settlements, they still lost out on the opportunity to put that
money to other uses, and that loss is a cognizable pecuniary
harm.
Defendants focus on the district court’s conclusion that
investors suffered pecuniary harm because they lost out on
Investors appear likely to recoup the principal amount of their
payments to PWCG not only because of the SEC’s enforcement action
here, which led to the appointment of a receiver, but also because the
COVID-19 pandemic meant that some insureds died earlier than they
likely would have otherwise.
4

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

37

their expectations of profits. 5 Defendants do not address the
district court’s alternate and sufficient grounds for finding
pecuniary harm, which is the investors’ loss of the time value
of their money. Ignoring the time value of money is
particularly ill-suited here because the whole concept of life
settlements rests upon the idea that money today is more
valuable than money tomorrow. The original insureds were
willing to sell their policies for less than they were
potentially worth because they preferred to have money
sooner. Letting Defendants disregard the time value of
money here would be especially perverse.
We do not need to address the question of whether
disgorgement is permissible in the absence of pecuniary
harm. 6 Since there was pecuniary harm to investors here in
We do not base our decision on the district court’s identification of
defeated expectations as a basis for pecuniary harm. See Maner v.
Dignity Health, 9 F.4th 1114, 1119 (9th Cir. 2021) (“We . . . may affirm
on any ground supported by the record.”). In other contexts, it has been
suggested that defeated expectations could be a type of pecuniary harm.
See, e.g., U.S. Sent’g Guidelines Manual § 2B1.1(b)(1)(C)(iii) (U.S.
Sent’g Comm’n 2024) (“‘Pecuniary harm’ means harm that is monetary
or that otherwise is readily measurable in money.”); Riley’s Am.
Heritage Farms v. Elsasser, 32 F.4th 707, 723 (9th Cir. 2022) (“The
cancellation of the field trips and prohibition of future field trips caused
Riley’s Farm to lose a valuable government benefit in the form of an
expected pecuniary gain . . . .” (emphasis added)). We do not need to
resolve whether defeated expectations should qualify as pecuniary loss
in this context, as the loss of the time value of money is sufficient to
establish that the investors suffered a pecuniary loss here.
5

Two circuit courts have split on whether pecuniary harm is required for
a disgorgement award under the federal securities law. The Second
Circuit held that pecuniary harm is required for disgorgement because
Liu’s requirement that disgorgement under Section 78u(d)(5) be
“awarded for victims” and “restore[] the status quo” would render
disgorgement unnecessary if investors did not suffer pecuniary harm.

6

38

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

the form of investors’ lost time value of money, we affirm
the district court’s award of disgorgement.
D. Injunction and Civil Penalties
Defendants argue that the district court erred in enjoining
Defendant Cannon from future violations of the securities
laws and in ordering civil penalties from all three
Defendants. We review a district court’s remedies for abuse
of discretion. Husain, 70 F.4th at 1180. We affirm the district
court’s imposition of its injunction against Cannon and its
civil penalties against Barry, Cannon, and Moody.
Before discussing these two remedies, we reject
Defendants’ argument that the remedies ordered by the
district court contravened our recent decision in SEC v.
Husain, 70 F.4th 1173. In that case, we held that genuine
disputes of material fact existed regarding defendant’s
scienter and recognition of wrongfulness, and that those
outstanding issues precluded the imposition of civil penalties
at the summary judgment stage. See id. at 1184-86. In our
case, the district court did not abuse its discretion in
concluding that there were no genuine disputes of material
fact regarding the liability of Defendants. It was therefore
entitled to weigh facts in determining the appropriate remedy
to impose on those Defendants. That the facts could have
SEC v. Govil, 86 F.4th 89, 102-03 (2d Cir. 2023) (quoting Liu, 591 U.S.
at 79-80). The First Circuit rejected Govil, relying instead on Liu’s
explanation that disgorgement deprives wrongdoers of their ill-gotten
gains: “Neither Liu nor our case law, however, require investors to suffer
pecuniary harm as a precondition to a disgorgement award.” SEC v.
Navellier & Assocs., Inc., 108 F.4th 19, 41 n.14 (1st Cir. 2024), cert.
denied, __S. Ct.__, 2025 WL 1603606 (June 6, 2025) (No. 24-949). We
do not speak to that question, nor do we address the import, if any, of
Congress’ addition of disgorgement as an available remedy following
Liu under 15 U.S.C. § 78u(d)(7).

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

39

been weighed differently did not preclude the district court’s
remedies. See SEC v. Murphy (Murphy II), 50 F.4th 832, 848
(9th Cir. 2022) (noting that district courts can make factual
findings for the purpose of determining appropriate
remedies).
1. Injunction Against Cannon
We affirm the district court’s injunction against Cannon.
In determining whether to issue an injunction, courts
consider whether there is a “reasonable likelihood of future
violations of the securities laws.” Murphy, 626 F.2d at 655.
To guide that inquiry, we have used five factors as in
Murphy: (1) “the degree of scienter involved”; (2) “the
isolated or recurrent nature of the infraction”; (3) “the
defendant’s recognition of the wrongful nature of his
conduct”; (4) “the likelihood, because of the defendant’s
professional occupation, that future violations might occur”;
and (5) “the sincerity of his assurances against future
violations.” Id.
The district court concluded that the Murphy factors
favored an injunction against Cannon, but not Barry or
Moody, for future securities law violations. Though all
Defendants’ lack of scienter weighed against an injunction
and their sincerity of assurances against future violations
“weigh[ed] neither for nor against” an injunction, the district
court permissibly concluded that the “recurrent nature” of
the wrongdoing, Cannon’s limited recognition of his
wrongdoing as evidenced by misrepresentations, Cannon’s
discounting of those misrepresentations, and his intent to
remain in the financial services industry, unlike Barry or
Moody, together favored an injunction against only Cannon.
Defendants argue that the district court erred in applying
the second and third Murphy factors. On the second factor,

40

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

Defendants argue that the district court should have
considered a lack of other securities violations as favoring a
conclusion that the violations here were “isolated” and not
“recurrent.” The district court could have placed more
weight on the absence of other securities violations, but an
absence of other securities violations does not necessarily
preclude a finding of “recurrent” violations. See Murphy II,
50 F.4th at 840, 842 (holding that Jocelyn Murphy providing
false zip codes on at least 21 different occasions for the
purpose of one proceeding against her sufficed to make her
violations “recurrent”). Although Defendants’ sales of
PWCG life settlements were part of a single scheme, they
were numerous and took place over several years. Therefore,
the district court did not err in concluding that Defendants’
violations were “recurrent.”
Defendants also argue that the district court erred in
applying the third Murphy factor, which weighs “the
defendant’s recognition of the wrongful nature of his
conduct.” In support of their position, they point to Cannon’s
two attempts to research the legal status of PWCG’s life
settlements. But Defendants conflate scienter—the first
Murphy factor—with recognition of wrongfulness—the
third. The third factor, recognition, relates to whether the
defendant “take[s] responsibility for the impact of his illegal
conduct on the market’s integrity.” See Husain, 70 F.4th at
1185 (internal quotation marks omitted). Here, the district
court pointed to instances where Cannon “discounted the
importance of [past] misrepresentations” (such as the
“likelihood of premium calls and PWCG’s track record”) to
investors, which it found was indicative of Cannon’s failure
to appreciate the wrongfulness of his actions. Defendants do
not offer relevant record evidence to cast material doubt on

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

41

the district court’s determination. The district court did not
err on the third Murphy factor.
2. Civil Penalties Against Barry, Moody, and
Cannon
We also uphold the civil penalties of $15,000 each
against Barry, Moody, and Cannon. The district court did not
abuse its discretion in imposing those penalties.
A district court can apply three “tiers” of civil penalties.
The first tier does not require a finding of scienter and
authorizes a maximum penalty of $7,500 per violation or the
“gross amount of pecuniary gain to such defendant as a result
of the violation.”
15
U.S.C. §§ 77t(d)(2)(A),
78u(d)(3)(B)(i); 17 C.F.R. § 201.1001 (adjusting the
maximum first-tier penalty to $7,500). “District courts have
discretion to determine what constitutes a ‘violation’ and
have relied on various proxies,” such as the “number of
investors defrauded,” “number of fraudulent transactions,”
“number of statutes . . . violated,” “number of months
[defendants] engaged in unregistered broker activity,” or
“number of transactions . . . made as an unregistered
broker.” Murphy II, 50 F.4th at 848. Courts look to the five
Murphy factors to guide the determination of a civil penalty
award “in light of the facts and circumstances of the case.”
Husain, 70 F.4th at 1184 (internal quotations marks
omitted).
Defendants raise three arguments on appeal. Two closely
resemble their arguments against Cannon’s injunction: first,
that Defendants did not act with scienter, and second, that
the recognition-of-wrongfulness factor favored them. As
with the injunction, we reject Defendants’ arguments. The
district court recognized that Defendants had not been found
to have acted with scienter and took these findings into

42

U.S. SEC. & EXCH. COMM’N V. BARRY

account by imposing a substantially lesser penalty than it
could have.
Defendants’ third argument is unique to the civil penalty
award. Defendants argue that the district court erred in
calculating penalties of $15,000 against each Defendant,
which they allege is twice the maximum statutory penalty.
The district court did not err because the civil penalty
amount of $15,000 each is not greater than the maximum
statutory amount. As discussed, the district court had broad
discretion to rely on various proxies to determine the number
of violations, such as the number of months each Defendant
engaged in unregistered broker activity or the number of
transactions they conducted while unregistered. See Murphy
II, 50 F.4th at 848. The district court also expressly declined
to impose the statutorily permitted “total amount of
pecuniary gain” because that amount was “already
accounted for in the disgorgement” discussion. The district
court’s disgorgement order required Barry to pay $227,000,
Cannon to pay $219,333.33, and Moody to pay $180,000,
each representing only one-third of each Defendants’ gross
amount of pecuniary gain. As $15,000 is far less than these
amounts, the district court did not err.
III. Conclusion
We affirm the district court’s judgment.
AFFIRMED.

