FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
CHARLENE WILLIAMS, Director
of the Oregon Department of
Education, in her individual and
official capacities; BRIAN
DETMAN, Director of the Youth
Development Division, in his
individual and official capacities;
CORD BUEKER, Jr., Deputy
Director of the Youth Development
Division, in his individual and
official capacities,

No. 24-4101
D.C. No.
1:24-cv-00399-CL
OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Mark D. Clarke, Magistrate Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 20, 2024
Pasadena, California
Filed August 18, 2025

2

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

Before: Johnnie B. Rawlinson, Morgan B. Christen, and
Anthony D. Johnstone, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Johnstone;
Concurrence by Judge Rawlinson
SUMMARY *
First Amendment
In a suit brought by Youth 71Five Ministries alleging
that the Oregon Department of Education, through its Youth
Development Division, violated 71Five’s First Amendment
rights when the Division withdrew its conditional award of
a grant to 71Five, the panel affirmed in part and reversed in
part the district court’s denial of 71Five’s request for a
preliminary injunction and its dismissal of 71Five’s claims
based on qualified immunity.
The Division added a new grant eligibility Rule that
prohibits grantees from discriminating based on religion,
and withdrew 71Five’s conditional grant award after
discovering that 71Five imposes religious requirements on
all employees and volunteers.
The panel affirmed the district court’s decision not to
enjoin the Division’s enforcement of the Rule as to 71Five’s
grant-funded initiatives. 71Five was unlikely to succeed on
the merits of its claim that the Rule violates the First
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

3

Amendment right to the free exercise of religion because the
Rule is neutral and generally applicable, and likely satisfies
rational-basis review. Nor was 71Five likely to succeed on
the merits of its novel religious autonomy claims that
conditioning grant funding on compliance with the Rule
impermissibly interferes with its choice of ministers and
faith-based hiring of non-ministers.
Addressing 71Five’s claim that the Rule abridges its
expressive association by requiring it to accept employees
and volunteers who disagree with its message, the panel held
that the Rule was likely permissible as a reasonable and
viewpoint-neutral regulation as to Division-funded
initiatives. But to the extent that Rule restricts 71Five’s
selection of speakers to spread its Christian message through
initiatives that receive no Division funding, the Rule likely
imposes an unconstitutional condition. Accordingly, the
panel directed the district court to enter an order enjoining
enforcement of the Rule as to initiatives that do not receive
grant funding from the Division.
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal of
71Five’s claims for damages because 71Five did not allege
any violation of a clearly established right, and therefore
defendants were entitled to qualified immunity. However,
the panel reversed the district court’s dismissal of 71Five’s
claims for declaratory and injunctive relief, against which
qualified immunity does not protect.
Judge Rawlinson concurred in the judgment only
because of this court’s truncated review of a district court’s
decision granting or denying injunctive relief, and obligatory
deference to a district court’s discretionary decision to
decline consideration of the arguments and evidence
presented in a Reply Brief. Otherwise, she would conclude

4

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

that the State of Oregon’s application of the rules governing
its grant program violated 71Five’s right to the free exercise
of religion.

COUNSEL
Jeremiah Galus (argued), James A. Campbell, Mark
Lippelmann, and Ryan J. Tucker, Alliance Defending
Freedom, Scottsdale, Arizona; David A. Cortman, Alliance
Defending Freedom, Lawrenceville, Georgia; John J.
Bursch, Alliance Defending Freedom, Washington, D.C.;
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Kirsten M. Naito (argued), Assistant Attorney General;
Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General; Ellen F. Rosenblum,
Attorney General; Oregon Department of Justice, Salem,
Oregon; for Defendants-Appellees.

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

5

OPINION
JOHNSTONE, Circuit Judge:
Oregon’s Department of Education, through its Youth
Development Division, runs a Youth Community
Investment Grant Program. The Program funds community
organizations that serve at-risk youth in furtherance of the
Division’s statutory goals to support educational success,
prevent crime, and reduce high-risk behaviors. The Division
awards grants through a competitive application process that
requires applicants to certify compliance with the Division’s
policies. To ensure that its grants benefit Oregonians of all
backgrounds, the Division implemented a new policy for the
2023–2025 grant cycle requiring applicants to certify that
they “do[] not discriminate . . . with regard to,” among other
protected characteristics, religion.
Since 2017, Youth 71Five Ministries (“71Five”) has
received funding from the Division for several of its
initiatives. While it serves all youth who choose to
participate, 71Five’s “primary purpose” is “to teach and
share about the life of Jesus Christ.” To that end, 71Five
requires that its board members, employees, and volunteers
agree to a Christian Statement of Faith and be involved in a
local church. Because 71Five’s hiring practices violate the
Division’s antidiscrimination policy, the Division withdrew
its conditional award of a grant for 2023–2025. 71Five sued
for equitable and monetary relief and sought a preliminary
injunction. It claims that the Division’s enforcement of the
antidiscrimination policy violates its free-exercise,
religious-autonomy, and expressive-association rights under
the First Amendment. The district court declined to grant the
preliminary injunction and dismissed 71Five’s claims based

6

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

on qualified immunity. We affirm in part, reverse in part, and
remand.
Though 71Five advances several claims, most of them
boil down to an argument that the Division treats it worse
than secular grantees because of its religious exercise or
message. If that is true, then the Division almost certainly
violates the First Amendment. But the district court did not
abuse its discretion in determining that—on the current
record—71Five has yet to show any such discrimination. We
therefore affirm the district court’s decision not to enjoin the
Division’s enforcement of its policy as to 71Five’s grantfunded initiatives. Even absent discrimination, however, the
Constitution does not permit the Division to leverage its
grants to restrict 71Five’s expression in initiatives that
receive no public funds. To the extent that the Division’s
nondiscrimination policy applies beyond 71Five’s grantfunded initiatives, the policy likely violates 71Five’s right of
expressive association. At this early stage, 71Five is entitled
to a preliminary injunction on that basis, and it can continue
to pursue final declaratory and injunctive relief for all its
claims. But because 71Five does not allege a violation of any
“clearly established” right, qualified immunity bars its
claims for damages.
I. 71Five challenges the Division’s religious nondiscrimination Rule.
Oregon’s Department of Education created its Youth
Development Division “to invest in communities to ensure
equitable and effective services for youth.” As part of that
mission, the Division administers the Youth Community
Investment Grant Program, which funds community-based
initiatives serving youth at risk of disengaging from school
or work. The Program serves the Division’s statutory goal of

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

7

“[p]rovid[ing] services to children and youth in a manner
that supports educational success, focuses on crime
prevention, reduces high risk behaviors,” and generally
“improve[s] outcomes for youth[.]” To ensure that its grants
benefit communities across Oregon, the Division funds
grantees that work in different regions, provide a wide array
of services, and offer “culturally responsive” programs
tailored to the “perceptions and behaviors unique to [the]
specific culture” of various groups.
The Division awards grants through a competitive
application process, which requires applicants to certify that
they meet certain eligibility requirements. For the 2023–
2025 cycle, the Division added a new eligibility Rule
requiring every grant applicant to certify that it “does not
discriminate in its employment practices, vendor selection,
subcontracting, or service delivery with regard to race,
ethnicity, religion, age, political affiliation, gender,
disability, sexual orientation, national origin or citizenship
status.” The Division added the Rule to align with other state
agencies’ practices and to further its “commitment to
equitable access, equal opportunity, and inclusion.”
Youth 71Five Ministries is a nonprofit Christian ministry
that “exists to share God’s Story of Hope with young
people.” 71Five fulfills this mission by offering youthoriented programs that “provide social interaction,
vocational training, and meaningful relationships, all while
emphasizing the importance of having a relationship with
Jesus Christ.” The ministry’s services include youth centers,
apprenticeship and career programs, camps, conflictresolution workshops, and mentoring. While these various
services “strive to meet participants’ physical, mental,
emotional, and social needs,” 71Five’s “primary purpose” is
“to teach and share about the life of Jesus Christ.”

8

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

71Five does not discriminate in its vendor selection,
subcontracting, or service delivery. But because it “depends
on its staff and volunteers to fulfill the ministry’s distinctly
Christian mission and purpose,” by “articulat[ing] and
advanc[ing] its Christian messages,” 71Five “requires all
board members, employees and volunteers ‘to be authentic
followers of Christ.’” Officers, staff, and volunteers must
“subscribe and adhere” to a “Statement of Faith” reflecting
“the beliefs of historic Christianity” and “must also be
actively involved in a local church.” And although it serves
students and families regardless of their religion, 71Five
“encourage[s] [them] to be involved in a local church too.”
From 2017 to 2023, the Division awarded seven grants
to 71Five. In 2023, after the Division implemented the Rule,
71Five again applied for grants to fund its youth centers and
“Break the Cycle,” a mountain-biking initiative that serves
youth in juvenile correction facilities. Though it
discriminates in employment based on religion, 71Five
certified in its applications that it complied with the Rule
because it believed its religious hiring practices were
constitutionally exempt. In July 2023, the Division
conditionally awarded 71Five grants totaling $410,000.
Four months later, the Division received an anonymous
report that, according to its website, 71Five discriminates in
hiring on the basis of religion. In response, the Division
reviewed 71Five’s website and discovered that 71Five
imposes religious requirements on all employees and
volunteers. The Division then wrote to 71Five to confirm
what its website suggested: that 71Five discriminates based
on religion in apparent violation of the Rule. 71Five’s
executive director confirmed that the ministry requires
applicants for staff and volunteer positions to affirm its
Statement of Faith and expects them to be affiliated with a

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

9

local church. As a result, the Division withdrew the
conditional awards.
71Five sued several state officials under 42 U.S.C.
§ 1983. 71Five claimed that the Defendants’ enforcement of
the Rule violates its First Amendment rights to the free
exercise of religion, religious autonomy, and expressive
association. 71Five sought declaratory and injunctive relief
against the Defendants in their official capacities, as well as
damages from the Defendants in their individual capacities.
71Five also moved for a preliminary injunction to
reinstate its conditionally awarded grants and to enjoin the
Division from refusing to award future grants based on
71Five’s religious hiring practices. The Defendants opposed
the motion and moved to dismiss 71Five’s claims for
damages based on qualified immunity. In its reply brief in
support of the motion for a preliminary injunction, 71Five
argued—for the first time and based on new factual
assertions—that the Division allows secular grantees to
violate the Rule by “openly discriminat[ing] in the provision
of services based on race, ethnicity, gender, and national
origin[.]”
The district court denied the preliminary injunction
because it found that 71Five was unlikely to succeed on the
merits, any past monetary harm would be reparable without
an injunction, and neither the balance of equities nor public
interest favored an injunction. For the same reasons it
deemed 71Five unlikely to succeed on the merits, the district
court determined that the Defendants were entitled to
qualified immunity. Though the Defendants moved to
dismiss only the damages claims, the district court dismissed
all claims with prejudice. After 71Five timely appealed, a

10

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

motions panel of this Court granted an emergency injunction
and set the case for argument on an expedited basis.
We have jurisdiction to review the denial of a
preliminary injunction under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1), and we
review such decisions for abuse of discretion. Fellowship of
Christian Athletes v. San Jose Unified Sch. Dist. Bd. of Educ.
(“FCA”), 82 F.4th 664, 680 (9th Cir. 2023) (en banc). “A
district court abuses its discretion when it utilizes ‘an
erroneous legal standard or clearly erroneous finding of
fact.’” Id. (quoting All. for the Wild Rockies v. Cottrell, 632
F.3d 1127, 1131 (9th Cir. 2011)).
II. The district court abused its discretion only in
declining to enjoin the Rule’s application beyond
Division-funded initiatives.
71Five seeks a preliminary injunction on the grounds
that the Division’s enforcement of the Rule violates its
religious and expressive freedoms under the First
Amendment. To obtain a preliminary injunction, 71Five
must establish that (1) it “is likely to succeed on the merits,”
(2) it “is likely to suffer irreparable harm in the absence of
preliminary relief,” (3) “the balance of equities tips in [its]
favor,” and (4) “an injunction is in the public interest.”
Winter v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 20 (2008).
“Where, as here, the party opposing injunctive relief is a
government entity, the third and fourth factors—the balance
of equities and the public interest—‘merge.’” FCA, 82 F.4th
at 695 (quoting Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 435 (2009)).
Likelihood of success is the most important factor in the
analysis, particularly where a plaintiff alleges a
constitutional violation. Meinecke v. City of Seattle, 99 F.4th
514, 521 (9th Cir. 2024). And here, it is the only factor we
need to consider at any length because the other three factors

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

11

favor an injunction. First, if 71Five shows that it is likely to
succeed on the merits, it has “demonstrate[d] the existence
of a colorable First Amendment claim” and established the
requisite irreparable injury. See FCA, 82 F.4th at 694–95
(quoting Cal. Chamber of Com. v. Council for Educ. & Rsch.
On Toxics, 29 F.4th 468, 482 (9th Cir. 2022)). Similarly, if
“we find that [the Rule] offends the First
Amendment, . . . the balance of hardships favors” 71Five.
Sanders Cnty. Republican Cent. Comm. v. Bullock, 698 F.3d
741, 749 (9th Cir. 2012); but cf. Dep’t of Educ. v. California,
145 S. Ct. 966, 968–69 (2025) (noting that the government’s
inability to recover grant funds after they are disbursed
weighs against compelling immediate disbursement). And
“it is always in the public interest to prevent the violation of
a party’s constitutional rights.” FCA, 82 F.4th at 695
(quoting Am. Beverage Ass’n v. City of San Francisco, 916
F.3d 749, 758 (9th Cir. 2019)).
One last note on the applicable standard: we have so far
assumed that 71Five must show only that it is likely to
succeed on the merits. This standard applies to prohibitory
injunctions, which aim to preserve the status quo by
preventing a party from taking action. FCA, 82 F.4th at 684
(quoting Ariz. Dream Act Coal. v. Brewer, 757 F.3d 1053,
1060 (9th Cir. 2014)). The Defendants argue, and the district
court concluded, that the standard for mandatory injunctions
applies. A mandatory injunction alters the status quo by
requiring a party to take action and thus “place[s] a higher
burden on the plaintiff to show ‘the facts and law clearly
favor the moving party.’” Id. (quoting Stanley v. Univ. of S.
Cal., 13 F.3d 1313, 1320 (9th Cir. 1994)). But we determine
the status quo based on “the legally relevant relationship
between the parties before the controversy arose,” that is,
before the action challenged in the complaint occurred. Ariz.

12

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

Dream, 757 F.3d at 1061 (emphasis omitted). Here, the
challenged action is the Division’s enforcement of the Rule
against 71Five; before that, 71Five had a conditional grant
award and was eligible for future Division funding.
“Because it was the [Division]’s action that ‘affirmatively
changed’ that status quo and [71Five’s] motion for a
preliminary injunction seeks to restore that status quo, the
relief sought is properly viewed as a prohibitory injunction.”
FCA, 82 F.4th at 685. We therefore disagree with the district
court and decline the Defendants’ request to apply the
heightened standard for mandatory injunctions.
We turn to 71Five’s likelihood of success on the merits
of its First Amendment claims. The district court did not
abuse its discretion in concluding that 71Five is unlikely to
succeed on its free-exercise and religious-autonomy claims,
and the Rule’s application to Division-funded initiatives is
likely a permissible burden on 71Five’s expressive
association. But applying the Rule to initiatives that receive
no grant funding likely violates 71Five’s right of expressive
association. Denying a preliminary injunction as to those
initiatives was an abuse of discretion.
A. The Rule likely does not prohibit the free exercise
of religion.
The Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment,
applicable to the states under the Fourteenth Amendment,
provides that “Congress shall make no law . . . prohibiting
the free exercise” of religion. U.S. Const. amend. I; U.S.
Const. amend XIV. But not all laws that burden religious
exercise presumptively violate this mandate. “[L]aws
incidentally burdening religion are ordinarily not subject to
strict scrutiny under the Free Exercise Clause so long as they
are neutral and generally applicable.” Fulton v. City of

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

13

Philadelphia, 593 U.S. 522, 533 (2021) (citing Emp. Div.,
Dep’t. of Hum. Res. of Or. v. Smith, 494 U.S. 872, 878–82
(1990)). The Defendants do not dispute that the Rule burdens
71Five’s religious exercise, so our analysis turns on whether
the Rule is both neutral and generally applicable. Although
71Five claims that the Rule is neither, the district court did
not abuse its discretion in determining that the Rule is both.
1. The Rule is likely neutral.
“[I]f it is to respect the Constitution’s guarantee of free
exercise,” the Division “cannot impose regulations that are
hostile to . . . religious beliefs” or engage in “even ‘subtle
departures from neutrality’ on matters of religion.”
Masterpiece Cakeshop v. Colo. Civ. Rts. Comm’n, 584 U.S.
617, 638 (2018) (quoting Church of Lukumi Babalu Aye, Inc.
v. City of Hialeah, 508 U.S. 520, 534 (1993)). We may infer
hostility from “the historical background of the decision
under challenge, the specific series of events leading to the
enactment or official policy in question, and the legislative
or administrative history, including contemporaneous
statements made by members of the decisionmaking body.”
FCA, 82 F.4th at 690 (quoting Masterpiece Cakeshop, 584
U.S. at 639).
71Five does not contend that any historical background
or events leading to the Division’s adoption of the Rule show
hostility to religion. Nor does 71Five contend that Division
officials made any statements of the kind courts have found
to show hostility to religion. See FCA, 82 F.4th at 692;
Masterpiece Cakeshop, 584 U.S. at 634–36; Lukumi, 508
U.S. at 541–42. Instead, 71Five’s motion argued that the
Division’s hostility toward religion was reflected in its
“target[ed]” enforcement of the Rule against 71Five while
excepting secular groups, which operated to “single out the

14

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

ministry’s religious beliefs and practices.” But as we discuss
below, the district court did not clearly err in finding that the
Division did not and could not grant such exceptions. 71Five
also asserts that the Division “went out of its way to
scrutinize 71Five’s website” without inspecting secular
organizations’ websites, showing animus toward religion.
Yet 71Five admits that the Division first reviewed 71Five’s
website based on an anonymous complaint. And the record
contains no evidence that the Division received similar
complaints about any secular grantee.
71Five next argues that the Rule is hostile toward
religion because “disqualifying otherwise eligible recipients
from a public benefit ‘solely because of their religious
character’ imposes ‘a penalty on the free exercise of
religion’” that is not neutral. Espinoza v. Mont. Dep’t of
Revenue, 591 U.S. 464, 475 (2020) (quoting Trinity
Lutheran Church of Columbia, Inc. v. Comer, 582 U.S. 449,
462 (2017)). It styles this argument as a distinct claim, but
we have situated this analysis within our ordinary framework
for free-exercise claims under Smith. See Loffman v. Cal.
Dep’t of Educ., 119 F.4th 1147, 1166–69 (9th Cir. 2024). In
Carson ex rel. O.C. v. Makin, the Supreme Court held that
denying public funds based on an entity’s religious use for
those funds is no different than denying funds based on
religious status because, in practice, only religious entities
use funds for religious purposes. 596 U.S. 767, 787–88
(2022). So 71Five contends that, in disqualifying potential
grantees who discriminate in hiring based on religion, the
Rule effectively “exclude[s] otherwise eligible organizations
because of their religious character and exercise.”
But unlike the religious-use prohibition at issue in
Carson, the Rule does not deny funding based on a practice
exclusive to religious organizations. Government agencies,

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

15

secular corporations, and religious ministries alike might
engage in religion-based employment discrimination. See,
e.g., Bolden-Hardge v. Off. of Cal. State Controller, 63 F.4th
1215, 1219–20 (9th Cir. 2023) (government); EEOC v.
Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, Inc., 575 U.S. 768, 770–71
(2015) (private retailer). So the Rule does not discriminate
based on religious status or exercise; it merely disqualifies a
class of potential grantees—those who discriminate based on
religion—that includes both secular and religious
organizations.
Nor does the Rule “grant[] a denominational preference
by explicitly differentiating between religions based on
theological practices.” Catholic Charities Bureau, Inc. v.
Wisc. Lab. & Indus. Rev. Comm., 605 U.S. 238, 250 (2025)
(emphasis added). 71Five contends that the Rule does so
because it permits the Division to fund religious grantees
whose beliefs, unlike 71Five’s, do not require them to hire
only co-religionists. While that may be the Rule’s result, it is
not due to any “explicit [or] deliberate distinctions between
different religious organizations” that would render the Rule
presumptively unconstitutional. Larson v. Valente, 456 U.S.
228, 246 n.23 (1982). Rather, it is the indirect consequence
of the Rule’s general prohibition on religious exclusion by
all grantees, whether faith-based or not. Such “‘secular
criteria’ that ‘happen to have a ‘disparate impact’ upon
different religious organizations” do not contravene the First
Amendment’s mandate of denominational neutrality.
Catholic Charities, 605 U.S. at 250 (quoting Larson, 456
U.S. at 246 n.23). The Rule is therefore neutral as to religion.
2. The Rule is likely generally applicable.
A policy is not generally applicable if the government
can or does apply it in a way that disfavors religious activity.

16

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

FCA, 82 F.4th at 686. So the policy may not have any
discretionary “mechanism for individualized exemptions”
that “invites the government to consider the particular
reasons for a person’s conduct.” Id. at 687 (quoting Fulton,
593 U.S. at 533). And “the government may not
‘treat . . . comparable secular activity more favorably than
religious exercise.’” Id. at 686 (omission in original)
(quoting Tandon v. Newsom, 593 U.S. 61, 62 (2021)). The
district court did not abuse its discretion in determining that
the Rule likely satisfies both requirements.
a. The Rule does not provide for individualized
exemptions.
71Five has not shown that the Rule contains any
“mechanism for individualized exemptions” that gives the
Division discretion to discriminate against religious conduct.
Fulton, 593 U.S. at 533 (citation omitted). Under the Rule,
an “Applicant must complete all . . . Certification
information.” That language is mandatory, leaving the
Division no room to make exceptions. 71Five recognizes as
much, conceding that a “failure to check the box” confirming
compliance with the Rule “would have caused 71Five’s
[grant] application . . . [not] to be considered.”
Unable to show that the Rule itself contains a mechanism
for exemptions, 71Five points to a separate policy providing
that “[i]t may be possible” for grant recipients “to negotiate
some provisions of the final Grant,” including the scope of
work to be funded. 71Five argues that, under this separate
policy, the Division may waive grantees’ compliance with
the Rule. But on its face, that policy allows the Division only
to negotiate the terms of its agreements with applicants who
have already satisfied baseline eligibility requirements like
the Rule. And the Division’s director confirmed that those

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

17

eligibility requirements cannot be waived or negotiated. In
any case, the policy notes that “many provisions cannot be
changed,” and 71Five offers no evidence that the Rule is
among the negotiable provisions. The district court thus did
not clearly err in finding that the Rule has no mechanism for
individualized exemptions.
b. The Division likely treats comparable
religious and secular activity the same.
It was also within the district court’s discretion to find
that, in enforcing the Rule, the Division does not treat
71Five’s religious exercise less favorably than comparable
secular activity. “[W]hether two activities are comparable
for purposes of the Free Exercise Clause must be judged
against the asserted government interest that justifies the
[policy] at issue.” Tandon, 593 U.S. at 62 (citing Roman
Cath. Diocese of Brooklyn v. Cuomo, 592 U.S. 14, 17–18
(2020) (per curiam)). The Division’s interest is its
“commitment to equitable access, equal opportunity, and
inclusion” in the programs it funds. Neither 71Five’s
complaint nor its motion for a preliminary injunction
identified any secular activity funded by the Division that
undermines the Division’s commitment to equity and
inclusion like 71Five’s religious hiring practices do. Instead,
71Five’s motion argued that the Rule triggers strict scrutiny
under the Free Exercise Clause only for the reasons we have
already rejected: that the Rule is not generally applicable due
to a “[s]ystem of [i]ndividualized [e]xemptions” and is not
neutral because it “[t]argeted” 71Five’s religious beliefs. So
the district court concluded that the Division does not favor
comparable secular activity over 71Five’s religious exercise.
71Five asks us to reverse based on a new argument and
new factual assertions in its reply brief in district court in

18

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

support of the motion for a preliminary injunction. There, for
the first time, 71Five attached screenshots of several secular
grantees’ websites, which state that the grantees: “serve
African and African American families” through programs
“designed to . . . empower[] Black students”; “serve & work
with . . . Latin/e/o/a/x,
immigrant,
Indigena,
[and]
Afrodescendiente”
communities;
“create
equitable
opportunities for African refugees and immigrant[s]”; “focus
on the needs of . . . immigrant Latine women”; and are
“committed to providing a pro-girl and girl-centered
environment” through “programming . . . designed for those
who identify as girls,” are “exploring their gender identity,”
or “are gender non-conforming.” The website of one grantee
featured a page addressing common questions, including
“Why not boys?”
Based on these screenshots, 71Five raised a new
argument that the Division allows secular grantees to
categorically deny services to particular demographic
groups. The reply brief further argued, again for the first
time, that the secular grantees’ alleged discrimination in
service provision is akin to 71Five’s admitted discrimination
in hiring, as both violate the Rule. Because, the reply brief
contended, the Division has not revoked funding from these
secular grantees, it treats comparable secular activity more
favorably than 71Five’s religious exercise.
71Five faults the district court for rejecting its belated
argument based on the court’s concerns about “depriving
Defendants of notice and an opportunity to respond.” But a
“district court need not consider arguments raised for the
first time in a reply brief.” Zamani v. Carnes, 491 F.3d 990,
997 (9th Cir. 2007). So it did not abuse its discretion by
declining to do so. And now, on appeal, 71Five asks us to
consider more screenshots of secular grantees’ websites that

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

19

were not included even in its reply brief to the district court.
We decline to consider this evidence in the first instance. See
Fed. R. App. P. 10(a)(1); Martinez v. Newsom, 46 F.4th 965,
975 (9th Cir. 2022). Based on the evidence properly before
the district court, it was not an abuse of discretion to
conclude that the Division likely treats comparable secular
and religious activity the same.
c. Considering the arguments and assertions in
71Five’s reply brief to the district court
would not change the outcome.
In any event, considering the new argument and
assertions in 71Five’s reply brief to the district court would
not alter our highly deferential review of the district court’s
finding that secular grantees comply with the Rule. 71Five’s
argument turns on inferences drawn from the statements on
secular grantees’ websites that they “serve,” “work with,”
“focus on the needs of,” “create . . . opportunities for,” and
offer
“programming . . . designed
for”
particular
demographic groups. In 71Five’s view, such statements must
mean that the secular grantees deny services to anyone not
in the specified demographic groups. If so, 71Five contends,
the secular grantees violate the Rule just like 71Five, so the
Division must either treat them the same or satisfy strict
scrutiny. FCA, 82 F.4th at 686. Were this evidence properly
before us, the Concurrence would reach the same conclusion
based on the same premise. Yet the district court did not read
the secular grantees’ websites that way. It explained that
“even if the facts alleged in [71Five]’s Reply were properly
at issue . . . , none of the allegations” suggest that the secular
grantees violate the Rule. The district court instead found the
statements on the secular grantees’ websites to show only
that the grantees “direct[] . . . services to particular

20

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

demographics in the community,” without refusing service
to others “who fall outside the target demographics.”
The Concurrence, with 71Five, sees these findings as
“mistaken.” But on abuse-of-discretion review we do not
“automatically reverse a district court’s factual finding if we
decide a ‘mistake has been committed.’” United States v.
Hinkson, 585 F.3d 1247, 1263 (9th Cir. 2009) (en banc).
Instead, we can reverse a district court’s factual finding only
for clear error—that is, only if it was “illogical, implausible,
or without support in inferences that may be drawn from the
facts in the record.” FCA, 82 F.4th at 680 (quoting M.R. v.
Dreyfus, 697 F.3d 706, 725 (9th Cir. 2012)). That is not the
case here. Unlike 71Five’s publicly posted hiring policy,
none of the secular grantees’ websites expressly state that
they serve only their target demographics or refuse to serve
individuals outside those groups. Even the statement that
comes closest—“Why not boys?”—is ambiguous. It is
possible to read that statement, as 71Five does, to mean that
the grantee does not serve boys. Or the statement could mean
that the grantee does not focus on boys but still allows them
to access the organization’s girl-centered programming. For
example, the grantee’s website also explained that “each
gender engages . . . differently” with “issues while growing
up,” so the grantee aims to “help youth who have
experienced girlhood” but “understand[s] that to help girls,
all genders . . . must be part of the conversation.” While we
may draw different inferences from this limited information,
and the district court may make different findings with a
fuller record on remand, its findings are logically coherent,
plausible, and supported by the record as it now stands.
Our decision in Fellowship of Christian Athletes is not to
the contrary. See 82 F.4th at 687–90. There, a school district
revoked its recognition of a Christian student club because

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

21

the club required its student leaders to affirm a statement of
faith, which violated the district’s nondiscrimination policy.
FCA, 82 F.4th at 672–75. Sitting en banc, we reversed the
district court’s denial of a preliminary injunction, holding
that the school district had likely violated the Free Exercise
Clause because its enforcement of the policy was neither
neutral nor generally applicable. Id. at 695–96. Our analysis
turned, in large part, on our determination that the school
district continued to recognize secular clubs with
discriminatory membership policies. Id. at 687–90.
Unlike in this case, though, the record before our en banc
court included some evidence that we interpreted as showing
that secular clubs expressly excluded individuals based on
protected characteristics. See, e.g., id. at 689 (noting
statement on club application form that a “student shall no
longer be considered a member if the student . . . does not
identify as female” (omission in original)). We also pointed
to a school district official’s statement that we took as an
acknowledgment that other groups could limit their
membership with impunity. Id. at 678. Here, the district
court found that the secular grantees did not categorically
exclude based on protected characteristics, and there is no
evidence in the record clearly establishing that they do. Quite
the opposite: every secular grantee has certified that it does
not discriminate, as is required to receive funding.
Recognizing that even its reply-brief attachments do not
conclusively show that secular grantees deny service based
on protected characteristics, 71Five argues that merely
tailoring services to a target demographic is comparable to
71Five’s categorical exclusion of non-Christians. We
disagree. The sole basis for that argument is FCA’s holding
that a South Asian Heritage club’s policy “‘prioritiz[ing]’
acceptance of south Asian students” was likely comparable

22

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

to a Christian club’s denial of leadership positions to all nonChristians. Id. at 678, 688. But in FCA, we read that policy
prioritizing “acceptance” of members from a particular
ethnic group not just to inform program design, but also to
“limit . . . membership” based on ethnicity. Id. at 678. Thus,
FCA held that secular and religious organizations’
exclusions are comparable when they both restrict who gets
in the door. Yet, as the district court found, 71Five did not
conclusively show that the secular grantees exclude anyone.
And FCA does not suggest that tailoring services to meet the
needs of a particular demographic, while allowing everyone
to access those services, is somehow comparable to shutting
out an entire protected class. 71Five offers no other
explanation to support that proposition. See Doe v. San
Diego Unified Sch. Dist., 19 F.4th 1173, 1176–77 (9th Cir.
2021) (noting that a free-exercise plaintiff seeking a
preliminary injunction bears the burden of establishing a
likelihood that the challenged policy is not generally
applicable).
Nor does the record reflect that the Division ever treats
service-tailoring as contrary to its interests, let alone a
violation of the Rule. That makes sense: the Program aims
to fund initiatives that are accessible to as many Oregonians
as possible. The Division allows grantees to accommodate
“perceptions and behaviors unique to a specific culture” to
ensure that many different communities can receive services
that suit their particular needs. For example, the Division
took no issue with 71Five’s tailoring of its services to
promote uniquely Christian values—those projects likely
serve people of faith who would not access less “culturally
responsive” secular resources. And the Division continues to
fund other faith-based groups. It revoked funding only after
learning that 71Five denies employment and volunteer

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

23

opportunities to non-Christians, which limits the number of
Oregonians who can be involved in Division-funded
initiatives. Service-tailoring does not similarly threaten the
Division’s interests, so allowing it does not favor
comparable secular activity over 71Five’s religious exercise.
d. On this record, we affirm the district court’s
preliminary conclusion that the Rule is likely
generally applicable.
At this early stage, the district court did not abuse its
discretion in concluding that the Rule is generally
applicable. To be clear, we do not foreclose the possibility
that 71Five may prove on remand that some secular grantees
refuse to serve individuals outside their target demographics.
In that case, the Division’s continued funding of those
secular grantees could reveal that it has discretion to grant
exemptions from the Rule. See Fulton, 593 U.S. at 533. And
if 71Five shows that such refusals of service are comparable
to its own exclusionary hiring practices, that would doubly
trigger strict scrutiny, as the Division would be favoring
comparable secular activity over religious exercise. FCA, 82
F.4th at 686. As is often the case “at a very preliminary stage
of the proceedings, . . . [f]urther development of the
record . . . as this case progresses,” such as the timely
presentation of screenshots of secular grantees’ websites,
“may alter [the district court’s] conclusions.” In re Creech,
119 F.4th 1114, 1119 (9th Cir. 2024) (alteration in original;
citation omitted); see also Univ. of Tex. v. Camenisch, 451
U.S. 390, 395 (1981) (“[T]he findings of fact and
conclusions of law made by a court [deciding] a preliminary
injunction are not binding at trial on the merits.”). But under
our deferential standard of review, the district court did not
abuse its discretion in refusing to consider 71Five’s new
arguments and evidence in its reply brief. Nor did it clearly

24

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

err in finding, in the alternative, that 71Five has thus far not
shown categorical exclusion by the secular grantees. So we
must affirm the district court’s preliminary conclusion.
3. The Rule likely satisfies rational-basis review.
Because the Rule is neutral and generally applicable, it
is subject only to rational-basis review. Tingley v. Ferguson,
47 F.4th 1055, 1084 (9th Cir. 2022). “States carry a ‘light
burden’ under this review”—a “law is ‘presumed to be valid
and will be sustained’ . . . if it is ‘rationally related to a
legitimate state interest.’” Id. at 1077–78 (quoting Erotic
Serv. Provider Legal Educ. & Rsch. Project v. Gascon, 880
F.3d 450, 457 (9th Cir. 2018)). The Division adopted the
Rule to, among other reasons, better reflect its “commitment
to equitable access, equal opportunity, and inclusion.” That
is a legitimate interest. Cf. Doe v. Horne, 115 F.4th 1083,
1112 (9th Cir. 2024) (explaining that “[s]tates have
important
interests
in
inclusion,
nondiscrimination, . . . [and] ensuring equal athletic
opportunities”); Roberts v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609, 625
(1984). The Rule rationally furthers that interest by ensuring
that Division-funded initiatives are equally open to
employees, volunteers, and participants regardless of race,
sex, religion, or any other protected characteristic. The
district court therefore did not abuse its discretion in
determining that 71Five is not likely to succeed on the merits
of its free-exercise claim.
B. The district court did not abuse its discretion in
concluding that 71Five’s religious-autonomy
claims are unlikely to succeed.
In addition to guaranteeing the free exercise of religion,
the First Amendment prohibits laws “respecting an
establishment of religion[.]” U.S. Const. amend. I. Together,

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

25

“the Religion Clauses protect the right of churches and other
religious institutions to decide matters ‘of faith and doctrine’
without government intrusion.” Our Lady of Guadalupe Sch.
v. Morrissey-Berru, 591 U.S. 732, 746 (2020) (quoting
Hosanna-Tabor Evangelical Lutheran Church & Sch. v.
EEOC, 565 U.S. 171, 186 (2012)). That broad principle of
religious autonomy has given rise to two related doctrines.
See id. at 747. First, ecclesiastical abstention “limit[s] the
role of civil courts in the resolution of religious controversies
that incidentally affect civil rights.” Puri v. Khalsa, 844 F.3d
1152, 1162 (9th Cir. 2017) (quoting Serbian E. Orthodox
Diocese for U.S. & Can. v. Milivojevich, 426 U.S. 696, 710
(1976)). Second, the ministerial exception “precludes
application of [certain] legislation to claims concerning the
employment relationship between a religious institution and
its ministers.” Hosanna-Tabor, 565 U.S. at 188. 71Five
argues that these doctrines prevent the Division from
conditioning grant funding on compliance with the Rule, as
doing so impermissibly interferes with 71Five’s choice of
ministers and faith-based hiring of non-ministers.
The district court declined to address the merits of
71Five’s argument. Instead it determined that 71Five is
unlikely to succeed because ecclesiastical abstention and the
ministerial exception are “affirmative defense[s] against
suit” and not “standalone right[s] that can be wielded against
a state agency.” Indeed, we have consistently described and
applied the ministerial exception as an affirmative defense.
Puri, 844 F.3d at 1157–58; Bollard v. Cal. Province of the
Soc’y of Jesus, 196 F.3d 940, 945–51 (9th Cir. 1999),
overruled on other grounds by Markel v. Union of Orthodox
Jewish Congregations of Am., 124 F.4th 796, 810 n.6 (9th
Cir. 2024). And we have explained that the ecclesiasticalabstention doctrine limits civil courts’ redetermination of

26

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

inherently religious decisions. See Paul v. Watchtower Bible
& Tract Soc’y of N.Y., Inc., 819 F.2d 875, 878 n.1 (9th Cir.
1987); Puri, 844 F.3d at 1162–64. The Supreme Court has
similarly characterized these doctrines. See Watson v. Jones,
80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 679, 733 (1871) (first articulating the
principle of religious autonomy as requiring “civil courts” to
defer to ecclesiastical authorities on questions of
“theological controversy, church discipline, [and]
ecclesiastical government”); Milivojevich, 426 U.S. at 710–
14; Hosanna-Tabor, 565 U.S. at 195 n.4 (recognizing the
ministerial exception “as an affirmative defense to an
otherwise cognizable claim”). And we are aware of no court
of appeals that treats the religious-autonomy doctrines as the
basis for standalone claims challenging legislative or
executive action, rather than as defenses against or limits
upon plaintiffs’ invocation of judicial authority. See, e.g.,
O’Connell v. U.S. Conf. of Cath. Bishops, 134 F.4th 1243,
1253–54 (D.C. Cir. 2025); Tucker v. Faith Bible Chapel Int’l,
36 F.4th 1021, 1028–29 (10th Cir. 2022); Demkovich v. St.
Andrew the Apostle Parish, 3 F.4th 968, 977 (7th Cir. 2021)
(en banc); McRaney v. N. Am. Mission Bd. of S. Baptist
Convention, Inc., 966 F.3d 346, 348 n.1 (5th Cir. 2020).
71Five has identified no opinion from the Supreme
Court, this Court, or another court of appeals suggesting that
plaintiffs may assert ecclesiastical abstention or the
ministerial exception as § 1983 claims, nor any “historical
practices [or] understandings” that would justify our
recognition of these novel claims under the Religion
Clauses. Kennedy v. Bremerton Sch. Dist., 597 U.S. 507,
535–36 (2022) (quoting Town of Greece v. Galloway, 572
U.S. 565, 576 (2014)). Without more, we cannot say that the
district court abused its discretion in concluding that 71Five’
religious-autonomy claims are unlikely to succeed.

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

27

C. The Rule’s application beyond grant-funded
activities likely violates 71Five’s right of
expressive association.
The Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment protects
the “right to associate with others in pursuit of a wide variety
of political, social, economic, educational, religious, and
cultural ends[,]” which “plainly presupposes a freedom not
to associate.” Boy Scouts of Am. v. Dale, 530 U.S. 640, 647–
48 (2000) (quoting Roberts v. U.S. Jaycees, 468 U.S. 609,
622–23 (1984)). 71Five claims that the Rule abridges its
expressive association by requiring it to accept employees
and volunteers “who disagree” with its message “or would
express a contrary view.” “Even though the district court did
not address this argument, we consider it in the first instance
because [71Five] raised the argument before the district
court.” Rosales-Martinez v. Palmer, 753 F.3d 890, 897 n.7
(9th Cir. 2014). We hold that 71Five has established that it is
likely to succeed, at least in part. As to Division-funded
initiatives, the Rule is likely permissible as a reasonable and
viewpoint-neutral regulation of expressive association in a
limited public forum—the Grant Program. But to the extent
that it restricts 71Five’s selection of speakers to spread its
Christian message through initiatives that receive no
Division funding, the Rule likely imposes an
unconstitutional condition.
1. The Rule likely burdens 71Five’s expressive
association.
To establish that the Rule likely burdens its expressive
associational right, 71Five first must show that, as a group,
it “engage[s] in some form of expression.” Dale, 530 U.S. at
648, 650 (citing N.Y. State Club Ass’n, Inc. v. City of New
York, 487 U.S. 1, 13 (1988)). It has done so. The ministry is

28

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

a nonprofit organization incorporated for the purely
expressive purpose of “teach[ing] and shar[ing] about the
life of Jesus Christ.” 71Five presented evidence that it relies
on employees and volunteers to fulfill that “overriding
religious purpose and mission” by “communicat[ing] and
introduc[ing] the Gospel of Jesus Christ to young people and
their families.” As its executive director explained, 71Five
provides “a wide range of voluntary programs” through its
employees and volunteers to “guide young people and to
help them develop the spiritual, mental, physical, and social
components of their lives[.]” “It seems indisputable that an
association that seeks to transmit such a system of values
engages in expressive activity.” Dale, 530 U.S. at 650 (citing
Roberts, 468 U.S. at 636 (O’Connor, J., concurring)).
Second, 71Five must show that compliance with the
Rule would likely affect that expression “in a significant
way.” Id. at 648, 650 (citing N.Y. State Club Ass’n, 487 U.S.
at 13). An organization cannot “erect a shield against
antidiscrimination laws simply by asserting that mere
acceptance of a member from a particular group would
impair its message.” Id. at 653. Instead, the right of
expressive association protects an organization’s decisions
to choose its messengers based only on what a person
expresses. Id.; see also Roberts, 468 U.S. at 647–48. So
when a law compels an organization to accept a messenger
who expresses views inconsistent with the core values the
organization promotes, the law may impose a cognizable
burden on expressive association. Dale, 530 U.S. at 654; see
also Roberts, 468 U.S. at 627–28 (1984); N.Y. State Club
Ass’n, 487 U.S. at 13. The key inquiry for finding a burden
is whether the law would “require the [organization] ‘to
abandon or alter’” its protected expressive activities. N.Y.
State Club Ass’n, 487 U.S. at 13 (quoting Bd. of Dirs. of

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

29

Rotary Int’l. v. Rotary Club of Duarte, 481 U.S. 537, 548
(1987)).
71Five has established that complying with the Rule
would likely alter its expression “in a significant way.” Dale,
530 U.S. at 648. The ministry’s executive director attested
that 71Five selects employees and volunteers to carry out its
expressive mission by “shar[ing] God’s Story of Hope” with
those it serves. Though 71Five imposes several religious
requirements on employees and volunteers, its core demand
is that they “subscribe and adhere” to a “Statement of Faith,
which reflects the beliefs of historic Christianity” that
71Five hopes to spread. In essence, 71Five wants its
spokespeople to affirm the very message they are tasked with
communicating on its behalf. Yet the Rule likely prohibits it
from doing so. In 71Five’s view, the Rule thus compels it not
just to use imperfect messengers, but to speak through
individuals who reject its message. The Defendants have
offered no evidence at the preliminary injunction stage to
rebut 71Five’s assertion that all its employees and volunteers
contribute to its expressive mission, nor 71Five’s argument
that the Rule requires it to hire speakers who disavow its
religious views.
The Supreme Court found a similar requirement to
significantly alter an organization’s expressive activity in
Dale. There, a state antidiscrimination law required the Boy
Scouts to accept as an adult leader an outspoken gay-rights
activist whose public statements were “inconsistent with the
values [the Boy Scouts sought] to instill in its . . . members.”
Id. at 654. Because accepting the activist as a spokesperson
would have “force[d] the organization to send a
message . . . that the Boy Scouts accept[ed] homosexual
conduct as a legitimate form of behavior,” contrary to the
organization’s actual views, the Court held that the law

30

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

burdened the Boy Scouts’ expressive association. Id. at 653.
On the record before us, the Rule would likely burden
71Five’s expressive association in a similar way by forcing
it to speak through individuals who reject its Statement of
Faith and thereby express their disagreement with 71Five’s
message.
2. The Rule is likely a permissible regulation of
71Five’s expressive association within Divisionfunded initiatives.
That the Rule burdens 71Five’s expressive association
does not end our inquiry—we next consider whether that
burden is permissible. 71Five insists that any regulation of
expressive association is subject to strict scrutiny. But as for
all expression, the appropriate standard depends on context.
See Sullivan v. Univ. of Wash., 60 F.4th 574, 580–81 (9th Cir.
2023) (analyzing the expressive association of appointees to
a public committee as the speech of public employees
“pursuant to their official duties” under Garcetti v. Ceballos,
547 U.S. 410 (2006)).
In Dale, the antidiscrimination law under challenge was
subject to heightened scrutiny because it directly regulated
the expression of organizations like the Boy Scouts,
regardless of whether those organizations received
government funding. See 530 U.S. at 659. That is not the
case here. Instead, the Rule affects only those who seek grant
funding from the Division. In cases challenging expressive
regulations attached to government grants, we usually must
decide whether the government is using the grants to
facilitate private expression, or whether it is merely hiring
private speakers to spread its own message. See, e.g.,
Rosenberger v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of Va., 515 U.S.
819, 833–34 (1995). Where the government itself is

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

31

speaking, even through private contractors, the First
Amendment affords it a freer hand to control such
expression. See id.; Boquist v. Courtney, 32 F.4th 764, 779
(9th Cir. 2022). That is what the Division appears to be
doing. It does not award grants simply to enable independent
speech—it uses them to enlist grantees in carrying out its
own statutory mandate of supporting at-risk youth in
Oregon, and it selects its preferred conduits through a
competitive application process. So the Rule is perhaps best
analyzed as a regulation of government speech, see
Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 833 (citing Rust v. Sullivan, 500
U.S. 173, 194, 196–200 (1991)), or speech by government
contractors, see Bd. of Cnty. Comm’rs, Wabaunsee Cnty. v.
Umbehr, 518 U.S. 668, 673–81 (1996); Planned Parenthood
Ass’n of Utah v. Herbert, 828 F.3d 1245, 1258–63 (10th Cir.
2016).
But the Defendants do not argue that the Rule simply
shapes the Division’s own speech. Instead, they argue, the
Rule regulates grantees’ use of public funding to facilitate
the grantees’ independent expression. When the government
creates a forum to enable private speech, the applicable freespeech standard depends on the government’s purpose for
opening its doors or, in this case, its purse. See Koala v.
Khosla, 931 F.3d 887, 900 (9th Cir. 2019). Where the
government holds its resources “open for indiscriminate
public use for communicative purposes,” the result is a
traditional or designated public forum, in which contentbased restrictions on expression are subject to strict scrutiny.
Lamb’s Chapel v. Ctr. Moriches Union Free Sch. Dist., 508
U.S. 384, 392 (1993); see also Pleasant Grove City v.
Summum, 555 U.S. 460, 470 (2009). The Division’s grant
program does not, however, facilitate just any speech. It
funds speech only by “certain groups” (i.e., select

32

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

community initiatives) and only on “certain subjects” (i.e.,
supporting youth development and reducing high-risk
behaviors). Christian Legal Soc’y Chapter of the Univ. of
Cal., Hastings Coll. of Law v. Martinez, 561 U.S. 661, 679
n.11 (2010) (quoting Pleasant Grove City, 555 U.S. at 470).
As the Defendants argue, the grant program thus looks more
like a limited public forum, so “a less restrictive level of
scrutiny” applies. Id. at 680. To pass constitutional muster,
the Rule need only be “reasonable and viewpoint neutral.”
Koala, 931 F.3d at 900.
a. Reasonableness.
For the same reasons the Rule satisfies rational-basis
review, it is reasonable. The program’s funding of
“community-based youth development programs and
services,” aims to support the Division’s overall mission of
“invest[ing] in communities to ensure equitable and
effective services for youth.” In prohibiting certain forms of
exclusion from grant-funded projects, the Rule rationally
aligns the grant program with that mission, ensuring that the
initiatives it funds are equally accessible to and can
effectively serve all Oregonians. Cf. Alpha Delta Chi-Delta
Chapter v. Reed, 648 F.3d 790, 799 (9th Cir. 2011) (finding
a university’s policy prohibiting discrimination based on
religion reasonable in light of the program’s purpose “to
promote diversity and nondiscrimination”), abrogated on
other grounds by FCA, 82 F.4th 686.
b. Viewpoint Neutrality.
The Rule is also likely viewpoint neutral. The
government discriminates based on viewpoint where it
“targets not merely a subject matter, ‘but particular views
taken by speakers on a subject.’” Vidal v. Elster, 602 U.S.
286, 293 (2024) (quoting Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 829).

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

33

Even where there is no intent to suppress a particular
message about a topic, a law is viewpoint discriminatory if
it treats speech differently “based on the specific motivating
ideology or perspective of the speaker.” Interpipe
Contracting, Inc. v. Becerra, 898 F.3d 879, 899 (9th Cir.
2018) (quoting First Resort, Inc. v. Herrera, 860 F.3d 1263,
1277 (9th Cir. 2017)).
Here, the Rule prohibits grantees from excluding
employees, vendors, subcontractors, or clients based on their
religious expression. But the Rule neither singles out any
viewpoint about religion nor favors expressive associations
that lack any religious perspective. That distinguishes this
case from others in which restrictions on “religious activity”
did not merely “exclude religion as a subject matter” but
“select[ed] for disfavored treatment those [speakers] with
religious . . . viewpoints.” Rosenberger, 515 U.S. at 831. In
Lamb’s Chapel, for example, the Supreme Court held that a
school district’s rule was viewpoint discriminatory because
it “permit[ted] school property to be used for the
presentation of all views” about certain family issues “except
those dealing with the subject matter from a religious
standpoint.” 508 U.S. 384, 393 (1993). And in Rosenberger,
the Supreme Court held that a university discriminated based
on viewpoint where it refused to fund student publications
that “primarily promote[d] or manifest[ed] a particular belief
in or about a deity or an ultimate reality” but funded
publications expressing no view on such metaphysical
topics. 515 U.S. at 831–32, 836–37. The Court explained
that religion is not only “a vast area of inquiry,” but also
“provides . . . a specific premise, a perspective, a standpoint
from which a variety of subjects may be discussed and
considered.” Id. at 831. And in Rosenberger, “[t]he
prohibited perspective, not the general subject matter,

34

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

resulted in the refusal to make . . . payments,” resulting in
viewpoint discrimination. Id.
By contrast, the Division does not deny funding to all
organizations that express a religious viewpoint: it awarded
grants to support 71Five’s religious programming for five
years and continues to fund at least four other faith-based
grantees. Nor does the Division treat those organizations
differently based on their religious messages. The Rule
equally burdens the expressive association of grantees that
seek to promote a religious perspective, an antireligious
perspective, or no perspective on religion at all. An atheist
organization that refuses to employ anyone who professes a
belief in God is also disqualified from receiving grant
funding under the Rule. And an organization that wishes not
to speak about religion and excludes all who express a
viewpoint on the topic, whether positive or negative, cannot
receive grant funding either. For example, to avoid offending
any of its clients, an organization that provides counseling to
families of diverse religious backgrounds might want to
prohibit its employees from commenting on the propriety or
impropriety of different family structures. But the Rule
would bar it from excluding employees who, for religious
reasons, refused to sign a statement personally affirming that
all family structures should be equally accepted.
The Rule simply disqualifies all potential grantees,
regardless of viewpoint, that exclude anyone based on
personal religious beliefs. It is therefore viewpoint neutral
on its face, even if in practice “it has an incidental effect on
some speakers or messages but not others.” Ward v. Rock
Against Racism, 491 U.S. 781, 791 (1989); see also R.A.V. v.
City of St. Paul, 505 U.S. 377, 390 (1992). Of course, “a
policy that is ‘viewpoint neutral on its face may still be
unconstitutional if not applied uniformly.’” Waln v. Dysart

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

35

Sch. Dist., 54 F.4th 1152, 1162 (9th Cir. 2022) (quoting
Alpha Delta, 648 F.3d at 803). But the district court did not
abuse its discretion in finding that the Division has not
enforced the Rule in a discriminatory manner. So the Rule
is, on this record, likely viewpoint neutral as enforced. Cf.
FCA, 82 F.4th at 711–12 (Forrest, J., concurring) (stating that
a nondiscrimination policy was viewpoint discriminatory
due only to its “selective application” to a religious club).
3. The Rule is likely an unconstitutional condition
on 71Five’s expressive association outside
Division-funded initiatives.
Though the Rule is likely a permissible restriction on
expressive association within the limited public forum of the
Program, that does not justify the separate burden it imposes
on 71Five as a whole. When a policy attaches strings not
only to government-funded speech, but to the speaker itself,
we must further scrutinize the constitutionality of those
strings. See California ex rel. Becerra v. Azar, 950 F.3d
1067, 1093 (9th Cir. 2020). Even a valid condition on
government funding may not “interfere with a recipient’s
conduct outside the scope of the [government] funded
program.” Id. at 1093 n.24 (citing Agency for Int’l Dev. v.
All. for Open Soc’y Int’l, Inc., 570 U.S. 205, 213 (2013)).
As 71Five argues, the “Rule does precisely that” by
“extending to all 71Five’s employees and every aspect of its
ministry,” including projects that receive no grant funding.
At oral argument, the Defendants conceded that the Rule’s
prohibition on discrimination is not limited to the particular
initiatives the Division funds. It applies to grantees as a
whole, leaving them no room “to conduct [expressive]
activities through programs that are separate and
independent from the project that receives [Division] funds.”

36

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

Rust, 500 U.S. at 196. Because 71Five seeks Division funds
for only some of its projects, requiring it to certify that it
does not discriminate in any of its projects is likely an
unconstitutional condition. This is because the Division
“seek[s] to leverage funding to regulate [expressive
association] outside the contours of the [Division-funded]
program itself.” Agency for Int’l Dev., 570 U.S. at 214–15.
The Defendants in theory could justify that extraprogrammatic burden on 71Five by showing that it satisfies
heightened scrutiny. See Crowe v. Or. State Bar, 112 F.4th
1218, 1233 (9th Cir. 2024). But they have not yet tried to do
so.
71Five’s expressive-association claim is therefore likely
to succeed only as much as it challenges the Rule’s
application to its expressive association in initiatives that
receive no Division funding. Because the remaining factors
also support granting injunctive relief, 71Five is entitled to a
preliminary injunction on that limited basis. See FlatheadLolo-Bitterroot Citizen Task Force v. Montana, 98 F.4th
1180, 1195 (9th Cir. 2024) (“The scope of the [injunction]
must be no broader and no narrower than necessary to
redress the injury shown by the plaintiff[s].” (alterations in
original) (quoting California v. Azar, 911 F.3d 558, 584 (9th
Cir. 2018))).
III. The district court erred in dismissing 71Five’s
claims for declaratory and injunctive relief but
not its claims for damages.
Finally, we turn from 71Five’s motion for a preliminary
injunction to the Defendants’ motion to dismiss. 71Five
challenges the district court’s dismissal of all its claims—
both for declaratory and injunctive relief and for damages—
based on qualified immunity. We have jurisdiction to review

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

37

that decision under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 and review it de novo,
“accepting as true all well-pleaded allegations of material
fact and construing them in the light most favorable to the
non-moving party.” Hyde v. City of Willcox, 23 F.4th 863,
869 (9th Cir. 2022) (citing Padilla v. Yoo, 678 F.3d 748, 757
(9th Cir. 2012)). In contrast to our analysis of 71Five’s
motion for a preliminary injunction, this inquiry “consider[s]
only allegations contained in the pleadings, exhibits attached
to the complaint, and matters properly subject to judicial
notice.” Mendoza v. Amalgamated Transit Union Int’l, 30
F.4th 879, 884 (9th Cir. 2022) (quoting Swartz v. KPMG
LLP, 476 F.3d 756, 763 (9th Cir. 2007) (per curiam)).
“In § 1983 actions, ‘qualified immunity protects
government officials from liability for civil damages insofar
as their conduct does not violate clearly established statutory
or constitutional rights of which a reasonable person would
have known.’” Sampson v. County of Los Angeles ex rel. L.A.
Cnty. Dep’t of Child. & Fam. Servs., 974 F.3d 1012, 1018
(9th Cir. 2020) (internal quotation marks omitted) (quoting
Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223, 231 (2009)). But
“[q]ualified immunity does not apply to claims for
declaratory or injunctive relief.” Shinault v. Hawks, 782 F.3d
1053, 1060 n.7 (9th Cir. 2015) (citing Hydrick v. Hunter, 669
F.3d 937, 939–40 (9th Cir. 2012)). So the dismissal of
71Five’s claims for declaratory and injunctive relief was
error. Still, we agree with the district court that qualified
immunity bars 71Five’s damages claims.
“To be entitled to qualified immunity at the motion to
dismiss stage, an [official] must show that the allegations in
the complaint do not make out a violation of a constitutional
right or that any such right was not clearly established at the
time of the alleged misconduct.” Hampton v. California, 83
F.4th 754, 765 (9th Cir. 2023) (citing Pearson, 555 U.S. at

38

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

232–36). Courts “have discretion to address the questions in
reverse order.” Sampson, 974 F.3d at 1018. The district court
did so here, dismissing 71Five’s claims under the “clearly
established” prong.
The complaint does not make out any clearly established
violation of 71Five’s free-exercise right. 71Five’s claim rests
on its argument that the Rule is neither neutral nor generally
applicable. Yet 71Five does not allege any facts from which
we can reasonably infer a lack of neutrality. The complaint
alleges that the Division “retained discretion to create
exceptions” from the Rule. As the exhibits to the complaint
show, however, the alleged waiver provisions do not apply
to the Rule. See Hicks v. PGA Tour, Inc., 897 F.3d 1109, 1117
(9th Cir. 2018) (explaining that, in ruling on a motion to
dismiss, we “can consider ‘exhibits attached to the
Complaint’” (quoting Daniels-Hall v. Nat’l Educ. Ass’n, 629
F.3d 992, 998 (9th Cir. 2010))). And while the complaint
vaguely alleges that the Rule “has not been applied or
enforced consistently,” it fails to “identify comparable
secular activity that undermines” the Division’s interest.
Tingley, 47 F.4th at 1088.
71Five also fails to establish any clear violation of its
right to religious autonomy. Neither the Supreme Court nor
we have ever held that the rights protected by the ministerial
exception and ecclesiastical abstention may be asserted as
standalone claims challenging executive action, rather than
as defenses to the invocation of judicial authority. A
reasonable official would therefore lack notice that
enforcing the Rule against 71Five, without resort to
litigation, might violate constitutional protections for
religious autonomy.

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

39

Finally, whether or not the complaint makes out a
violation of 71Five’s right of expressive association, that
right was not clearly established. 71Five’s complaint claims
that the Rule violates the First Amendment by attaching
nondiscrimination requirements to government grants that
are awarded only to select organizations. We are aware of no
case, either in this Court or the Supreme Court, clearly
establishing that such a requirement impermissibly infringes
a grantee’s right of expressive association. 71Five relies
solely on Dale, but that case involved a law forbidding
discrimination wholly apart from any government funding
scheme. See 530 U.S. at 644–45. Our cases finding
violations of plaintiffs’ expressive association also involve
contexts quite different from the grant program at issue here.
See, e.g., Crowe, 112 F.4th at 1233–40 (compelled
membership in state bar); Perry v. Schwarzenegger, 591 F.3d
1147, 1163–65 (9th Cir. 2010) (compelled disclosure of
ballot-measure campaign’s internal communications that
chilled plaintiffs’ expressive association); White v. Lee, 227
F.3d 1214, 1226–29 (9th Cir. 2000) (sweeping government
investigation that chilled plaintiffs’ expressive association).
None of these cases would put the Defendants on notice that
requiring recipients of competitive Division grants not to
discriminate violates the First Amendment. See District of
Columbia v. Wesby, 583 U.S. 48, 63 (2018); Moore v.
Garnand, 83 F.4th 743, 750 (9th Cir. 2023).
71Five’s complaint does not allege a violation of any
clearly established right under the First Amendment, so the
Defendants are entitled to qualified immunity, and the
district court did not err in dismissing 71Five’s damages
claims with prejudice. See Daniels Sharpsmart, Inc. v. Smith,
889 F.3d 608, 616–17 (9th Cir. 2018) (holding that plaintiff
was likely to succeed on the merits of its constitutional

40

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

claims and that the doctrine of qualified immunity protected
defendants from damages liability).
IV. Conclusion
We hold that, on this record, the Division’s Rule
prohibiting religious discrimination by grantees does not
itself violate the First Amendment’s prohibitions on religious
discrimination. Because the district court did not abuse its
discretion in finding that the Division applies the Rule
neutrally and without exception to prohibit comparable
discrimination by all grantees, 71Five is not likely to succeed
on its free-exercise claim as presented in its motion. Nor is
71Five’s religious-autonomy claim likely to succeed, as we
have never held the ministerial exception or ecclesiastical
abstention to be standalone claims.
But 71Five has established that—though the Rule
permissibly regulates expressive association within
Division-funded initiatives—it likely imposes an
unconstitutional condition to the extent that it applies beyond
those projects to regulate 71Five’s independent speech. The
remaining preliminary-injunction factors are also satisfied.
Therefore, we reverse the district court’s denial of 71Five’s
motion for a preliminary injunction and direct the district
court to enter an order enjoining enforcement of the Rule as
to initiatives that do not receive grant funding from the
Division. Because 71Five does not allege any violation of a
clearly established right, we also hold that the Defendants
are entitled to qualified immunity and affirm the dismissal
of 71Five’s claims for damages. And we reverse the district
court’s dismissal of 71Five’s claims for declaratory and
injunctive relief, against which qualified immunity does not
protect.

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

41

AFFIRMED in part, REVERSED in part, and
REMANDED. 1
Rawlinson, Circuit Judge, concurring in the judgment:
I concur in the judgment because, and only because, of
our truncated review of a district court=s decision granting or
denying injunctive relief, and our obligatory deference to a
district court=s discretionary decision to decline
consideration of arguments and evidence presented in a
Reply Brief. See Harris v. Board of Supervisors, 366 F.3d
754, 760 (9th Cir. 2004); see also Zamani v. Carnes, 491
F.3d 990, 997 (9th Cir. 2007). Otherwise, I would agree with
the motions panel, and conclude that the State of Oregon=s
application of the rules governing its grant program violated
Youth 71Five Ministries= right to the free exercise of religion
in violation of the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution. See Tingley v. Ferguson, 47 F.4th 1055, 1088
(9th Cir. 2022) (holding that a law is not one of Agenerally
applicability (neutrality) . . . if the law. . . treat[s] any
comparable secular activity more favorably than religious
exercise@).
I decline to join the majority opinion=s analysis because
it relies heavily on the premise (mistaken, in my view), that
Youth Five=s website evidenced discrimination, while
websites from the secular organizations applying for grants
did not evidence discrimination. Keeping in mind that this

The emergency injunction, Dkt. No. 18, shall remain in effect until
issuance of the mandate. Each party shall bear its own costs on appeal.

1

42

YOUTH 71FIVE MINISTRIES V. WILLIAMS

analysis is conducted in light of Athe government=s interest
in enacting the law,@ see id., I cannot agree with this premise.
The State of Oregon=s stated purpose for the grant
program is to A[p]rovide services to children and youth in a
manner that supports educational success, focuses on crime
prevention, reduces high risk behaviors and is integrated,
measurable and accountable.@
Nothing on Youth 71Five=s website indicates exclusion
of any group from the provision of the services delineated by
the State in its grant application solicitation. In contrast,
several of the other grant applicants indicated on their
websites a focus on some populations to the exclusion of
others, including based on gender, race and ethnicity. On
these facts, I would conclude that Youth 71Five established
a likelihood of success on the merits of its free exercise
claim. See Meinecke v. City of Seattle, 99 F.4th 514, 521
(9th Cir. 2024) (observing that Alikelihood of success on the
merits . . . is the most important factor in the preliminary
injunction@ analysis, and that A[i]t is all the more critical
when a plaintiff alleges a constitutional violation@) (citation
and internal quotations omitted).

