FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
AZADEH KHATIBI, M.D., an
individual; DO NO HARM, a
Virginia nonprofit corporation,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.

No. 24-3108
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-06195MRA-E
Central District of
California,
Los Angeles

RANDY HAWKINS, in his official
capacity as President of the Medical
Board of California; LAURIE ROSE
LUBIANO, in her official capacity as
Vice President of the Medical Board
of California; REJI VARGHESE, in
his official capacity as Executive
Director of the Medical Board of
California; MARINA O'CONNOR,
in her official capacity as Chief of
Licensing, Medical Board of
California; RYAN BROOKS, in his
official capacity as Secretary of
the Medical Board of California,
Defendants - Appellees.
Filed December 29, 2025

ORDER

2

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Before: A. Wallace Tashima, Jacqueline H. Nguyen, and
Salvador Mendoza, Jr., Circuit Judges.
Order;
Dissent by JudgeVanDyke;
Dissent by Judge Tung
SUMMARY *
First Amendment/Government Speech
The panel denied a petition for panel rehearing and
rehearing en banc of the panel’s decision affirming the
district court’s dismissal of an action, brought by a physician
instructor of continuing medical education (CME) courses
and a nonprofit comprised of healthcare professionals and
policymakers, alleging that the Medical Board of
California’s requirement that CME courses eligible for
credit include information about implicit bias violates the
Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
VanDyke, joined by Judges Bumatay and Tung, wrote that
the panel erred in concluding that CME courses are
government speech devoid of any First Amendment
protection because (1) California has not historically used
CME courses to communicate the state’s own messages,
(2) those attending CME courses would be unlikely to
perceive the instructor’s message as the government’s
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

3

message, and (3) the state’s regulations otherwise exert very
little control over CME instructors’ messages. The panel’s
decision puts this circuit out of step with the precedent of the
Supreme Court and sister circuits, and even this circuit’s
precedent.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Tung, joined by Judges Bumatay and VanDyke, wrote that
private instructors of continuing medical education courses
do not engage in “government speech,” for the simple reason
that they are not the government and they do not speak for
the government. A law requiring them to convey a
viewpoint they find objectionable thus restricts their private
expression and is not exempt from First Amendment
scrutiny.

ORDER
The panel unanimously voted to deny the petition for
panel rehearing. Judges Nguyen and Mendoza voted to deny
the petition for rehearing en banc and Judge Tashima so
recommended. The full court was advised of the petition for
rehearing en banc. A judge requested a vote on whether to
rehear the matter en banc. The matter failed to receive a
majority of the votes of the nonrecused active judges in favor
of en banc consideration. Fed. R. App. P. 40.
The petitions for panel rehearing and rehearing en banc
(Dkt. No. 64) are DENIED.

4

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

VANDYKE, Circuit Judge, joined by BUMATAY and
TUNG, Circuit Judges, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc
In a published opinion, a panel of our court held that a
medical course taught by a private instructor and accredited
by private entities is government speech unprotected by the
First Amendment. That conclusion isn’t merely incorrect—
it puts our circuit out of step with Supreme Court precedent,
our sister circuits’ precedent, and even our own precedent.
Our court’s denial of rehearing en banc passes up the
opportunity to rectify the panel’s mistaken conclusion. I
respectfully dissent from that denial.
The state of California conditions medical licenses on the
completion of accredited continuing medical education
(“CME”) classes. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1336(a).
Plaintiff Dr. Azadeh Khatibi and at least one member of
plaintiff Do No Harm, a nonprofit corporation, create
content for those CME courses—content that involves
speech protected by the First Amendment. But under
California’s relatively recent changes to its CME
regulations, Plaintiffs must affirm
controversial
state-sanctioned political and ideological beliefs by
incorporating into any CME course “curriculum that
includes the understanding of implicit bias.” Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code § 2190.1(d)(1). Plaintiffs challenged that
requirement in federal court, arguing that CME courses are
private speech and that the government cannot
constitutionally compel CME instructors to adopt the state’s
views on divisive political subjects. The district court
dismissed Plaintiffs’ claims, finding that the content of CME
courses—despite being crafted and taught by private
parties—constitutes government speech.
The panel
affirmed.

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

5

The panel misread the Supreme Court’s government
speech precedent, deviating from the Supreme Court’s
instructions and creating a split with our sister circuits by
focusing on the scope of California’s regulation of CME
courses rather than examining the manner in which
California’s regulations shape or convey the messages
involved in CME instruction. The result: an expansive
government speech doctrine that discards the Supreme
Court’s cautionary instruction in Matal v. Tam, 582 U.S.
218, 235 (2017). A proper analysis—as prescribed by the
Supreme Court, our own court’s prior cases, and our sister
circuits—reveals that California’s prior CME regulations
did not meaningfully express or shape messages through
CME courses. Because California has not historically used
CME courses to communicate the state’s own messages,
because those attending CME courses would be unlikely to
perceive the instructor’s message as the government’s, and
because the state’s regulations otherwise exert very little
control over CME instructors’ messages, the panel erred in
concluding that CME courses are government speech devoid
of any First Amendment protection.
I.
Similar to continuing legal education requirements for
lawyers, CME course attendance is required for California
physicians and surgeons wishing to maintain their licenses.
Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1336. California’s express goal for
having these CME regulations is to “ensure the continuing
competence of licensed physicians and surgeons,” and to
that end the Medical Board of California is authorized to
“adopt and administer standards for the continuing education
of … licensees.” Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190. At issue
here is California’s statutory requirement, added in 2019,
that a CME instructor must include in his or her course

6

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

“curriculum that includes the understanding of implicit
bias.” Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(d)(1). An instructor
can satisfy that requirement by providing “[e]xamples of
how implicit bias affects perceptions and treatment
decisions,” or by detailing “strategies to address how
unintended biases in decisionmaking may contribute to
health care disparities.” Id. § 2190.1(e).
Other standards broadly dictate that the content of CME
courses must—unsurprisingly—be medical in nature. Cal.
Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(a); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16,
§ 1337.5(a)(3). CME lectures must “maintain, develop, or
increase the knowledge, skills, and professional
performance that a physician and surgeon uses to provide
care,” which may be done by educational activities that
“include, but are not limited to” a broad list of options such
as “scientific or clinical content with a direct bearing on the
quality or cost-effective provision of patient care,
community or public health, or preventive medicine.” Cal.
Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(a). California’s regulations
echo these same options. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16,
§ 1337.5(a)(3). More granular subject matter requirements
are imposed on CME attendees: physicians with a certain
percentage of elderly patients must complete CME courses
in geriatric medicine, and all physicians and surgeons must
complete CME courses on either pain management and the
treatment of terminally ill patients or on the treatment of
opiate-dependent patients.
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 2190.3, 2190.5, 2190.6. California also allows CME
attendees to earn at most 30% of the required credits from
CMEs on medical office management. Id. § 2190.15. Other
standards lay out requirements for CME instructors,
including that the need for the course be “maintained on
file,” and a handful of other miscellaneous requirements

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

7

unrelated to CME content. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16,
§ 1337.5(a)(1)–(2), (4)–(7).
CME courses must also
“contain curriculum that includes cultural and linguistic
competency in the practice of medicine.” Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 2190.1(b). The Code directs the private associations
that accredit CME courses to develop standards to assess
compliance with the cultural and linguistic competency
requirement and mandates that CME courses “shall address
at least one or a combination of” a long list of possible ways
to include such content. Id. §§ 2190.1(b)(3), 2190.1(c).
California does “not give prior approval to individual
courses or programs.” Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1337.5(b).
Instead, California outsources the accreditation of CME
courses to private entities. Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§ 2190.1(g); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1337(a). The only
involvement California maintains in the process is that state
actors can “randomly audit courses or programs submitted
for credit in addition to any course or program for which a
complaint is received.” Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1337.5(b).
When a course is audited, “course organizers will be asked
to submit” certain information, like the rationale for the
course, the course content, educational objectives,
attendance records, and the like. Id.
Dr. Khatibi and at least one member of Do No Harm
have taught CME courses in California. They object to
California’s new implicit bias requirement, Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 2190.1(d), on the ground that the regulation requires
them to express the state’s controversial viewpoint in CME
courses that they created and compiled on their own and that
were approved by private CME accreditors. The district
court dismissed Plaintiffs’ complaint, finding that teaching
CME courses is government speech and that California was

8

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

therefore free to require CME instructors to express the
state’s view about implicit bias. The panel affirmed.
II.
When the government speaks for itself, the First
Amendment’s protections for private expression are not
implicated. Pleasant Grove City v. Summum, 555 U.S. 460,
467–68 (2009). But sometimes the line between government
and private speech blurs, necessitating a more detailed
analysis to assess “whether the government intends to speak
for itself or to regulate private expression.” Shurtleff v. City
of Boston, 596 U.S. 243, 252 (2022). The Supreme Court
has highlighted several factors of particular importance to
that analysis: “the history of the expression at issue; the
public’s likely perception as to who (the government or a
private person) is speaking; and the extent to which the
government has actively shaped or controlled the
expression.” Id. Because of the risk that “government could
silence or muffle the expression of disfavored viewpoints”
by characterizing that expression as government speech and
therefore outside the First Amendment’s ambit, the Supreme
Court has admonished courts to exercise “great caution”
before extending the government speech doctrine. Matal,
582 U.S. at 235. In line with this warning, the Supreme
Court has deemed that “simply affixing a government seal
of approval” to private speech fails to transform private
speech into government speech. Id.
A.
While the panel in this case paid lip service to the threefactor Shurtleff test, its approach boils down to a singlefactor analysis: does the government “heavily” or “actively”
regulate CMEs? The panel’s application of the Shurtleff test
can be aptly summarized: Does the history of the expression

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

9

indicate that CME courses are government speech? Yes,
because of the broad scope of the government’s historical
regulation of CMEs. Does the public likely perceive the
government as speaking? Yes, because of the broad scope
of the government’s CME regulations. Does the government
exercise sufficient control over the message expressed in
CME courses? Yes, because of the broad scope of the
government’s CME regulations. This one-factor-to-rulethem-all test is not the test that prior cases have prescribed.
The Supreme Court’s precedent, our own prior cases, and
cases from our sister circuits all indicate that the analysis is
not so simple—that the mere fact of extensive regulation is
far from the be-all end-all conclusion of the analysis.
Instead, prior cases establish that the analysis focuses not
on the mere scope of the state’s regulations, but instead on
the government’s particular involvement in shaping the
message being expressed. Under Shurtleff, it is obvious that
merely regulating private speech does not necessarily
transform that speech into government speech: “we conduct
a holistic inquiry designed to determine whether the
government intends to speak for itself or to regulate private
expression.” Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 252. Shurtleff’s
subsequent description of the government speech analysis
factors further clarifies that the government’s involvement
in actually expressing or shaping the message is the
touchstone of the analysis: “the history of the expression at
issue; the public’s likely perception as to who (the
government or a private person) is speaking; and the extent
to which the government has actively shaped or controlled
the expression.” Id. at 252 (emphases added); see also
Matal, 582 U.S. at 238 (describing the analysis in Walker v.
Texas Div., Sons of Confederate Veterans, Inc., 576 U.S. 200
(2015), as partially dependent on whether the State

10

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

historically used license plates “to convey state messages”
and whether the state maintained “direct control over the
messages conveyed” (emphases added) (quoting Walker,
576 U.S. at 213)).
While our own precedent on the government speech
doctrine is fairly sparse, our cases that consider the doctrine
display a similar emphasis on the government’s involvement
with the message being conveyed. For instance, we have
considered whether the “message is ‘from beginning to end’
that of the State.” Delano Farms Co. v. Cal. Table Grape
Comm’n, 586 F.3d 1219, 1228 (9th Cir. 2009) (emphasis
added) (quoting Paramount Land Co. LP v. Cal. Pistachio
Comm’n, 491 F.3d 1003, 1012 (9th Cir. 2007)); see also
Ranchers Cattlemen Action Legal Fund United
Stockgrowers of Am. v. Vilsack, 6 F.4th 983, 990 (9th Cir.
2021) (same). These cases suggest that if a given regulation
does not meaningfully control the message being
communicated,
mere
regulation—even
extensive
regulation—carries little weight, if any, in proving that the
government is actually speaking for itself.
Cases from other circuits likewise focus on whether the
government is articulating its own message both overall and
for each Shurtleff factor, rather than on the mere breadth of
the government’s regulations. See Sutliffe v. Epping Sch.
Dist., 584 F.3d 314, 331 (1st Cir. 2009) (finding government
speech where a town “communicated an important message
about itself”); Women for Am. First v. Adams, No. 21-485cv, 2022 WL 1714896, at *4 (2d Cir. May 27, 2022) (finding
that certain murals were government speech because the City
propagated “its own message” through the murals); Brown
v. Yost, 133 F.4th 725, 734 (6th Cir. 2025) (determining that
summaries of proposed ballot initiatives were not
government speech because they did not “historically

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

11

convey[] government messages”); Wandering Dago, Inc. v.
Destito, 879 F.3d 20, 36 (2d Cir. 2018) (finding, as part of
the government speech analysis, that a private party’s
participation in a government program would likely not “be
viewed by the public” as the government adopting the
private party’s speech as its own); Little v. Llano Cnty., 138
F.4th 834, 860 (5th Cir. 2025) (en banc) (emphasizing that
the third Shurtleff factor considers “the extent to which the
government has actively shaped or controlled the
expression” (quoting Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 252)).
Because in conducting the three-factor Shurtleff analysis
the panel here diverged from the guidance of the Supreme
Court, our own precedent, and the reasoning of our sister
circuits, the panel’s analysis of each factor was improperly
skewed by its heavy reliance on the existence of numerous
regulations that have little to no connection to shaping the
messages conveyed in CME courses. An analysis that
properly focuses on the formation of those messages reveals
that California has historically had almost no involvement
with the content of the speech expressed by CME
instructors: not historically, nor in the eyes of the public, nor
in terms of controlling CME expression.
B.
Historically, California has rarely, if ever,
communicated government messages through CME courses.
This is largely because most of California’s CME
regulations have not required that CME courses include
specific content.
Begin with California’s “content

12

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

standards” in section 2190.1(a), which suggest that qualified
CMEs
may include, but are not limited to,
educational activities that meet any of the
following criteria:
(1) Have a scientific or clinical content with
a direct bearing on the quality or costeffective provision of patient care,
community or public health, or preventive
medicine.
(2) Concern
quality
assurance
or
improvement, risk management, health
facility standards, or the legal aspects of
clinical medicine.
(3) Concern bioethics or professional ethics.
(4) Are designed to improve the physicianpatient relationship and quality of physicianpatient communication.
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(a) (emphasis added). Other
than unsurprisingly assuming that CME courses will be
broadly related to the medical field, this incredibly
expansive, nonbinding, and nonexhaustive list imposes
functionally no content restriction on CME instructors,
giving them free rein to pick their topics and decide what to
say about them. If someone sets out in good faith to teach a
CME course, it’s hard to imagine what topic would be
excluded under this provision. The provision is so broad that
it does not even prevent CME instructors from expressing
messages that conflict with other courses, or indeed even
presenting conflicting viewpoints within the same course.

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

13

The content standards in California’s regulations merely
parrot the language from section 2190.1(a): “The content of
the course or program shall be directly related to patient care,
community health or public health, preventive medicine,
quality assurance or improvement, risk management, health
facility standards, the legal aspects of clinical medicine,
bioethics, professional ethics, or improvement of the
physician-patient relationship.” Cal. Code Regs. tit 16,
§ 1337.5(a)(3). As such, this second content standard—
essentially the same as the first, but now with mandatory
language—adds nothing to the analysis. Unlike the
monuments that the Supreme Court deemed to be
government speech in Summum, California’s generic content
standards do not aim “to convey some thought or instill some
feeling.” Summum, 555 U.S. at 470. Similarly, unlike the
license plates deemed government speech in Walker,
California’s CME content standards come nowhere close to
communicating messages as specific as “a graphic” or “a
slogan.” Walker, 576 U.S. at 211. Properly assessed for any
historically
communicated
government
message,
California’s content standards do nothing to show that the
government has historically used CME courses to
communicate a government message.
California’s regulations include “Criteria for
Acceptability of Courses” that lay out generic quality
standards for CME courses: standards for who can be
certified as a CME instructor, requirements that course
rationales, objectives, and teaching methods be kept on file,
and the like. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1337.5(a)(1)–(2), (4)–
(7). These quality requirements evince the same absence of
a historical government message as the content standards:
they do not require that any specific message be conveyed
during CME courses and therefore do nothing to

14

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

demonstrate that the messages historically communicated
through CME courses were government messages as
opposed to the messages of private CME instructors.
The state’s oversight role beyond its written regulations
does nothing to move the needle closer to government
speech. California’s CME regulations allow the government
to audit individual courses, which it apparently occasionally
does. But because California’s content and quality standards
do not show that the state has historically conveyed
messages through CME courses, neither does the state’s
ability to audit CME courses. Whether the potential for an
audit means that CME courses express a government
message depends entirely on what the state is auditing for:
auditing for compliance with content and quality standards
that don’t require any particular government message means
the audits cannot have required historical government
messages either. And outside of sporadic audits, the state
has outsourced the bulk of the approval work to private
accreditors, making it even less likely that any state message
has somehow been historically communicated through CME
courses. Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(g); Cal. Code
Regs. tit. 16, § 1337.5(b).
Finally, California’s requirements that certain licensees
take CME courses covering specific subject matter (like
geriatric medicine) or capping how much credit can be
earned from courses covering specific subject matter (like
medical office management) are restrictions only on CME
attendees, not on the private speakers involved in the CME
process: the CME instructors. Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§§ 2190.3, 2190.5, 2190.6, 2190.15.
Nowhere does
California force private parties to create CME courses on
those specific topics. As such, those requirements also fail

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

15

to evidence a history of California speaking through CME
courses.
The panel concluded otherwise, but the closest it got to
identifying any specific government message historically
communicated using CME courses is California’s
requirement that CME instructors discuss cultural and
linguistic competence. Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(b)–
(c). But as discussed below in applying the third Shurtleff
factor, even the cultural and linguistic competence
provisions are so broad and leave so much discretion to CME
instructors that they practically exert essentially no control
over the messages conveyed by CME courses, which in turn
makes it impossible to point to any discrete state message
communicated through CME courses as a result of these
provisions.
To its credit, the panel did attempt (albeit
unsuccessfully) to distill from California’s historical
regulations one “overarching” government message: “what
is necessary to ensure the continuing competence of licensed
physicians” that “reflects the State’s evolving judgment of
what subjects it has deemed essential” for doctors to know.
California argued in the same vein that its regulations
“convey[] a message regarding what subjects the State
deems important for doctors to know.”
First off, this amorphous, super-generalized message is
communicated, at most, only by the existence of the
regulations, not by the content of any individual CME
courses. This looks nothing like the government speech in
Summum and Walker, in which the government used
individual monuments to communicate discrete messages
and individual license plates to communicate specific
graphics, slogans, and the like. See Summum, 555 U.S. at

16

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

470; Walker, 576 U.S. at 211. The analysis in Summum and
Walker suggests that Shurtleff’s reference to “the history of
the expression at issue” looks not to whatever broad
governmental priorities can be inferred from the mere fact of
regulation, but to the discrete, particular messages the
government has historically communicated using the
regulated medium. Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 252 (drawing the
“history of the expression” factor from Summum and
Walker). This is confirmed by Matal, in which the Court
determined that trademarks were not government speech
despite being significantly regulated. Matal, 582 U.S. at
239. Applying the panel’s logic, the Court could have
inferred from the heavy regulation of trademarks that the
government was communicating its “evolving judgment”
about the importance of trademark protections. But that is
not how the Court approached its analysis. Instead, it flatly
stated that “[t]rademarks have not traditionally been used to
convey a Government message.” Matal, 582 U.S. at 238.
Inferring a message from just the mere fact of extensive
regulation and treating that nebulous message as capable of
satisfying the first Shurtleff element would effectively erase
the historical element altogether, an outcome hard to square
with the Supreme Court’s treatment of the historical element
as a discrete and meaningful piece of the analysis.
But second, even if we ignore that the panel’s reasoning
clashes with Supreme Court precedent and functionally
rewrites the test prescribed by Shurtleff, the “overarching
message” here, as articulated by the panel and by California,
is at such a high level and is so nonspecific that it
communicates no more than “simply affixing a government
seal of approval.” Matal, 582 U.S. at 235. If all that it takes
to transform private speech into government speech is the
government’s implied signal that it thinks some number of

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

17

topics are important, or an implied “evolving judgment of
what subjects it has deemed essential” for people to know,
then a mere government seal of approval (which is
essentially the same thing) would suffice to swallow private
speech. Yet Matal indicates the exact opposite: that “simply
affixing a government seal of approval” is categorically
insufficient to transform private speech into government
speech, notwithstanding the high-level messages inferable
from such a seal. Id. The first Shurtleff factor therefore
weighs in favor of CME messages being private speech, and
the panel erred in concluding otherwise.
C.
Based purely on the fact that California “heavily”
regulates CME courses, the panel concluded that “‘common
sense’ commands that licensees could attribute approved
CMEs’ content to California.” panel reached this conclusion
despite acknowledging that Dr. Khatibi “plausibly alleged
facts suggesting that [CME] attendees treat her as the person
responsible for CME content.”
First, this analysis runs directly counter to “accept[ing]
as true all well-pleaded factual allegations, and constru[ing]
all factual inferences in the light most favorable to the
plaintiff,” which we are required to do at the motion-todismiss stage. Parents for Priv. v. Barr, 949 F.3d 1210,
1221 (9th Cir. 2020). As the panel recognized, Dr. Khatibi
clearly alleged that the attendees of her CME courses view
her content as her own, not the government’s. That
allegation, irrespective of California’s regulatory scheme,
suggests that the public would likely believe that a private
person is speaking through CME courses. See Shurtleff, 596
U.S. at 252. At the motion-to-dismiss stage, that should be
the end of the analysis of Shurtleff’s public perception factor.

18

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

The panel, however, went on to draw inferences
unfavorable to Plaintiffs based on their allegations. The
basis for these unfavorable inferences, in the panel’s eyes, is
the Supreme Court’s language from Ashcroft v. Iqbal that
“[d]etermining whether a complaint states a plausible claim
for relief … requires the reviewing court to draw on its
judicial experience and common sense.” 556 U.S. 662, 679
(2009) (citation omitted). The subsequent paragraphs in that
decision, however, suggest that the point of resorting to
common sense is to weed out “legal conclusion[s]” and to
ensure that a plaintiff’s allegations are logically consistent,
not to flatly contradict a well-pleaded allegation the court is
supposed to accept as true. Id. at 679–80.
And even assuming it can be permissible to rely on
“judicial experience and common sense” as the panel
suggests, the most obvious cognate to CME from our own
“judicial experience” would obviously be the comparable
continuing legal education (“CLE”) requirements of our
profession, which like the medical profession is heavily
regulated, often in very similar ways. See, e.g., Cal. Bus. &
Prof. Code § 6070.5 (directing the State Bar to adopt
regulations requiring “that the mandatory continuing legal
education … curriculum for all licensees … includes
training on implicit bias and the promotion of bias-reducing
strategies”). Every judge has sat through hours upon hours
of CLE, and surely that experience and common sense
support the eminent plausibility of Plaintiff’s allegation that
CLE attendees perceive CLE instructors as speaking on their
own behalf, not on behalf of the government. Given the
similarity between CME and CLE requirements, there is
little reason to believe that CME attendees would think any
differently—certainly nothing in our “judicial experience”
compels a different conclusion. Just like the first factor, the

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

19

second Shurtleff factor also supports a finding that CME
courses are private speech. 1
D.
The panel’s analysis of the third Shurtleff factor involved
a lengthy recitation of the laws that California has in place.
As discussed above, the mere existence of a plethora of
regulations is not enough to prove that the government is
speaking. We must instead consider the ways in which the
regulations “actively shape[] or control[] the expression”
involved in the CME lectures. Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 252; cf.
id. at 256 (“[I]t is Boston’s control over the flags’ content
and meaning that here is key; that type of control would
indicate that Boston meant to convey the flags’ messages.”).
Conducting that analysis reveals that the state in fact
exercises very little control over CME expression, because
every part of the regulations that have to do with the content
of the CME courses is so broad as to exercise practically no
control over the courses’ messages.
For the same reasons that many of California’s
regulations do not evidence a history of the state speaking
through CME courses, the same regulations impose no
meaningful government control over the expression
involved with CME courses. The breadth of California’s
content standards leaves CME instructors free to speak about
whatever medical topics they choose. See Cal. Bus. & Prof.
The panel contended that “[e]ven assuming that the public perception
factor favors Dr. Khatibi, [the] ultimate conclusion would remain the
same” because the “remaining factors of history and extent of state
control decisively” favor California. But this conclusion relies on the
panel’s erroneous analysis of the history and extent-of-control factors.
As explained, properly analyzed, neither of those factors favor the
government—much less “decisively” so.
1

20

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Code § 2190.1(a); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1337.5(a)(3).
Within the factual context of Walker, this would be akin to
the government saying, “Create whatever license plate
design you want, as long as it’s a license plate.” Such a
permissive content requirement, a far cry from Texas’s
granular “sole control over the design, typeface, color, and
alphanumeric pattern for all license plates,” would certainly
not have led the Court to conclude that “Texas maintains
direct control over the messages conveyed on its specialty
plates.” Walker, 576 U.S. at 213. Given that Walker “likely
marks the outer bounds of the government-speech doctrine,”
Matal, 582 U.S. at 238, this vast disparity between Texas’s
control over the license plates in Walker and California’s
exercise of control over the messages conveyed in CME
courses means that the third Shurtleff factor also favors
Plaintiffs.
Since California’s miscellaneous quality standards do
not impact the messages conveyed in CME courses, those
regulations cannot be characterized as “actively shap[ing] or
controll[ing] the expression” at issue. 2 Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at
252; see Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, § 1337.5(a)(1)–(2), (4)–(7).
The subject matter requirements for certain licensees in
The panel makes much of the fact that “Dr. Khatibi admits that her
courses have complied with all CME requirements,” which the panel
reads as Dr. Khatibi “conced[ing] that her CMEs have been shaped by
California.” This is another example of the panel putting dispositive
weight on the mere fact of regulation, rather than properly analyzing
whether those regulations shape the messages conveyed by CME
instructors. All regulations require compliance, regardless of whether
they control or shape speech. If regulatory compliance alone is sufficient
to resolve the analysis of the third Shurtleff factor, then the distinction
drawn by the Court between “the government intend[ing] to speak for
itself” and the government merely “regulat[ing] private expression”
would be meaningless. Shurtleff, 596 U.S. 243, 252 (2022).
2

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

21

California Business and Professions Code sections 2190.3,
2190.5, 2190.6, and 2190.15 are imposed on CME attendees,
not CME instructors, and therefore likewise fail to provide
examples of the state asserting control over the messages
CME instructors convey.
As part of its control analysis, the panel again leaned on
California’s
cultural
and
linguistic
competency
requirements. Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(c). The
panel cited two pages’ worth of the associated statute in an
attempt to demonstrate the extent of the control California
exerts over CME instructors’ speech. If the cited statute
listed requirements that all had to be met, the panel’s
argument might be stronger. But the statute is disjunctive:
CME lectures must address “at least one or a combination
of” the subsequently listed items. Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code
§ 2190.1(c). As a result, the length of the statute actually
serves to undercut the panel’s point: because CME
instructors can choose among almost unlimited options to
satisfy the cultural and linguistic competence requirement,
section 2190.1(c) in fact exercises very little control over
CME instructors’ speech. This provision doesn’t merely
leave “the development of the remaining details” to the
private speakers who create CME courses. Johanns v.
Livestock Mktg. Ass’n, 544 U.S. 550, 561 (2005). Giving
CME instructors a choice between a whole host of options
for one small aspect of CME lectures and wholesale control
over the rest of the message means that CME instructors are
functionally building their courses from the ground up, with
no meaningful state-imposed guardrails or direction.
Because neither the cultural and linguistic competence
provision nor the generic content requirements significantly
control or limit CME instructors’ messages, the third

22

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Shurtleff factor too weighs against finding that the
government is speaking through CME courses.
III.
In California, CME courses are created, prepared,
approved, and accredited by private actors. While, as one
might expect, the state extensively regulates CME courses,
it has not historically used that regulation to control the
courses’ messages. Nor is the mere scope of California’s
regulatory scheme a good reason to conclude, at the motionto-dismiss stage and in the face of Plaintiffs’ well-pleaded
allegations, that CME attendees perceive instructors as
relaying the government’s views. As a factual matter, and
certainly as plausibly pled in this case, they don’t. And the
breadth of California’s CME regulations generally belies the
fact that the state actually exercises very little control over
the messages expressed by CME instructors. The panel’s
conclusion in this case that the mere breadth of CME
regulation inherently expresses a governmental message
about California’s priorities improperly rewrites the test
prescribed by the Supreme Court in Shurtleff. Our court
should have reheard this case en banc to correct that
improperly anemic governmental speech analysis and to
prevent the government from so easily coopting private
speech.

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

23

TUNG, Circuit Judge, joined by BUMATAY and
VANDYKE, Circuit Judges, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
This case is about whether private instructors of
continuing medical education courses engage in
“government speech” when a State requires them (over their
objection) to teach that “implicit bias” “lead[s] to disparities
in health outcomes.”
The answer is no. Such private instructors do not engage
in “government speech,” for the simple reason that they are
not the government and they do not speak for the
government. A law requiring them to convey a viewpoint
they find objectionable thus restricts their private expression
and is not exempt from First Amendment scrutiny. Because
the panel concluded otherwise, I respectfully dissent from
the denial of rehearing en banc.
*

*

*

The concept of “implicit bias” is controversial.
Popularized in the 2000s, it espouses the view that
individuals harbor unconscious biases that favor whites and
males over blacks and females (or other groups) that have
resulted in disparities in income, job opportunities, and most
relevant here, healthcare outcomes. See, e.g., Assemb. B.
241, 2019–2020 Leg., Reg. Sess. (Cal. 2019) (enacted)
(codified at Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 2190.1(d)–(g),
2736.5(a)–(c), 3524.5(a)–(d)). Plaintiffs here—a female
physician and a nonprofit—dispute the validity of the
concept and its relevance to their curriculum. ER 36–37, 39.
“Implicit bias” theory, they say, is rooted in neither evidence
nor fact, disregards other potential factors that could better
explain outcome disparities, and hastily (and inaccurately)
identifies racism or sexism as the primary cause. Id. at 35–

24

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

37. In Plaintiffs’ view, the theory is also divisive, producing
resentment by needlessly setting one racial (or other) group
against another. Id. at 35, 39. For these reasons, Plaintiffs
object to teaching “implicit bias” in their continuing medical
education courses. Id. at 36–39.
The State of California has taken a firm side in this
debate. It has sought to disseminate the idea of “implicit
bias” through various mandatory training programs. To that
end, and for our purposes here, the California legislature in
2019 enacted a statute requiring that private instructors teach
“implicit bias” in all their continuing medical education
courses relating to “direct patient care.” Cal. Bus. & Prof.
Code § 2190.1(d). In that Act, the legislature “declares”
“find[ings]” that purportedly support its mandate—though
the Act itself does not cite evidence for those findings:
•

Implicit bias . . . exists, and often
contributes to unequal treatment of
people based on race, ethnicity, gender
identity, sexual
orientation,
age,
disability, and other characteristics[.]

•

Implicit bias contributes to health
disparities by affecting the behavior of
physicians and surgeons, nurses,
physician assistants, and other healing
arts licenses[.]

•

African American women are three to
four times more likely than white women
to die from pregnancy-related causes
nationwide.

•

African American patients often are
prescribed less pain medication than

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

25

white patients who present the same
complaints[.]
•

African American patients with signs of
heart problems are not referred for
advanced cardiovascular procedures as
often as white patients with the same
symptoms[.]

•

Implicit gender bias also impacts
treatment decisions and outcomes.
Women are less likely to survive a heart
attack when they are treated by a male
physician and surgeon.

Assemb. B. 241, 2019–2020 Leg., Reg. Sess. § 1 (Cal.
2019). In accordance with these “findings,” the Act states
that “all continuing medical education courses shall contain
curriculum that includes the understanding of implicit bias.”
Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 2190.1(d)(1). Specifically, the Act
requires private instructors to incorporate “at least one or a
combination” of the following in virtually all courses:
(1) Examples of how implicit bias affects
perceptions and treatment decisions of
physicians and surgeons, leading to
disparities in health outcomes.
(2) Strategies to address how unintended
biases in decisionmaking may contribute
to health care disparities by shaping
behavior and producing differences in
medical treatment along lines of race,
ethnicity, gender identity, sexual

26

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

orientation, age, socioeconomic status, or
other characteristics.
Id. § 2190.1(e).
*

*

*

Let us be clear about a few points. First, no one disputes
that Plaintiffs are a private instructor and a private entity
who teach courses to physicians so that the physicians can
maintain their licenses. Plaintiffs are not government
employees or government agents; nor are they funded by the
government. See Khatibi v. Hawkins, 145 F.4th 1139, 1151
(9th Cir. 2025) (“[T]he State certainly expects, if not relies[]
on[,] the participation of private parties in executing the
CME scheme”); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 16, §§ 1337, 1337.5
(expressly opening up continuing education courses to
approved private providers). Second, no one contends that
the government owns (by copyright or otherwise) the course
materials that Plaintiffs put together. It is not disputed that
the course materials (and the content contained therein)
belong to Plaintiffs. Third, the law at issue does not purport
to transform Plaintiffs into agents of the government or cloak
them with the authority to speak on its behalf. Plaintiffs
remain private speakers just as they were before the law was
passed.
What then does the law do? Simply put, it requires
Plaintiffs to convey a message that the government favors
but that Plaintiffs do not. The statute mandates, in
unmistakable terms, that private instructors teach (and
assume) the validity of the “implicit bias” theory. That is
not the government “speak[ing] for itself”; rather, it is the
government compelling others to speak in a certain way.
Shurtleff v. City of Bos., 596 U.S. 243, 252 (2022). The State

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

27

of California could have hired its own employees to spread
its message of “implicit bias” and the deleterious effects of
this purported phenomenon. Matal v. Tam, 582 U.S. 218,
234 (2017) (“The Free Speech Clause does not require
government to maintain viewpoint neutrality when its
officers and employees speak.”). The State could have
enlisted volunteers to do the same. See Shurtleff, 596 U.S.
at 270 (Alito, J., concurring in the judgment) (“So long as
this responsibility is voluntarily assumed, speech by a
private party within the scope of his power to speak for the
government constitutes government speech.”). The State
could have even created a program in which it was involved
“from beginning to end” in proposing edits or suggestions to
solicited course material. Matal, 582 U.S. at 237 (citing
Johanns v. Livestock Mktg. Ass’n, 544 U.S. 550, 560–61
(2005)); see also Walker v. Texas Div., Sons of Confederate
Veterans, Inc., 576 U.S. 200, 213 (2015) (holding that Texas
specialty license plates are government speech and
considering that “Texas maintains direct control over the
messages conveyed on its specialty plates”). All these
options might have been considered an exercise in
“government speech.”
But the State has done none of that. The State has chosen
instead to commandeer a vast majority of course providers,
who are private, to express a specific viewpoint. That may
be the most efficient way for the State to proselytize its
message; it may have the added benefit, too, of creating the
perception of uniformity on a divisive topic, while imposing
a steep social cost on those in the field who dare to dissent.
In the end, the statute’s aim appears to be nothing less than
ideological conformity enforced through private
conscription by the State.

28

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

Our First Amendment stands stubbornly athwart that
approach. See W. Va. State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319
U.S. 624, 642 (1943) (“If there is any fixed star in our
constitutional constellation, it is that no official, high or
petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics,
nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or force
citizens to confess by word or act their faith therein.”). As
our Supreme Court has said rather bluntly, “the government
may not compel a person to speak its own preferred
messages,” nor “force an individual to include other ideas
with his own speech that he would prefer not to include.”
303 Creative LLC v. Elenis, 600 U.S. 570, 586–87 (2023).
“All that offends the First Amendment just the same.” Id. at
587. Yet that appears to be what California is doing here—
requiring physicians to treat “implicit bias” as gospel
(despite their unwillingness to assent) and, worse still, to
then teach it to their students in virtually every continuing
education course.
Contrary to the panel’s contention (and as Judge
VanDyke well explains), the existence of extensive
“regulation” in the “medical profession” does not justify
State compulsion of a particular viewpoint. See Dissent at
8–11 (VanDyke, J.). If that were so, doctors could be forced
to affirm viewpoints they find odious as a condition of
maintaining their licenses. Lawyers could find themselves
suffering the same fate, too. Both fields (and others) are
highly regulated. Indeed, any professional accreditation
regime, now open to and supported by a vast network of
private providers expressing differing (and perhaps
conflicting) viewpoints, would be in jeopardy of being
converted into an engine of state-sanctioned groupthink if
those providers could be compelled to announce a singular
position. That maneuver is not exempt from the First

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

29

Amendment’s purview. But that is where the panel’s logic
leads; for the panel, it is “government speech” all the way
down.
Nor does private expression become “government
speech” simply because that expression is made a condition
of a benefit. See, e.g., Matal, 582 U.S. at 239. Being
compelled to express a particular viewpoint—on pain of
losing professional accreditation—is anything but
voluntarily speaking on behalf of the government. See
Shurtleff, 596 U.S. at 271 (Alito, J., concurring in the
judgment) (citing Matal, 582 U.S. at 234–35) (“Facilitating
speech by private persons cannot constitute government
speech unless the government assigns a power to speak to
those persons or appropriates the products of their expressive
activity to express its own message. When the government’s
role is limited to applying a standard of assessment to
determine a speaker’s eligibility for a benefit, the
government is regulating private speech, and ordinary First
Amendment principles apply.”).
The factors announced in Shurtleff do not help the panel
either, as Judge VanDyke correctly concludes. See Shurtleff,
596 U.S. at 252 (“[W]e conduct a holistic inquiry
. . . look[ing] to several types of evidence to guide the
analysis, including: the history of the expression at issue; the
public’s likely perception as to who (the government or a
private person) is speaking; and the extent to which the
government has actively shaped or controlled the
expression.”). But stepping back, the diametrically opposed
outcomes that the panel and Judge VanDyke have reached in
applying the Shurtleff “test”—and other circuits’ divergence
from the panel—might give us pause as to the test’s
workability. Id. at 266 (Alito, J., concurring in the
judgment) (“[L]ike any factorized analysis, this approach

30

KHATIBI V. HAWKINS

cannot provide a principled way of deciding cases.”); see
also Dissent at 5, 10–11 (VanDyke, J.). The panel insists
that it engaged in Shurtleff’s “holistic inquiry” in concluding
that the government speaks—indeed, it invokes the word
“holistic” no fewer than nine times in its opinion. But all too
often, such “holistic” multi-factor tests serve as mere cover
for judges to reach their preferred result. See Lexmark Int’l,
Inc. v. Static Control Components, Inc., 572 U.S. 118, 136
(2014) (observing that “open-ended balancing tests[] can
yield unpredictable and at times arbitrary results”). Better
off, it seems, for constitutional principles to “be anchored in
rules, not set adrift in some multifactored ‘balancing test.’”
Granfinanciera, S.A. v. Nordberg, 492 U.S. 33, 70 (1989)
(Scalia, J., concurring in part and concurring in the
judgment).
The panel here has gone adrift. If Shurtleff is being
applied (as here) to deny First Amendment protection to
undeniably private instructors, compelled by the State to
teach a doctrine they disbelieve, then something has gone
seriously awry and we have lost the plot. The point of the
factors is “to determine whether the government intends to
speak for itself or to regulate private expression.” Shurtleff,
596 U.S. at 252. If they cease to serve that function reliably,
then it is hard to see what function they should serve at all.
Here, it is clear the State seeks to “regulate private
expression.” I dissent from the denial of rehearing en banc.

