FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
EMMANUEL WALKER, as
Guardian of an incapacitated adult on
behalf of Issac Contreras,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 24-1806
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-01401DWL-ESW
OPINION

STATE OF ARIZONA; AARON
BOWEN; UNKNOWN BOWEN,
husband and wife; DONALD
HERRINGTON; UNKNOWN
HERRINGTON, husband and wife;
CARA CHRIST; UNKNOWN
CHRIST, husband and wife;
KATHERINE WOODS;
UNKNOWN WOODS, husband and
wife; UNKNOWN PARTIES,
Defendants – Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
Dominic Lanza, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 28, 2025
Phoenix, Arizona

2

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

Filed October 22, 2025
Before: Marsha S. Berzon and Mark J. Bennett, Circuit
Judges, and Joan H. Lefkow, District Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Bennett
SUMMARY**
Stipulated Dismissal / Jurisdiction
In an appeal from the district court’s dismissal of a state
law claim, where the parties jointly stipulated to dismiss
plaintiff’s federal claims after the case was removed to
federal court, the panel remanded to the district court with
instructions to reopen the case and remand the state law
claim to the Arizona Superior Court.
Emmanuel Walker, as guardian and on behalf of Isaac
Contreras, filed suit against the State of Arizona, alleging
that Contreras’s confinement in an isolation cell in the
Arizona State Hospital violated his state and federal
rights. Following removal to federal court, the State moved
for judgment on the pleadings on Count 3—Walker’s state
law claim under Arizona Revised Statutes § 36-516, which
provides a cause of action for violations of the rights of
seriously mentally ill persons—and the district court
*

The Honorable Joan H. Lefkow, United States District Judge for the
Northern District of Illinois, sitting by designation.
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

3

dismissed Count 3. To facilitate immediate appellate review
of the district court’s dismissal of Count 3, the parties jointly
stipulated to dismiss Walker’s remaining state and federal
claims with prejudice. While the appeal was pending, the
Supreme Court decided Royal Canin U.S.A., Inc. v.
Wullschleger, 604 U.S. 22 (2025), which held that if,
following removal, a plaintiff amends her complaint
pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 15(a)(1)(B) to
eliminate all federal claims, the district court loses
jurisdiction and must remand the case to state court.
The panel held that it had appellate jurisdiction but
lacked Article III jurisdiction to reach the merits of Walker’s
appeal on Count 3.
The panel held that, pursuant to Royal Canin, for
purposes of assessing jurisdiction, a joint stipulation of
dismissal functions the same as an amendment as of right
under Rule 15(a)(1)(B). Because the joint stipulation was
self-executing, the district court lost jurisdiction over entry
of any final judgment and was required to remand Count 3
to state court.
COUNSEL
Matthew P. MacLeod (argued) and Lincoln Combs, O'Steen
& Harrison PLC, Phoenix, Arizona; Holly R. Gieszl, The
Gieszl Firm, Phoenix, Arizona; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Eileen D. GilBride (argued), Georgia A. Staton, and Ravi V.
Patel, Jones Skelton & Hochuli PLC, Phoenix, Arizona, for
Defendants-Appellees.

4

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

OPINION
BENNETT, Circuit Judge:
In 2022, Plaintiff Emmanuel Walker, as guardian and on
behalf of Isaac Contreras, filed suit in Arizona state court
against Defendants Aaron Bowen, Donald Herrington, Cara
Christ, Katherine Woods, and the State of Arizona
(collectively “the State”). Walker alleged that Contreras’s
confinement in an isolation cell in the Arizona State Hospital
(the “Hospital”), while Contreras was criminally committed
as mentally insane, violated Contreras’s state and federal
rights. Walker alleged five state law claims and two federal
claims. Invoking federal question jurisdiction, the State
removed the case to federal court.
Following removal, the State moved for judgment on the
pleadings on Count 3—Walker’s state law claim brought
under Arizona Revised Statutes § 36-516, which provides a
cause of action for violations of the rights of seriously
mentally ill persons. The district court granted the State’s
motion for judgment on the pleadings and dismissed
Count 3. However, the district court was not asked to, and
did not, enter partial judgment on this claim pursuant to
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(b). To facilitate
immediate appellate review of the district court’s dismissal
of Count 3, Walker and the State jointly stipulated to dismiss
Walker’s remaining state and federal claims with prejudice.
Walker then appealed the dismissal of the state law claim.
While Walker’s appeal was pending, the Supreme Court
decided Royal Canin U.S.A., Inc. v. Wullschleger, 604 U.S.
22 (2025), which held that if, following removal, a plaintiff
amends her complaint pursuant to Rule 15(a)(1)(B) to
eliminate all federal claims, the district court loses

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

5

jurisdiction and must remand the case to state court. See id.
at 25–26. In the wake of Royal Canin, we must decide
whether, for purposes of assessing jurisdiction, a joint
stipulation of dismissal functions the same as an amendment
as of right under Rule 15(a)(1)(B). We hold that it does.
This conclusion requires us to decide what the district court
should have done when it lost jurisdiction. 1 Because the
joint stipulation was self-executing, the district court lost
jurisdiction before entry of any final judgment. When that
occurred, the district court should have remanded Count 3 to
the Arizona Superior Court. We now instruct the district
court to remand that claim.
BACKGROUND
The question before us concerns the district court’s
jurisdiction. The underlying dispute involves confinement
conditions in an Arizona state mental health facility.
In May 2015, Contreras was arrested for aggravated
assault. Contreras was found not competent to stand trial
and was ordered to participate in a state-run “Restoration to
Competency” program. After successfully completing the
program, Contreras was found competent to stand trial. He
was then adjudicated “Guilty Except Insane” under Arizona
Revised Statutes § 13-502.2
1

Of course, Royal Canin was decided after the district court acted on the
parties’ stipulation. We do not suggest that the district court should have
anticipated the Supreme Court’s ruling.
2

A “Guilty Except Insane” finding establishes that the defendant was
guilty but “afflicted with a mental disease or defect of such severity that
the person did not know the criminal act was wrong.” Ariz. Rev. Stat.
§ 13-502(A). Arizona law provides that individuals found Guilty Except
Insane shall be “placed and remain under the jurisdiction of the superior
court and committed to a secure state mental health facility under the

6

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

Contreras was not sentenced to prison but was
committed to the Hospital under Arizona Revised Statutes
§ 13-3992(A). While committed, Contreras was involved in
a series of incidents including spitting in another patient’s
face and issuing multiple verbal and physical threats to other
patients and staff. Contreras was placed in an isolation cell
under the Hospital’s “Administrative Separation” policy.3
According to the complaint, Contreras was confined to
“a tiny bedroom with a concrete slab for a bed, an adjoining
bathroom, and a short hallway connecting the two rooms.”
Contreras had only one window, which “was an internal
glass pane between his bedroom and the adjacent nursing
station in the interior of the hospital” and “was often covered
with a tarp by [Hospital] personnel.” Contreras had
“minimal in-person human interaction” and for months “was
forced to eat like an animal, on the floor, and with his hands.”
Contreras was confined to these conditions for 665 days,
from July 17, 2020, until he was released from commitment

department of health services pursuant to [Arizona Revised Statutes]
§ 13-3992.” Id. § 13-502(D); see also id. § 13-3992(A) (“A person who
is found guilty except insane pursuant to § 13-502 shall be committed to
a secure mental health facility for a period of treatment.”).
3

Under Arizona regulations, “administrative separation” is “the
temporary isolation of a patient . . . for a situation where not isolating the
patient presents a risk of serious harm to other individuals or a serious
risk to the safety or security of a hospital.” Ariz. Admin. Code § R9-10235(A). Administrative separation may not be used “[i]n conjunction
with a restraint” or “[a]s a method to manage behaviors.” Id. § R9-10235(C). The regulation also requires that policies and procedures be
adopted “for determining when administrative separation will no longer
be used for a patient.” Id. § R9-10-235(C)(2)(g).

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

7

on May 12, 2022.4 Contreras’s mental health “predictably
deteriorated further” due to his confinement.
In May 2022, Emmanuel Walker was appointed to serve
as Contreras’s guardian because Contreras “is an
incapacitated adult who . . . was and is unable to manage his
daily affairs.” In July 2022, Walker filed a complaint on
Contreras’s behalf in the Arizona Superior Court. Walker
alleged two federal claims 5 under 42 U.S.C. § 1983:
(1) violation of Contreras’s Eighth Amendment right to be
free from cruel and unusual punishment and (2) violation of
Contreras’s Fourteenth Amendment due process right to be
free from a government employee placing a person in actual,
particularized danger. Walker also alleged five state law
claims: (3) violations of the rights of a seriously mentally ill
person under Arizona Revised Statutes § 36-516;
(4) negligence; (5) intentional infliction of emotional
distress; (6) violation of Arizona’s Adult Protective Services

4

Under Arizona law, “a person who is found guilty except insane
pursuant to § 13-502 shall be committed to a secure mental health facility
for a period of treatment.” Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-3992(A). Contreras was
committed to the Hospital “for restorative psychiatric treatment.”
Contreras’s commitment expired in May 2022.
5

Walker brought his federal claims only against Defendants Bowen,
Christ, Herrington, and Woods. Bowen was the Chief Executive Officer
and Superintendent of the Hospital. Herrington was the Interim Director
of the Arizona Department of Health Services. Christ was the Director
of the Arizona Department of Health Services before Herrington. Woods
was the Chief Medical Officer of the Hospital. Walker alleged that these
Defendants’ use of administrative separation violated Arizona law and
demonstrated deliberate indifference to Contreras’s medical needs.

8

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

Act, Arizona Revised Statutes § 46-455; and (7) medical
negligence.6
The State removed the case pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1441
to the United States District Court for the District of Arizona,
invoking federal question jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1331. The State’s notice of removal stated that “[t]his
action may be removed . . . because Plaintiff has asserted
§1983 claims against Defendants . . . , asserting violations of
the Eighth (Cruel and Unusual Punishment) and Fourteenth
(State-Created Danger) Amendments to the United States
Constitution.” Notice of Removal at 2, Walker v. Arizona,
No. 22-cv-01401 (D. Ariz. Aug. 18, 2022), Dkt. No. 1. The
removal notice also explained that the district court had
“supplemental jurisdiction of [Plaintiff’s] state law claims
asserted against Defendants, since they are closely related to
the federal claims asserted [under] 42 U.S.C.§ 1983.” Id.
Following discovery, the State moved for partial
judgment on the pleadings under Rule 12(c) on Count 3,
Walker’s state law claim alleging violations of Arizona
Revised Statutes § 36-516. The State argued that Arizona’s
civil commitment statutes and regulations do not apply to
criminal commitments, including Contreras’s commitment.
Walker opposed, arguing that there is no provision expressly
limiting § 36-516 to civil commitments and that the statutory
and regulatory protections apply broadly to committed
persons.
On February 14, 2024, the district court granted the
State’s motion for partial judgment on the pleadings and
6

Walker asserted his claim for medical negligence only against
Defendants Bowen and Woods. All other state claims were brought
against all Defendants.

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

9

dismissed Count 3. The district court held that the chapter
containing § 36-516 discusses only the procedures for civil
commitment and does not “address or set forth any
procedures for criminal commitment,” which is instead
governed by Arizona Revised Statutes § 13-502(D). The
district court concluded that criminal commitment “is
governed by an entirely different statutory framework than
the framework governing the civil commitment of those
receiving treatment.” The district court did not enter partial
judgment on Count 3 pursuant to Rule 54(b).
According to Walker, “[t]he Arizona state law claims
that were dismissed were [his] strongest and most
consequential causes of action.” Rather than wait and pursue
his other claims, Walker’s “strategy was to appeal [the
district court’s] decision immediately.” On February 29,
2024, in order to obtain a final decision so that Walker’s
“appeal rights matured,” the parties jointly entered a
“Stipulation to Dismiss Remaining Counts.” Walker v.
Arizona, No. 22-cv-01401 (D. Ariz. Feb. 29, 2024), Dkt. No.
42. The stipulation read:
On February 14, 2024, the Honorable
Dominic W. Lanza granted Defendants’
Motion for Partial Judgment on the Pleadings
(Doc. 28) dismissing Count Three of
Plaintiff’s complaint without leave to amend.
The parties, by and through counsel
undersigned, hereby stipulate to dismiss the
remaining counts with prejudice, each side to
bear its own fees and costs.
Id. at 2. After the stipulation, Walker had no remaining
federal or state law claims.

10

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

On March 1, 2024, the district court entered an order
“granting the stipulation of dismissal.” The district court
ordered “that all claims in the above-captioned case are
dismissed with prejudice,” vacated all hearings and
deadlines, and denied as moot all pending motions. Walker
then appealed.
While Walker’s case was on appeal, the Supreme Court
decided Royal Canin, which held that “if, after removal, the
plaintiff amends her complaint to delete all the federal-law
claims, . . . the federal court loses its supplemental
jurisdiction over the related state-law claims. The case must
therefore return to state court.” 604 U.S. at 25–26. Royal
Canin undid Sparta Surgical Corp. v. National Ass’n of
Securities Dealers, Inc., our circuit precedent holding to the
contrary—namely, that the availability of supplemental
jurisdiction depended on the allegations in the complaint at
the time of removal, and that subsequent amendments did
not eliminate the district court’s ability to exercise
supplemental jurisdiction. See 159 F.3d 1209, 1213 (9th Cir.
1998).
Following Royal Canin, Walker’s case presents two
questions. First, does a joint stipulation by the parties to
dismiss claims function the same as amendment under
Rule 15(a)(1)(B)? We hold that it does because it alters the
substance of the complaint. Second, did the filing of the
parties’ joint stipulation cause the district court to lose
supplemental jurisdiction before it entered final judgment?
We hold that the district court lost supplemental jurisdiction
upon the filing of the joint stipulation, which was selfexecuting. Pursuant to the rule (later) established in Royal
Canin, the district court was required to remand the case
back to state court. See 28 U.S.C. § 1447(c) (“If at any time

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

11

before final judgment it appears that the district court lacks
subject matter jurisdiction, the case shall be remanded.”).
JURISDICTION
We must first address whether we have jurisdiction to
hear this appeal. After Royal Canin was decided, we asked
the parties to submit supplemental briefing that addressed,
among other issues, that question. Dkt. No. 34. Walker
argues that we have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291
because this appeal arises from a final decision of the district
court. The State contends that we lack jurisdiction because
the case must “aris[e] under” federal law, and Walker
dismissed his federal claims. The State offers that “[w]hile
this Court has statutory authority under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 to
consider appeals from final judgments, Article III’s
umbrella limitation [to cases “arising under” federal law]
still applies.” “We review de novo jurisdictional issues,
even when they are raised for the first time on appeal.”
United States v. Scott, 83 F.4th 796, 799 (9th Cir. 2023).
Here, we conclude that we have appellate jurisdiction but
lack jurisdiction to reach the merits of Walker’s appeal on
Count 3.
There is a difference between statutory grants of
jurisdiction and jurisdiction under Article III. All federal
courts are limited, “by the Constitution, to only the kinds of
‘Cases’ and ‘Controversies’ listed in Article III.” Royal
Canin, 604 U.S. at 26. Moreover, “all lower federal courts[]
[are] limited as well by statute.” Id. “Article III generally
requires a federal court to satisfy itself of its jurisdiction over
the subject matter before it considers the merits of a case.”
Ruhrgas AG v. Marathon Oil Co., 526 U.S. 574, 583 (1999);
see also Steel Co. v. Citizens for a Better Env’t, 523 U.S. 83,
94 (1998) (“Without jurisdiction the court cannot proceed at

12

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

all in any cause.” (quoting Ex parte McCardle, 74 U.S. (7
Wall.) 506, 514 (1868))). As relevant here, Article III
provides as one basis for the subject matter jurisdiction of all
federal courts, including this one, “Cases . . . arising
under . . . the Laws of the United States.” U.S. Const.
art. III, § 2. In turn, by enacting 28 U.S.C. § 1331, Congress
has authorized district courts to exercise federal question
jurisdiction. Congress has also authorized this court to
exercise jurisdiction over “appeals from all final decisions of
the district courts of the United States, . . . except where a
direct review may be had in the Supreme Court.” Id. § 1291.
But “Congress may not expand the jurisdiction of the federal
courts beyond the bounds established by the Constitution.”
Verlinden B.V. v. Cent. Bank of Nigeria, 461 U.S. 480, 491
(1983). Thus our statutory jurisdiction to hear this appeal
cannot override Article III’s limitations. Even so, “a federal
court always has jurisdiction to determine its own
jurisdiction.” Brownback v. King, 592 U.S. 209, 218–19
(2021) (quoting United States v. Ruiz, 536 U.S. 662, 628
(2002)).
The finality requirement of statutory jurisdiction is met
here. “Under the final judgment rule embodied in 28 U.S.C.
§ 1291, the courts of appeals have jurisdiction over appeals
from all final decisions of the district courts of the United
States,” Galaza v. Wolf, 954 F.3d 1267, 1270 (9th Cir. 2020),
“except where a direct review may be had in the Supreme
Court,” 28 U.S.C. § 1291. To have jurisdiction from a final
decision, “[t]he United States Supreme Court has affirmed
the general rule that ‘the whole case and every matter in
controversy in it [must be] decided in a single appeal.’”
Galaza, 954 F.3d at 1270 (second alteration in original)
(quoting Microsoft Corp. v. Baker, 582 U.S. 23, 36 (2017)).
So, ordinarily, “[a] district court order is . . . not appealable

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

13

unless it disposes of all claims as to all parties or unless
judgment is entered in compliance with Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 54(b).” United States v. Gila Valley Irrigation
Dist., 859 F.3d 789, 797 (9th Cir. 2017) (alteration in
original) (quoting Romoland Sch. Dist. v. Inland Empire
Energy Ctr., LLC, 548 F.3d 738, 747 (9th Cir. 2008)).
Walker invoked federal subject matter jurisdiction under
28 U.S.C. § 1331 for his federal claims and supplemental
jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1367 for his state law
claims. The district court granted the State’s motion for
partial judgment on the pleadings and dismissed Walker’s
state law claim under Arizona Revised Statutes § 36-516.
Because Walker still had remaining claims, the district
court’s order was not immediately appealable. See Galaza,
954 F.3d at 1272 (noting that the plaintiff’s pending
retaliation claim would preclude a final, appealable
judgment). To facilitate his appeal, Walker agreed with the
State to dismiss his remaining claims with prejudice. Once
Walker dismissed his remaining claims with prejudice,7 the
district court’s previous dismissal of Count 3 became a final
decision capable of appellate review. See Concha v. London,
62 F.3d 1493, 1507 (9th Cir. 1995) (“[W]e have made clear
7

If Walker had dismissed his claims without prejudice, the district
court’s order would not be final and appealable. See Galaza, 954 F.3d
at 1272 (“We . . . hold that when a party that has suffered an adverse
partial judgment subsequently dismisses any remaining claims without
prejudice, and does so without the approval and meaningful participation
of the district court, this court lacks jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1291.”); Adonican v. City of Los Angeles, 297 F.3d 1106, 1108 (9th
Cir. 2002) (per curiam) (finding that the parties’ agreement for the
plaintiff to voluntarily dismiss her remaining claims with the option to
refile them after the appeal was decided was “sufficient evidence that the
parties have attempted to manufacture finality in the partial . . . judgment
order,” which “raise[d] concerns about piecemeal litigation”).

14

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

that plaintiffs may appeal from a voluntary dismissal with
prejudice . . . . The basic principle we follow is that the
plaintiff may appeal a voluntary dismissal only when it is
with prejudice to his right to commence another action for
the same cause or otherwise subjects him to prejudicial terms
or conditions.”).
Although we ultimately conclude that the district court
lost subject matter jurisdiction when the parties dismissed
the remaining claims with prejudice pursuant to a joint
stipulation, that holding does not alter our statutory
jurisdiction to hear this appeal. See Romoland, 548 F.3d at
751, 756 (exercising jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 but
finding that the district court lacked subject matter
jurisdiction over the underlying claims). But because we
conclude that this case no longer involves a federal question,
we lack Article III jurisdiction to reach the merits of
Walker’s claim. Thus, our exercise of jurisdiction is limited
to the “familiar law that a federal court always has
jurisdiction to determine its own jurisdiction.” Ruiz, 536
U.S. at 628. “When the lower federal court lacks
jurisdiction, we have jurisdiction on appeal, not of the merits
but merely for the purpose of correcting the error of the
lower court in entertaining the suit.” Bender v. Williamsport
Area Sch. Dist., 475 U.S. 534, 541 (1986) (alterations
omitted) (quoting United States v. Corrick, 298 U.S. 435,
440 (1936)).
DISCUSSION
“Federal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction. They
possess only that power authorized by Constitution and
statute . . . .” Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of Am.,
511 U.S. 375, 377 (1994). “Congress has authorized the
federal district courts to exercise original jurisdiction in ‘all

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

15

civil actions arising under the Constitution, laws, or treaties
of the United States’ . . . .” Gunn v. Minton, 568 U.S. 251,
257 (2013) (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 1331). Congress has also
permitted defendants to remove a case to federal court when
a complaint that asserts federal claims is filed in state court.
See 28 U.S.C. § 1441(a); Rivet v. Regions Bank of La., 522
U.S. 470, 475 (1998).
When a case is removed, the federal district court has the
power to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over state law
claims that arise from the same operative facts as the federal
claim. See City of Chicago v. Int’l Coll. of Surgeons, 522
U.S. 156, 164–65 (1997). But the exercise of supplemental
jurisdiction always depends on the existence of a federal
jurisdictional anchor. See Royal Canin, 604 U.S. at 32–33
(“[W]hen the plaintiff in an original case amends her
complaint to withdraw the federal claims, leaving only state
claims behind, she divests the federal court of adjudicatory
power.”). In a removed case, if “at any time before final
judgment it appears that the district court lacks subject
matter jurisdiction, the case shall be remanded.” 28 U.S.C.
§ 1447(c).
Prior to the Supreme Court’s decision in Royal Canin—
at the time the parties stipulated to dismissing Walker’s
federal claims—our precedent instructed district courts to
look for the presence of federal question jurisdiction in the
complaint at the time of removal, regardless of subsequent
amendments to that complaint. See Sparta Surgical Corp.,
159 F.3d at 1213. Under this precedent, if a plaintiff
amended the complaint to eliminate all federal claims after
removal, the federal court could still retain jurisdiction. Id.
It was “of no moment to us” whether any federal claims
remained in the amended complaint because “jurisdiction
must be analyzed on the basis of the pleadings filed at the

16

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

time of removal without reference to subsequent
amendments.” Id. Under this rule, a plaintiff could “not
compel remand by amending a complaint to eliminate the
federal question upon which removal was based.” Id.
At the time of removal, Walker’s complaint contained
federal claims. Thus, our then-controlling precedent
instructed that the district court had jurisdiction and could
retain supplemental jurisdiction over Walker’s state law
claims even after the stipulation was entered. See id.
But Royal Canin abrogated our precedent. In that case,
the Supreme Court answered the question “if, after removal,
the plaintiff amends her complaint to delete all the federallaw claims, leaving nothing but state-law claims[,] . . . [m]ay
the federal court still adjudicate the now purely state-law
suit?” Royal Canin, 604 U.S. at 25. The Court held that “it
may not” because “the federal court loses its supplemental
jurisdiction over the related state-law claims.” Id. at 25–26.
That is because “[t]he appropriateness of federal
jurisdiction—or the lack thereof—does not depend on
whether the plaintiff first filed suit in federal or state court.
Rather, it depends, in either event, on the substance of the
suit . . . .” Id. at 38–39. When a complaint is amended and
“any federal anchor gone,” the federal court “must remand
the case to the state court where it started.” Id. at 39.
“[A] federal court’s jurisdiction,” the Supreme Court
emphasized, “depends on what the new complaint says.” Id.
at 30 (emphasis added). “[T]he presence of jurisdiction, in
removed as in original cases, hinges on the amended, now
operative pleading. By adding or subtracting claims or
parties, and thus reframing the suit, that pleading can alter a
federal court’s authority.” Id. at 39.

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

17

The Supreme Court instructed courts to look to the
amended complaint because “the new pleading ‘supersedes’
the old one” and the “original pleading no longer performs
any function in the case.” Id. at 35 (quoting 6 C. Wright, A.
Miller, & M. Kane, Federal Practice & Procedure § 1476,
at 636–37 (3d ed. 2010)). “So unless the withdrawn
allegations were ‘replaced by others’ giving the court
adjudicatory power, the plaintiff’s amendment ‘will defeat
jurisdiction.’” Id. at 36 (quoting Rockwell Int’l Corp. v.
United States, 549 U.S. 457, 473 (2007)).
The Supreme Court also emphasized that “[t]he plaintiff
is ‘the master of the complaint,’ and therefore controls much
about her suit.” Id. at 35 (quoting Caterpillar Inc. v.
Williams, 482 U.S. 386, 398–99 (1987)). “She gets to
determine which substantive claims to bring against which
defendants. And in so doing, she can establish—or not—the
basis for a federal court’s subject-matter jurisdiction.” Id. A
plaintiff may choose to establish a federal court’s subject
matter jurisdiction—by “[a]dding federal claims [to] create
federal jurisdiction where it once was wanting”—and may
choose to destroy a federal court’s subject matter
jurisdiction—by “eliminating federal claims.” Id. at 36
(citing Rockwell, 549 U.S. at 473–74; ConnectU LLC v.
Zuckerberg, 522 F.3d 82, 91 (1st Cir. 2008)).
Unlike the plaintiff in Royal Canin, Walker did not
amend his complaint as of right under Rule 15(a)(1)(B).
Instead, Walker and the State filed a joint stipulation to
dismiss Walker’s federal claims. We must first assess
whether a joint stipulation operates the same as a party’s
unilateral amendment under Royal Canin. We hold that it
does because a joint stipulation similarly alters the substance
of the plaintiff’s complaint.

18

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

The plaintiff in Royal Canin did not want to litigate in
federal court. See 604 U.S. at 29. To “counter[] Royal
Canin’s move” to federal court, “[s]he amended her
complaint to delete its every mention of the [federal law
claims], leaving her state claims to stand on their own.” Id.
To make these changes, the plaintiff filed an amended
complaint as a matter of right under Rule 15(a)(1)(B). See
Amended Complaint, Wullschleger v. Royal Canin U.S.A.,
Inc., No. 19-cv-00235 (W.D. Mo. Nov. 11, 2020), Dkt. No.
43; Plaintiffs’ Motion for Declination of Supplemental
Jurisdiction and Remand to State Court, Wullschleger, No.
19-cv-00235 (W.D. Mo. Nov. 11, 2020), Dkt. No. 44; see
also Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(1)(B) (“A party may amend its
pleading once as a matter of course no later than . . . 21 days
after service of a responsive pleading . . . .”). By contrast,
Walker filed the joint stipulation to “dismiss” his remaining
claims without citing any particular Rule. Stipulation to
Dismiss Remaining Counts at 2, Walker v. Arizona, No. 22cv-01401 (D. Ariz. Feb. 29, 2024), Dkt. No. 42. Walker
therefore did not “amend” his complaint in the same manner
as the plaintiff in Royal Canin did. But for assessing
jurisdiction under Royal Canin, that makes no difference.
Under Rule 41(a), “the plaintiff may dismiss an action
without a court order by filing . . . a stipulation of dismissal
signed by all parties who have appeared.” Fed. R. Civ.
P. 41(a)(1)(A)(ii). Because this provision applies only to
dismissal of an “action,” we have explained that “the Rule
does not allow for piecemeal dismissals.
Instead,
withdrawals of individual claims against a given defendant
are governed by [Rule] 15, which addresses amendments to
pleadings.” Hells Canyon Pres. Council v. U.S. Forest Serv.,
403 F.3d 683, 687 (9th Cir. 2005) (citing Ethridge v. Harbor
House Rest., 861 F.2d 1389 (9th Cir. 1988)); see also Gen.

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

19

Signal Corp. v. MCI Telecomms. Corp., 66 F.3d 1500, 1513
(9th Cir. 1995) (“[W]e have held that Rule 15, not Rule 41,
governs the situation when a party dismisses some, but not
all, of its claims.”). 8 At the same time, we have taken a
functional approach when analyzing the effect of a plaintiff’s
attempt to dismiss individual claims. “The fact that a
voluntary dismissal of a claim under Rule 41(a) is properly
labeled an amendment under Rule 15 is a technical, not a
substantive, distinction.” Hells Canyon, 403 F.3d at 689
(quoting Nilssen v. Motorola, Inc., 203 F.3d 782, 784 (Fed.
Cir. 2000)). As a result, we have construed the stipulated
dismissal of a claim as a consensual amendment under
Rule 15(a)(2), which allows a party to amend its pleadings
“with the opposing party’s written consent or the court’s
leave.” See Am. States Ins. Co. v. Dastar Corp., 318 F.3d
881, 888 n.8 (9th Cir. 2003); cf. Hells Canyon, 403 F.3d at
690 (construing a plaintiff’s unopposed withdrawal of a
claim at oral argument as a Rule 15(a) amendment of
complaint).
Presented with the parties’ joint stipulated dismissal with
prejudice, we do the same here. Although the parties’
stipulation did not cite any Rule, it functionally amended
Walker’s complaint to remove all remaining claims and, in
doing so, removed the only source of federal jurisdiction.
Because “a federal court’s jurisdiction depends on what the
8

A recently proposed amendment to Rule 41(a) would permit a
plaintiff voluntarily to dismiss one or more individual claims. See
Judicial Conference Committee on Rules of Practice and Procedure,
Preliminary Draft: Proposed Amendments to the Federal
Rules of Appellate, Bankruptcy, Civil, and Criminal Procedure,
and
the
Federal
Rules
of
Evidence
51–54
(2025),
https://www.uscourts.gov/sites/default/files/document/preliminarydraft-of-proposed-amendments-to-federal-rules_august2025.pdf.

20

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

new complaint says,” it does not matter whether Walker used
Rule 15(a), like the plaintiff in Royal Canin, to file an
amended complaint or simply stipulated to dismiss all
remaining claims. See Royal Canin, 604 U.S. at 30. As the
State accurately observes in its supplemental brief:
Both actions operate to eliminate the “federal
ingredient of the action” forevermore. And
the elimination of the federal ingredient
forevermore is what deprives this Court of
adjudicatory power to consider a purely state
claim. What matters is that Plaintiff decided
to permanently remove the federal claims
from his suit; it should not matter what
procedural device he used to accomplish this
voluntary action.
Dkt. No. 38, at 4–5 (citations omitted).
Like the plaintiff in Royal Canin, Walker chose to
eliminate his federal claims to expedite his appeal of the
district court’s ruling on his state law claim. As the master
of his complaint, Walker can decide what claims to present
and in what forum to litigate. See Caterpillar, 482 U.S. at
392 (“The presence or absence of federal-question
jurisdiction is governed by the ‘well-pleaded complaint
rule,’ which . . . makes the plaintiff the master of the claim;
he or she may avoid federal jurisdiction by exclusive
reliance on state law.”); Baddie v. Berkeley Farms, Inc., 64
F.3d 487, 491 (9th Cir. 1995) (“Plaintiffs in this case chose
the state forum. They dismissed their federal claims and
moved for remand with all due speed after removal. There
was nothing manipulative about that straight-forward
tactical decision . . . .”). Both Walker and the Royal Canin

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

21

plaintiff exercised their command over their complaints to
alter the substance of their suits. Accordingly, for purposes
of analyzing jurisdiction under Royal Canin, we hold that a
joint stipulation to dismiss claims functions the same as a
plaintiff amending her complaint as a matter of right under
Rule 15(a)(1)(B).
Ordinarily, “prejudice does not attach to a claim that is
properly dropped from a complaint under Rule 15(a) prior to
final judgment.” Hells Canyon, 403 F.3d at 690; see also
Am. States Ins. Co., 318 F.3d at 886 (noting that a Rule 15
amendment eliminating a claim “effectively dismisse[s] that
claim without prejudice”). Here, however, we construe the
parties’ stipulation to dismiss the surviving claims with
prejudice as not only functionally amending the complaint
to eliminate those claims, but also as a binding agreement
that Walker cannot re-introduce those claims in a subsequent
amendment.9
Our second question is whether, once the parties agreed
to a stipulation of dismissal with prejudice, the district court
lost jurisdiction to enter a final judgment. Congress has
required that “[i]f at any time before final judgment it
appears that the district court lacks subject matter
jurisdiction, the case shall be remanded.” 28 U.S.C.
§ 1447(c) (emphasis added). In this case, the joint
stipulation was filed February 29, 2024, and the district court
entered its order dismissing all claims on March 1, 2024.
9

Although we conclude above that the parties’ stipulation to dismiss
Walker’s surviving claims led to a final decision appealable under 28
U.S.C. § 1291, we do not imply that the same conclusion will follow
every similarly situated plaintiff’s attempt to create finality by amending
his or her complaint under Rule 15. As explained supra note 7, parties
cannot manufacture finality by voluntarily dismissing surviving claims
without prejudice.

22

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

But a joint stipulation is self-executing, whether entered
under Rule 41(a)(1) or Rule 15(a)(2). See Eitel v. McCool,
782 F.2d 1470, 1473 & n.4 (9th Cir. 1986) (noting that “no
order of the court was necessary” for a stipulated dismissal
under Rule 41); Com. Space Mgmt. Co. v. Boeing Co., 193
F.3d 1074, 1077 (9th Cir. 1999) (“[A]ll that we and other
courts have said about voluntary dismissals makes it clear
that a court has no discretion to exercise once a Rule 41(a)(1)
dismissal is filed.”); Am. States Ins. Co., 318 F.3d at 888
(“Although the district court ‘approved’ the stipulations to
amend and dismiss [filed under Rule 15(a)(2)], such
approval cannot be said to involve meaningful consideration
or participation by the district court inasmuch as the parties
were entitled to do so without leave of the court.”). The
district court thus lost jurisdiction when the stipulation was
entered, which occurred after the district court granted the
State’s motion for judgment on the pleadings but before the
entry of any judgment. When the parties filed the selfexecuting stipulation and the district court consequently lost
jurisdiction, the district court should have remanded Count 3
to state court pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1447(c). See Royal
Canin, 604 U.S. at 25–26.
Because 28 U.S.C. § 1447(c) requires remand, we reject
the State’s request to dismiss the entire case outright and
express no view on its contention that “[t]here is nothing left
of the case to remand to state court.” We leave for the state
court to determine what, if any, preclusive effect should be
given to the district court’s dismissal of Count 3 or to the
joint stipulation. See Semtek Int’l Inc. v. Lockheed Martin
Corp., 531 U.S. 497, 503–06 (2001) (holding that the
preclusive effect of a dismissal under Rule 41 is governed by
the substantive law of preclusion).

WALKER V. STATE OF ARIZONA

23

CONCLUSION
When Walker and the State jointly stipulated to dismiss
Walker’s pending federal claims in this removed case, the
district court lost jurisdiction. Because the district court lost
jurisdiction before the entry of any final judgment, the
district court was required to remand Count 3, Walker’s state
law claim brought under Arizona Revised Statutes § 36-516,
to state court pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1447(c). Accordingly,
we REMAND the case to the district court with instructions
to reopen the case and remand Count 3 to the Arizona
Superior Court.

