FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
HEALTH FREEDOM DEFENSE
FUND, INC., a Wyoming Not-forProfit Corporation; JEFFREY
FUENTES; SANDRA GARCIA;
HOVHANNES SAPONGHIAN;
NORMA BRAMBILA;
CALIFORNIA EDUCATORS FOR
MEDICAL FREEDOM,
Plaintiffs-Appellants,
v.
ALBERTO CARVALHO, in his
official capacity as Superintendent of
the Los Angeles Unified School
District; ILEANA DAVALOS, in her
official capacity as Chief Human
Resources Officer for the Los Angeles
School District; GEORGE
MCKENNA; MONICA GARCIA;
SCOTT SCHMERELSON; NICK
MELVOIN; JACKIE GOLDBERG;
KELLY GONEZ; TANYA ORTIZ
FRANKLIN, in their official
capacities as members of the Los
Angeles Unified School District
governing board,

No. 22-55908
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-08688DSF-PVC
OPINION

2

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

Defendants-Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Dale S. Fischer, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted En Banc March 18, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed July 31, 2025
Before: Mary H. Murguia, Chief Judge, and Kim McLane
Wardlaw, Consuelo M. Callahan, John B. Owens, Mark J.
Bennett, Bridget S. Bade, Daniel P. Collins, Kenneth K.
Lee, Danielle J. Forrest, Salvador Mendoza, Jr. and Roopali
H. Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bennett;
Dissent by Judge Owens;
Partial Dissent by Judge Lee
SUMMARY *
COVID-19 Vaccination Policy
The en banc court affirmed the district court’s judgment
on the pleadings in favor of the Los Angeles Unified School
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

3

District (LAUSD) in an action brought pursuant to 42 U.S.C.
§ 1983 alleging that LAUSD’s COVID-19 vaccination
policy (the Policy), which required all employees to be fully
vaccinated, violated plaintiffs’ substantive due process and
equal protection rights.
Plaintiffs alleged that the Policy violated their
fundamental right to bodily integrity in refusing medical
treatment because COVID-19 vaccines are therapeutic
treatments that reduce symptoms but do not prevent
infection or transmission and additionally pose significant
health risks to the recipients. Plaintiffs also alleged that the
Policy violated their right to equal protection because it
arbitrarily classifies employees based on their vaccination
status.
As a threshold issue, the en banc court held that this case
was not moot. Although LAUSD rescinded the Policy
shortly after oral argument before the three-judge panel, the
court could still grant effective relief by ordering
reinstatement of the individual plaintiffs who remain
terminated from their original positions under the Policy.
On the merits, the en banc court, joining all the sister
circuits that have considered substantive due process
challenges to COVID-19 vaccine mandates, held that the
Policy was subject to rational basis review because Jacobson
v. Massachusetts, 197 U.S. 11 (1905), which upheld a
smallpox vaccine mandate, remains binding. Jacobson
holds that the constitutionality of a vaccine mandate, like the
Policy here, turns on what reasonable legislative and
executive decisionmakers could have rationally concluded
about whether a vaccine protects the public’s health and
safety, not whether a vaccine actually provides immunity to
or prevents transmission of a disease.

4

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

The Policy survives such review, as the LAUSD could
have reasonably concluded that COVID-19 vaccines would
protect the health and safety of its employees and
students. For this reason, plaintiffs’ equal protection claim
also failed under rational basis review. The en banc court
therefore affirmed the district court’s order granting
LAUSD’s motion for judgment on the pleadings.
Dissenting, Judge Owens wrote that the court lacks
jurisdiction because the case is moot, given that there is no
longer any policy for the court to enjoin or declare
unlawful. Nothing in the record (or the world) even hints at
the possibility that LAUSD would resurrect its COVID-19
vaccine mandate. The majority’s assertion that the
complaint’s boilerplate language fairly encompassed a
request for employment reinstatement did not survive close
inspection.
Dissenting in part, Judge Lee, joined by Judge Collins,
wrote that although he agrees that the case is not moot, he
believes that the court should not affirm the dismissal of this
lawsuit without permitting the plaintiffs to offer evidence to
rebut government officials’ far-reaching claims. Contrary to
the majority, he read the Supreme Court’s decision in
Jacobson as applying only if a vaccine prevents the
transmission and contraction of a disease. The plaintiffs
here plausibly claimed—at least at the pleading stage—that
the COVID-19 vaccine mitigates serious symptoms but does
not “prevent transmission or contraction of COVID19.” And if that is true, then Jacobson’s rational basis
review does not apply, and the court must examine the
vaccine mandate under a more stringent standard of
review. Ultimately, the plaintiffs may be wrong about the
COVID-19 vaccine, but they should be given a chance to
challenge the government’s assertions about it.

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

5

COUNSEL
Scott J. Street (argued) and John W. Howard, JW Howard
Attorneys Ltd., San Diego, California; George R. Wentz Jr.,
The Davillier Law Group LLC, New Orleans, Louisiana; for
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Keith A. Jacoby (argued) and Connie L. Michaels, Littler
Mendelson PC, Los Angeles, California; Carrie A.
Stringham, Littler Mendelson PC, San Diego, California; for
Defendants-Appellees.
Leigh A. Salmon, Senior Assistant Attorney General;
Benjamin Gutman, Solicitor General; Dan Rayfield,
Attorney General; State of Oregon, Salem, Oregon; Rob
Bonta, Attorney General, State of California, San Francisco,
California; Kathleen Jennings, Attorney General, State of
Delaware, Wilmington, Delaware; Kwame Raoul, Attorney
General, State of Illinois, Chicago, Illinois; William Tong,
Attorney General, State of Connecticut, Hartford,
Connecticut; Anne E. Lopez, Attorney General, State of
Hawai‘i, Honolulu, Hawai‘i; Anthony G. Brown, Attorney
General, State of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland; Andrea J.
Campbell, Attorney General, Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, Boston, Massachusetts; Keith Ellison,
Attorney General, State of Minnesota, St. Paul, Minnesota;
Raul Torrez, Attorney General, State of New Mexico, Santa
Fe, New Mexico; Charity R. Clark, Attorney General, Office
of the Vermont Attorney General, Montpelier, Vermont;
Brian L. Schwalb, Attorney General, District of Columbia,
Washington, D.C.; Peter F. Neronha, Attorney General,
State of Rhode Island, Providence, Rhode Island; Dana
Nessel, Attorney General, State of Michigan; Lansing,
Michigan; Matthew J. Platkin, Attorney General, State of
New Jersey, Trenton, New Jersey; Letitia James, Attorney

6

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

General, Office of the New York State Attorney General,
Albany, New York; Nicholas W. Brown, Attorney General,
State of Washington, Olympia, Washington; Edward E.
Manibusan, Attorney General, Commonwealth of the
Northern Mariana Islands, Saipan, Northern Mariana
Islands; for Amici Curiae States of Oregon, California,
Connecticut, Delaware, Hawai‘i, Illinois, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, New Jersey, New
Mexico, New York, Rhode Island, Vermont, and
Washington, and the District of Columbia, and the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Sloan R. Simmons, Alyssa R. Bivins, and Ryan I. Ichinaga,
Lozano Smith LLP, Sacramento, California; Kristin
Lindgren-Bruzzone, California School Boards Association’s
Education Legal Alliance, West Sacramento, California; for
Amicus Curiae California School Boards Association’s
Education Legal Alliance.
Gregory Dolin, Mark Chenoweth, and Jenin Younes, New
Civil Liberties Alliance, Arlington, Virginia, for Amicus
Curiae New Civil Liberties Alliance.

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

7

OPINION
BENNETT, Circuit Judge:
This case concerns the Los Angeles Unified School
District’s (“LAUSD”) COVID-19 vaccination policy
(“Policy”), which essentially required all of its employees to
be fully vaccinated. As relevant here, Plaintiffs 1 filed suit
under 42 U.S.C. § 1983, claiming that the Policy violated
their Fourteenth Amendment substantive due process and
equal protection rights. The district court granted judgment
on the pleadings to the LAUSD. 2 Plaintiffs appeal. We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 and affirm.
As a threshold issue, this case is not moot. Although the
LAUSD rescinded the Policy shortly after oral argument
before the three-judge panel, a court could still grant
effective relief by ordering reinstatement of the individual
Plaintiffs who remain terminated from their original
positions under the Policy.
On the merits, we hold that the Policy is subject to
rational basis review because Jacobson v. Massachusetts,
197 U.S. 11 (1905), is binding and controls. The Policy
survives such review, as the LAUSD could have reasonably
concluded that COVID-19 vaccines would protect the health
and safety of its employees and students. For this reason,
Plaintiffs’ equal protection claim also fails under rational
“Plaintiffs” are the Health Freedom Defense Fund, California
Educators for Medical Freedom, and certain individuals who are or were
employed by the LAUSD.

1

Defendants are LAUSD employees and board members, named in their
official capacities. For simplicity, we refer to defendants collectively as
the “LAUSD.”

2

8

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

basis review. We therefore affirm the district court’s order
granting the LAUSD’s motion for judgment on the
pleadings.
BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY 3
On January 30, 2020, the World Health Organization
declared COVID-19 a public health emergency. The next
day, President Trump and the Secretary of Health and
Human Services (“Secretary”) declared COVID-19 a public
health emergency. These emergency declarations were
renewed and extended into at least 2021. In February 2021,
President Biden extended the emergency declaration
because more than “500,000 people in th[e] Nation ha[d]
perished from the disease.” The Secretary renewed his
emergency declaration in January, April, and July 2021.
On August 13, 2021, the LAUSD issued the Policy
challenged here. The Policy established a mandatory
vaccination requirement for all LAUSD employees. Under
the Policy, employees had to be fully vaccinated 4 against
COVID-19 by October 15, 2021. The Policy allowed
employees to apply for religious or medical exemptions. But
even “exempt” employees were excludable from the
These facts are based on the allegations in the operative second
amended complaint, which we accept as true and construe in Plaintiffs’
favor. See Fleming v. Pickard, 581 F.3d 922, 925 (9th Cir. 2009). We
also consider documents incorporated into the complaint by reference.
See Webb v. Trader Joe’s Co., 999 F.3d 1196, 1201 (9th Cir. 2021). We
GRANT Plaintiffs’ motion to take judicial notice that the LAUSD voted
to withdraw the Policy on September 26, 2023. Dkt. No. 46.
3

The Policy defines “fully-vaccinated” as having “received the first and
second doses of the vaccine (or, in the case of Johnson & Johnson, the
single required dose) and [having] completed the two-week period that
follows to ensure maximum immunity.”

4

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

9

workplace “[i]f a risk to the health and safety of others [could
not] be reduced to an acceptable level through a workplace
accommodation.” The Policy explained that its purpose was
to “provide the safest possible environment in which to learn
and work.”
At the time the LAUSD issued the Policy, health experts
had been recommending that individuals get COVID-19
vaccinations and had been reporting that such vaccinations
are effective in preventing and spreading the disease. For
example, the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (“CDC”) reported that COVID-19 vaccines “are
highly effective at protecting vaccinated people against
symptomatic and severe COVID-19,” and “[f]ully
vaccinated people are less likely to become infected” and
“less likely to get and spread SARS-CoV-2.” Interim Public
Health Recommendations for Fully Vaccinated People,
CDC
(July
28,
2021),
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/108355
[https://perma.cc/AMW8-KH3Z]. The director of the CDC
reiterated that COVID-19 vaccines prevent “severe illness
and death.” Madeline Holcombe & Christina Maxouris,
Fully Vaccinated People Who Get a Covid-19 Breakthrough
Infection Can Transmit the Virus, CDC Chief Says, CNN
Health
(Aug.
6,
2021),
https://edition.cnn.com/2021/08/05/health/us-coronavirusthursday/index.html [https://perma.cc/Z5RV-UPLR]. Other
experts
urged
that
“[g]etting
more
people
vaccinated . . . w[ould] help prevent other—potentially even
more aggressive—variants from arising in the future.” Id.
A
former
CDC
director
explained
that
“outbreaks . . . w[ould] not be as explosive in areas with
higher vaccination coverage.” Id. And a children’s hospital

10

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

president characterized “adult vaccination” as a “simple
solution” to protect children from COVID-19. Id.
After the LAUSD issued the Policy, health experts
continued to urge the public to get vaccinated. Indeed, the
CDC reported that “[v]accines remain the best public health
measure to protect people from COVID-19, slow
transmission, and reduce the likelihood of new variants
emerging.” Omicron Variant: What You Need to Know,
CDC
(Dec.
9,
2021),
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/112430
[https://perma.cc/B4EG-5QMR]. The CDC recommended
that “everyone 5 years and older protect themselves from
COVID-19 by getting fully vaccinated.” Id.
In November 2021, Plaintiffs filed this suit challenging
the Policy. The operative second amended complaint
(“SAC”) alleges that, under the Policy, the LAUSD
threatened to terminate employees who failed to get the
COVID-19 vaccination. According to the SAC, the LAUSD
terminated at least two of the individual Plaintiffs based on
their refusal to get vaccinated.
Although the SAC asserts several state and federal law
claims, the only claims before us are Plaintiffs’ Fourteenth
Amendment substantive due process and equal protection
claims brought under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. As to their due
process claim, Plaintiffs allege that the Policy violates their
fundamental right to bodily integrity in refusing medical
treatment, as the vaccines are “therapeutic treatments for
COVID and not vaccines at all.” According to Plaintiffs,
COVID-19 vaccines do not prevent infection or transmission
of COVID-19. Instead, the vaccines “only reduce symptoms
of those who are infected by COVID,” and thus they are
medical “treatments” and not traditional vaccines. The SAC

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

11

also alleges that the COVID-19 vaccines “cause a
significantly higher incidence of injuries, adverse reactions,
and deaths than any prior vaccines that have been allowed to
remain on the market, and, therefore, pose a significant
health risk to recipients.”
Plaintiffs also claim that the Policy violates their right to
equal protection because it arbitrarily classifies employees
based on their vaccination status. The SAC alleges that
vaccinated and unvaccinated employees are similarly
situated because both groups can be infected with and
transmit COVID-19. Thus, in Plaintiffs’ view, the Policy
arbitrarily treats the unvaccinated differently.
In terms of relief, the SAC seeks “[t]emporary,
preliminary, and permanent injunctive relief restraining [the
LAUSD] from enforcing” the Policy. It also contains a
general prayer for relief for “such other and further relief as
the Court may deem just and proper.”
The LAUSD moved for judgment on the pleadings under
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(c), and the district court
granted the motion in September 2022.
The court
determined that, under Jacobson, the substantive due
process claim failed because the Policy did not violate any
fundamental right and survived rational basis review. The
district court also decided that the equal protection claim
failed under rational basis review. The district court’s order
permitted Plaintiffs to amend their equal protection and
ADA claims. Plaintiffs declined to do so and instead timely
appealed.
A divided three-judge panel of our court vacated the
district court’s order and remanded. Health Freedom Def.
Fund, Inc. v. Carvalho, 104 F.4th 715, 718 (9th Cir. 2024),
vacated and reh’g en banc granted, 127 F.4th 750 (9th Cir.

12

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

2025). Before addressing the merits, the panel considered
whether the case had become moot in light of the LAUSD’s
recent recission of the Policy (twelve days after oral
argument). Id. at 721–22. Applying the voluntary cessation
exception to mootness, the panel majority determined that
the case was not moot because the LAUSD had failed to
show it was reasonably clear that the Policy would not be
reinstated. 5 Id. at 722–24. Judge Hawkins dissented from
the majority’s mootness determination. Id. at 728–32
(Hawkins, J., dissenting). In his view, the case was moot
“[b]ecause there [wa]s no longer any policy for the court to
enjoin or declare unlawful.” Id. at 732 (Hawkins, J.,
dissenting).
On the merits, the panel majority held that the district
court erred in applying Jacobson. Id. at 724–25. The
majority reasoned that Jacobson did not apply, much less
control, because it addressed only those vaccines that
provide immunity and prevent transmission. Id. Because
Plaintiffs alleged that COVID-19 vaccines, unlike traditional
vaccines, do not provide immunity and prevent transmission
(and the court must accept those allegations as true at the
judgment-on-the-pleadings stage), the panel majority held
that Jacobson did not apply. Id. Therefore, the panel
vacated the district court’s order and remanded for further
proceedings. Id. at 725.

See Rosemere Neighborhood Ass’n v. EPA, 581 F.3d 1169, 1173 (9th
Cir. 2009) (“Under [the voluntary cessation exception to mootness], the
mere cessation of illegal activity in response to pending litigation does
not moot a case, unless the party alleging mootness can show that the
‘allegedly wrongful behavior could not reasonably be expected to
recur.’” (quoting Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Env’t Servs.
(TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 189 (2000))).

5

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

13

The LAUSD petitioned for rehearing en banc. Dkt. No.
56. While it continued to urge that the case was moot, the
LAUSD also argued that the three-judge panel had
misapplied Jacobson, creating a conflict with our sister
circuits. Id. at 13–17. A majority of our active judges voted
to rehear this case en banc, and we vacated the three-judge
panel opinion. Health Freedom, 127 F.4th 750.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
“We review de novo an order granting a Rule 12(c)
motion for judgment on the pleadings. We must accept all
factual allegations in the complaint as true and construe them
in the light most favorable to the non-moving party.”
Fleming v. Pickard, 581 F.3d 922, 925 (9th Cir. 2009)
(citation omitted). Along with the complaint, we may also
consider documents incorporated into the complaint by
reference and matters of which we may take judicial notice.
Webb v. Trader Joe’s Co., 999 F.3d 1196, 1201 (9th Cir.
2021). “Judgment on the pleadings is properly granted when
there is no issue of material fact in dispute, and the moving
party is entitled to judgment as a matter of law.” Fleming,
581 F.3d at 925.
DISCUSSION
I.
We first explain why this case is not moot even though
the Policy has been rescinded. “The test for mootness of an
appeal is whether the appellate court can give the [plaintiff]
any effective relief in the event that it decides the matter on
the merits in his favor. If it can grant such relief, the matter
is not moot.” Garcia v. Lawn, 805 F.2d 1400, 1402 (9th Cir.
1986) (emphasis added). In the context of injunctive relief,
a case is not moot if the court is able to “undo” the effects of

14

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

the alleged illegal action. Id.; see, e.g., id. (“The question
[of mootness] thus becomes whether we can now give
[plaintiff] effective relief which would ‘undo’ the effects of
the alleged retaliatory action . . . .”).
The SAC seeks “injunctive relief restraining [the
LAUSD] from enforcing the [Policy]” and “other and further
relief as the Court may deem just and proper.” The SAC also
alleges that one of the individual Plaintiffs was terminated
from employment by the LAUSD for refusing to be
vaccinated and another was “separated from his employment
with LAUSD” after objecting to being vaccinated. There is
no suggestion that these individuals have been reinstated, 6
and so construing these allegations in Plaintiffs’ favor, see
Fleming, 581 F.3d at 925, we accept that these individuals
remain terminated from their original positions.
Given the SAC’s broad request for any proper injunctive
relief, along with the allegations that individual Plaintiffs
have been terminated under the Policy and have not been
reinstated to their prior positions, the SAC fairly
encompasses a request for reinstatement. See Garcia, 805
F.2d at 1402–04 (noting that reinstatement to a prior position
can be a proper injunctive remedy). Because reinstatement
would undo some effects of the alleged illegal action—the
LAUSD’s enforcement of the Policy—a court could grant
effective relief despite the Policy’s rescission. 7 Thus, this
Indeed, during en banc oral argument, Plaintiffs’ counsel represented
that at least one individual remains terminated from his original full-time
position. Oral Arg. at 1:47–2:12.
6

During en banc oral argument, Plaintiffs’ counsel confirmed that if the
case were remanded, Plaintiffs would explicitly seek reinstatement for
all the individual Plaintiffs who have not been reinstated to their former
positions. Oral Arg. at 52:14–52:25.
7

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

15

case is not moot. 8 See id. at 1402–03 (holding, in an action
seeking an injunction, that the case was not moot because the
court could order reinstatement of the plaintiff to his prior
position); see also Norris v. Stanley, 73 F.4th 431, 433 n.1
(6th Cir. 2023) (holding, in similar circumstances, that the
case was not moot despite rescission of the vaccine policy at
issue because, among other reasons, there was no “indication
that [the university] ha[d] undone any of the negative
employment actions faced by [some of the plaintiffs], so the
harm plaintiffs faced ha[d] not been removed”), cert. denied,
144 S. Ct. 1353 (2024).
Our precedent supports that this case is not moot. In
Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain v. Alexander, 303 F.3d 1059
(9th Cir. 2002), the plaintiffs sought an injunction to stop a
timber sale on national forest land. Id. at 1064–65.
Although the timber sale had been completed, we held that
the case was not moot because the alleged “harm to old
growth species may yet be remedied by any number of
mitigation strategies.” Id. at 1066. Significantly, we held
that such mitigation measures were fairly requested in the
complaint because “[i]n addition to an injunction, [the
plaintiffs’] complaint request[ed] ‘such further relief as may
For this reason, the LAUSD’s motion to dismiss is DENIED, Dkt. No.
49, and we need not (and do not) decide whether the voluntary cessation
exception to mootness applies. We also need not address whether our
recent decision in Kohn v. State Bar of California, 87 F.4th 1021 (9th
Cir. 2023) (en banc), cert. denied, 144 S. Ct. 1465 (2024), would permit
Plaintiffs to seek damages against the LAUSD. See Health Freedom,
104 F.4th at 726–27 (R. Nelson, J., concurring) (opining that Kohn may
conflict with our precedent holding that California school districts have
sovereign immunity under the Eleventh Amendment); id. at 727 n.2 (R.
Nelson, J., concurring) (“If LAUSD does not have sovereign immunity,
Plaintiffs may be able to amend to raise a monetary claim, which would
be another reason this case is not moot.”).

8

16

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

be necessary and appropriate to avoid further irreparable
harm.’” Id. In so holding, we noted that our prior case law
had recognized that we “may construe such requests for
[other appropriate] relief ‘broadly to avoid mootness.’” Id.
(quoting Headwaters, Inc. v. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 893
F.2d 1012, 1015 n.6 (9th Cir. 1989)); see also Oregon Nat.
Desert Ass’n v. U.S. Forest Serv., 957 F.3d 1024, 1032 n.7
(9th Cir. 2020) (explaining that, even though the complaint
“ask[ed] for injunctive relief only with respect to claims that
[were] not on appeal,” “we c[ould] consider further
injunctive relief in deciding whether th[e] appeal [wa]s
moot” because the complaint “also request[ed] ‘any such
further relief as requested by the Plaintiffs or as this Court
deems just and proper’” (citing Neighbors of Cuddy
Mountain, 303 F.3d at 1066)). 9
Judge Owens’s dissent argues that Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain’s
mootness rationale should be limited to “the narrow context of [National
Forest Management Act] and [National Environmental Policy Act]
violations.” Owens Dissent at 33. But we do not read Neighbors of
Cuddy Mountain as suggesting such a limitation. See 303 F.3d at 1065–
66. Indeed, in Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain, our mootness analysis
derived from the generally applicable and longstanding principle that “a
case is moot only where no effective relief for the alleged violation can
be given.” Id. at 1065; see also Garcia, 805 F.2d at 1402 (noting that
“[t]he test for mootness of an appeal”—“whether the appellate court can
give the appellant any effective relief in the event that it decides the
matter on the merits in his favor”—“goes back at least to” the Supreme
Court’s decision in Mills v. Green, 159 U.S. 651 (1895)).
We also note that our conclusion that this case is not moot is consistent
with Z Channel Limited Partnership v. Home Box Office, Inc., 931 F.2d
1338 (9th Cir. 1991). Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 54(c) provides
that a final judgment “should grant the relief to which each party is
entitled, even if the party has not demanded that relief in its pleadings.”
In Z Channel, “[t]he only relief expressly requested [in the
9

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

17

Contrary to Judge Owens’s suggestion in his dissent,
Arizonans for Official English v. Arizona, 520 U.S. 43
(1997), does not undermine our conclusion that this case is
not moot. In Arizonans for Official English, the Supreme
Court noted that we had held that the case was not moot
because the plaintiff’s broad request for “other relief” could
encompass a request for nominal damages. Id. at 60 (quoting
Yniguez v. Arizona, 975 F.2d 646, 647 n.1 (9th Cir. 1992)
(per curiam)). The Supreme Court reversed that holding—
but not because we relied on the broad request for other
relief. Rather, the Supreme Court reversed because it would
have been impossible for the plaintiff there to seek nominal
damages against the state under 42 U.S.C. § 1983. Id. at 69
(“[T]he claim for relief the Ninth Circuit found sufficient to
overcome mootness was nonexistent [because] . . . § 1983
creates no remedy against a State.” (emphasis added)). But
here, reinstatement of the individual Plaintiffs to their
original positions is not impossible. See Doe v. Lawrence
Livermore Nat’l Lab’y, 131 F.3d 836, 839–42 (9th Cir.
1997) (holding that a request for reinstatement of
employment is a request for prospective injunctive relief that

complaint] . . . was declaratory and injunctive relief,” and such relief had
become “clearly moot” on appeal. 931 F.2d at 1340. Applying Rule
54(c), we held that the unavailability of declaratory and injunctive relief
did not moot the case because, even though the plaintiff had not
expressly requested relief in the form of damages in its complaint, a court
could nonetheless award damages as a form of relief. Id. at 1340–41;
see also Walden v. Bodley, 39 U.S. (14 Pet.) 156, 164 (1840) (“Under [a]
general prayer for relief, the [c]ourt [in equity] will often extend relief
beyond the specific prayer, and not exactly in accordance with it.”).

18

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

falls within the Ex parte Young exception to Eleventh
Amendment immunity). 10
II.
A.
The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment
includes “a substantive component that protects certain
individual liberties from state interference.” Mullins v.
Oregon, 57 F.3d 789, 793 (9th Cir. 1995). “Only those
Respectfully, we also disagree with Judge Owens’s dissent because it
is based on the incorrect premise that our holding rests only on the SAC’s
broad request for relief. Owens Dissent at 30–31. We also see no
violation of the party presentation rule. See United States v. SinenengSmith, 590 U.S. 371, 375 (2020) (“In our adversarial system of
adjudication, we follow the principle of party presentation.”). As
previously explained, Plaintiffs themselves fairly raised a request for
reinstatement in the SAC.
“We have noted in cases involving questions of mootness that ordinary
discretionary principles of waiver and forfeiture can affect whether
certain relief is available.” United States v. Yepez, 108 F.4th 1093, 1099
n.1 (9th Cir. 2024); see Bain v. Cal. Tchrs. Ass’n, 891 F.3d 1206, 1212
(9th Cir. 2018) (holding that the plaintiffs’ “eleventh hour” request for
damages was an attempt “to transform their lawsuit from a request for
prospective equitable relief into a plea for money damages to remedy
past wrongs”); Seven Words LLC v. Network Sols., 260 F.3d 1089, 1095
(9th Cir. 2001) (holding that the plaintiff’s belated request for damages
had been “effectively disavowed . . . for tactical reasons”). But Plaintiffs
here have neither waived nor forfeited their request for reinstatement to
their prior positions. Throughout this case (which was dismissed at the
pleadings stage), the gravamen of the relief sought by Plaintiffs has been
prospective injunctive relief to permit them to continue to work for the
LAUSD without also having to comply with the Policy. For this reason,
we also believe that the out-of-circuit and rescinded-COVID-19-policy
cases relied upon by Judge Owens are inapt. See Owens Dissent at 31–
32, 31 n.1. In none of those cases did the courts find that they could still
grant effective injunctive relief consistent with the gravamen of the
injunctive relief sought by the respective plaintiffs all along.
10

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

19

aspects of liberty that we as a society traditionally have
protected as fundamental are included within the substantive
protection of the Due Process Clause.” Id. When no
fundamental liberty interest is implicated, a legislative act
“must satisfy only the deferential rational basis standard of
review.” Erotic Serv. Provider Legal Educ. & Rsch. Project
v. Gascon, 880 F.3d 450, 455 (9th Cir.), amended by 881
F.3d 792 (9th Cir. 2018). Under that standard, we “merely
look to see whether the government could have had a
legitimate reason for acting as it did.” Dittman v. California,
191 F.3d 1020, 1031 (9th Cir. 1999) (quoting Halverson v.
Skagit County, 42 F.3d 1257, 1262 (9th Cir. 1994), amended
on denial of reh’g (9th Cir. Feb. 9, 1995)). “Rational basis
review is highly deferential to the government, allowing any
conceivable rational basis to suffice.” Erotic Serv. Provider,
880 F.3d at 457.
Like all our sister circuits that have considered
substantive due process challenges to COVID-19 vaccine
mandates, we hold that Jacobson controls our analysis. See
We The Patriots USA, Inc. v. Hochul, 17 F.4th 266, 293–94
(2d Cir.) (per curiam) (applying Jacobson to plaintiffs’ claim
that a COVID-19 vaccine mandate “violate[d] their
fundamental rights to privacy, medical freedom, and bodily
autonomy under the Fourteenth Amendment”), clarified, 17
F.4th 368 (2d Cir. 2021); Child.’s Health Def., Inc. v.
Rutgers, The State Univ. of N.J., 93 F.4th 66 (3d Cir.)
(holding that “Jacobson control[led],” id. at 80, plaintiffs’
claim that a COVID-19 vaccine mandate “violated their
substantive due process rights under the Fourteenth
Amendment,” id. at 78), cert. denied, 144 S. Ct. 2688
(2024); Norris, 73 F.4th at 435 (applying Jacobson to
plaintiffs’ substantive due process challenge to a COVID-19
vaccine mandate); Klaassen v. Trs. of Ind. Univ., 7 F.4th

20

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

592, 593 (7th Cir. 2021) (holding that, because the court
“must apply the law established by the Supreme Court,”
Jacobson applied to plaintiffs’ substantive due process claim
challenging a COVID-19 vaccine mandate); see also
Antunes v. Becerra, No. 22-2190, 2024 WL 511038, at *1
(4th Cir. Feb. 9, 2024) (per curiam) (adopting the district
court’s decision in Antunes v. Rector & Visitors of Univ. of
Va., 627 F. Supp. 3d 553 (W.D. Va. 2022), which applied
Jacobson in rejecting plaintiff’s claim that a COVID-19
vaccine mandate violated her due process right to refuse
unwanted medical treatment, id. at 564–65), cert. denied,
145 S. Ct. 159 (2024); Brox v. Hole, 83 F.4th 87, 100–01 (1st
Cir. 2023) (applying Jacobson’s rational basis test to a due
process challenge to a COVID-19 vaccination mandate
(based on plaintiffs’ failure to challenge the application of
the rational basis test) and holding that the mandate easily
satisfied rational basis review).
In Jacobson, the Supreme Court considered a
substantive due process challenge to a smallpox vaccination
requirement for all adult residents of Cambridge,
Massachusetts, with criminal penalties. 197 U.S. at 12–14.
The Massachusetts legislature provided that certain
municipalities could require vaccinations, if the board of
health of a municipality determined that “in its opinion, it
[wa]s necessary for the public health or safety . . . [to] require
and enforce the vaccination and revaccination of all [its]
inhabitants.” Id. at 12. The Board of Health of the City of
Cambridge adopted the following regulation in the face of a
health emergency:
Whereas, smallpox has been prevalent to
some extent in the city of Cambridge, and
still continues to increase; and whereas, it is

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

21

necessary for the speedy extermination of the
disease that all persons not protected by
vaccination should be vaccinated; and
whereas, in the opinion of the board, the
public health and safety require the
vaccination or revaccination of all the
inhabitants of Cambridge; be it ordered, that
all the inhabitants of the city who have not
been successfully vaccinated since March
1st, 1897, be vaccinated or revaccinated.
Id. at 12–13.
Jacobson, who had been convicted for refusing to get
vaccinated for smallpox in violation of the Cambridge
regulation, id. at 14, argued that the statute was “hostile to
the inherent right of every freeman to care for his own body
and health in such way as to him seems best,” id. at 26. He
claimed, among other things, that the vaccine resulted in
“injurious or dangerous effects.” Id. at 23.
The Court first explained that state legislatures and other
policymakers have the authority to enforce “reasonable
[laws] . . . as will protect the public health and the public
safety,” like vaccination requirements. Id. at 25. But
because such laws remain subject to the Constitution of the
United States, the Court next considered whether the statute
violated a right to bodily integrity secured by the
Constitution. Id. at 25–26; see also Roman Cath. Diocese of
Brooklyn v. Cuomo, 592 U.S. 14, 24 (2020) (per curiam)
(Gorsuch, J., concurring) (“Mr. Jacobson claimed that he
possessed an implied ‘substantive due process’ right to
‘bodily integrity’ that emanated from the Fourteenth
Amendment . . . .”). The Court determined that the
Constitution secured no fundamental right to be free from

22

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

vaccine requirements imposed to protect the safety and
health of the community. Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 26–27. And
the Court stressed that whether a vaccine requirement would
protect the safety and health of the community is a matter for
the legislature or policymakers, not a question for a court or
jury. Id. at 30 (“It is no part of the function of a court or a
jury to determine which one of two modes was likely to be
the most effective for the protection of the public against
disease. That was for the legislative department to determine
in the light of all the information it had or could obtain.”).
Having determined that Jacobson had no fundamental
right to refuse the vaccination, the Court essentially applied
rational basis review to his due process challenge. Id. at 31
(“[But] if a statute purporting to have been enacted to protect
the public health, the public morals, or the public safety, has
no real or substantial relation to those objects, or is, beyond
all question, a plain, palpable invasion of rights secured by
the fundamental law, it is the duty of the courts to so adjudge,
and thereby give effect to the Constitution.”); see also
Roman Cath. Diocese, 592 U.S. at 23 (Gorsuch, J.,
concurring) (“Although Jacobson pre-dated the modern tiers
of scrutiny, this Court essentially applied rational basis
review to Henning Jacobson’s challenge . . . .”). Because the
state legislature and the Cambridge Board of Health could
have reasonably concluded that requiring adults to get the
smallpox vaccine would protect the public’s health and
safety, the Court held that it survived rational basis review.
Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 30–31 (explaining that the legislature
could have found that the vaccine requirement “was likely to
be the most effective for the protection of the public against
disease,” id. at 30); id. at 38 (“[The Court] do[es] not
perceive that this [regulation] has invaded any right secured
by the Federal Constitution.”).

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

23

Jacobson holds that the constitutionality of a vaccine
mandate, like the Policy here, turns on what reasonable
legislative and executive decisionmakers could have
rationally concluded about whether a vaccine protects the
public’s health and safety, not whether a vaccine actually
provides immunity to or prevents transmission of a disease.
Whether a vaccine protects the public’s health and safety is
committed to policymakers, not a court or a jury. Further,
alleged scientific uncertainty over a vaccine’s efficacy is
irrelevant under Jacobson. Jacobson simply does not allow
debate in the courts over whether a mandated vaccine
prevents the spread of disease. Jacobson makes clear that it
is up to the political branches, within the parameters of
rational basis review, to decide whether a vaccine effectively
protects public health and safety.
Jacobson is materially indistinguishable from this case.
Here, as in Jacobson, we are presented with a bodily
integrity substantive due process challenge to a vaccine
mandate imposed to protect the public’s health and safety in
response to a health emergency. Thus, under Jacobson, we
must apply rational basis review.
The Policy easily survives such review because (even
assuming the truth of Plaintiffs’ allegations) it was more than
reasonable for the LAUSD to conclude that COVID-19
vaccines would protect the health and safety of its employees
and students. The SAC concedes that COVID-19 vaccines
“lessen the severity of symptoms for individuals who receive
them.” From this, the LAUSD could have reasonably
determined that the vaccines would protect the health of its
employees. And as discussed above, the LAUSD could have
reasonably concluded, based on information in the
documents incorporated by reference into the SAC, that
COVID-19 vaccines would protect the health and safety of

24

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

its students and employees. In fact, the CDC reported that
COVID-19 vaccines “are highly effective at protecting
vaccinated people against symptomatic and severe COVID19,” and “[f]ully vaccinated people are less likely to become
infected” and “less likely to get and spread SARS-CoV-2.”
Interim Public Health Recommendations for Fully
Vaccinated
People,
CDC
(July
28,
2021),
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/108355
[https://perma.cc/AMW8-KH3Z].
The CDC also
recommended that “everyone 5 years and older protect
themselves from COVID-19 by getting fully vaccinated.”
Omicron Variant: What You Need to Know, CDC (Dec. 9,
2021),
https://stacks.cdc.gov/view/cdc/112430
[https://perma.cc/B4EG-5QMR].
B.
We reject Plaintiffs’ attempt to limit Jacobson to only
those vaccines that prevent the spread of a disease and
provide immunity. Jacobson required no such findings. The
Court dealt with arguments very similar to Plaintiffs’ about
the nature of vaccines, including through offers of proof
made by Jacobson on which he sought to introduce expert
testimony:
Looking at the propositions embodied in
the defendant’s rejected offers of proof, it is
clear that they are more formidable by their
number than by their inherent value. Those
offers in the main seem to have had no
purpose except to state the general theory of
those of the medical profession who attach
little or no value to vaccination as a means of
preventing the spread of smallpox, or who
think that vaccination causes other diseases

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

of the body. What everybody knows the
court must know, and therefore the state court
judicially knew, as this court knows, that an
opposite theory accords with the common
belief, and is maintained by high medical
authority. We must assume that, when the
statute in question was passed, the legislature
of Massachusetts was not unaware of these
opposing theories, and was compelled, of
necessity, to choose between them. It was not
compelled to commit a matter involving the
public health and safety to the final decision
of a court or jury. It is no part of the function
of a court or a jury to determine which one of
two modes was likely to be the most effective
for the protection of the public against
disease.
That was for the legislative
department to determine in the light of all the
information it had or could obtain. It could
not properly abdicate its function to guard the
public health and safety. The state legislature
proceeded upon the theory which recognized
vaccination as at least an effective, if not the
best-known, way in which to meet and
suppress the evils of a smallpox epidemic that
imperiled an entire population. Upon what
sound principles as to the relations existing
between the different departments of
government can the court review this action
of the legislature? If there is any such power
in the judiciary to review legislative action in
respect of a matter affecting the general
welfare, it can only be when that which the

25

26

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

legislature has done comes within the rule
that, if a statute purporting to have been
enacted to protect the public health, the
public morals, or the public safety, has no real
or substantial relation to those objects, or is,
beyond all question, a plain, palpable
invasion of rights secured by the fundamental
law, it is the duty of the courts to so adjudge,
and thereby give effect to the Constitution.
Whatever may be thought of the
expediency of this statute, it cannot be
affirmed to be, beyond question, in palpable
conflict with the Constitution. Nor, in view
of the methods employed to stamp out the
disease of smallpox, can anyone confidently
assert that the means prescribed by the state
to that end has no real or substantial relation
to the protection of the public health and the
public safety.
197 U.S. at 30–31 (citations omitted).
As this discussion demonstrates, the Court determined
that Jacobson’s claims about the smallpox vaccine—very
similar to Plaintiffs’ claims—were immaterial, given the
other evidence from which the legislature could have
reasonably concluded that the vaccine would likely protect
the health and safety of the public. 11 Jacobson thus applies
For this reason, we respectfully disagree with Judge Lee’s attempt to
limit Jacobson “to apply only if a vaccine prevents transmission and
contraction of a disease.” Lee Partial Dissent at 35. By rejecting
Jacobson’s argument—supported by offers of proof—that the smallpox

11

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

27

to vaccination requirements regardless of whether such
vaccines actually provide immunity and prevent the spread
of disease or whether they provide no immunity and merely
render COVID-19 less dangerous to those who contract it,
so long as policymakers could reasonably conclude that the
vaccines would protect the public’s health and safety. 12
We also reject Plaintiffs’ argument that a heightened
standard of review applies based on a more recent line of
cases that, according to Plaintiffs, recognize a fundamental
right to refuse unwanted medical treatment. Plaintiffs
primarily rely on Cruzan ex rel. Cruzan v. Director,
Missouri Department of Health, 497 U.S. 261 (1990)
(stating that “a competent person has a constitutionally
protected liberty interest in refusing unwanted medical
treatment,” id. at 278), and Washington v. Glucksberg, 521
U.S. 702 (1997) (noting that the Court “ha[s] also assumed,
and strongly suggested, that the Due Process Clause protects
the traditional right to refuse unwanted lifesaving medical
treatment,” id. at 720 (citing Cruzan, 497 U.S. at 278–79)).

vaccine did not prevent the spread of the disease, the Court necessarily
held that whether the vaccine actually prevented the spread of smallpox
did not matter, given the contrary evidence from which policymakers
could reasonably conclude that the vaccine would protect the public’s
health and safety. See Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 30–31; see also Child.’s
Health Def., 93 F.4th at 79 (“Jacobson did not turn on the longevity of
the vaccine or consensus regarding its efficacy.”). Jacobson cannot be
cabined to circumstances that the Court found immaterial.
12
Even if the SAC plausibly alleged that COVID-19 vaccines do not
effectively provide immunity or prevent the spread of COVID-19 and
that they only reduce symptoms for the recipient, that would be
irrelevant. What matters is whether policymakers could reasonably
conclude that vaccination requirements are necessary to protect public
health and safety. Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 30–31.

28

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

Whatever the reach of these cases, they did not overrule
Jacobson. 13 See We The Patriots USA, 17 F.4th at 293 n.35
(“Jacobson remains binding precedent.”); Norris, 73 F.4th
at 436 (“[A]bsent any indication from the [Supreme] Court
that Jacobson is to be overruled or limited, [the court is]
bound to apply that decision to reject plaintiffs’ arguments
here.”). Indeed, even Plaintiffs do not go so far as to claim
that Jacobson is no longer good law. As Jacobson remains
binding and squarely governs this case, we must apply it.
III.
Plaintiffs concede, and we agree, that their equal
protection claim is subject to rational basis review. See
Hooks v. Clark Cnty. Sch. Dist., 228 F.3d 1036, 1041 (9th
Cir. 2000) (“To withstand [a due process or equal protection
challenge under the] Fourteenth Amendment . . . , a
regulation must bear only a rational relation to a legitimate
Moreover, these cases do not address the circumstances addressed in
Jacobson: a due process challenge to a vaccine policy imposed to protect
the public’s health and safety. So we do not read these cases as
undermining Jacobson. But even if we did, we would still need to apply
Jacobson. See In re Twelve Grand Jury Subpoenas, 908 F.3d 525, 529
(9th Cir. 2018) (per curiam) (“Where Supreme Court precedent ‘has
direct application in a case,’ the Supreme Court has instructed ‘the Court
of Appeals [to] follow the case which directly controls,’ even if it
‘appears to rest on reasons rejected in some other line of decisions,’ and
thereby to ‘leav[e] to th[e] Court the prerogative of overruling its own
decisions.’” (alterations in original) (quoting Agostini v. Felton, 521 U.S.
203, 237 (1997))). We thus agree with our sister circuits that, despite
Cruzan and its progeny, Jacobson continues to control in cases
challenging COVID-19 vaccination policies. See We The Patriots USA,
17 F.4th at 293–94 (rejecting plaintiffs’ argument that Jacobson did not
apply because Cruzan and its progeny recognized a fundamental right to
refuse medical treatment); Child.’s Health Def., 93 F.4th at 79–80
(same); Norris, 73 F.4th at 437 (same).
13

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

29

governmental purpose, unless the regulation implicates a
fundamental right or an inherently suspect classification.”).
Because we hold above that the Policy is rationally related
to the LAUSD’s legitimate interest in protecting the health
and safety of its employees and students, Plaintiffs’ equal
protection claim fails.
CONCLUSION
Although the LAUSD has rescinded the Policy, this case
is not moot. Given the SAC’s broad request for any proper
injunctive relief along with its allegations that individual
Plaintiffs were terminated under the Policy, the SAC fairly
encompasses a request for reinstatement of the individual
Plaintiffs who have not been restored to their prior positions.
On the merits, Jacobson is binding and controls, and thus
rational basis review applies to Plaintiffs’ substantive due
process claim. Even construing Plaintiffs’ allegations in
their favor, the Policy survives such review, as the LAUSD
could have reasonably concluded that COVID-19 vaccines
would protect the health and safety of its employees and
students. For this same reason, Plaintiffs’ equal protection
claim fails under rational basis review. We therefore affirm
the district court’s order granting the LAUSD’s motion for
judgment on the pleadings.
AFFIRMED.

30

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

OWENS, Circuit Judge, dissenting.
Plaintiffs brought this suit to obtain “injunctive relief
restraining Defendants from enforcing” their vaccine policy.
As Judge Hawkins correctly concluded in his dissent from
the panel decision, this case is moot, as “there is no longer
any policy for the court to enjoin or declare unlawful.”
Health Freedom Def. Fund, Inc. v. Carvalho, 104 F.4th 715,
732 (9th Cir. 2024) (Hawkins, J., dissenting), vacated and
reh’g en banc granted, 127 F.4th 750 (9th Cir. 2025).
Nothing in the record (or the world) even hints at the
possibility that the Los Angeles Unified School District
would resurrect its COVID-19 vaccine mandate, which has
been dead for nearly two years. The majority does not
dispute this reality. We lack Article III jurisdiction and must
dismiss this case. See Brach v. Newsom, 38 F.4th 6, 12 (9th
Cir. 2022) (en banc) (dismissing a challenge to a pandemicrelated restriction as moot in line with “the numerous other
circuit courts across the country” that have done the same).
The majority first attempts to skirt the mootness problem
by asserting that the complaint “fairly encompasses a request
for reinstatement,” leaning on a boilerplate catchall request
for “other and further relief as the Court may deem just and
proper.” Maj. Op. at 14. Yet when unanimously reversing
our court on mootness grounds, the Supreme Court warned
that new forms of relief, “extracted late in the day from [a]
general prayer for relief and asserted solely to avoid
otherwise certain mootness, bore close inspection.”
Arizonans for Off. Eng. v. Arizona, 520 U.S. 43, 71 (1997)
(rejecting this court’s theory that a live controversy existed
where the “complaint did not expressly request nominal
damages” but “it did request ‘all other relief that the Court
deems just and proper’” (citation omitted)). Indeed, the

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

31

Court has distinguished cases where a plaintiff “has
presented a claim” for the type of relief that “ensure[s] a live
controversy,” Mission Prod. Holdings v. Tempnology, LLC,
587 U.S. 370, 377 (2019), from those where a plaintiff “ha[s]
not prayed for” such relief and thus “no longer ha[s] a legally
cognizable interest in the result of th[e] case,” Murphy v.
Hunt, 455 U.S. 478, 491 (1982); cf. United States v.
Sineneng-Smith, 590 U.S. 371, 380 (2020) (unanimously
reversing this court and applying the party presentation
principle to require that cases be “shaped by the parties,” not
the court).
Not surprisingly, our sister circuits routinely reject
attempts to grow a magic Article III jurisdiction beanstalk
from boilerplate language. For example, the First Circuit, in
a nearly identical rescinded COVID-19 mandate case, cited
Arizonans for Official English to hold that “the students’
request for ‘any other relief [the] Court deems proper’
cannot operate to save their otherwise moot action.” Harris
v. Univ. of Mass., 43 F.4th 187, 193 (1st Cir. 2022). 1 The
1
See, e.g., Thomas R.W. v. Mass. Dep’t of Educ., 130 F.3d 477, 480 (1st
Cir. 1997) (holding that a “general prayer for relief” cannot preserve a
request for damages to avoid mootness, citing Arizonans for Official
English); Fox v. Bd. of Trs. of State Univ. of N.Y., 42 F.3d 135, 141 (2d
Cir. 1994) (declining to “read a damages claim into the Complaint’s
boilerplate prayer” for relief when there was “absolutely no specific
mention in [the Complaint] of nominal damages” (citation omitted));
Lillbask ex rel. Mauclaire v. Conn. Dep’t of Educ., 397 F.3d 77, 90 (2d
Cir. 2005) (applying Arizonans for Official English to reject that a
“general claim for ‘other such relief as the Court deems appropriate’ is
sufficiently expansive to include” the only relief that would render the
case not moot); WildEarth Guardians v. Pub. Serv. Co., 690 F.3d 1174,
1191 (10th Cir. 2012) (holding that “[a] broad request for ‘other’ relief
cannot save [a] complaint” from mootness); Harris v. City of Houston,

32

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

majority attempts to distinguish the many contrary
precedents from other circuits by asserting that, unlike in
those cases, relief consistent with the “gravamen” of
Plaintiffs’ requested injunction—even if not expressly
sought—can still be granted. Maj. Op. at 18 n.10. But the
mootness inquiry hinges on the relief “specific[ally]
mention[ed]” by the parties, not on the court’s post hoc
characterization of the case’s supposed essence. Fox v. Bd.
of Trs. of State Univ. of N.Y., 42 F.3d 135, 141 (2d Cir.
1994). Blindly embracing a never briefed or argued theory
that the Supreme Court and our sister circuits have explicitly
rejected is more Inspector Clouseau than “close inspection.”
To side shuffle this constitutional black hole, the
majority departs from the many analogous challenges to
rescinded COVID-19 policies that have been dismissed as
moot, see Brach, 38 F.4th at 12 n.3 (collecting cases), and
instead relies on Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain v. Alexander,
303 F.3d 1059 (9th Cir. 2002), which concerned alleged
violations of the National Forest Management Act (NFMA)
and the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). Maj.
Op. at 15-16. 2 In that case, plaintiffs sought to enjoin a
timber sale on national forest land or any other relief that
“may be necessary and appropriate to avoid further
irreparable harm” from the sale. Id. at 1066. Even after
151 F.3d 186, 191 (5th Cir. 1998) (declining to “conjure up relief” by
“‘read[ing] into’ [the] complaint additional requests” that would
manufacture a live controversy).
The majority also cites Norris v. Stanley, 73 F.4th 431 (6th Cir. 2023),
cert. denied, 144 S. Ct. 1353 (2024)—another pandemic-related case that
it claims involves “similar circumstances” and was not moot. Maj. Op.
at 15. Unlike here, however, the plaintiffs in Norris specifically “sought
nominal damages for the alleged violations of their constitutional rights.”
Id. at 433 n.1.

2

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

33

logging of the timber concluded, we held over a dissent that
the case was not moot because further environmental harm
from the sale “may yet be remedied by any number of
mitigation strategies,” which were fairly encompassed in the
requested relief. Id.
The parties never cited Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain
nor its underlying theory in their many briefs submitted to
this court, nor did the original panel or dissent. And despite
the majority’s claim that Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain
derived from longstanding mootness principles, Maj. Op. at
16 n.9, no published decision in this circuit—or any other—
has ever relied on Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain’s mootness
rationale outside the narrow context of NFMA and NEPA
violations. That collective silence speaks for itself: There is
simply no basis to extend Neighbors of Cuddy Mountain’s
mootness holding beyond its specific environmental context
to the claims presented here. Compare Feldman v. Bomar,
518 F.3d 637, 642 (9th Cir. 2008) (citing Neighbors of
Cuddy Mountain and similar cases to illustrate this court’s
recognition of “‘live’ controversies in environmental cases
even after the contested government projects were
complete” (emphasis added)), with Brach, 38 F.4th at 11
(holding that, where plaintiffs sue to enjoin a pandemic
policy but the policy no longer remains, the plaintiffs “have
gotten everything they asked for” and the “actual
controversy has evaporated,” presenting a “classic case” of
mootness). 3
The majority’s tepid reliance on Z Channel Limited Partnership v.
Home Box Office, Inc., 931 F.2d 1338 (9th Cir. 1991)—a nearly thirtyfive-year-old case that was also never cited by the parties nor the original
panel—is even less persuasive. Maj. Op. at 16 n.9. No published
3

34

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

Because neither of the majority’s last-minute mootness
rationales survive “close inspection,” Arizonans for Off.
Eng., 520 U.S. at 71, I respectfully dissent for the reasons
stated by Judge Hawkins.
LEE, Circuit Judge, joined by COLLINS, Circuit Judge,
dissenting in part.
The majority’s opinion comes perilously close to giving
the government carte blanche to require a vaccine or even
medical treatment against people’s will so long as it
asserts—even if incorrectly—that it would promote “public
health and safety.” But the many mistakes and missteps by
our government and the scientific establishment over the
past five years counsel caution: Their errors underscore the
importance of carefully evaluating the sort of sweeping
claims of public-health authority asserted by the Los
Angeles Unified School District (“LAUSD”) here. Faithful
adherence to Supreme Court precedent confirms that we
decision from this circuit in nearly three decades has relied on Z Channel
to overcome a mootness challenge based on hypothetical relief that no
party specifically sought. And for good reason: Z Channel is a textbook
example of overreach, with the majority “[d]efying a clear rule of
procedure, creating an inter-circuit conflict and resurrecting a legal
theory long ago abandoned by the parties” to bring the case “back from
the dead.” 931 F.2d at 1346, 1349 (Kozinski, J., dissenting); see also
Sineneng-Smith, 590 U.S. at 380 (cautioning against appellate courts
“interject[ing]” themselves into cases); NAACP v. U.S. Sugar Corp., 84
F.3d 1432, 1438 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (citing the Z Channel dissent); Seven
Words LLC v. Network Sols., 260 F.3d 1089, 1095–97 (9th Cir. 2001)
(declining to apply Z Channel to overcome a mootness challenge); Bain
v. Cal. Tchrs. Ass’n, 891 F.3d 1206, 1212 (9th Cir. 2018) (declining to
“transform” the requested relief “at the eleventh hour” to avoid
mootness, citing Seven Words and Arizonans for Official English).

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

35

should not blindly accept the mere say-so of the government.
We thus should not affirm the dismissal of this lawsuit
challenging LAUSD’s COVID-19 vaccine mandate—
without permitting the plaintiffs to offer evidence to rebut
the government officials’ far-reaching claims. 1
Contrary to the majority, I read the Supreme Court’s
decision in Jacobson v. Massachusetts—which upheld a
smallpox vaccine mandate—to apply only if a vaccine
prevents transmission and contraction of a disease. 197 U.S.
11 (1905). The plaintiffs here have plausibly claimed—at
least at the pleading stage where we must accept the truth of
the allegations—that the COVID-19 vaccine mitigates
serious symptoms but does not “prevent transmission or
contraction of COVID-19.” And if that is true, then
Jacobson’s rational basis review does not apply, and we
must examine the vaccine mandate under a more stringent
standard. Ultimately, the plaintiffs may be wrong about the
COVID-19 vaccine, but they should be given a chance to
challenge the government’s assertions about it.
I respectfully dissent in part.
* * * *
When the mRNA-based COVID-19 vaccines were first
announced in late 2020, pharmaceutical companies touted
clinical trials that they claimed showed an efficacy rate of
over 90 percent. 2 As scientists contended then, these
1
2

I agree with the majority that this appeal is not moot.

Pfizer and BioNTech Announce Vaccine Candidate Against COVID19 Achieved Success in First Interim Analysis from Phase 3 Study,
Pfizer,
https://www.pfizer.com/news/press-release/press-releasedetail/pfizer-and-biontech-announce-vaccine-candidate-against (Nov. 9,

36

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

vaccines would “protect individuals from infection and
transmission.” 3
Based in part on these trial results, federal, state and local
governments acted swiftly to impose vaccine mandates. The
United States government required federal employees,
government contractors, and millions of private sector
employees to be vaccinated. 4 Over 8,000 men and women
in uniform were discharged and severed from service for
their refusal to be vaccinated. 5 States also imposed their own
mandates. Even 18 months into the pandemic, California
Governor Gavin Newsom announced that he planned to
require schoolchildren to be vaccinated, despite scientific
evidence that showed young children face extremely low

2020); Moderna’s COVID-19 Vaccine Candidate Meets its Primary
Efficacy Endpoint in the First Interim Analysis of the Phase 3 COVE
Study,
Moderna,
https://investors.modernatx.com/news/newsdetails/2020/Modernas-COVID-19-Vaccine-Candidate-Meets-itsPrimary-Efficacy-Endpoint-in-the-First-Interim-Analysis-of-the-Phase3-COVE-Study/default.aspx (Nov. 16, 2020).
3
Ali Pormohammad et al., Efficacy and Safety of COVID-19 Vaccines:
A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of Randomized Clinical Trials,
9
Vaccines
1,
15
(2021),
https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC8148145/.
4
See, e.g., Kathryn Watson et al., Biden announces COVID-19 vaccine
mandates that will affect 100 million Americans, CBS News (Sept. 10,
2021), https://www.cbsnews.com/live-updates/biden-covid-19-vaccinemandates-announcement/.
5

Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Reinstates Service Members
Discharged for Refusing the COVID Vaccine, The White House,
https://www.whitehouse.gov/fact-sheets/2025/01/fact-sheet-presidentdonald-j-trump-reinstates-service-members-discharged-for-refusingthe-covid-vaccine/ (Jan. 27, 2025).

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

37

health risks from COVID-19. 6 That proposed mandate
would have banned unvaccinated children from the
classroom and relegated them to online learning. And
relevant here, LAUSD issued a memorandum requiring all
employees to get vaccinated—or lose their jobs.
But it turned out that the government—and the scientific
establishment—were wrong about a lot of things. The
COVID-19 vaccines did not end up having an efficacy rate
of over 90 percent in real-life. People repeatedly caught
COVID-19, despite being vaccinated and “boosted.”
Indeed, repeat infections among the vaccinated became so
common that the phrase “breakthrough infection” entered
common parlance. Given this reality, the government
shifted its emphasis on why people should get vaccinated: It
was less about preventing transmission and contraction of
COVID-19 and more about mitigating serious symptoms.7
Even LAUSD in its brief before the three-judge panel
focused largely on the vaccine’s effect in lessening
symptoms, stating that “[t]he overwhelming consensus
amongst the nation’s leading health experts is that COVIDCalifornia Becomes First State in Nation to Announce COVID-19
Vaccine Requirements for Schools, Governor Gavin Newsom,
https://www.gov.ca.gov/2021/10/01/california-becomes-first-state-innation-to-announce-covid-19-vaccine-requirements-for-schools/ (last
visited May 28, 2025). California ultimately walked away from this
announced policy.
6

See
Benefits
of
Getting
Vaccinated,
CDC,
https://www.cdc.gov/covid/vaccines/benefits.html#:~:text=Vaccination
%20is%20more%20reliable%20way,associated%20with%20COVID%
2D19%20infection., (Jan 13, 2025) (emphasizing that “Getting
vaccinated against COVID-19 has many benefits that are supported by
scientific studies. The COVID-19 vaccine helps protect you from severe
illness, hospitalization, and death.”).
7

38

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

19 vaccines are safe and effective in preventing serious
illness and death from this highly contagious virus.”
The plaintiffs here go further and contend that the
COVID-19 vaccine is not even a “traditional” vaccine that
prevents transmission or provides immunity. Rather, the
COVID-19 vaccines merely mitigate symptoms in a manner
more akin to a medical treatment than a vaccine. Thus,
according to the plaintiffs, the Supreme Court’s Jacobson v.
Massachusetts decision does not apply here. The district
court, for its part, held that the plaintiffs’ “distinction”
between “lessen[ing] the severity of the disease” and
“prevent[ing] contraction or transmission” was “misplaced”
and that Jacobson applies even if requiring the COVID-19
vaccines constitutes forced medical treatment. Health
Freedom Def. Fund v. Reilly, 2022 WL 5442479, at *5 (C.D.
Cal. Sept. 2, 2022).
The majority reads Jacobson broadly to empower the
government to impose any vaccine mandate so long as it
believes the mandate would “protect public health and
safety.” Maj. Op. 23. Under the majority’s reading, “alleged
scientific uncertainty over a vaccine’s efficacy is irrelevant
under Jacobson.” Id. In other words, if the government
believes a vaccine will protect “public health and safety,”
that is the end of the story. The majority adopts a sweeping
definition of “public health and safety” such that the
government can mandate a vaccine—and potentially any
medical treatment—if the required measure just “lessen[s]
the severity of symptoms,” whether or not it prevents
transmission and contraction of the disease. Id.
I disagree with the majority’s overly broad reading of
Jacobson. The Supreme Court upheld Massachusetts’
vaccine requirement against smallpox precisely because the

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

39

vaccine prevented the transmission and contraction of
smallpox. It emphasized this point repeatedly:
•

The “principle of vaccination as a means
to prevent the spread of smallpox has
been enforced in many [S]tates.” 197
U.S. at 31–32 (emphasis added).

•

“[V]accination strongly tends to prevent
the transmission or spread of this
disease.” Id. at 34 (quoting Viemeister v.
White, 179 N.Y. 235, 72 N.E. 97, 98–99
(1904) (emphasis added)).

•

It is “common belief” that a vaccine has a
“decided tendency to prevent the spread
of this fearful disease.” Id. at 34
(emphasis added).

•

Quarantine requirements were justified
because of “the danger of the spread of
the disease.” Id. at 29 (emphasis added).

To be sure, the Court in Jacobson noted that the
defendant had challenged the effectiveness of the smallpox
vaccine in limiting the spread of the disease. Id. at 23–24.
The majority opinion latches onto that language to argue that
it does not matter whether a vaccine limits transmission and
contraction of a disease; we must just defer to a state’s belief
that a vaccine will protect “public health and safety.” Maj.
Op. 23. But the Court did not hold that vaccines can be
required even if they do not prevent the transmission and
contraction of the disease.
Admittedly, it is somewhat difficult to parse this 120year-old case because it predates our tiers-of-scrutiny

40

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

analysis. But I read the Court’s opinion much more
narrowly than the majority does: If “everybody knows . . .
and therefore the [trial] court judicially knew, as th[e]
[C]ourt knows, that an opposite theory [about the publichealth efficacy of the smallpox vaccine] accords with the
common belief, and is maintained by high medical
authority,” Jacobson’s argument that this overwhelming
consensus was not unanimous does not amount to a viable
constitutional claim. Jacobson, 197 U.S. at 30. While it
acknowledged that some people shared Jacobson’s distinctly
unorthodox belief, the Court noted that it is “common belief”
that is “accepted by the mass of the people, as well as by
most members of the medical profession” that the smallpox
vaccine has the “decided tendency to prevent the spread” of
disease. Id. at 34 (quoting Viemeister’s upholding of a
smallpox vaccine mandate in New York); see also id. at 35
(“vaccination, as a means of protecting a community against
smallpox, finds strong support in the experience of this and
other countries”); id. at 37 (suggesting that there is “deep and
universal” belief in the “community” and “medical advisers”
about the vaccine’s efficacy). Jacobson then recited the
number of states—and countries ranging from Britain to
Denmark to Germany to Sweden—that have adopted
compulsory smallpox vaccination, underscoring the
common and almost universal belief that smallpox vaccines
prevent the spread of that disease. Id. at 31 n.1.
Our case is factually different from Jacobson. At the
pleading stage, we must accept as true the plaintiffs’ wellpleaded allegation that the newly developed mRNA
COVID-19 vaccines do not effectively prevent the
transmission and contraction of COVID-19 and thus more
resemble medical treatments than the sort of robustly
validated smallpox vaccine at issue in Jacobson. Ashcroft v.

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

41

Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009). That allegation may
ultimately not bear out once the parties offer evidence, but
the plaintiffs’ theory appears plausible at this stage,
especially given the federal government’s focus on
mitigation of symptoms over prevention of transmission and
LAUSD’s failure in its brief to try to factually rebut that
claim. This means that Jacobson does not bar this suit—at
least for now.
The majority opinion suggests that Jacobson’s reference
to “public health and public safety” is so capacious that
merely “lessen[ing] the severity of symptoms” is enough to
justify a vaccine mandate. Maj. Op. 23. But nothing in
Jacobson hints that just mitigating symptoms alone can
count as “public health and public safety.” The entire thrust
of Jacobson is that “public health and public safety” means
protecting the mass public from the spread of smallpox.
Aside from the repeated references to “preventing the
spread” of smallpox, the opinion makes many allusions to
the dangers of widespread transmission of the disease among
the public. See, e.g., 197 U.S. at 26 (mentioning the “injury
that may be done to others” if a person has the liberty to
refuse vaccines); id. at 27 (“a community has the right to
protect itself against an epidemic of disease which threatens
the safety of its members”); id. at 28 (noting smallpox was
“prevalent and increasing at Cambridge”); id. at 30–31
(vaccination is the “best known[] way in which to meet and
suppress the evils of a smallpox epidemic that imperiled an
entire population”); id. at 31 (discussing the need to “stamp
out the disease of smallpox” for the “protection of the public
health and the public safety”).
If we accept the majority’s holding that a state can
impose a vaccine mandate just to “lessen the severity of
symptoms” of sick persons—without considering whether it

42

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

lessens transmission and contraction of this disease—then
we are opening the door for compulsory medical treatment
against people’s wishes. Vaccines, by definition, build
immunity and prevent transmission and contraction of an
infectious disease, but we risk blurring the line between
vaccines and medical treatment if vaccines are defined as
anything that lessens symptoms.
None of this is to deny that the COVID-19 vaccines may
well have saved millions of lives of the elderly, people with
comorbidities, and others with weakened immune systems.
But we have held that the government cannot compel people
to involuntarily receive even life-saving medical treatment.
If lessening the severity of symptoms alone justifies vaccine
mandates, then it may well implicate the fundamental right
to “refus[e] unwanted medical treatment,” as explained by
Judge Collins in his panel concurrence. Health Freedom
Def. Fund v. Carvalho, 104 F.4th 715, 728 (9th Cir. 2024)
(Collins, J., concurring), vacated, 127 F.4th 750 (9th Cir.
2025); see also Cruzan ex rel. Cruzan v. Director, Mo. Dep’t
of Health, 497 U.S. 261, 278–79 (1990); Washington v.
Glucksberg, 521 U.S. 702, 724–25 (1997) (holding that the
“right of a competent individual to refuse medical treatment”
is “entirely consistent with this Nation’s history and
constitutional traditions” (citation omitted)). Indeed, under
the majority’s reasoning, we are only a step or two from
allowing the government to require COVID-19 patients to
take, say, Ivermectin if the government in its judgment
believes that it would “lessen the severity of symptoms.”
As a practical matter, I fear we are giving the
government a blank check to foist health treatment mandates
on the people—despite its checkered track record—when we
should be imposing a check against the government’s
incursion into our liberties.

HEALTH FREEDOM DEF. FUND, INC. V. CARVALHO

I respectfully dissent in part.

43

