FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
VIP MORTGAGE
INCORPORATED,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 24-7624
D.C. No.
2:24-cv-02865DWL

v.
JENNIFER GATES, an Arizona
individual,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
Dominic Lanza, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 21, 2025
Phoenix, Arizona
Filed December 22, 2025
Before: Richard C. Tallman, Bridget S. Bade, and Kenneth
K. Lee, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Lee

2

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

SUMMARY *
Arbitration
The panel affirmed the district court’s order
(1) confirming an arbitration award in favor of Jennifer
Gates on claims under the Fair Labor Standards Act and
Arizona state law and (2) denying VIP Mortgage Inc.’s
petition to vacate the award of unpaid overtime wages,
attorneys’ fees, and liquidated damages.
VIP contended that the arbitrator erred in awarding
attorneys’ fees without disallowing time spent on VIP’s
counterclaims because the arbitrator had previously
approved the parties’ stipulation to dismiss the
counterclaims, which stated that the parties would bear their
own fees and costs on the counterclaims.
The panel held that, generally, an arbitrator’s
unsubstantiated fact finding cannot justify federal court
review of an arbitral award under the Federal Arbitration
Act. There is, however, a narrow basis for vacatur where the
facts are so firmly established that an arbitrator cannot fail
to recognize them without manifestly disregarding the
law. To vacate an arbitration award based on such an error
regarding a legally dispositive fact, the factual error must be
dispositive to the disputed legal issue, and the arbitrator must
have known about this undisputed fact when she decided the
legal issue. In other words, the arbitrator’s factual error must

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

3

have been so critical, obvious, and intentional that it
amounted to manifestly disregarding the law.
The panel held that the arbitrator’s factual error in
apparently not remembering that the parties had agreed to
bear their own fees for the settled counterclaims did not fall
within the narrow carveout for “legally dispositive
facts.” VIP met the first prong because the factual error was
legally dispositive, but it could not meet the second prong
because the fact was not so obvious that the arbitrator must
have known about it when she decided Gates’s fees motion.

COUNSEL
Jeffrey W. Toppel (argued), Bianchi & Brandt, Scottsdale,
Arizona, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
James Weiler (argued) and Jason Barrat, Weiler Law PLLC,
Phoenix, Arizona, for Defendant-Appellee.

4

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

OPINION
LEE, Circuit Judge:
Federal courts rarely vacate arbitration awards. Even
when faced with a legal error, we do not vacate an award
unless the arbitrator manifestly disregarded the law, acted
completely irrationally, or violated one of the narrow
provisions under the Federal Arbitration Act (FAA). For
factual errors, our review is even more deferential: We
generally do not vacate an award based on a factual error and
only recognize a narrow exception for “legally dispositive
facts.” See Pac. Reinsurance Mgmt. Corp. v. Ohio
Reinsurance Corp., 935 F.2d 1019, 1025–26 (9th Cir. 1991).
In this case, we address the contours of this carveout for
“legally dispositive facts.” To vacate an award based on this
ground, (1) the factual error must be dispositive to the
disputed legal issue, and (2) the arbitrator must have known
about this undisputed fact when she decided the legal issue.
In other words, the arbitrator’s factual error must have been
so critical, obvious, and intentional that it amounted to
manifestly disregarding the law.
Here, the arbitrator awarded attorneys’ fees to the
plaintiff—including for time spent on the settled
counterclaims—even though the parties had earlier agreed to
bear their own attorneys’ fees and costs for those
counterclaims. The arbitrator apparently ignored this fact,
but the parties never reminded her about this stipulation
when they briefed the attorneys’ fees issue over a year later.
The record suggests that the arbitrator merely forgot about

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

5

the stipulation. We thus affirm the district court’s ruling that
this factual error does not warrant vacatur. 1
BACKGROUND
VIP Mortgage is in the business of mortgage loan
banking and brokering. Jennifer Gates worked for VIP as a
loan officer beginning in May 2016 until she resigned in
September 2022. After she resigned, Gates filed a demand
for arbitration under the arbitration provision in her
employment agreement. The arbitration provision provided
that the FAA would govern any dispute, and that attorneys’
fees “shall [be] award[ed]” “consistent with the statute at
issue,” i.e., the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA).
In Gates’ demand for arbitration, she alleged that VIP
and her supervisor Brandon Hendrick violated the FLSA and
an Arizona state law by withholding overtime pay. Gates
also alleged that the defendants required her to work over
forty hours a week but did not compensate her for overtime
hours. She later testified that she was instructed to record
eight-hour workdays on her timesheet. In response, VIP
counterclaimed, alleging breach of fiduciary duty and breach
of contract.
Before the arbitrator issued the final award, the parties
agreed to settle VIP’s counterclaims. In April 2023, the
arbitrator approved the stipulation to dismiss the
counterclaims, which stated that parties would bear their
own fees and costs. Fourteen months later in June 2024—
after the arbitrator had issued an interim award for Gates—
VIP filed a brief objecting to Gates’ request for attorneys’

We address other issues raised on appeal in a concurrently-filed
memorandum disposition.

1

6

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

fees but it did not remind the arbitrator about the stipulation
dismissing the counterclaims.
In the final award, the arbitrator awarded Gates unpaid
overtime wages under the FLSA, attorneys’ fees, and
liquidated damages in the total amount of $650,805.41. In
awarding attorneys’ fees, the arbitrator reduced the lodestar
hourly rate in response to VIP’s objections, but it still
awarded the bulk of the requested fees, explaining that Gates
is “the prevailing party in this action” and “was successful
in this matter, and not to a de minimis degree.” The
arbitrator, however, did not distinguish between time spent
on Gates’ claims and the counterclaims.
VIP petitioned the district court to vacate or modify the
award, and Gates moved to confirm the award. The district
court concluded the arbitrator’s award was not “completely
irrational or emblematic of a manifest disregard of the law,”
noting that the final award decision was “unusually detailed
and carefully reasoned.” The district court thus denied VIP’s
petition to vacate the award and granted Gates’ motion to
confirm the award. On appeal, VIP raises a variety of
challenges, including whether the arbitrator erred in
awarding Gates attorneys’ fees for the counterclaims.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
“We review a district court’s decision to confirm or
vacate an arbitration award de novo.” HayDay Farms, Inc.
v. FeeDx Holdings, Inc., 55 F.4th 1232, 1238 (9th Cir. 2022).

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

7

DISCUSSION
I. The district court correctly held that the arbitrator
did not exceed her authority by awarding attorneys’
fees for the settled counterclaims.
The FAA sets “a high standard for vacatur,” affording
courts “extremely limited authority to review arbitration
awards.” Id. at 1239–40. Section 10 of the FAA authorizes
vacatur only where (1) “the award was procured by
corruption, fraud, or undue means”; (2) “there was evident
partiality or corruption in the arbitrators”; (3) “the arbitrators
were guilty of misconduct”; and (4) where “the arbitrators
exceeded their powers, or so imperfectly executed them that
a . . . final, and definite award upon the subject matter
submitted was not made.” 9 U.S.C. § 10(a). In construing
that last statutory basis for vacatur, we have held that
“arbitrators ‘exceed their powers’ . . . not when they merely
interpret or apply the governing law incorrectly, but when
the award is ‘completely irrational,’ or exhibits a ‘manifest
disregard of law.’” Lagstein v. Certain Underwriters at
Lloyd’s, London, 607 F.3d 634, 641 (9th Cir. 2010) (citations
omitted).
In other words, we will not disturb even an incorrect
legal decision by an arbitrator unless it was completely
irrational or reflected manifest disregard of the law. For
example, courts do not “decide the rightness or wrongness
of the arbitrators’ contract interpretation”—we must only
decide “whether the panel’s decision ‘draws its essence’
from the contract.” Pac. Reinsurance Mgmt. Corp., 935 F.2d
at 1024 (quoting New Meiji Market v. United Food &
Comm’l Workers Loc. Union 905, 789 F.2d 1334, 1335 (9th
Cir. 1986)). We cannot “vacate an award simply because we

8

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

might have interpreted the contract” or statute “differently.”
Bosack v. Soward, 586 F.3d 1096, 1107 (9th Cir. 2009).
There is good reason for this generous deference. “Broad
judicial review of arbitration decisions could well jeopardize
the very benefits of arbitration, rendering informal
arbitration merely a prelude to a more cumbersome and
time-consuming judicial review process.” Kyocera Corp. v.
Prudential-Bache Trade Servs., Inc., 341 F.3d 987, 998 (9th
Cir. 2003). We heed Congress’ judgment that courts should
have limited ability to review arbitration awards. Id. Parties
engaging in arbitration may trade “greater certainty of
correct legal decisions by federal courts” for the efficiency
and flexibility of arbitration, but that is their choice to make.
Id.
A. We review factual errors even more deferentially
than legal ones and have only recognized the
“legally dispositive fact” exception.
Generally, an arbitrator’s “unsubstantiated factual
finding” cannot “justify federal court review of an arbitral
award under the FAA.” Aspic Eng’g & Constr. Co. v. ECC
Centcom Constructors LLC, 913 F.3d 1162, 1166 (9th Cir.
2019) (citation modified). As we have explained, “[i]t is not
enough to show that the panel committed an error—or even
a serious error.” Lagstein, 607 F.3d at 641 (quoting StoltNielsen S.A. v. AnimalFeeds Int’l Corp., 559 U.S. 662, 671
(2010) (citation modified)). Nor does a “[m]anifest disregard
of the facts” provide a basis to vacate an arbitration award.
Coutee v. Barington Cap. Grp., 336 F.3d 1128, 1133 (9th
Cir. 2003).
But we have recognized a narrow basis for vacatur where
the facts are “so firmly established that an arbitrator cannot
fail to recognize them without manifestly disregarding the

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

9

law.” HayDay Farms, 55 F. 4th at 1243 (citing Coutee, 336
F.3d at 1133). Under this “legally dispositive fact” vacatur
ground, the arbitrator’s factual error must be so “egregious”
and central to the legal issue that it amounts to manifestly
disregarding the law. See Pac. Reinsurance Mgmt. Corp.,
935 F.2d at 1025. The record thus must show that the
arbitrator intentionally ignored a critical, undisputed fact that
would have determined a legal issue in the arbitration.
Put another way, the “legally dispositive fact” basis for
vacatur applies if (1) the factual error was so critical to the
disputed legal issue that it determined the outcome of that
issue, and (2) the fact was so obvious and undisputed that the
arbitrator must have known about it when she decided the
legal issue.
B. The narrow “legally dispositive fact” vacatur
basis does not apply here.
The arbitrator’s factual error here—apparently not
remembering that the parties had agreed to bear their own
fees for the settled counterclaims—does not fall within the
narrow carveout for “legally dispositive facts.”
To be sure, VIP meets the first prong of the “legally
dispositive fact” basis for vacatur. Had the arbitrator
recognized that the parties agreed to pay their own fees for
the counterclaims, she would have ruled for VIP on this
question. But VIP cannot meet the second prong—that this
fact was so obvious that the arbitrator must have known
about it when she decided the fees motion. By the time the
arbitrator issued the final award, it had been over a year since
she had entered the order approving the stipulation to
dismiss the counterclaims. Critically, VIP did not rely on, or
remind the arbitrator of, the stipulation’s fees provision

10

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

when it objected to the motion for attorneys’ fees fourteen
months later.
Given that the fees request for the counterclaims was a
minor issue in the arbitration, the arbitrator may not have
remembered the details of that stipulation. And because VIP
did not mention that stipulation in its briefing, the arbitrator
awarded attorneys’ fees without distinguishing between time
spent on Gates’ claims and that devoted to the counterclaims.
The arbitrator merely explained that “[Gates] was successful
in this matter, and not to a de minimis degree” in awarding
attorneys’ fees.
Our case law illustrates the high bar set by the “legally
dispositive fact” basis—and how the error here does not
clear that bar. As we stated in HayDay Farms, the
“quintessential example” of a “legally dispositive fact”
comes from American Postal Workers Union v. U.S. Postal
Serv. 55 F. 4th at 1243; 682 F.2d 1280, 1284 (9th Cir. 1982).
In that case, the arbitrator held that a postal worker did not
participate in a strike, even though it was undisputed that he
did. American Postal Workers Union, 692 F.2d at 1284.
Whether the worker participated in a strike was the key issue
in the arbitration because it determined whether he would be
reinstated. Id. We held that the arbitrator was aware of this
fact but ignored it as a form of compromise. See id. at 1284
(“[W]e conclude that the award of reinstatement does not
reflect any doubt in the arbitrator’s mind as to whether
Murphy participated in a strike. Rather, the award
demonstrates the arbitrator’s belief that the penalty was too
severe and should be reduced.”). The arbitrator there was put
on notice of this critical fact but ignored it to apply his own
form of justice.

VIP MORTGAGE INCORPORATED V. GATES

11

That is unlike the facts here. While the stipulation here
determined the fees issue for the counterclaims, it was still
an ancillary matter in the arbitration with no bearing on
whether VIP ultimately violated the FLSA. Indeed, the
record indicates that the parties did not remind the arbitrator
of the stipulation she had entered over a year before she
entered the final arbitration award, which suggests that the
arbitrator forgot about it. We are not convinced that the
arbitrator ignored a legally dispositive fact to orchestrate a
desired outcome.
In short, this is not one of those “egregious cases” where
vacatur is warranted. Pac. Reinsurance Mgmt. Corp., 935
F.2d at 1025. Though the arbitrator may have erred, such
errors are risks inherent in arbitration proceedings. And
because VIP “accepted this risk when [it] consented to
arbitration[,] [it] cannot now claim the benefits of expanded
judicial review because the award[] [was] unfavorable to
[it].” Bosack, 586 F.3d at 1107.
CONCLUSION
We AFFIRM the district court’s rulings to confirm the
arbitration award and deny the motion to vacate the
arbitration award.

