FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
YULY KROYTOR,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 24-3444
D.C. No.
2:03-cr-00379JAM-CKD-1

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of California
John A. Mendez, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted August 22, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed October 21, 2025
Before: Morgan B. Christen, Kenneth K. Lee, and Daniel
A. Bress, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Lee

2

USA V. KROYTOR

SUMMARY *
Coram Nobis
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of Yuly
Kroytor’s second coram nobis petition seeking to vacate his
2003 conviction by guilty plea to health care fraud.
Based on that conviction, the government began removal
proceedings in 2008. Over a decade after his conviction,
Kroytor filed his first coram nobis petition, claiming that his
attorneys failed to adequately advise him that his conviction
could lead to his removal from the United States. Focusing
on the time period between 2014 and 2016, this court in 2020
affirmed the dismissal of the first petition, given Kroytor’s
delay in filing it. His second petition, in which he largely
recycles the same allegations, claims the attorney who
prepared his first coram nobis petition also provided
ineffective assistance of counsel.
The panel concluded that Kroytor is not entitled to relief
in his second coram nobis petition—this time under the
doctrine of laches. Kroytor’s delay prejudiced the
government’s ability to respond to his ineffective assistance
of counsel claim and to retry him for health care fraud. The
panel also rejected Kroytor’s claim that he exercised
reasonable diligence in filing his petition. Even if his
lawyers gave unsound legal advice, the sentencing judge in
2003 and a U.S. immigration official in 2007 informed him
that his conviction could subject him to removal. Kroytor
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. KROYTOR

3

was thus put on notice of the consequences of his conviction
and should have acted sooner to vacate it.

COUNSEL
Elliot C. Wong (argued), Assistant United States Attorney;
Nirav K. Desai, Assistant United States Attorney, Chief of
Appeals, Criminal Division; Michelle Beckwith, Acting
United States Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney,
United States Department of Justice, Sacramento,
California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Erin J. Radekin (argued), Law Office of Erin J. Radekin,
Sacramento, California, for Defendant-Appellant.

4

USA V. KROYTOR

OPINION
LEE, Circuit Judge:
In 2003, Yuly Kroytor—who became a U.S. permanent
resident in 1995—pleaded guilty to one count of health care
fraud in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1347. Based on that
conviction, the government began removal proceedings in
2008.
Over a decade after his conviction, Kroytor filed a coram
nobis petition to vacate his conviction, claiming that his
attorneys failed to adequately advise him that his conviction
could lead to his removal from the United States. Focusing
on the time period between 2014 and 2016, our court in 2020
affirmed the dismissal of Kroytor’s petition, given his delay
in filing it. United States v. Kroytor, 977 F.3d 957, 962–63
(9th Cir. 2020). Kroytor then filed a second petition—the
subject of this appeal—in which he largely recycles the same
allegations. Kroytor claims the attorney who prepared his
first coram nobis petition also provided ineffective
assistance of counsel.
Again, we conclude Kroytor is not entitled to coram
nobis relief—this time under the doctrine of laches. His
delay prejudiced the government’s ability to respond to his
ineffective assistance of counsel claim and to retry him for
health care fraud. We also reject Kroytor’s claim that he
exercised reasonable diligence in filing his petition. Even if
his lawyers gave unsound legal advice, the sentencing judge
in 2003 and a U.S. immigration official in 2007 informed
him that his conviction could subject him to removal.
Kroytor was thus put on notice of the consequences of his
conviction and should have acted sooner to vacate it. We

USA V. KROYTOR

5

thus affirm the district court’s denial of his coram nobis
petition.
BACKGROUND
I. Kroytor pleads guilty to health care fraud and
becomes removable from the United States.
Yuly Kroytor is a Canadian citizen who has been a
lawful permanent resident of the United States since 1995.
About five years after obtaining legal status, Kroytor
embarked on a multi-year fraudulent scheme: He bought
fake prescriptions from medical clinics and then submitted
false Medicaid/Medi-Cal bills for reimbursement. In 2002,
Kroytor learned federal authorities had begun to investigate
him for fraud. Soon after, he hired his first attorney, William
Graysen, who represented him in plea negotiations.
Kroytor was eventually charged with health care fraud
and aiding and abetting the same in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§§ 1347(1), (2). The government estimated that Kroytor
defrauded taxpayers of between $80,000 and $500,000.
Because the loss exceeded $10,000, the crime was an
aggravated felony that rendered Kroytor removable and
ineligible for certain forms of relief. See 8 U.S.C.
§ 101(a)(43)(M)(i); 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(a)(3).
Kroytor claims he asked his lawyer about potential
immigration consequences. Graysen allegedly counseled
Kroytor “not to worry” about his immigration status, urging
that Kroytor “had bigger problems, such as avoiding jail
time.” Kroytor decided to plead guilty and appeared before
the district court in September 2003. The district court asked
Kroytor whether he understood the conviction would make
him subject to removal. Kroytor said “yes” and pleaded
guilty.

6

USA V. KROYTOR

After the plea hearing, Kroytor could not reach Graysen,
and in early 2004, he hired a new attorney, Daniel
Behesnilian. Kroytor claims that Behesnilian told him that
it was too late to withdraw his plea (which was not
necessarily correct) but said that immigration authorities
would not discover Kroytor’s conviction if he paid
restitution in full. Kroytor was sentenced to 12 months of
probation and ordered to pay $80,000 in restitution. He paid
in full before sentencing.
In fall 2007, U.S. immigration authorities detained
Kroytor at the Canadian border on his return from a trip
outside the United States. An immigration official informed
him that his conviction rendered him inadmissible to the
United States. Though the government let him return home
to California, it placed Kroytor in removal proceedings in
February 2008.
II. Kroytor files his first coram nobis petition.
Over the next several years, Kroytor hired a series of
attorneys to represent him in immigration proceedings. In
August 2014, after learning that successfully contesting the
conviction may be the only way to prevent his removal,
Kroytor hired a criminal attorney, Clyde Blackmon, to
pursue post-conviction relief.
Nearly two years passed before this attorney filed for
post-conviction relief. He filed a coram nobis petition in
May 2016—almost nine years after immigration authorities
had detained Kroytor at the border. The petition addressed
only Behesnilian’s alleged advice that Kroytor could not
rescind his guilty plea and that he likely would not be
removed if he paid restitution. Blackmon allegedly told
Kroytor that he delayed filing because he was awaiting
further guidance on whether United States v. Kwan, 407 F.3d

USA V. KROYTOR

7

1005 (9th Cir. 2005)—in which we held that misadvising a
defendant about immigration consequences of a conviction
could constitute ineffective assistance of counsel—applied
retroactively to Kroytor’s case.
In June 2019, the district court denied Kroytor’s first
petition for relief, finding he had no valid reason for stalling
in filing. We affirmed, ruling that Kroytor unreasonably
delayed between 2014 and 2016 because uncertainty in the
law “is not itself a valid reason to delay filing a coram nobis
petition.” Kroytor I, 977 F.3d at 962. Because we concluded
that the delay between 2014 and 2016 (attributable to
Blackmon) provided a sufficient basis for affirming the
denial of Kroytor’s first petition, we did not address other
periods of possible unjustified delay. Id. We also noted that
Kroytor’s first coram nobis petition was based on “a claim
of ineffectiveness of the defense attorney who represented
him at sentencing,” i.e., Behesnilian, and we “express[ed] no
opinion about whether [Kroytor] could seek relief based on
the representation he received from any other attorney.” Id.
at 963 n.4.
III. Kroytor again requests coram nobis relief, and
the district court dismisses his second petition.
In late April 2021, Kroytor hired another criminal
attorney and then filed a second petition for coram nobis in
October 2021. He now claims he suffered ineffective
assistance of counsel from three attorneys: (1) Behesnilian,
who allegedly told him that paying restitution would likely
avoid removal, (2) Graysen, who supposedly “affirmatively
misadvised” Kroytor about the immigration consequences of
pleading guilty, and (3) Blackmon, who delayed filing
Kroytor’s first coram nobis petition. Of these three
attorneys, only Behesnilian is still living.

8

USA V. KROYTOR

The district court dismissed Kroytor’s second petition,
finding it barred under the doctrine of laches. The district
court held that Kroytor’s delay prejudiced the government
because Graysen and Blackmon have passed away and
evidence related to the health care fraud charge has been
destroyed. The court concluded Kroytor did not meet his
burden to show that he exercised reasonable diligence in
filing because he failed to (1) seek post-conviction relief
between 2007 and 2014 after authorities at the border
informed him that his conviction made him inadmissible,
and (2) exercise reasonable diligence in waiting a year after
our decision in Kroytor I to file a claim implicating
Blackmon. Kroytor now appeals.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review a district court’s dismissal of a coram nobis
petition on the basis of laches for abuse of discretion. See
Telink, Inc. v. United States, 24 F.3d 42, 47, 47 n.10 (9th Cir.
1994). Abuse of discretion occurs only “if the district court
bases its decision on an erroneous legal standard or on
clearly erroneous findings of facts.” Pinkette Clothing, Inc.
v. Cosmetic Warriors Ltd., 894 F.3d 1015, 1025 (9th Cir.
2018) (citation omitted).
DISCUSSION
I. The district court properly held that laches bars
Kroytor’s second coram nobis petition.
Coram nobis is an extraordinary remedy that allows a
court to correct an error in light of new evidence. United
States v. Morgan, 346 U.S. 502, 511 (1954). Unlike a habeas
petition, coram nobis relief is available to a person who is
not detained by the government.

USA V. KROYTOR

9

One of the defenses to a coram nobis petition is the
equitable doctrine of laches. United States v. Riedl, 496 F.3d
1003, 1006 (9th Cir. 2007). When invoking laches, the
government must first show that unreasonable delay
prejudiced the government. Id. at 1008. Both the
government’s ability to respond to the coram nobis petition
and to mount a retrial are relevant factors in the prejudice
analysis. Telink, Inc. v. United States, 24 F.3d 42, 48 (9th
Cir. 1994). Once the government shows it has suffered
prejudice, the burden then shifts to the petitioner to either
rebut the government’s claim of prejudice or show the delay
fell within the petitioner’s “exercise[ of] reasonable
diligence” in filing the claim. Riedl, 496 F.3d at 1008. If
the petitioner cannot do either, his coram nobis claim fails.
Id.
A. The government made an unrebutted prima facie
showing of prejudice.
The government satisfied its burden to show prejudice in
two ways.
First, the deaths of key witnesses—two of Kroytor’s
attorneys who allegedly provided ineffective assistance of
counsel—create a prima facie showing of prejudice. Cf.
Telink, 24 F.3d at 48 (finding that the government was
prejudiced by the death of a witness). Kroytor offers his
version of conversations with attorneys Blackmon and
Graysen. But neither Blackmon nor Graysen is available to
share their side of the story, including offering plausible
alternative explanations, more context, or rebuttals. And not
only are the attorneys unavailable, but Graysen’s records
have since been destroyed and the status of Blackmon’s
records is unknown.

10

USA V. KROYTOR

Second, the government makes another, independent
prima facie showing of prejudice because it faces obstacles
in mounting a re-prosecution over twenty years after
Kroytor’s original conviction. Because of the passage of
time, evidence of Kroytor’s health care fraud may be lost or
unavailable. The government, for example, had interviewed
numerous doctors and patients, many of whom may not be
easily found, may be deceased, or have faded memories. Cf.
Telink, 24 F.3d at 48 (affirming prejudice because the
government could have preserved its case but for the
petitioner’s delay); Riedl, 496 F.3d at 1008 (holding
unavailability of evidence prejudiced government).
Kroytor responds that the government may still notch a
conviction at retrial because it could rely on other evidence.
But the government need not show that it would lose at
retrial to show prejudice; it only needs to show that lack of
certain evidence would “hamper the government’s ability to
prove” its claims. Riedl, 496 F.3d at 1008. The government
has met that bar. Kroytor also half-heartedly argues the
prosecutor involved in Kroytor’s plea negotiations might be
able to fill in some of the missing details related to his
ineffective assistance of counsel claim. But the prosecutor
could not testify about any conversations that Kroytor had
with his attorneys outside the prosecutor’s earshot.
B. Kroytor did not exercise reasonable diligence.
We also hold that Kroytor failed to show reasonable
diligence in filing his coram nobis petition—given that he
was put on notice in 2003 and 2007 that his conviction could
make him removable.
Kroytor relies on United States v. Kwan to argue that his
delay was “reasonable.” 407 F.3d 1005 (9th Cir. 2004). We
concluded there that a petitioner’s near six-year delay in

USA V. KROYTOR

11

attacking his conviction from the time of his guilty plea did
not defeat his claim to coram nobis relief, ruling that “[t]he
law does not require [a petitioner] to challenge his
conviction at the earliest opportunity” but merely “requires
[him] to have sound reasons for not doing so.” 407 F.3d at
1011, 1014. When he pleaded guilty, Kwan’s defense
counsel allegedly advised him that removal on account of his
conviction was “not a serious possibility.” Id. at 1008. But
in 1996, within months of his conviction, the government
issued Kwan a Notice to Appear. Id. at 1008-09. His
immigration lawyer advised him that he was not likely
deportable—and the immigration judge agreed, finding that
his conviction was not an aggravated felony. Id. at 1009.
But in February 2001, after the government issued Kwan a
second Notice to Appear, a different immigration judge
ruled that Kwan’s conviction did qualify as an aggravated
felony. Id. Shortly after, Kwan petitioned for coram nobis
relief. Id. Kroytor contends that his situation is like Kwan’s
because his attorney at first dismissed the serious possibility
of removal, telling Kroytor “not to worry” about it.
The district court distinguished Kwan, reasoning that
Kwan’s attorney affirmatively advised him not to file for
habeas relief while he challenged his removability (while
Kroytor’s lawyers did not tell him to forgo collateral relief).
We disagree with this reading of Kwan. Nothing in Kwan
suggests that his attorney expressly told him not to seek postconviction relief; Kwan’s attorney, like Kroytor’s, was silent
about seeking this avenue of relief. 407 F.3d at 1013.
But Kwan still does not help Kroytor. Contrary to
Kroytor’s suggestion, Kwan does not stand for the broad
proposition that a delay in seeking coram nobis relief is de
facto “reasonable” just because the petitioner claims he
relied on counsel’s advice. A petitioner still must show that

12

USA V. KROYTOR

he had “sound reasons” for the delay based on all the facts.
Id. at 1014. In Kwan, we held that Kwan had “sound
reasons” for his delay in filing for post-conviction relief
because an immigration judge at first confirmed that his
lawyer’s advice was correct—Kwan’s deportation was not a
“serious possibility” because his conviction was not an
aggravated felony. See id. at 1008. It was only after a
second immigration judge determined that Kwan had
committed an aggravated felony that Kwan had “reason to
conclude that his criminal defense counsel had in fact erred
. . . by advising him that there was ‘no serious possibility’ of
deportation.” Id. at 1014. And once Kwan learned that his
attorney may have been mistaken, he immediately sought
post-conviction relief.
In contrast, Kroytor did not have any comparably “sound
reasons” to justify his tardiness in filing his coram nobis
petition. No judge, immigration or federal, told him that he
could not be removed or confirmed his lawyer’s errant
advice. To the contrary, the district court judge in 2003
asked Kroytor whether he understood that pleading guilty
would make him removable from the United States—and
Kroytor responded “yes.” Then in 2007, U.S. immigration
authorities at the border again told him that his conviction
rendered him inadmissible to the United States. This
encounter with immigration authorities in 2007, in
particular,
specifically
contradicted
Behesnilian’s
assurances that if Kroytor paid his restitution in full,
immigration authorities would not find out about his
conviction. Even assuming Kroytor’s attorneys provided
inaccurate or incomplete advice, Kroytor was put on notice
in 2003 (by a federal judge) and in 2007 (by an immigration
official) that he could be removed based on his conviction,
and at least by 2007 he knew or had reason to question his

USA V. KROYTOR

13

counsel’s advice otherwise. In sum, laches applies because
Kroytor did not exercise reasonable diligence in seeking
relief.
In light of Kroytor’s delay between at least 2007 and
2014, we have no occasion to consider whether Kroytor
additionally delayed in pursuing his second coram nobis
petition after our decision in Kroytor I. Finally, although
Kroytor notes our remark in Kroytor I that “[w]e do not
doubt that Kroytor was earnest in trying to resolve his
problem,” 977 F.3d at 963, that observation does not resolve
this case in Kroytor’s favor. That Kroytor may have been
earnest in trying to resolve his problem does not mean he
pursued the relief at issue here with reasonable diligence.
We AFFIRM the denial of Kroytor’s petition for coram
nobis.

