FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
SCOTT RAYMOND KEAST,

No. 24-1253
D.C. No.
3:22-cr-00297HZ-1
OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Marco A. Hernández, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted February 7, 2025
Portland, Oregon
Filed September 10, 2025
Before: Carlos T. Bea, Lucy H. Koh, and Jennifer Sung,
Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Sung

2

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

SUMMARY*
Criminal Law
The panel vacated a sentence and remanded for
resentencing in a case in which Scott Keast pled guilty to one
count of felon in possession of a firearm in violation of 18
U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).
When Keast was sentenced for that federal crime, he had
a prior, Oregon conviction for aggravated “unlawful use of
a weapon.” See Or. Rev. Stat. §§ 161.610, 166.220(1)(a).
The district court concluded that Keast’s prior conviction
qualified as a “crime of violence” under the Sentencing
Guidelines, U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1), which increased the
recommended sentence.
Keast contended that the district court’s crime-ofviolence analysis was incorrect. The panel agreed. The
panel held that because the Oregon statutes of conviction do
not require “as an element the use, attempted use, or
threatened use of physical force against the person of
another,” Keast’s prior conviction is not a crime of violence
under the Sentencing Guidelines. The district court
therefore erred when determining Keast’s base offense level
and calculating the Sentencing Guidelines range.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

3

COUNSEL
Suzanne Miles (argued), Criminal Appellate Chief; Sarah
Barr, Thomas H. Edmonds, and Lewis Burkhart, Assistant
United States Attorneys; Natalie K. Wight, United States
Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Portland, Oregon; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Andrew M. Kohlmetz (argued), The Law Office of Andrew
M. Kohlmetz LLC, Portland, Oregon, for DefendantAppellant.
OPINION
SUNG, Circuit Judge:
Scott Keast challenges his 46-month sentence for one
count of felon in possession of a firearm in violation of 18
U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). When Keast was sentenced for that
federal crime, he had a prior, Oregon conviction for
aggravated “unlawful use of a weapon.” See Or. Rev. Stat.
§§ 161.610, 166.220(1)(a). The district court concluded that
Keast’s prior conviction qualifies as a “crime of violence”
under the Sentencing Guidelines, U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1),
which increased the recommended sentence. Keast contends
the district court’s crime-of-violence analysis was incorrect,
and we agree. Because the Oregon statutes of conviction do
not require “as an element the use, attempted use, or
threatened use of physical force against the person of
another,” Keast’s prior conviction is not a crime of violence
under the Sentencing Guidelines. We therefore vacate his
sentence and remand for resentencing.

4

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

I. BACKGROUND
In 2024, Keast pled guilty in federal court to one count
of felon in possession of a firearm in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(g)(1). At that time, Keast had a prior Oregon felony
conviction for “unlawful use of a weapon,” under the
“possession” subsection, Or. Rev. Stat. § 166.220(1)(a), as
aggravated by Oregon’s firearm enhancement statute, id.
§ 161.610. See infra, Section III (explaining how the firearm
enhancement statute is applied to create aggravated versions
of state law crimes).
At sentencing, the parties disputed whether Keast’s prior
conviction qualifies as a “crime of violence,” as defined
under the Sentencing Guidelines, § 4B1.2(a)(1). The district
court concluded that it does. That conclusion increased
Keast’s base offense level from 14 to 20, which, in turn,
increased his Guidelines imprisonment range from 30–37
months to 51–63 months. See U.S.S.G. § 2K2.1(a)(4)(A),
(6). The district court sentenced Keast to a below-guidelines
sentence of 46 months’ imprisonment. Keast timely
appealed.1
After receiving briefing and hearing argument in this
case, we concluded that Keast’s prior Oregon conviction is
not a crime of violence under the Sentencing Guidelines.
This meant that, when the district court sentenced Keast, it
should have considered a recommended Guidelines range of
30–37 months, instead of 51–63 months. By the time this
case was argued, however, Keast had already served
approximately 28 months in custody. Thus, it was possible
1

The government does not dispute that Keast’s appeal is permitted under
his plea agreement, which specifically reserved his right to appeal the
district court’s determination regarding his “base offense level based on
his prior Oregon conviction for Unlawful Use of a Firearm.”

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

5

that, if the mandate issued immediately, the district court on
remand would impose a sentence for which Keast would be
eligible for immediate, or at least imminent, release.
Accordingly, we issued our dispositive order promptly, on
February 10, 2025, stating that an opinion explaining the
disposition would follow in due course. See United States v.
Perez-Garcia, 96 F.4th 1166, 1172–74 (9th Cir. 2024)
(explaining that appellate courts may at times bifurcate an
expedited order from an opinion explaining its reasoning
when an immediate ruling is warranted). We now provide
the rationale for our dispositive order.2
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
“Whether a prior offense constitutes a crime of violence
under the Sentencing Guidelines is a legal question that we
review de novo.” United States v. Castro, 71 F.4th 735, 737
(9th Cir. 2023).
III. DISCUSSION
The Sentencing Guidelines instruct a sentencing court to
apply a base offense level of 20 if “the defendant committed
any part of the instant offense subsequent to sustaining one
felony conviction of . . . a crime of violence.” U.S.S.G.
§ 2K2.1(a)(4). Section 4B1.2(a) in turn defines a “crime of
violence” as “any offense under federal or state law,
punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding one year,”
that either falls within a list of enumerated offenses, see
2

The government filed a motion to recall the mandate of the dispositive
order, seeking to “preserv[e] [its] ability to seek further review of the
Court’s decision regarding the issue presented on appeal.” We denied the
motion but clarified that “[a]fter [the] opinion explaining the disposition
in this case is filed, the government may seek further review of the
Court’s decision by filing a petition for panel rehearing or rehearing en
banc accompanied by a motion to recall the mandate.”

6

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

§ 4B1.2(a)(2), or else “has as an element the use, attempted
use, or threatened use of physical force against the person of
another,” § 4B1.2(a)(1). The latter definition is referred to as
“the elements clause” of § 4B1.2(a). Castro, 71 F.4th at 738.
“To determine whether a felony is a crime of violence”
under § 4B1.2(a), “we apply the categorical approach.” Id.
This approach requires the reviewing court to “ignore what
actually occurred during the defendant’s prior felony” and
instead “consider only whether the prior felony’s elements
cover conduct that sweeps more broadly than the conduct
covered by § 4B1.2(a)’s crime-of-violence definitions.” Id.
(quotation marks and citation omitted). “If so, then the prior
felony is not categorically a crime of violence and cannot be
used to increase the base offense level under § 2K2.1(a).” Id.
In conducting this analysis, we “must presume that [the
defendant’s prior conviction] rested upon nothing more than
the least of the acts criminalized.” Id. at 739 (quotation
marks and citation omitted).
If the statute of conviction “criminalizes more conduct
than the federal generic offense, the court may consider
whether the statute is divisible.” United States v. Willis, 795
F.3d 986, 989 (9th Cir. 2015). “A divisible statute is one that
comprises multiple, alternative versions of the crime, at least
one of which corresponds to the generic offense.” United
States v. Sahagun-Gallegos, 782 F.3d 1094, 1098 (9th Cir.
2015) (cleaned up). If the statute of conviction is divisible,
then “we may examine a limited class of judicially
noticeable documents to determine whether the alternative
corresponding to the generic offense was the basis of the
conviction.” Id.
At issue in this case is Keast’s prior conviction for
“unlawful use of a weapon with a firearm,” a felony offense

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

7

that arises from two Oregon statutes. The first statute, Or.
Rev. Stat. § 166.220, prohibits the “unlawful use of a
weapon” or “UUW.” 3 As relevant here, § 166.220(1)(a)
states that a person commits this offense if the person
“[a]ttempts to use unlawfully against another, or carries or
possesses with intent to use unlawfully against another, any
dangerous or deadly weapon.” The UUW offense is a felony.
Id. § 166.220(3).
The second statute, Or. Rev. Stat. § 161.610, creates a
sentencing enhancement for the use of a firearm during the
commission of a felony. Section § 161.610(2) provides that
“[t]he use or threatened use of a firearm, whether operable
or inoperable, by a defendant during the commission of a
felony may be pleaded in the accusatory instrument and
proved at trial as an element in aggravation of the crime.”
The conduct proscribed by § 161.610(2) “is expressly
designated an element.” State v. Flores, 313 P.3d 378, 381
(Or. Ct. App. 2013). Adding this element to a felony offense
“creates a new crime, the aggravated crime, which is
separate from the ‘unaggravated crime.’” Id. Here, Keast
was convicted of the aggravated crime of UUW “with a
firearm.”
We previously considered Oregon’s UUW statute, Or.
Rev. Stat. § 166.220, in United States v. Willis, 795 F.3d 986
(9th Cir. 2015). There, we concluded that § 166.220(1)(a) is
“divisible” and consists of two crimes, “(1) attempting to use
a deadly weapon unlawfully against another (the ‘attempt
offense’), and (2) carrying or possessing a deadly weapon
3

Oregon state courts typically abbreviate “unlawful use of a weapon” as
“UUW” and refer to a § 166.220 conviction as a “UUW conviction.” See
generally, e.g., State v. McAuliffe, 366 P.3d 1206, 1208–09 (Or. Ct. App.
2016).

8

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

with intent to use it unlawfully (the ‘possession offense’).”
Id. at 995. We held that the UUW-attempt offense
“constitutes a crime of violence as defined in § 4B1.2(a)(1)
of the Sentencing Guidelines.” Id. However, we concluded
that the UUW-possession offense “does not include as an
element ‘the use, attempted use, or threatened use of
physical force against the person of another.’” Id. at 996
(quoting U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1)).
The parties agree that Keast was convicted of the UUWpossession offense in § 166.220(1)(a). The parties also agree
that, under Willis, the UUW-possession offense, by itself, is
not a crime of violence. 4 The parties dispute, however,
whether Keast’s aggravated conviction for the UUWpossession offense “with a firearm” is a crime of violence.
Therefore, the question presented is whether adding
Oregon’s firearm enhancement statute, Or. Rev. Stat.
§ 161.610(2), to the UUW-possession offense transforms

4

At the time Willis was decided, the Sentencing Guidelines definition of
a crime of violence included a “residual clause” that encompassed any
offense that “otherwise involves conduct that presents a serious potential
risk of physical injury to another.” 795 F.3d at 996. Willis concluded that
because the UUW-possession offense in § 166.220(1)(a) does not
include as an element “the use, attempted use, or threatened use of
physical force against the person of another,” it could qualify as a crime
of violence “only if it falls within the residual clause.” Id. The court then
remanded to the district court to determine which provision of
§ 166.220(1)(a) applied to the defendant’s conviction. See id. at 996–97.
The residual clause has since been removed from U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a).
Because Willis concluded that the UUW-possession offense could
“constitute[] a ‘crime of violence’ only if it falls within the residual
clause,” id. at 996 (emphasis added), under the current Sentencing
Guidelines definition, the UUW-possession offense in § 166.220(1)(a) is
not a crime of violence.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

9

that offense into a crime of violence. For the reasons below,
we conclude that it does not.
A. Statutory Interpretation
Under the categorical approach, we must determine
whether the elements of the aggravated UUW-possession
offense “cover conduct that sweeps more broadly than the
conduct covered by § 4B1.2(a)’s crime-of-violence
definitions.” Castro, 71 F.4th at 738 (quotation marks and
citation omitted). We begin by analyzing the text of the state
statute, id., employing “ordinary tools of statutory
interpretation, including state case law interpreting the
statutes in question,” United States v. DeFrance, 124 F.4th
814, 820 (9th Cir. 2024).
We conclude, first, that Oregon’s firearm enhancement
statute by itself does not include as an element “the use,
attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against the
person of another.” U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1). The firearm
enhancement statute applies to “[t]he use or threatened use
of a firearm, whether operable or inoperable, by a defendant
during the commission of a felony.” Or. Rev. Stat.
§ 161.610(2). Although this language requires the use or
threatened use of a firearm, it does not, on its face, require
the use or threatened use of a firearm “against the person of
another.” U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1).
In contrast, other Oregon statutes criminalizing the use
of weapons do specifically require use of the weapon
“against another,” or similar language. See, e.g., Or. Rev.
Stat. § 166.220(1)(a) (“A person commits the crime of
unlawful use of a weapon if the person . . . [a]ttempts to use
unlawfully against another, or carries or possesses with
intent to use unlawfully against another, any dangerous or
deadly weapon . . . .”) (emphasis added); id. § 166.190

10

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

(“Any person over the age of 12 years who, with or without
malice, purposely points or aims any loaded or empty pistol,
gun, revolver or other firearm, at or toward any other person
within range of the firearm, except in self-defense, shall be
fined upon conviction . . . .”) (emphasis added). The Oregon
legislature knows how to include such a requirement and
declined to do so in § 161.610(2). Cf. Astrue v. Ratliff, 560
U.S. 586, 595 (2010) (explaining that Congress’s “express”
use of statutory language shows that it “knows how” to
achieve a statutory effect “where it desires to do so,” and
courts are “reluctant” to read that effect into related
provisions “absent clear textual evidence supporting such an
interpretation”).
The government also fails to identify any Oregon state
court decision interpreting § 161.610(2) to require the use or
threatened use of a firearm against another person, even
though Oregon courts have narrowed the statute in other
ways. See, e.g., State v. Harris, 25 P.3d 404, 407 (Or. Ct.
App. 2001) (clarifying that “use or threatened use” of a
firearm refers to the “discharge or threatened discharge” of
a firearm); State v. Pies, 802 P.2d 702, 704 (Or. Ct. App.
1990) (holding that a defendant must “personally” use or
threaten to use the firearm).
We conclude that the firearm enhancement statute does
not require the use or threatened use of a firearm against the
person of another. Accordingly, neither the firearm
enhancement nor the UUW-possession offense, by
themselves, include as an element “the use, attempted use,
or threatened use of physical force against the person of
another.” U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1); see Willis, 795 F.3d at
996. However, as noted, under Oregon law, the firearm
enhancement creates a new crime, the “aggravated crime,”
by “adding” an “element” to the UUW-possession offense.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

11

Flores, 313 P.3d at 381. The government argues that the
elements of the aggravated UUW-possession offense, when
considered together, require the use of physical force against
the person of another.
To address the government’s argument, we begin by
reading the combined elements of the aggravated offense
together. UUW-possession with a firearm requires:
(1) “[t]he use or threatened use of a firearm, whether
operable or inoperable, by [the] defendant during the
commission of” the felony of (2) carrying or possessing;
(3) a dangerous or deadly weapon; (4) with intent to use it
unlawfully; (5) against another. Or. Rev. Stat. § 161.610(2)
(firearm enhancement); id. § 166.220(1)(a) (UUWpossession); Willis, 795 F.3d at 996 (listing elements of
UUW-possession). “[U]se or threatened use of a firearm”
means the discharge or threatened discharge of the firearm.
Harris, 25 P.3d at 407.
The government argues that because the aggravated
UUW-possession offense requires the “use or threatened use
of a firearm . . . during the commission of a felony” that, in
turn, requires “intent to use” the firearm unlawfully “against
another,” the use or threatened use of the firearm must be
against the defendant’s intended target. The government
refers to this potential limitation of the aggravated offense as
the “intended-target” requirement. Keast contends that the
aggravated offense does not impose any such intended-target
requirement; rather, he argues, the aggravated offense covers
instances in which a defendant—while intending to use a
firearm against a target in the future—discharges the weapon
at something other than a person.
We agree with Keast’s interpretation of the aggravated
offense. The government’s “intended-target” theory is not

12

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

supported by either the statutory text or state court
interpretations of that text. See Castro, 71 F.4th at 738;
DeFrance, 124 F.4th at 820. The text of the UUWpossession statute, as supplemented by the firearm
enhancement statute, does not state that the use or threatened
use of a firearm must be “against the intended target.”
Rather, the statute states that the use or threatened use of a
firearm must be “during the commission” of the
corresponding felony. Or. Rev. Stat. § 161.610(2). The
terms “during the commission” and “against the intended
target” are not interchangeable: A defendant could use or
threaten to use a firearm during the commission of the
UUW-possession offense without using or threatening to use
the firearm against his intended target.
Consider a defendant who, right before setting out to find
and shoot his intended target, fires his weapon into the
ground to confirm the gun is loaded, but is then intercepted
before reaching his intended target. As Keast argues, this
defendant has used a firearm while possessing the weapon
with intent to use it unlawfully against another, as required
by the text of the aggravated UUW-possession offense. See
Or. Rev. Stat. §§ 161.610(2), 166.220(1)(a). The defendant
has not, however, used the weapon against his intended
target, or any other person. As this example illustrates, the
text of the aggravated offense lacks any “intended-target”
requirement. Indeed, the government arguably concedes this
point in its brief when it refers to this hypothetical
prosecution as a “theoretical possibility” under the statute.
Oregon state court decisions do not support the
government’s interpretation of UUW-possession with a
firearm. Indeed, at least two state court decisions undermine
the government’s intended-target theory. In State v. Gilbert,
781 P.2d 389 (Or. Ct. App. 1989), the Oregon Court of

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

13

Appeals considered a defendant’s challenge to the
application of the same firearm enhancement at issue here,
Or. Rev. Stat. § 161.610, to a different state crime, felon in
possession of a firearm (“FIP”). Id. at 390; see also Or. Rev.
Stat. § 166.270(1) (FIP offense). The defendant argued,
among other things, that the firearm enhancement “applies
only to crimes where use or threatened use of a firearm
actually facilitates or furthers the underlying crime.” Id. The
court rejected this argument, holding that “[n]othing in the
language of [§] 161.610 requires that the use or threatened
use of a firearm be in furtherance of the felony charged.” Id.
Here, the government’s intended-target interpretation of
§ 161.610 is a narrower version of the interpretation that the
Gilbert court rejected. That is, under the government’s
interpretation, § 161.610’s firearm enhancement applies
only if the defendant uses or threatens to use the firearm
against his intended victim. Such use necessarily “furthers”
the underlying crime of UUW-possession—i.e., possessing
a weapon with intent to use it unlawfully against the target.
See Or. Rev. Stat. § 166.220(1)(a). But Gilbert held that
§ 161.610 applies even if the defendant’s use of the weapon
does not further the underlying crime. Therefore, the Gilbert
court impliedly rejected the government’s intended-target
theory and instead suggested that § 161.610 applies whether
or not the defendant’s use or threatened use of the firearm is
against his intended target.5
5

Even if we assume (contrary to the Gilbert court’s conclusion) that
§ 161.610’s firearm enhancement applies only when the firearm is used
“in furtherance of” the underlying crime, that limiting construction
would not necessarily lead us to adopt the government’s interpretation
of UUW-possession with a firearm. A defendant could fire a gun in
furtherance of his intent to shoot another person without actually
shooting at that person. The hypothetical discussed above—in which a

14

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

State v. Garibay, 478 P.3d 1006 (Or. Ct. App. 2020), also
undermines the government’s intended-target theory. In
Garibay, the defendant and two acquaintances drove to a
nearby house after hearing that a group of men were
“hanging around” the house. Id. at 1007. When they arrived,
one of the defendant’s acquaintances began fighting with a
man referred to as “F.” Id. at 1007–08. The defendant
eventually got out of the car and shot a different person,
referred to as “M,” in the foot. Id. at 1008. The state charged
the defendant with, among other things, aggravated UUWpossession against F. Id. at 1008–09. Although the Oregon
Court of Appeals did not discuss the state’s application of
the firearm enhancement in Garibay, the decision is
inconsistent with the government’s intended-target theory.6
The defendant in Garibay was charged with the use or
threatened use of a firearm while possessing with intent to
shoot F, even though the defendant actually used the weapon
against a different individual, M. Id. In other words, the state
charged the firearm enhancement to the UUW-possession
offense as to F, even though the defendant did not actually
use his weapon against F, his alleged intended target.7
None of the other state court cases cited by the
government support its intended-target theory. The
defendant fires his weapon at the ground to test it before setting out to
find his target—illustrates that point.
6

The Garibay court reversed the defendant’s conviction on the ground
that there was insufficient evidence to establish the defendant’s liability
for even the unaggravated UUW-possession offense, because the
evidence did not establish that the defendant “intended to use the gun
against F.” Id. at 1010.
7

Although the state argued that the defendant “shot M to ‘assist’ [the
defendant’s acquaintance] in his fight with F,” it did not argue that the
defendant used or threatened to use the gun against F. Id. at 1009.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

15

government asserts that State v. McAuliffe, 366 P.3d 1206
(Or. Ct. App. 2016), shows “that [the UUW-possession
offense’s] intent requirement is victim specific,” meaning
that “each intended target is a separate unit of prosecution.”
The defendant in McAuliffe was charged with the aggravated
UUW-possession offense after he admitted to police that he
had “serious thoughts about shooting at” an airplane flying
over his property, and that he had “held a shotgun shell up to
the airplane as it flew by in order to send the pilot a message
to stop flying over his house.” Id. at 1208 (cleaned up).
Because the defendant did not raise the issue, the McAuliffe
court expressly declined to address whether the evidence
was sufficient to establish that the defendant had “used or
threatened to use” the shotgun in a manner that subjected
him to the firearm enhancement. See id. at 1209–10, 1210
n.2. But even assuming that the firearm enhancement was
validly applied in McAuliffe, that case simply demonstrates
that the aggravated UUW-possession offense can be applied
where the defendant uses or threatens to use a firearm against
his intended target. McAuliffe does not establish that the
aggravated UUW-possession offense can only be applied in
such circumstances, as the categorical approach requires.
The government also relies on State v. Dentel, 354 P.3d
753 (Or. Ct. App. 2015), for the proposition that the
“intended-target requirement is . . . what prevents a firearmenhanced UUW conviction from merging with a firearmenhanced felon in possession conviction” under Oregon law.
In Dentel, the Oregon Court of Appeals determined, on plain
error review, that a guilty verdict for the crime of UUW with
a firearm does not necessarily merge with a guilty verdict for
the crime of FIP with a firearm. Id. at 755–57. In relevant
part, the court concluded that the state had presented a
“plausible argument” that “intent to use [a] weapon

16

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

. . . unlawfully against another person” is an element of the
aggravated UUW-possession offense but not of the
aggravated FIP offense. Id. at 757–58. This conclusion does
not, however, support the government’s position here. It is
undisputed that the aggravated UUW-possession offense
requires intent to use a weapon against another person. See
Or. Rev. Stat. § 166.220(1)(a). Dentel does not address the
question at issue here, which is whether the aggravated
UUW-possession offense requires that a defendant’s use or
threatened use of a firearm be against their intended target.
In sum, the government’s intended-target theory is
inconsistent with the statutes of conviction facially and as
interpreted by state courts. We therefore conclude that
Keast’s prior conviction for UUW-possession with a firearm
does not include as an element “the use, attempted use, or
threatened use of physical force against the person of
another.” U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1).
B. The “Realistic Probability” Standard
The government alternatively argues that even assuming
the aggravated UUW-possession offense does not facially
require the use of a firearm against another, Keast’s prior
conviction constitutes a crime of violence because Keast
establishes only a “theoretical possibility” that the statutes
could be applied in a way that does not meet the Sentencing
Guidelines definition. The government emphasizes that
Keast has not identified an actual case in which an Oregon
court has applied the aggravated UUW-possession offense
to a defendant who did not use or threaten to use a firearm
against another person. Here, the government relies on
Gonzalez v. Duenas-Alvarez, where the Supreme Court held
that “to find that a state statute creates a crime outside the
generic definition of a listed crime in a federal statute” there

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

17

must be “a realistic probability, not a theoretical possibility,
that the State would apply its statute to conduct that falls
outside the generic definition of a crime.” 549 U.S. 183, 193
(2007).
Duenas-Alvarez concerned a provision of the
Immigration and Nationality Act (“INA”) that instructs that
certain noncitizens convicted of one of the offenses listed in
8 U.S.C. § 1227(a) may be deported. Id. at 185. To
determine whether a conviction qualifies as a listed offense,
federal courts apply a version of the categorical approach.
First, because the listed offenses are not defined by the INA,
a court must determine the “generic” definition of the listed
offense by determining how it is defined in “the criminal
codes of most States.” Id. at 186 (citation omitted). Second,
a court must compare the statute of conviction to the generic
definition. Id. at 186–87. In Duenas-Alvarez, the Supreme
Court considered Duenas-Alvarez’s argument that the
California theft offense was broader than the generic
definition of “theft” because the state offense covered
“aiding and abetting.” Id. at 188–89. The Court concluded
that both the California and generic theft offenses covered
“aiding and abetting” a theft, and then explained that the
California theft statute would be a categorical match for
generic theft unless Duenas-Alvarez could show that
California law was somehow “special”—i.e., that California
courts applied the state’s statute to cover aiding and abetting
conduct beyond that which most other states criminalized.
Id. at 190–91.
Duenas-Alvarez tried to make this showing by pointing
to various state court decisions that, in his view,
demonstrated that California’s application of its statute
swept more broadly than the generic offense. See id. at 190–
93. The Court, however, disagreed with Duenas-Alvarez’s

18

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

reading of the state cases. Id. It then explained that “to find
that a state statute creates a crime outside the generic
definition of a listed crime,” there must be a “realistic
probability, not a theoretical possibility, that the State would
apply its statute to conduct that falls outside the generic
definition.” Id. at 193. To demonstrate this “realistic
probability,” the litigant could either “show that the statute
was so applied in his own case,” or else “point to . . . other
cases in which the state courts in fact did apply the statute in
the special (nongeneric) manner for which he argues.” Id.
Because Duenas-Alvarez could not make this showing, the
Court rejected his argument that California’s statute
criminalized conduct that fell “outside the generic definition
of ‘theft.’” Id. at 193–94.
There are two problems with the government’s reliance
on Duenas-Alvarez here. First, as we recently recognized,
the Supreme Court’s decision in United States v. Taylor, 596
U.S. 845 (2022), suggests that Duenas-Alvarez’s realistic
probability standard “may have no application” in a
case where, as here, “the inquiry posed by federal law is
whether a state law has the use of force as an element.”
Defrance, 124 F.4th at 819 n.7. To understand why, it helps
to review the Court’s reasoning in Taylor.
In Taylor, the issue presented was whether the felony of
“attempted Hobbs Act robbery” under 18 U.S.C. § 1951(a)
categorically qualifies as a “crime of violence” under 18
U.S.C. § 924(c)(3)(A)’s “elements clause.” 596 U.S. at 848.
The elements clause of § 924(c)(3)(A) defines “crime of
violence” as a felony offense that includes “as an element
the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

19

against the person or property of another.”8 The Court first
explained that, when determining whether there is a
categorical match between attempted Hobbs Act robbery
and the elements clause of § 924(c)(3)(A), “the only relevant
question” is whether “attempted Hobbs Act robbery”
“always requires the government to prove . . . as an element
of its case . . . the use, attempted use, or threatened use of
force.” 596 U.S. at 850. After comparing the elements of
attempted Hobbs Act robbery under § 1951(a) and the
elements of “crime of violence” under § 924(c)(3)(A), the
Court concluded that the answer to that question was “no.”
Id. at 852 (“Simply put, no element of attempted Hobbs Act
robbery requires proof that the defendant used, attempted to
use, or threatened to use force.”).9

8

Section 924(c)(3)(A)’s definition of “crime of violence” is similar to
but broader than the Sentencing Guidelines definition of “crime of
violence” at issue here: § 924(c)(3)(A) includes the use, attempted use,
or threatened use of force against another person or their property, while
U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1) is limited to force against another person.
9

The Court’s reasons for concluding that attempted Hobbs Act robbery
“does not require the government to prove that the defendant used,
attempted to use, or even threatened to use force against another person
or his property” also support our conclusion that UUW-possession with
a firearm does not require proof of the use of force against another
person. Taylor, 596 U.S. at 851. The Court explained: “[T]o win a case
for attempted Hobbs Act robbery the government must prove two things:
(1) The defendant intended to unlawfully take or obtain personal
property by means of actual or threatened force, and (2) he completed a
‘substantial step’ toward that end.” Id. “Whatever one might say about
completed Hobbs Act robbery, attempted Hobbs Act robbery does not
satisfy the elements clause.” Id. “[A]n intention is just that, no more,”
and “whatever a substantial step requires, it does not require the
government to prove that the defendant used, attempted to use, or even
threatened to use force against another person or his property.” Id. A

20

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

In Taylor, as here, the government pointed to DuenasAlvarez to argue that—even if the elements of attempted
Hobbs Act robbery did not require the government to prove
the use, attempted use, or threatened use of force as required
under § 924(c)(3)(A)—Taylor’s § 924(c)(3)(A) conviction
was still proper because “most” prosecutions under the
Hobbs Act involve an actual “communicated threat of
force,” and Taylor had “fail[ed] to identify a single case in
which [the government] ha[d] prosecuted someone for
attempted Hobbs Act robbery without proving a
communicated threat.” Id. at 857. The Court rejected this
argument, explaining that Duenas-Alvarez was inapposite
for “at least two reasons.” Id. at 858. First, the Court
explained, “the immigration statute at issue in DuenasAlvarez required a federal court to make a judgment about
the meaning of a state statute,” and therefore the decision
reflected a “federalism concern” that was not present in
Taylor because the Hobbs Act is a federal statute.10 Id. at
858–59. Second, and relevant here, the Court explained that
“in Duenas-Alvarez the elements of the relevant state and
federal offenses clearly overlapped and the only question the
Court faced was whether state courts also ‘appl[ied] the
statute in [a] special (nongeneric) manner.’” Id. at 859
hypothetical helped to illustrate the point: a defendant could be convicted
of “attempted Hobbs Act robbery” if they “intended and attempted” to
use a threat of force, but “never even got to the point of threatening the
use of force against anyone or anything.” Id. at 852. Like attempted
Hobbs Act robbery, UUW-possession with a firearm requires the
government to prove the defendant intended to unlawfully use a firearm
against another, but it does not require the government to prove the
defendant actually did so.
10

Although this case, like Duenas-Alvarez but unlike Taylor, requires us
to interpret a state statute, we address the federalism concern by
accounting for state court interpretations in our categorical analysis.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

21

(quoting Duenas-Alvarez, 549 U.S. at 193). The Court did
not need to “reach that question” in Taylor because the
“[a]ttempted Hobbs Act robbery does not require proof of
any of the elements § 924(c)(3)(A) demands.” Id. “That ends
the inquiry, and nothing in Duenas-Alvarez suggests
otherwise.” Id. The Court’s reasoning suggests that where,
as here, the elements of the underlying crime do not require
the government to prove any of the elements of the “crime
of violence” definition in U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1), there is no
categorical match, and the inquiry ends—we do not reach
Duenas-Alvarez’s “realistic probability” standard.
The second problem with the government’s argument is
that, even assuming Duenas-Alvarez’s realistic probability
standard applies here, Keast has satisfied that standard.
Under our precedents, a defendant has “two paths” to show
a realistic probability that a state would apply its statute to
conduct that falls outside the generic definition of a crime.
Castro, 71 F.4th at 741 (quoting United States v. Baldon, 956
F.3d 1115, 1124 (9th Cir. 2020)); see also DeFrance, 124
F.4th at 819. First, a defendant “may simply rely on the
statutory language to establish the statute as overly
inclusive.” Castro, 71 F.4th at 741 (quotation marks and
citations omitted). If it is “evident from [the] text” of a state
statute that it does not categorically meet a generic definition
of a crime, a defendant “need not point to an actual case
applying the statute of conviction in a nongeneric manner.”
DeFrance, 124 F.4th at 819 (quoting Chavez-Solis v. Lynch,
803 F.3d 1004, 1010 (9th Cir. 2015)); see Lopez-Aguilar v.
Barr, 948 F.3d 1143, 1147 (9th Cir. 2020) (“As long as the
application of the statute’s express text in the nongeneric
manner is not a logical impossibility, the relative likelihood
of application to nongeneric conduct is immaterial.”).
Second, as an alternative to relying on the statutory text

22

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. KEAST

alone, the defendant may “point to his own case or other
cases in which the state courts in fact did apply the statute in
the special (nongeneric) manner for which he argues.”
Baldon, 956 F.3d at 1124 (quoting Duenas-Alvarez, 549
U.S. at 193).
Keast has satisfied the realistic probability standard
under the first path. The elements of Keast’s statutes of
conviction, UUW-possession with a firearm, on their face
and as interpreted by Oregon state courts, do not require the
government to prove the use or threatened use of force
against another person. Therefore, the statutes of conviction
are facially overly inclusive relative to the Sentencing
Guidelines definition of “crime of violence,” and Keast has
satisfied any burden he may have under Duenas-Alvarez.
IV. CONCLUSION
Keast’s prior conviction for UUW-possession with a
firearm is not categorically a crime of violence under
U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2(a)(1) because the statutory elements of
UUW-possession with a firearm do not require the
government to prove the “use, attempted use, or threatened
use of physical force against the person of another.”
Therefore, the district court erred when determining Keast’s
base offense level and calculating the Sentencing Guidelines
range.
VACATED AND REMANDED.

