FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CHELSEY DUDLEY,
v.

Plaintiff - Appellant,

BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY;
TONY ROARK, in his official and
individual capacity; MANDY
NELSON, in her official and
individual capacity; KATE LAW, in
her official and individual capacity;
JOELLE POWERS, in her official
and individual capacity; JOHN
BUCKWALTER, in his official and
individual capacity; CHRISTOPHER
HYER, in his official and individual
capacity; ROGER MUNGER, in his
official and individual capacity;
GUNNAR WHISLER, in his official
and individual capacity; KELSIE
ZAK, in her official and individual
capacity; EMMA FORD, in her
official and individual capacity;
MIKE DIXON, in his official and
individual capacity,
Defendants - Appellees.

No. 24-3233
D.C. No.
1:22-cv-00495DCN
OPINION

2

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Idaho
David C. Nye, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 4, 2025
Portland, Oregon
Filed August 27, 2025
Before: Jay S. Bybee and Danielle J. Forrest, Circuit
Judges, and Xavier Rodriguez, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Bybee
SUMMARY **
Due Process
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s judgment dismissing for failure to state a
claim Chelsey Dudley’s lawsuit alleging violations of her
Fourteenth Amendment procedural and substantive due
process rights arising from Boise State University’s
revocation of her bachelor’s degree after the Idaho
Department of Health and Welfare informed the university

The Honorable Xavier Rodriguez, United States District Judge for the
Western District of Texas, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

3

that Dudley used a state database to view a third party’s
confidential information without permission.
Addressing Dudley’s procedural due process claim, the
panel held that Dudley has a property interest in her degree
that is protected by the Fourteenth Amendment and may not
be rescinded without due process. The panel reversed the
district court’s dismissal of Dudley’s procedural due process
claim insofar as she alleged that defendants denied her
sufficient time to present her defense and did not allow her
to cross-examine university-affiliated witnesses at her
conduct hearing, and remanded for further proceedings.
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal of
Dudley’s substantive due process claim. First, the
university’s decision to revoke Dudley’s degree and report
that revocation, while procedurally infirm, was not
substantively arbitrary and lacking a rational basis. Second,
Dudley failed to allege that she is unable to pursue a career
in the broader social work profession without a license or
degree, or that she cannot pursue a social work education
elsewhere.
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment granting
qualified immunity to defendants as to Dudley’s claims for
monetary relief because it was not clearly established that
Dudley had a property interest in her college degree or any
entitlement to certain procedural protections.
Finally, the panel dismissed, as moot, Dudley’s appeal
of the district court’s denial of an extension of a temporary
restraining order issued in 2022.

4

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

COUNSEL
Jeremiah Hudson (argued), Fisher & Hudson PLLC, Boise,
Idaho, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Michael E. Kelly (argued) and Shannon M. Graham, Kelly
Law PLLC, Boise, Idaho, for Defendants-Appellees.

OPINION
BYBEE, Circuit Judge:
Boise State University revoked Chelsey “Brooke”
Dudley’s bachelor’s degree in social work after the Idaho
Department of Health and Welfare (IDHW), which hosted
Dudley for an internship, informed the university that
Dudley used a state database to view a third party’s
confidential information without permission. Dudley sued
the university, several students, several administrators and
employees, and an IDHW employee (hereinafter, “BSU”),
for violating her Fourteenth Amendment procedural and
substantive due process rights. Dudley sought preliminary
and permanent injunctive relief and money damages.
The district court dismissed Dudley’s suit for failure to
state a claim. As to Dudley’s procedural due process claim,
the district court concluded that she lacked a property
interest in her degree, and that—even if she possessed such
an interest—BSU gave her adequate process. With respect
to Dudley’s substantive due process claim, the district court
concluded that Dudley failed to plausibly allege that she was
unable to pursue a career in social work.

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

5

We reverse in part and affirm in part. We hold that
Dudley’s BSU-issued college degree is a property interest
protected by the Fourteenth Amendment and that BSU failed
to afford Dudley adequate process before depriving her of
that interest. However, because it was not clearly established
that Dudley had a property interest in her college degree or
any entitlement to certain procedural protections, we hold
that Defendants are entitled to qualified immunity.
Therefore, we affirm the district court’s dismissal of
Dudley’s substantive due process claim seeking monetary
damages. Finally, we dismiss Dudley’s appeal of the district
court’s denial of a preliminary injunction.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Dudley appeals the district court’s dismissal of her suit
under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6). Ordinarily, we would take the
facts from Dudley’s complaint, accept them as true, construe
them in the light most favorable to her, and stop there. See
GP Vincent II v. Estate of Beard, 68 F.4th 508, 514 (9th Cir.
2023). In this case, however, Dudley requested a temporary
restraining order when she filed her complaint, and the
parties submitted additional evidence to the district court in
support of or opposition to that temporary restraining order.
Where helpful, we have drawn some facts below from that
record. See United States v. Ritchie, 342 F.3d 903, 908 (9th
Cir. 2003) (describing how we may treat certain documents
“as part of the complaint, and thus may assume that [their]
contents are true for purposes of a motion to dismiss under
Rule 12(b)(6)”).
A. The Facts
Dudley graduated from BSU in May 2022 with a
bachelor’s degree in social work. As part of her required
coursework, she completed an internship between January

6

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

and April 2022 with the Idaho Department of Health and
Welfare (IDHW). BSU referred to the internship as “Social
Work Field Practicum II” and coded it as SOCWRK 481 on
her transcript. Dudley graduated from BSU in May 2022,
and, in July 2022, she passed the Social Work Licensing
Exam administered by the State Board of Social Work
Examiners in the Idaho Department of Occupational
Learning. In late August 2022, she was licensed as a social
worker in the State of Idaho.
On November 2, 2022, Defendant Tony Roark, BSU’s
Interim Dean for the College of Health Sciences and Social
Work, sent Dudley a letter notifying her that BSU had
received information from IDHW “establishing beyond
doubt that [she] accessed confidential client information
within IDHW’s database, information in files [she] had no
authorization to view and in which [she] had no legitimate
business interest.” Specifically, Dudley is alleged to have
accessed the records of the father of her child and the records
of the biological mother of his other child. Roark also
advised Dudley that BSU would retroactively change her
passing grade for SOCWRK 481 to a failing grade. And
because Dudley failed SOCWRK 481, she did not meet the
requirements for graduation, rendering her transcript
“invalid.” Roark told her that she could appeal the decision
to change her grade. He also told her that the matter had
been referred to the Office of the Dean of Students for
additional discipline. The next day, Mandy Nelson, BSU’s
Registrar, sent Dudley a letter stating her “degree has been
rescinded.” Nelson informed Dudley that her diploma was
“no longer valid and should be destroyed.”
Kate Law, BSU’s Assistant Dean of Students, sent
Dudley a letter on November 10, with the subject line
“Notification of Formal Conduct Hearing.” Law stated that

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

7

“it has been alleged that you have violated the Student Code
of Conduct during Spring 2022” and cited “Section 4/AC[,]
Violation of University Policy and/or Law.” Law recited that
Dudley’s alleged accessing of confidential files had been
“documented by IDHW’s IT department” and that the breach
violated “the School of Social Work’s field requirements, the
[National Association of Social Workers] Code of Ethics, the
Student Professional Conduct and Professional Standards,
and IDHW’s expectations for employees and interns . . . .”
Law indicated that Dudley would be subject to disciplinary
procedures outlined in University Policy #2020, Student
Code of Conduct Section 6.2.c, and she offered to meet with
Dudley “to discuss the Student Code of Conduct process and
[Dudley’s] rights and responsibilities” under the policy. Law
scheduled a “conduct hearing” for December 12 to “review
the[] charges.”
On December 7, Dudley sued BSU, several BSU
administrators and employees; the members of the Student
Conduct Board; Mike Dixon, IDHW’s chief of the Child
Welfare Office; and ten unnamed employees of BSU or
IDHW in the District of Idaho. Dudley sought injunctive
relief, monetary damages, and a temporary restraining order
(TRO) to prevent BSU from holding her conduct hearing on
December 12. She also asked the court to order BSU to
reinstate her degree.
The district court granted Dudley’s TRO request, in part
and ex parte, on December 9. The district court enjoined the
BSU Defendants from holding the conduct hearing, but it
declined to require them to implement any specific
procedural safeguards or reinstate Dudley’s degree. BSU
accordingly “vacated” the scheduled conduct hearing. When
the district court declined to extend the TRO, which expired

8

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

on December 23, 2022, Law sent Dudley a letter that reset
her conduct hearing for February 17, 2023.
BSU held Dudley’s conduct hearing before a fivemember Student Board of Conduct. There were no live
witnesses. BSU was represented by an employee from the
Dean of Students’ Office (DSO), who was denominated the
“Complainant,” and who presented written statements from
Dixon, Law, and Raymond Mullenax, BSU’s Director of
Field Education, that described Dudley’s alleged
misconduct. Dudley testified on her own behalf. She
admitted that, while at IDHW, “she had likely clicked on
hyperlinks of caregivers in her own” file within the IDHW
database. Dudley claimed that she accessed her file because
she was “in a unique position to . . . see how a common type
of interaction was reported by a social worker with the
perspective of the person who was interacting with the social
worker.” Dudley also testified that her IDHW supervisor
referenced database records related to the supervisor’s
family members and instructed her to look at closed files to
learn how to draft reports. Dudley complained of the time
constraints placed upon her at the hearing and the fact that
she was not permitted to cross-examine any witness who
provided a written statement.
At the conclusion of the hearing, the Complainant asked
the Board to revoke Dudley’s degree and expel her from
BSU. Dudley alleges that Law remained with the Board
while they deliberated.
Law subsequently notified Dudley that the Student
Board of Conduct decided to revoke her degree and expel
her because it determined that it was “more likely than not”
that she violated the ethical and professional standards and
expectations established in BSU’s Professional Conduct and

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

9

Professional Standards, IDHW’s expectations for employees
and interns, and “state/federal privacy laws.” Law stated
that the “start date” for both sanctions was March 15, 2023.
Dudley unsuccessfully appealed the Board’s decision.
B. Procedural History
As we noted above, Dudley filed her suit in federal court
in December 2022 in an effort to prevent BSU from
conducting a hearing. The district court issued a TRO
forbidding BSU from proceeding with a hearing, and BSU
vacated the hearing in response. After holding a hearing, the
district court declined to extend the TRO, which lapsed on
December 23. BSU proceeded with the February 2023
hearing and issued its decision as we described above. In
July 2023, Dudley filed an amended complaint in district
court, alleging that Defendants violated the Due Process
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and seeking monetary
and injunctive relief. BSU moved to dismiss the complaint.
The district court dismissed Dudley’s complaint. See
Dudley v. Boise State Univ., 732 F. Supp. 3d 1270 (D. Idaho
2024). The district court ruled that Dudley had no property
interest in her SOCWRK 481 grade, her degree in social
work, her BSU diploma, or the process by which BSU
deprived her of those interests. Id. at 1279–83. The court
observed that “[t]his holding effectively ends this case.
Because there is no property interest at stake, there can be no
due process violation.” Id. at 1283. In the interest of judicial
efficiency, and alternatively, the district court held that the
Student Conduct Hearing afforded Dudley due process. Id.
at 1285–87. The court further held that Dudley did not state
a claim that Defendants deprived her of her substantive due
process liberty interest in pursuing her chosen profession,
social work. Id. at 1284. Finally, the court held that even if

10

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

Dudley had stated a cause of action under the Fourteenth
Amendment, Defendants would be entitled to qualified
immunity for any damages in their individual capacities. Id.
at 1287–89. This appeal followed.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review the district court’s dismissal of Dudley’s suit
under Fed. R. Civ. P. 12(b)(6) de novo. Barker v. Riverside
Cnty. Off. of Educ., 584 F.3d 821, 824 (9th Cir. 2009). We
accept Dudley’s allegations as true and draw inferences from
them in the light most favorable to her. Id.
Although “[g]enerally, the scope of review on a motion
to dismiss for failure to state a claim is limited to the contents
of the complaint,” we “may consider evidence on which the
complaint ‘necessarily relies’ if: (1) the complaint refers to
the document; (2) the document is central to the plaintiff’s
claim; and (3) no party questions the authenticity of the copy
attached to the 12(b)(6) motion.” Marder v. Lopez, 450 F.3d
445, 448 (9th Cir. 2006) (citations omitted). Here, because
Dudley’s First Amended Complaint refers to documents
which she attached to her motion for a preliminary
injunction, those documents are “central” to her case, and
neither party disputes those documents’ authenticity, we
review those documents alongside Dudley’s First Amended
Complaint. See id.
III. DISCUSSION
Dudley has presented four issues on appeal. First,
Dudley claims that she has property interests in various
facets of her BSU education and that BSU’s recission of
those interests, first without process or notice, and then after
a “conduct hearing,” violated the Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Second, she claims that BSU

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

11

violated her Fourteenth Amendment substantive due process
right to pursue an occupation in social work. Third, she
argues that the district court erred when it held that, even if
BSU violated her due process rights, the individual
defendants were entitled to qualified immunity from her
request for monetary damages because her rights were not
clearly established. Fourth, she argues that the court erred
when it denied her preliminary injunctive relief. We discuss
each of these issues below.
A. Procedural Due Process
We first consider whether Dudley plausibly alleged that
Defendants violated her Fourteenth Amendment procedural
due process rights. The Due Process Clause of the
Fourteenth Amendment provides that “[n]o State shall . . .
deprive any person of life, liberty, or property, without due
process of law.” U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1. “To obtain
relief on a procedural due process claim, the plaintiff must
establish the existence of ‘(1) a liberty or property interest
protected by the Constitution; (2) a deprivation of the
interest by the government; [and] (3) lack of process.’”
Shanks v. Dressel, 540 F.3d 1082, 1090 (9th Cir. 2008)
(alteration in original) (quoting Portman v. County of Santa
Clara, 995 F.2d 898, 904 (9th Cir. 1993)). Because BSU
does not dispute that it has taken various actions against
Dudley that would constitute a deprivation if she had a
property right, we must consider whether Dudley had any
property interests in various aspects of her BSU education,
and if so, whether BSU provided her with sufficient notice
and process before depriving her of those interests. The
district court held for BSU on both questions. Dudley, 732
F. Supp. 3d at 1279–83, 1285–87. We reverse on both.

12

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

1. Dudley’s property interests in her BSU education
“When [the Fourteenth Amendment’s protection of life,
liberty, or property is] implicated, the right to some kind of
prior hearing is paramount.” Bd. of Regents of State Colls.
v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564, 569–70 (1972) (footnote omitted).
Although the Due Process Clause imposes “process”
requirements, it does not supply the meaning of “property.”
Property interests are instead “defined by existing rules or
understandings that stem from an independent source such
as state law—rules or understandings that secure certain
benefits and that support claims of entitlement to those
benefits.” Id. at 577.
After the Supreme Court’s groundbreaking decisions in
Roth and Perry v. Sindermann, 408 U.S. 593 (1972), the term
“property” in the Due Process Clause can no longer be
“limited by a few rigid, technical forms. Rather, ‘property’
denotes a broad range of interests.” Perry, 408 U.S. at 601
(citing Roth, 408 U.S. at 577). As we have explained, “[d]ue
process protects property interests ‘well beyond actual
ownership of real estate, chattels, or money.’” Redd v.
Guerrero, 84 F.4th 874, 893 (9th Cir. 2023) (quoting Roth,
408 U.S. at 571–72). Following Roth, Sindermann, and the
Court’s recognition of the “new property,” courts have
identified property interests in “utility service, public
education, welfare benefits, driver’s licenses, nursing care, a
cause of action, and a type of immigration petition.” Redd,
84 F.4th at 893 (citations omitted); see Goldberg v. Kelley,
397 U.S. 254, 262 n.8 (1970) (holding that welfare benefits
are a form of property as “a matter of statutory entitlement
for persons qualified to receive them” and citing, inter alia,
Charles Alan Reich, The New Property, 73 Yale L.J. 733
(1964)); see also Johnson v. Ryan, 55 F.4th 1167, 1191–92
(9th Cir. 2022) (describing the “‘new property’ revolution”

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

13

that “began with Goldberg” and was “developed” in Roth
and Sindermann).
“To have a property interest in a benefit, a person must
‘have a legitimate claim of entitlement to it,’ not just ‘an
abstract need or desire for it.’” K.W. ex rel. D.W. v.
Armstrong, 789 F.3d 962, 972 (9th Cir. 2015) (quoting Roth,
408 U.S. at 577). We look to “the language of the statute and
the extent to which the entitlement is couched in mandatory
terms” to determine whether state law gives rise to a
protected property interest. Redd, 84 F.4th at 893 (citing
Greene v. Babbitt, 64 F.3d 1266, 1272 (9th Cir. 1995)).
Dudley asserts that the Due Process Clause protects four
discrete property interests: her SOCWRK 481 grade, BSU’s
disciplinary process, her bachelor’s degree awarded in May
2022, and her future reenrollment at BSU.
We can set two of these interests aside quickly. First, we
need not decide whether Dudley has a property interest in
her SOCWRK 481 grade because we think that, in this case,
that question is subsumed by her claim to a property right in
her degree, which we discuss in greater detail below.
Second, BSU’s disciplinary process cannot be Dudley’s
property for due process purposes. 1 Concluding otherwise
would place the cart before the horse: “[T]he mere fact . . .
[of] a careful procedural structure . . . [does not] indicate[]
the existence of a protected liberty interest.” Hewitt v.
Helms, 459 U.S. 460, 471 (1983); see also Olim v.
Wakinekona, 461 U.S. 238, 250 (1983) (“Process is not an
end in itself. Its constitutional purpose is to protect a
Dudley relies on ISBOE Policy III.B.2.iii.3, which provides: “In
matters of disciplinary action, students have the right to due process and
to be held accountable using academic standards and institutional
procedures.”

1

14

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

substantive interest to which the individual has a legitimate
claim of entitlement.”). A state may provide process to
address its interests without imbuing those affected by the
process with substantive rights in the process itself. In such
cases, it may be “unfair for the [state] not to follow its own
procedures . . . but it [is] not unconstitutional.” Charleston
v. Bd. of Trs. of Univ. of Ill. at Chi., 741 F.3d 769, 774 (7th
Cir. 2013).
That leaves Dudley with two potentially viable property
interests: (a) her BSU degree and (b) her future reenrollment
at BSU. We consider whether Dudley has “a legitimate
claim of entitlement” to each one. Roth, 408 U.S. at 577.
a. Dudley’s bachelor’s degree
Although Dudley contends that certain regulations
governing the conferral of her degree provide her with a
contract-based property interest in her diploma, we need not
reach this argument. 2 Dudley has not sued BSU for failing
to confer a degree that she earned; nor has BSU refused to
confer anything.
Dudley instead challenges BSU’s
revocation of a degree that it already conferred to her.
Regardless of whether BSU and Dudley had an
enforceable contract for a degree, she had “a legitimate claim
of entitlement to it” under Idaho law. See id. Idaho’s law
does provide Dudley with a property interest in her degree.
The Idaho Constitution and Idaho statutes authorize the
Idaho State Board of Education (ISBOE) to promulgate
educational regulations. See Idaho Const. art. IX, § 2
See, e.g., The Idaho Supreme Court has stated that “it is by now wellsettled that the principal relationship between a college and its students
is contractual.” Wickstrom v. N. Idaho Coll., 725 P.2d 155, 157 (Idaho
1986).

2

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

15

(vesting the ISBOE with certain powers); Idaho Code § 332811 (granting the ISBOE the authority to “confer such
degrees and grant such diplomas as are usual in universities,
or as they shall deem appropriate”). And the ISBOE
promulgated a regulation that gives college graduates like
Dudley a property interest in their degrees. See ISBOE
Governing Policies and Procedures § III.E.1 (stating that
“[c]ompletion of the program of instruction results in . . .
conferring of a degree upon the student by the faculty and
the Chief Executive Officer”). Because ISBOE policy
§ III.E.1. is couched in “mandatory language” that “leaves
no discretion” for BSU to deny conferral of a degree upon
“completion of the program of instruction,” Idaho law
created a property interest in Dudley’s degree. See Redd, 84
F.4th at 893.
Moreover, it is not difficult to see how, for a recipient, a
college degree “resembles more traditional conceptions of
property,” because it has an “ascertainable monetary value,”
one that can be measured in tuition payments. See Redd, 84
F.4th at 893–94 (citation omitted); see also, e.g., Crook v.
Baker, 813 F.2d 88, 94 (6th Cir. 1987) (assuming that a
university “degree constituted an important property
interest”).
But a college degree opens additional
opportunities to its recipient that cannot be reduced to the
bursar’s account. College and university degrees are
frequently prerequisites for employment opportunities and
admission to graduate school, professional programs, or, as
relevant here, professional licensing. See Goss v. Lopez, 419
U.S. 565, 575 & n.7 (1975) (observing that school discipline
may “interfere with later opportunities for higher education
and employment”); see also Bd. of Curators of the Univ. of
Mo. v. Horowitz, 435 U.S. 78, 82 n.1 (1978) (noting that a
medical student’s dismissal would make it difficult for her to

16

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

get into another medical school). To obtain a social work
license in Idaho, an applicant must pass an examination and
have, at least, “a baccalaureate degree in social work from a
college or university approved by the board.” Idaho Code
§ 54-3206(3). Here, Dudley alleges that, three months after
graduating from BSU, she passed the Social Work Licensing
Exam and was licensed as a social worker in the State of
Idaho. 3
BSU conferred a diploma to Dudley in a public
ceremony. The diploma itself is physical property, suitable
for framing. And BSU has effectively demanded it back.
The diploma was important enough that, when BSU first
decided that Dudley had violated various terms of her
internship, university rules, and national ethical rules for
social workers, it advised her that “the diploma you received
for your BA is no longer valid and should be destroyed.”
While Dudley’s diploma, like the title to a car, has relatively
little intrinsic value, it has substantial extrinsic value as nearconclusive evidence of a bundle of legal rights. The
diploma’s real value is not in its sheepskin, but in what it
represents: the rights and responsibilities pertaining to a
Bachelor of Arts degree from BSU.
In sum, Dudley’s diploma, and the degree it represents,
have real value. Therefore, we hold that Dudley’s degree is
a property interest that BSU may not rescind without due
process.

In November 2022, the Board of Social Work Examiners within the
Idaho Division of Occupational and Professional Licenses sent Dudley a
letter requesting further information regard BSU’s retraction of her
degree. The Board’s inquiry is on hold pending resolution of this case.
3

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

17

b. Re-enrollment
Dudley also maintains that she has a property interest in
her future enrollment at BSU. Having concluded that she
has a property interest in her degree, it is both premature and
unnecessary for us to consider her interest in re-enrollment.
As we will discuss, if the allegations in Dudley’s complaint
are true, BSU must hold a new hearing that affords Dudley
greater process. If, at the end of those proceedings, BSU
decides not to revoke Dudley’s degree, re-enrollment will
not be an issue. If it instead revokes her degree after a
constitutionally-adequate hearing, even assuming Dudley
has a property interest in re-enrollment, BSU will have
afforded her a constitutionally-adequate hearing before
depriving her of that interest. The accusations underlying
Dudley’s degree revocation and her expulsion are the same,
and there is no reason to believe that a hearing that suffices
as to the former would be unconstitutional as to the latter.
Indeed, BSU reached its revocation and expulsion decisions
following the same hearing, and Dudley does not argue that
more process is necessary for one decision versus another.
Thus, we need not decide whether Dudley has a property
interest in re-enrollment.
2. The process due
Having decided that Dudley has a property interest in her
BSU degree, we next consider whether BSU provided her
with sufficient procedural safeguards when it revoked that
degree. Dudley claims that BSU violated her due process
rights by depriving her of her degree twice: first without any
notice or hearing in November 2022, and then again, in
March 2023, after a “conduct hearing.” To determine what
process is due before BSU may deprive Dudley of her
degree, we balance three factors: (a) Dudley’s interest in

18

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

retaining her degree; (b) BSU’s interest in revoking her
degree; and (c) the risk that, given the process provided,
BSU erroneously deprived Dudley of her interest and the
probable value and burdens of additional safeguards. See
Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 335 (1976).
a. Dudley’s interest in retaining her degree
For reasons that we have largely detailed above, it is
obvious that Dudley has a substantial interest in her degree:
The revocation of a degree that has already been publicly
awarded is perhaps the most dramatic and far-reaching
discipline that a university can impose on one of its students.
Nonetheless, BSU argues that Dudley’s constitutional
interest in her degree was equivalent to her interest in her
SOCWRK 481 grade because Dudley needed to pass
SOCWRK 481 to graduate. There is some logic to BSU’s
position—if Dudley failed to pass SOCWRK 481, she
likewise failed to satisfy the requirements for graduation,
and she should not have been awarded her diploma. But this
linear reasoning equating a grade in a required course to a
resulting degree would make that degree only as “important”
as any of an alumna’s underlying grades, assignments, exam
answers, or other academic prerequisites. And such an
argument commits the fallacy of continuum, because it
cannot distinguish between the grade and the degree. BSU,
like every other American university, surely lavishes
students with praise and regales them with “Pomp and
Circumstance” when they graduate; we doubt that it does so
whenever they pass SOCWRK 481 or turn an assignment in
on time. At graduation, BSU awards students with diplomas
that attest to their academic achievement; we doubt that it
doles out any equivalent recognition for earning a “B+” or
writing a good exam answer. BSU’s degrees represent far

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

19

more than any grade in one class. Dudley’s interest in her
degree was substantial, and it far outstripped her interest in
her SOCWRK 481 grade. That means that we should not
undervalue Dudley’s BSU degree by focusing on her grades.
More importantly, we reiterate that a BSU degree, unlike
a grade in a single class, has collateral value. It is the
gateway to licensure as a social worker in Idaho. Without “a
baccalaureate degree in social work from a college or
university,” such as BSU, Dudley is not eligible to be a social
worker. Idaho Code § 54-3206(3). Dudley has strong
interest in retaining her degree, and that gives her a strong
interest in seeing that she has a full and fair opportunity to
contest any charges before BSU strips her of her diploma.
b. BSU’s interest in revoking Dudley’s degree
BSU obviously had its own significant interest in the
outcome of any decision to revoke Dudley’s degree: the
integrity of its degrees was at stake.
BSU argues that, because it revoked Dudley’s degree for
“academic,” rather than “disciplinary reasons” it “need not
hold a hearing.” As the Supreme Court has observed, there
is a “significant difference between the failure of a student
to meet academic standards and the violation by a student of
valid rules of conduct. This difference calls for far less
stringent procedural requirements in the case of an academic
dismissal.” Horowitz, 435 U.S. at 86.
But we do not think that Dudley’s degree revocation
implicates BSU’s “constitutional right to academic
freedom.” As Horowitz explained, “[a]cademic evaluations
of a student, in contrast to disciplinary determinations, bear
little resemblance to the judicial and administrative factfinding proceedings to which we have traditionally attached

20

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

a full-hearing requirement.” 435 U.S. at 89. BSU did not
revoke Dudley’s degree over a purely “academic” dispute
about whether her course work was deserving of an “A” or a
“C,” or whether she exhibited sufficient care in her personal
appearance to meet the requirements for interacting with
patients in a lab. Cf. id. Those questions involve the kind of
academic judgment that is “not readily adapted to the
procedural tools of judicial or administrative
decisionmaking.” Id. at 90; see al-Dabagh v. Case W.
Reserve Univ., 777 F.3d 355, 360 (6th Cir. 2015); Brown v.
Li, 308 F.3d 939, 954 (9th Cir. 2002); Hennessy v. City of
Melrose, 194 F.3d 237, 250–51 (1st Cir. 1999).
By contrast, BSU conducted an affirmative
“investigation” into whether Dudley violated “state and
federal privacy laws,” among other rules. This makes BSU’s
revocation decisions seem “disciplinary” rather than based
on Dudley’s mere failure to satisfy academic standards.
Additionally, Dudley’s alleged misconduct occurred during
an off-campus practicum in which she was supervised and
evaluated by IDHW employees, not BSU professors.
Moreover, BSU asserted that Dudley violated professional
ethical norms that applied to both IDHW employees and
BSU’s social work students. Had Dudley been a full-time
employee whom IDHW fired for cause, we have little doubt
that she could have requested both administrative and
judicial review of the claim that she had violated IDHW
rules when she viewed confidential files without
authorization. That claim would be appropriate for judicial
review.
BSU has an additional interest here that cannot be easily
classified as “academic” or “disciplinary”: its relationship
with IDHW. The record does not disclose how many BSU
students accept internships at IDHW or other state or

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

21

municipal agencies. If IDHW loses confidence in BSU’s
programs because, for example, BSU students are allowed
to commit ethical violations with academic impunity, it
might decline to accept future BSU interns. Having been
notified by IDHW of Dudley’s misconduct, BSU was
obligated to respond, even though Dudley’s misconduct
occurred while she was under IDHW’s, not BSU’s, direct
supervision.
Nevertheless, we think that BSU’s broader reputational
concerns weigh in favor of resolving disputes like Dudley’s
properly, and not just expeditiously. Given the rarity of
degree revocation and the centrality of conferring degrees to
BSU’s mission, this was not a decision that BSU could take
lightly. BSU, which has more than 20,000 degree-seeking
students, 4 also has an interest in not arbitrarily denying or
revoking students’ diplomas. Surely, imposing arbitrary
discipline would do more to harm than to preserve BSU’s
reputation.
We have little difficulty concluding that BSU has a
strong interest in accurately resolving the charges against
Dudley, and that the charges against her, despite having an
academic component, are primarily disciplinary in nature.
c. The process due and the risk of error
We have determined that both Dudley and BSU have a
strong interest in accurately resolving the charges against
Dudley. See Goss, 419 U.S. at 579–80. Having reached this
conclusion, we turn to “[t]he final, and perhaps most
important, Mathews factor,” which is “the risk of erroneous
deprivation and the probable value of additional procedural
See Boise State University, Facts and Figures - About Boise State,
https://www.boisestate.edu/about/facts/ (last accessed August 26, 2025).

4

22

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

safeguards. As we evaluate this factor, we ask ‘considering
the current process, what is the chance the [university] will
make a mistake?’” Humphries v. Cnty. of L.A., 554 F.3d
1170, 1194 (9th Cir. 2009), rev’d in part on other grounds,
562 U.S. 29 (2010). Dudley challenges separately the two
decisions BSU made to revoke her degree. We consider
BSU’s first revocation of Dudley’s degree, and then BSU’s
second revocation of Dudley’s degree following its conduct
hearing.
BSU first revoked Dudley’s degree in November 2022
by sending her two letters. The first letter, signed by Interim
Dean Tony Roark, informed Dudley that BSU retroactively
changed her SOCWRK 481 grade from passing to failing,
and that this rendered her transcript “invalid.” The second
letter, which was signed by BSU Registrar Mandy Nelson,
and which came the next day, informed Dudley that BSU had
“rescinded” her degree because she no longer satisfied the
requirements for graduation. A week later, and only after
BSU told her it had revoked her degree, Assistant Dean Kate
Law advised Dudley that BSU would hold a “conduct
hearing.”
Dudley argues that she was entitled to notice and a
hearing before BSU revoked her degree. Given each side’s
substantial interest in accurately resolving this dispute, we
agree that BSU should have given Dudley prior notice of its
intent to revoke her degree and an opportunity to contest the
potential revocation. See Boddie v. Connecticut, 401 U.S.
371, 378–79 (1971) (emphasizing the “root requirement that
an individual be given an opportunity for a hearing before he
is deprived of any significant property interest.”). BSU’s
belated decision to provide Dudley with a hearing after it
first revoked her degree suggests that it recognized its error
and attempted to rectify it. Although Dudley obtained a

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

23

TRO to prevent the December 2022 hearing, BSU eventually
provided her with a hearing in February 2023. This
subsequent hearing mooted Dudley’s equitable claims
stemming from her first degree revocation. See Ming Kuo
Yang v. City of Wyoming, 793 F.3d 599, 604 (6th Cir. 2015)
(“Post-hearing notice alone may satisfy due process so long
as the interested party still has another meaningful
opportunity for a hearing. The subsequent hearing ‘cure[s]’
any lack of notice . . . .”) (alteration in original) (citations
omitted); Walker v. City of Berkeley, 951 F.2d 182, 184 (9th
Cir. 1991) (explaining that due process received in a postdeprivation hearing may cure earlier deficiencies). 5
BSU revoked Dudley’s degree again in March 2023 after
giving her notice and holding a “conduct hearing” to
“review” the “charges” against her. Dudley challenged
many aspects of this process before the district court. The
district court rejected these challenges and concluded that
Dudley was not entitled to any additional procedural
safeguards.
The district court found that Dudley’s
“disagreements with the process itself” were “largely
immaterial” because “BSU provided notice, an
informational meeting and packet, and a hearing.” BSU
makes a similar argument on appeal, asserting that
“Dudley’s disagreement with how the hearing was
conducted does not mean she was deprived of due process.”
On appeal, Dudley challenges nearly every aspect of the
“conduct hearing” that preceded her second degree
revocation. We will not address all of Dudley’s claims, many
of which are duplicative or not developed. We instead
address Dudley’s four potentially viable claims: that (1) she
received insufficient notice of the hearing; (2) she was given
5

We discuss Dudley’s damages claim in Section III.C.

24

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

insufficient time to present her case at the hearing; (3) she
was not allowed to cross-examine BSU’s principal witness,
Law; and (4) BSU violated the separation of functions when
Law was in the room with the Student Conduct Board
deciding Dudley’s case.
(1) Insufficient notice. Due process requires that the
government provide notice that “give[s] the charged party a
chance to marshal the facts in his defense and . . . clarif[ies]
what the charges are, in fact.” Wolff v. McDonnell, 418 U.S.
539, 564 (1974). Dudley argues that BSU denied her due
process by failing to provide her with adequate notice of the
“specific underlying policies or laws” that she allegedly
violated. However, BSU provided Dudley with at least three
written notices that apprised her of the violation and the
consequences. First, Law sent Dudley a letter on November
10, 2022, that identified the provision of the Student Code of
Conduct that BSU accused Dudley of violating; summarized
the IDHW investigation; scheduled the first conduct hearing;
and offered a pre-hearing meeting. Second, Raymond
Mullenax, BSU’s Director of Field Education, sent Dudley a
letter on December 1, 2022, that enumerated specific NASW
Code of Ethics standards and BSU local policies that BSU
believed Dudley violated. Finally, Law sent Dudley a new
notice of hearing on January 9, 2023, that repeated the
information in the November 10, 2022, letter. These letters
fully advised Dudley of the grounds for discipline, the facts
supporting the charge, and the consequences for her alleged
conduct. If there was any remaining ambiguity, Dudley
should have requested clarification or a meeting with Law,
as Law offered in her initial letter. BSU provided fair notice.
(2) Insufficient time to present her case. In discussions
prior to her February 2023 hearing, Dudley objected that
BSU would only provide her with ten minutes to present her

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

25

case, ten minutes to question witnesses, and five minutes for
summation. She allegedly requested 45 minutes to present
her case, 25 minutes to question each witness, and 45
minutes for summation. Dudley alleges that she in fact had
25 minutes for her defense, thus “substantially complying”
with the time restrictions for the hearing—this was her first
meaningful opportunity to challenge the evidence against
her. 6
We have no firm principles for prescribing time limits for
such a hearing. The lack of quantifiable standards
notwithstanding, Dudley’s alleged ten-minute time
allotment for presenting her case, plus ten minutes for
questioning witnesses and five minutes for summation,
strikes us as unreasonably restrictive. Dudley’s allegations
imply that she in fact received more than ten minutes to
present her case given that she had a total of twenty-five
minutes and she was unable to question any witnesses. But
going into the hearing, she would have been aware of BSU’s
harsh time constraint and had to prepare accordingly. For all
the reasons we have described above, this was a serious
hearing, with much at stake for both Dudley and BSU. We
recognize that an administrative body such as the Student
Conduct Board must be able to control its own proceedings,
including the time allowed for the parties’ presentations.
The board retains discretion to determine, for example,
BSU’s Student Conduct Board hearing is one piece of an informal
administrative process. The charge was summarized in the letters from
Roark and Law. Law offered to meet with Dudley to go over the
university’s process and Dudley’s rights and responsibilities. In such a
meeting, Dudley might have asked, informally, about the proof against
her, but Dudley declined the invitation. As a result, the Student Conduct
Board was Dudley’s first real opportunity to challenge the evidence
against her.

6

26

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

whether a party’s perspective has been fully and fairly aired
and any further evidence would be duplicative. We will not
prescribe a time for Dudley’s presentation but expect that
BSU will offer Dudley a more reasonable time for her
presentation in any new proceeding.
(3) Cross-examination.
Dudley alleges that BSU
violated her due process right by allowing “witnesses to
present written testimony” at her hearing “without being
subjected to cross-examination.” The DOS Complainant to
the Student Conduct Board allegedly presented three
relevant pieces of evidence: a sworn affidavit from IDHW’s
Mike Dixon, a letter from BSU’s Raymond Mullenax, and
the investigative report prepared by Law. Dudley alleged
that Dixon and Law declined her requests to appear at her
hearing in person. Dudley also alleges that she decided
against trying to examine Mullenax.
Cross-examination is an important procedural safeguard.
“In almost every setting where important decisions turn on
questions of fact, due process requires an opportunity to
confront and cross-examine adverse witnesses.” Goldberg,
397 U.S. at 269. In American adversarial proceedings,
“[c]ross-examination has always been considered a most
effective way to ascertain truth.” Watkins v. Sowders, 449
U.S. 341, 349 (1981) (footnote omitted); see also Black
Coal. v. Portland Sch. Dist. No. 1, 484 F.2d 1040, 1045 (9th
Cir. 1973) (suggesting that a school district could not expel
high school students without allowing them to “cross[]examine adverse witnesses”). Not every hearing requires
live testimony, and not every live witness must be subjected
to cross-examination. But where a “university is faced with
competing narratives about potential misconduct, the
administration must facilitate some form of cross-

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

27

examination in order to satisfy due process.” Doe v. Baum,
903 F.3d 575, 581 (6th Cir. 2018).
We hold that Dudley has a due process right to ask
questions to adverse witnesses affiliated with BSU—and, in
particular, Law. Law does not have first-hand knowledge of
Dudley’s conduct; that witness would be Dixon, who
declined to testify in person but submitted a sworn
statement. 7 Yet Law’s investigation is the foundation for
BSU’s complaint, and Dudley should be able to question her
about the people she spoke with, the evidence she gathered,
and her diligence in establishing the facts. Without the
ability to question Law, Dudley can only proffer her own
account of the events; that testimony is critical to her
defense, of course, but an opportunity to testify in her own
defense is not the same as being able to probe the strength of
the university’s case against her.
BSU and Dudley have a shared interest in reaching the
truth. BSU does not further its institutional interests by
erroneously revoking a diploma. We can see little burden to
BSU to make Law available for questioning since she was
already present at Dudley’s hearing. It is surely not a severe
“fiscal and administrative burden[]” that BSU has a strong
interest in avoiding. See Mathews, 424 U.S. at 335.
Although Law’s primary task was investigating Dudley, Law
allegedly created an evidentiary “hearing packet” that
“included documents that [Law] had drafted” herself. Law
thus plausibly acted as a witness, in addition to a prosecutor
(and, possibly, an adjudicator) in Dudley’s case. Because
Law was intimately involved in Dudley’s case, we conclude
We decline to hold that due process required BSU to procure a subpoena
or otherwise compel unaffiliated witnesses such as Dixon to be available
for questioning.

7

28

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

that making her available for questioning would
substantially reduce the likelihood of “erroneous
deprivation.” See Eldridge, 424 U.S. at 335.
We recognize that requiring BSU to permit crossexamination in this case makes the proceeding more formal
in nature, but it does not convert the proceeding into a formal
hearing. Informal administration proceedings, even where
cross-examination is permitted, are not subject to the same
rules we follow in formal judicial proceedings. In particular,
the proceedings are not subject to the rules of evidence. See
Fairbank v. Hardin, 429 F.2d 264, 267 (9th Cir. 1970) (“Of
course, the technical rules of evidence, applicable in civil
trials, are not employed in administrative hearings.”). We do
not mandate the exact form that cross examination must take,
but we do hold that due process in this context means
permitting Dudley to probe the university’s case by putting
questions to Law.
(4) Separation of functions. Finally, Dudley argues that
BSU denied her due process by permitting Law to both
investigate and adjudicate her case. Specifically, she alleges
that “[a]t the conclusion of the hearing, Ms. Dudley left, and
Defendant Law remained with the Student Conduct Board as
they deliberated.”
In administrative boards, “the
combination of investigative and adjudicative functions does
not, without more, constitute a due process violation . . . .”
Withrow v. Larkin, 421 U.S. 35, 58 (1975). Indeed, “[i]t
is . . . very typical for the members of administrative
agencies to receive the results of investigations, to approve
the filing of charges or formal complaints instituting
enforcement proceedings, and then to participate in the
ensuing hearings. This mode of procedure . . . does not
violate due process of law.” Id. at 56 (footnote omitted); see
Heyne v. Metro. Nashville Pub. Sch., 655 F.3d 556, 567 (6th

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

29

Cir. 2011) (“[D]ue process is not necessarily violated when
the school official who initiates, investigates, or prosecutes
charges against a student plays a role in the decision to
suspend the student.” (citations omitted)); Humphries, 554
F.3d at 1197 (declining to adopt the proposition that
decisionmakers “who participate in an investigation are
disqualified from adjudicating” (citation omitted)). We
cannot conclude that Law’s alleged presence in the room
with the Student Conduct Board violated Dudley’s due
process rights.
Dudley also argues that BSU denied her due process by
adopting Law’s Investigation Report in its ultimate
findings. 8 But BSU’s alleged adoption of the Investigation
Report, per se, did not deny Dudley due process. See
Midland Banana & Tomato Co., Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of Agric.,
104 F.3d 139, 142 (8th Cir. 1997) (determining that a litigant
“considerably overplay[ed] his hand by suggesting that any
uniform adoption of one party’s proposed findings signifies
‘bias’ and supports a conclusion that there has been a due
Dudley also argues that Law’s allegedly biased investigatory actions
denied her due process. Dudley makes a litany of claims: She alleges
that Law adopted allegations from Roark’s letter revoking Dudley’s
degree; failed to interview Dudley or witnesses she asserted were
relevant; “withheld, mischaracterized, altered, and fabricated evidence
against Dudley;” included irrelevant assertions that “cast Dudley in a
poor light;” and investigated Dudley only to ratify Roark’s initial
revocation of Dudley’s degree. Yet due process does not guarantee an
unbiased investigation. Instead, “[t]he mere fact that [certain] charges
may be unfair or untrue does not give rise to a Constitutional claim: ‘The
Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment is not a guarantee
against incorrect or ill-advised [] decisions.’” Portman, 995 F.2d at 908
(quoting Bishop v. Wood, 426 U.S. 341, 350 (1976)). If Dudley thinks
the investigation has been in error, the hearing before the Board is
Dudley’s opportunity to set the record straight.
8

30

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

process violation.”). The Student Conduct Board reviewed
the evidence and reached a conclusion, and that conclusion
is entitled to a presumption of regularity. As “policymakers
with decisionmaking power,” Student Conduct Board
members enjoy a “presumption of honesty and integrity,”
and even “[a] showing that the Board was ‘involved’ in the
events preceding [its] decision . . . is not enough to
overcome [that] presumption.” Hortonville Joint Sch. Dist.
No. 1 v. Hortonville Educ. Ass’n, 426 U.S. 482, 496–97
(1976).
Dudley’s objections to Law’s investigation, her
complaint that Law remained a part of the decisionmaking
process, and her claim that the Board agreed with Law’s
conclusions are, without more, not founded in the Due
Process Clause.
***
We conclude that BSU’s first revocation of Dudley’s
degree without any notice or hearing deprived her of due
process. And, on balance, we further conclude that BSU’s
alleged artificial restrictions on Dudley’s time for presenting
her case and its alleged refusal to allow her to examine BSUaffiliated witnesses also deprived her of due process. Both
of these decisions go to the heart of the Student Conduct
Board’s truth-finding function and, thus, given the important
interests at stake here, we conclude that those procedures
created an unacceptable risk of an erroneous result.
By contrast, we conclude that Dudley failed to plausibly
allege that BSU violated due process by giving her
insufficient notice prior to her conduct hearing, or by
allegedly allowing Law to remain in the room with the Board
when it deliberated its decision. We offer no views on the
merits of BSU’s dispute with Dudley and hold only that

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

31

Dudley properly pleaded that certain elements of BSU’s
process were inadequate. Insofar as the district court
dismissed Dudley’s claim stemming from BSU’s alleged
failure to provide Dudley with sufficient time to present her
case or directly or indirectly cross-examine witnesses, we
reverse the district court.
B. Substantive Due Process Right to an Occupation
We next consider whether Dudley plausibly alleged that
Defendants violated her Fourteenth Amendment substantive
due process right to pursue an occupation in social work. We
agree with the district court that Dudley failed to state a
claim. Dudley, 732 F. Supp. 3d at 1284.
The Supreme Court has acknowledged that “the liberty
component of the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process
Clause includes some generalized due process right to
choose one’s field of private employment.” Conn v.
Gabbert, 526 U.S. 286, 291–92 (1999). That right “is
nevertheless subject to reasonable government regulation.”
Id. The contours of this generalized right, however, have not
been clearly set forth, either by the Supreme Court or by our
court. In Engquist v. Oregon Department of Agriculture, 478
F.3d 985, 997 (9th Cir. 2007), we held that “a plaintiff can
make out a substantive due process claim if she is unable to
pursue an occupation and this inability is caused by
government actions that were arbitrary and lacking a rational
basis.”
However, we have only recognized occupational liberty
claims in “extreme cases, such as a ‘government blacklist,
which when circulated or otherwise publicized to
prospective employers effectively excludes the blacklisted
individual from his occupation, much as if the government
had yanked the license of an individual in an occupation that

32

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

requires licensure.’” Id. at 997–98 (quoting Olivieri v.
Rodriguez, 122 F.3d 406, 408 (7th Cir. 1997)). “[I]n order
to bring an occupational liberty claim, a plaintiff must show
that the ‘character and circumstances of a public employer’s
stigmatizing conduct or statements are such as to have
destroyed an employee’s freedom to take advantage of other
employment opportunities.’” Id. at 998 (quoting Bordelon v.
Chi. Sch. Reform Bd. of Trs., 233 F.3d 524, 531 (7th Cir.
2000)). This standard “ensures that substantive due process
protects the right to pursue an entire profession, and not the
right to pursue a particular job.” Id.
We dealt with the Engquist standard more recently in
Armstrong v. Reynolds, 22 F.4th 1058 (9th Cir. 2022). In that
case, Armstrong alleged that she suffered “‘a loss of 13 years
of future employment, . . . loss of a clean employment file,
and loss of a neutral recommendation to possible future
employers.’” Id. at 1081 (omission in original). We held
that this was insufficient to survive a motion to dismiss. She
could not allege facts that would show that the defendants
engaged in “conduct rising to the level of a government
blacklist or the revocation of a license to practice a particular
profession.” Id.
Here, Dudley has not alleged that BSU subjected her to
anything resembling a “government blacklist.” See id.
Instead, Dudley makes a barebones argument that “BSU
arbitrarily revoked her BSW degree without due process and
informed [the Idaho Division of Occupational and
Professional Licenses] so that Dudley would lose her BSW
license—making her unable to pursue her chosen
occupation.”
Dudley further argues that it can be
“reasonably inferred that Appellees’ intent behind revoking
Dudley’s course credit and BSW degree, and expelling her,
was to prevent her from being eligible for a BSW license.”

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

33

We reject Dudley’s argument for two reasons. First,
BSU’s decision to revoke Dudley’s degree and report that
revocation to the Idaho Division of Occupational and
Professional Licenses, while procedurally infirm, was not
substantively “arbitrary and lacking a rational basis,” given
the severity of IDHW’s allegations. See Engquist, 478 F.3d
at 997. Any conclusion to the contrary would risk subjecting
all professional licensure schemes and professional
education program enrollment decisions to arbitrary-andcapricious review. See Aka v. United States Tax Court, 854
F.3d 30, 35 (D.C. Cir. 2017) (concluding that there is no
“substantive due process right to bar membership or against
unduly harsh disbarment”).
Second, as BSU observes, even if Dudley’s allegations
were true, she has not alleged that she is unable to pursue a
career in the broader social work profession without a
license or degree, and she never alleged that she cannot
pursue a social work education elsewhere. Dudley thus
failed to allege that BSU’s revocation of her degree was
anything more than a “brief interruption” in her social work
career, much less “a complete prohibition of the right to
engage in a calling.” See Engquist, 478 F.3d at 997 (citation
omitted). We therefore agree with the district court that
Dudley failed to state a claim that BSU deprived her of an
occupational liberty interest.
C. Qualified Immunity
The district court dismissed Dudley’s claims to the extent
they seek monetary relief, concluding that even if Dudley
had alleged a due process violation, Defendants are
protected by qualified immunity. Dudley, 732 F. Supp. 3d at
1287–89. Dudley argues this was error because ISBOE
Policy § III.B.2.iii.3 requires that BSU give students “due

34

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

process” and hold them accountable “using academic
standards and institutional procedures.” Although we have
concluded that Dudley sufficiently alleged that BSU denied
her due process when it revoked her degree following a
deficient hearing, we affirm the district court’s decision that
Defendants are protected by qualified immunity because
they did not violate any clearly established right.
“Public officials are immune from suit [for damages]
under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 unless they have ‘violated a
statutory or constitutional right that was clearly established
at the time of the challenged conduct.’” City and County of
San Francisco v. Sheehan, 575 U.S. 600, 611 (2015) (citation
omitted). “We do not require a case directly on point, but
existing precedent must have placed the statutory or
constitutional question beyond debate.” Ashcroft v. al-Kidd,
563 U.S. 731, 741 (2011).
Dudley cites no caselaw that establishes that a
university’s analogous conduct violated a graduate’s rights
under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment.
Even though Dudley plausibly alleged that Defendants did
deprive Dudley of her degree with insufficient process, “[a]
procedural due process analysis that requires a complicated
balancing test is sufficiently unpredictable” such that it was
not clearly established that BSU was required to provide
Dudley with certain procedural protections. See Humphries,
554 F.3d at 1202.
D. Preliminary Injunction
Finally, we dismiss as moot Dudley’s appeal of the
district court’s 2022 denial of a TRO extension, which we
construe as denial of a preliminary injunction. See
Washington v. Trump, 847 F.3d 1151, 1158 (9th Cir. 2017)
(treating “an order styled as a TRO” as a preliminary

DUDLEY V. BOISE STATE UNIVERSITY

35

injunction when the order “was strongly challenged in
adversarial proceedings before the district court and [] it has
or will remain in force for longer than [a] fourteen-day
period”); Barbaria v. Blinken, 87 F.4th 963, 976 (9th Cir.
2023) (treating a “denial of a TRO” as “tantamount to the
denial of a preliminary injunction” (citation omitted)); see
also Planned Parenthood Ariz. Inc. v. Betlach, 727 F.3d 960,
963 (9th Cir. 2013).
IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we REVERSE the district
court’s dismissal of Dudley’s procedural due process claim
insofar as Dudley alleged that Defendants denied her due
process by not allowing her sufficient time to present her
defense and by refusing to allow her to cross-examine or
otherwise question adverse BSU-affiliated witnesses at her
conduct hearing, and we REMAND for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion. We AFFIRM the district
court’s dismissal of Dudley’s substantive due process claim.
We AFFIRM the district court’s judgment granting
qualified immunity to the Defendants as to Dudley’s claims
for monetary relief. Finally, we DISMISS Dudley’s appeal
of the district court’s denial of a preliminary injunction.
Each party shall bear its own costs on appeal.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART,
DISMISSED IN PART, and REMANDED.

