FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF
THE COLVILLE RESERVATION,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
and
JOSEPH A. PAKOOTAS, an
individual and enrolled member of
the Confederated Tribes of the
Colville Reservation, DONALD R.
MICHEL, an individual and enrolled
member of the Confederated Tribes
of the Colville Reservation,
Plaintiffs,
STATE OF WASHINGTON,
Intervenor-Plaintiff,
v.
TECK COMINCO METALS LTD, a
Canadian corporation,
Defendant - Appellee.

No. 24-5565
D.C. No.
2:04-cv-00256SAB
OPINION

2

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Washington
Stanley Allen Bastian, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 17, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed September 3, 2025
Before: Ronald M. Gould and Richard A. Paez, Circuit
Judges, and Michael J. McShane, Chief District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Gould
SUMMARY **
Environmental Law
In an interlocutory appeal, the panel reversed the district
court’s summary judgment in favor of Teck Cominco Metals
Ltd. and remanded for trial on the Confederated Tribes of the
Colville Reservation’s claims for natural resource damages
under § 107(a)(4)(C) of the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation, and Liability Act against Teck.
The Tribes’ claims were based on Teck’s contamination
of the Upper Columbia River with hazardous substances
The Honorable Michael J. McShane, United States Chief District Judge
for the District of Oregon, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

3

from its lead-zinc smelter in British Columbia, resulting in
injuries to fish and benthic organisms in the river. The
Tribes sought damages for their members’ interim lost use
of the injured natural resources. The district court granted
summary judgment on the basis that the Tribes sought
damages for injured “cultural resources,” not “natural
resources,” and that claims involving damages with a
cultural component are not cognizable under CERCLA.
The panel agreed with the district court that natural
resource damages under CERCLA are only available to
address injury to natural resources, defined under the statute
as “land, fish, wildlife, biota, air, water, ground water,
drinking water supplies, and other such resources.” But the
panel held that this definition does not mean that natural
resource trustees can only recover damages to restore or
replace natural resources that are directly injured by the
release of a hazardous substance. Rather, natural resource
damages under CERCLA normally include restoration costs
at a minimum, plus interim lost-use value in appropriate
cases. Considering CERCLA’s text and its restorative
purpose, and agreeing with the D.C. Circuit, the panel held
that CERCLA authorizes damages for lost uses of injured
natural resources in cases where the lost uses have a cultural
dimension.

4

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

COUNSEL
Paul J. Dayton (argued), Daniel J. Vecchio, and Alexandrea
M. Smith, Ogden Murphy Wallace PLLC, Seattle,
Washington, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Andrew A. Fitz and Joshua A. Osborne-Klein, Assistant
Attorneys General, Ecology Division, Office of the
Washington Attorney General, Olympia, Washington, for
Intervenor-Plaintiff.
Anne M. Voigts (argued), Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman
LLP, Palo, Alto, California; Amanda G. Halter, Pillsbury
Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP, Houston, Texas; Deborah B.
Baum, Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman LLP, Washington,
D.C.; Mark E. Elliott, Pillsbury Winthrop Shaw Pittman
LLP, Los Angeles, California; Bryce J. Wilcox and Kammi
M. Smith, Witherspoon Brajcich Mcphee PLLC, Spokane,
Washington; for Defendant-Appellee.
Brian J. Cleary and Dianne L. Herz, Cleary Law Group PC,
Hayden, Idaho, for Amicus Curiae Spokane Tribe of Indians.
Rex S. Heinke and Jessica M. Weisel, Complex Appellate
Litigation Group LLP, Los Angeles, California, for Amicus
Curiae His Majesty the King in Right of the Province of
British Columbia.
Joseph M. Manning, David S. Gualtieri, and Mary G.
Sprague, Attorneys, Environment & Natural Resources
Division; Todd Kim, Assistant Attorney General; United
States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus
Curiae the United States.
Kendra A. Martinez, Tribal Attorney, Suquamish Indian
Tribe, Suquamish, Washington; Michael M. Frandina, The

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

5

Askman Law Firm, Denver, Colorado; for Amicus Curiae
Suquamish Indian Tribe.
Julie A. Weis, Haglund Kelley LLP, Portland, Oregon, for
Amicus Curiae Confederated Tribes of Siletz Indians.
Kelly L. Perigoe and Hannah T. Nguyen, King & Spalding
LLP, Los Angeles, California, for Amici Curiae the
Canadian Chamber of Commerce and the Mining
Association of Canada.
Thomas L. Murphy and Ada M. Stepleton, Native American
Rights Fund, Boulder, Colorado; Winter Hayes, Nez Perce
Tribe, Lapwai, Idaho; Diana R. Bob, Native Law PPLC,
Bellingham, Washington; Josh Newton, Best Best & Krieger
LLP, Bend, Oregon; Tom Zeilman, Law Offices of Thomas
Zeilman, Yakima, Washington; for Amici Curiae Nez Perce
Tribe, the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian
Reservation, the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs
Reservation of Oregon, and the Confederated Tribes and
Bands of the Yakama Nation.
William M. Jay and Isabel M. Marin, Goodwin Procter LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Tawny A. Bridgeford, National Mining
Association, Washington, D.C.; Andrew R. Varcoe and
Stephanie A. Maloney, U.S. Chamber Litigation Center; for
Amici Curiae the National Mining Association, American
Exploration & Mining Association, and Chamber of
Commerce of the United States of America.

6

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

OPINION
GOULD, Circuit Judge:
This appeal concerns the Confederated Tribes of the
Colville Reservation’s (the “Colvilles” or “Tribes”) claims
for natural resource damages under section 107(a)(4)(C) of
the
Comprehensive
Environmental
Response,
Compensation, and Liability Act (“CERCLA”), 42 U.S.C.
§ 9607(a)(4)(C), against Teck Cominco Metals, Ltd.
(“Teck”), a Canadian corporation. The Tribes’ claims are
based on Teck’s contamination of the Upper Columbia River
with hazardous substances from its lead-zinc smelter in
Trail, British Columbia, resulting in injuries to fish and
benthic organisms in the river. The Tribes seek damages for
their members’ interim lost use of the injured natural
resources between the time of the release of the hazardous
substances and potential restoration. The district court
granted Teck summary judgment on the Tribes’ damages
claims, holding that the Tribes sought damages for injured
“cultural resources,” not “natural resources,” and that claims
involving damages with a cultural component are not
cognizable under CERCLA. We have jurisdiction under 28
U.S.C. § 1292(b) and we reverse the district court’s grant of
summary judgment on the Tribes’ claims for natural
resource damages and remand for trial.
I. FACTS AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
A
This case concerns the Upper Columbia River, roughly
150 miles of river and reservoir in Washington State,
bounded to the north by the Canada-U.S. border and to the
south by the Grand Coulee Dam. The Colvilles are a

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

7

federally recognized tribe comprised of twelve individual
tribes whose members claim they have lived on the banks of
the Upper Columbia River since “time immemorial.” The
Upper Columbia River forms the eastern and southern
boundary of the Colville Reservation and holds great cultural
significance to the Tribes.
Teck, a Canadian mining company, owns a smelter on
the banks of the Columbia River, ten miles north of the
Canadian border, in Trail, British Columbia. The district
court found that between 1930 and 1995, Teck discharged
about 400 tons of slag daily—an estimated 9.97 million tons
in total—directly into the Columbia River. The slag
discarded into the river contained 7,300 tons of lead and
255,000 tons of zinc. In addition to slag, Teck also
discharged untold gallons of contaminated effluent directly
into the Columbia River. The effluent discharged into the
river between 1923 and 2005 contained about 132,000 tons
of hazardous substances, including 108,000 tons of zinc,
22,000 tons of lead, 200 tons of mercury, 1,700 tons of
cadmium, and 270 tons of arsenic. What was once the
lifeblood of the Tribes, now became a toxic dumping
ground, impacting the relationship the Tribe had with the
river.
B
Litigation regarding the contamination of the Upper
Columbia River commenced in 2004 when two members of
the Tribes brought a CERCLA citizen suit against Teck.
These plaintiffs were later joined by the State of Washington
as a plaintiff-intervenor and by the Colville Tribes as a coplaintiff.
The district court trifurcated the case to
sequentially determine: (1) whether Teck was liable as a
potentially responsible party; (2) Teck’s liability for

8

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

response (i.e., cleanup) costs; and (3) Teck’s liability for
natural resource damages.
In Phase I of trial, the district court concluded that Teck
was liable as an arranger under CERCLA section 107(a)(3),
§ 9607(a)(3), and that Teck was jointly and severally liable
to the Tribes and the State in any subsequent action or
actions to recover past or future response costs at the Upper
Columbia River site under CERCLA section 107(a)(4)(A),
§ 9607(a)(4)(A).
In Phase II, the State settled its claim for past response
costs while the Tribes proceeded to trial. The district court
found in favor of the Tribes and awarded them
$3,394,194.43 in investigative expenses incurred through
December 31, 2013, $4,859,482.22 in attorney’s fees up to
that date, and $344,300.00 in prejudgment interest. Teck
appealed, and we affirmed the district court’s judgment.
Pakootas v. Teck Cominco Metals, Ltd, 905 F.3d 565, 574,
596 (9th Cir. 2018).
The district court then proceeded with Phase III of the
case to determine Teck’s liability for damages to natural
resources. The Tribes and the State brought joint claims for
natural resource damages based on injury to benthic
organisms in the river sediment and elevated mercury levels
in fish, including claims for damages for the public’s lost use
of those natural resources. Along with these joint damages
claims, the Tribes also separately seek natural resource
damages for their interim lost uses of the injured natural
resources that are specific to their members because of their
unique relationship with the Upper Columbia River. The
Tribes’ experts opined that the Tribes sustained natural
resource damages as a result of: (1) reduced tribal fishing
trips due to state-issued advisories concerning unsafe

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

9

mercury levels in fish; (2) the interim lost use of an
uncontaminated river; and (3) the interim lost use of the
injured natural resources for cultural purposes. 1
Teck moved for partial summary judgment on the
Tribes’ separate natural resource damages claims, arguing in
part that CERCLA does not authorize natural resource
damages for cultural service losses. 2 The district court
granted the motion, reasoning that the Tribes in effect sought
damages for cultural resources that are not authorized under
CERCLA.
The Tribes moved for reconsideration,
contending that Teck and the court misconstrued their claims
and emphasizing that they sought natural resource damages,
not cultural resource damages. The district court denied the
Tribes’ motion for reconsideration. The Tribes then moved
to certify the summary judgment order for interlocutory
appeal under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b). The district court
reiterated its previous holding and granted the motion while
acknowledging that “there is a conflict between the holding
in State of Ohio which claims ‘nonuse’ services are
actionable under CERCLA and this Court’s Order
determining that such claims are not cognizable under
The Colvilles state that their second and third categories of damages
are alternative approaches to damages.

1

CERCLA refers to recovery of damages for the “use value” of injured
natural resources, 42 U.S.C. § 9651(c)(2), but the implementing
regulations and the governing caselaw have used a variety of other terms
to describe the same concept, including “lost use,” “interim lost use,”
and “service loss.” See 43 C.F.R. § 11.83; State of Ohio v. U.S. Dep’t.
of the Interior, 880 F.2d 432, 448 (D.C. Cir. 1989). The Tribes originally
referred to their claims as “tribal service loss” claims, but on appeal they
refer to their claims as claims for their “interim lost use” of injured
natural resources. In this opinion, we refer to the Tribes’ claims as lost
use or interim lost use claims.
2

10

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

CERCLA if they involved damages with a cultural
component.” See State of Ohio v. U.S. Dep’t of the Interior,
880 F.2d 432 (D.C. Cir. 1989). We granted interlocutory
review of the district court’s summary judgment order
dismissing the Tribes natural resource damages claims.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review de novo a grant of summary judgment. Lolli
v. Cnty. of Orange, 351 F.3d 410, 414 (9th Cir. 2003). When
considering a grant of summary judgment, we view the
evidence in the light most favorable to the nonmoving party,
and we determine whether there are any genuine issues of
material fact and whether the district court correctly applied
the relevant substantive law. Id.
III. DISCUSSION
The Tribes contend that the district court erred in
granting summary judgment to Teck on their claims for
natural resource damages by characterizing the claims as
“cultural resources” injury and concluding that CERCLA
does not authorize damages for injuries to such “cultural
resources.” The Tribes contend that they are not seeking
damages for injured cultural resources, but rather for their
lost use of injured natural resources where their lost use has
a cultural dimension in light of the Tribes’ unique
relationship with the Upper Columbia River. We use the
traditional tools of statutory interpretation to determine
whether the district court erred by dismissing the Tribes’
natural resource damage claims as a matter of law, and
whether § 9607(a)(4)(C) authorizes damages for the interim
lost uses of injured natural resources in a case where the
diminished uses have a cultural dimension.

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

11

CERCLA was enacted “[t]o provide for liability,
compensation, cleanup, and emergency response for
hazardous substances released into the environment and the
cleanup of inactive hazardous waste disposal sites.” State of
Idaho v. Hanna Mining Co., 882 F.2d 392, 394 (9th Cir.
1989) (alteration in original) (citing Pub. L. No. 96–510, 94
Stat. 2767 (1980)). CERCLA makes potentially responsible
parties jointly and severally liable not only for “all costs of
removal or remedial action,” but also for “damages for injury
to, destruction of, or loss of natural resources, including the
reasonable cost of assessing such injury, destruction, or loss
resulting from such a release [of a hazardous substance].”
§ 9607(a)(4)(A), (C). “Indian” Tribes, in addition to the
United States and the states, may sue as natural resource
trustees to recover these natural resource damages.
§ 9607(f)(1).
Congress conferred on the President (who in turn
delegated to the Department of the Interior (“Interior”)) the
responsibility for promulgating regulations to address how
these natural resource damages would be assessed.
§ 9651(c)(1); State of Ohio, 880 F.2d at 439. Congress
stated that the regulations must:
identify the best available procedures to
determine [natural resource] damages,
including both direct and indirect injury,
destruction, or loss and shall take into
consideration factors including, but not
limited to, replacement value, use value, and

12

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

ability of the ecosystem or resource to
recover. § 9651(c)(2).
The statute also states that the measure of natural
resources damages “shall not be limited by the sums which
can be used to restore or replace [natural] resources.”
§ 9607(f)(1).
Interior promulgated its first round of regulations
assessing natural resource damages in 1986. 51 Fed. Reg.
27,674 (Aug. 1, 1986) (codified at 43 C.F.R. pt. 11). This
first round of regulations prescribed a hierarchy of
methodologies by which the lost-use value of natural
resources could be measured, focusing exclusively on
market values for such resources when market values were
available. State of Ohio, 880 F.2d at 462 (citing id.).
Interior’s regulations were reviewed by the D.C. Circuit in
State of Ohio, which held that “Congress intended the
damage assessment regulations to capture fully all aspects of
loss,” and that Interior had “erroneously construed the
statute” to preclude certain methods for determining the lostuse value of natural resources. Id. at 463–64. The D.C.
Circuit remanded the regulations to Interior with instructions
to “consider a rule that would permit trustees to derive use
values for natural resources by summing up all reliably
calculated use values, however measured,” including
“‘passive’ use” or “non-consumptive” values such as
“[o]ption and existence values” which “reflect utility derived
by humans from a resource, and thus, prima facie, ought to
be included in a damage assessment.” Id. at 464. The D.C.
Circuit defined option value as “the dollar amount an
individual is willing to pay although he or she is not
currently using a resource but wishes to reserve the option to
use that resource in a certain state of being in the future.” Id.

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

13

at 475 n.72. And it defined existence value as the “dollar
amount an individual is willing to pay although he or she
does not plan to use the resource, either at present or in the
future. The payment is for the knowledge that the resource
will continue to exist in a given state of being.” Id. at 476
n.73.
Interior revised its regulations in response to State of
Ohio. Adhering to the D.C. Circuit’s reading of the scope of
CERCLA’s natural resource damages provisions, the current
implementing regulations provide that recoverable damages
for the interim lost use of natural resources are measured by
“both public use and nonuse values such as existence and
bequest values.” 43 C.F.R. § 11.83(c)(1). “Use value” is
defined as “the economic value of the resources to the public
attributable to the direct use of the services provided by the
natural resources.” § 11.83(c)(1)(i); see also 43 C.F.R.
§ 11.14(nn) (defining “[s]ervices” as “the physical and
biological functions performed by the resource including the
human uses of those functions.”). “Nonuse value,” on the
other hand, represents “the economic value the public
derives from natural resources that is independent of any
direct use of the services provided.” § 11.83(c)(1)(ii).
Here, the Tribes have identified natural resource injuries
from Teck’s release of hazardous substances into the Upper
Columbia River—injured benthic organisms and injured fish
with elevated mercury levels—and seek damages for their
members’ interim lost use of those natural resources. The
Tribes provide three methods for quantifying their interim
lost use of the injured natural resources: (1) reduced river
trips by Tribal members due to the mercury-based fish
consumption advisories; (2) the interim lost use of an
uncontaminated river; and (3) the interim lost use of the
injured natural resources for cultural purposes. The Tribes’

14

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

first lost use claim measures the Tribes’ reduced river use
due to the mercury-based fish advisories issued over the
years and applies an enhanced value based on the role of
fishing in the Colvilles’ culture. The Tribes’ second claim
is derived from a contingent valuation study that was based
on the nonuse or “existence value” of an uncontaminated
Upper Columbia River. The Tribes’ third claim reflects the
Tribes’ alternative measure of damages for use and nonuse
service losses as a result of the injured natural resources.
The Tribes acknowledge that their uses of the injured natural
resources include a cultural component because of their
unique relationship with the Upper Columbia River.
We agree with the district court that natural resource
damages under CERCLA are only available to address injury
to natural resources. Natural resources are defined as “land,
fish, wildlife, biota, air, water, ground water, drinking water
supplies, and other such resources.” 42 U.S.C. § 9601(16);
43 C.F.R. § 11.14(z). But, contrary to the district court’s
conclusion, this definition does not mean that natural
resource trustees can only recover damages to restore or
replace natural resources that are directly injured by the
release of a hazardous substance. Congress made this
explicit by instructing that natural resource damages “shall
not be limited by the sums which can be used to restore or
replace natural resources.” § 9607(f)(1). Section 9651(c)(2)
requires that the regulations for assessing natural resource
damages consider, among other factors, “use value,” and
read together with § 9607(f)(1)’s “shall not be limited by”
language, directs that “the measure of damages must not
only be sufficient to cover the intended restoration or
replacement uses in the usual case but may in some cases
exceed restoration cost by incorporating interim lost use
value as well.” State of Ohio, 880 F.2d at 448. This means

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

15

that natural resource damages under CERCLA “normally
include restoration costs at a minimum, plus interim lost-use
value in appropriate cases.” Alaska Sport Fishing Ass’n v.
Exxon Corp., 34 F.3d 769, 772 (9th Cir. 1994) (emphasis
omitted) (quoting State of Ohio, 880 F.2d at 454 & n.34).
The Tribes seek damages for their interim lost use of injured
natural resources, and the district court erred by rejecting the
Tribes’ claims as claims for cultural resource damages
without assessing whether CERCLA authorizes damages for
lost uses of injured natural resources in cases where the lost
uses have a cultural dimension. We complete that analysis
here.
We start with CERCLA’s text. When Congress ordered
the President to promulgate regulations to guide the
assessment of natural resource damages, it included a broad
array of recoverable damages in its directive. The
regulations had to:
identify the best available procedures to
determine such damages, including both
direct and indirect injury, destruction, or loss
and shall take into consideration factors
including, but not limited to, replacement
value, use value, and ability of the ecosystem
or resource to recover.
§ 9651(c)(2)
(emphasis added).
Congress did not limit the types of recoverable natural
resource damages, nor specify the types of approved “uses.”
See id.; § 9607(f)(1). Instead, it provided that recoverable
damages must include at least those specified in the statute,
including “use value.” § 9651(c)(2).

16

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

CERCLA does not define “use value,” id., so this term is
given its ordinary meaning. U.S. Commodity Futures
Trading Comm’n v. Monex Credit Co., 931 F.3d 966, 973
(9th Cir. 2019). Webster’s Dictionary in 1979, the year
before CERCLA was enacted, defined “use” to include “a
method or manner of employing or applying something” and
“a particular service or end.” Webster’s New Collegiate
Dictionary 1279 (1979). Nothing in this common meaning
of the word suggests that lost uses that have a cultural
component fall outside the scope of recoverable lost use
damages authorized by the statute. See § 9651(c)(2).
Interpreting CERCLA to authorize damages for the lost
use of injured natural resources where the lost use has a
cultural component is consistent with CERCLA’s restorative
purpose. A core pillar of the statute’s purpose is to “assure
that parties responsible for hazardous substances [bear] the
cost of remedying the conditions they created.” Pinal Creek
Grp. v. Newmont Mining Corp., 118 F.3d 1298, 1300 (9th
Cir. 1997). Although response actions are one method
towards accomplishing this objective because they seek to
remove or isolate hazardous substances from the
environment to prevent or minimize future harm from the
contamination, such response costs are not designed to repair
the harm to natural resources that occurred while the
contamination was not yet contained, including the
disruption of any human uses of the natural resources. See
§ 9607(a). This is where a cultural component of natural
resource damages must be considered. See § 9607(a)(4)(C).
Reading in new limitations to CERCLA’s natural resource
damages provisions, such as by holding that CERCLA does
not authorize damages for the lost use of injured natural
resources where the lost use has a cultural component, would
fall short of “Congress’s intent to [permit] recover[y] for the

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

17

full damages resulting from a release.” Nat’l Ass’n of Mfrs.
v. U.S. Dep’t of Interior, 134 F.3d 1095, 1112 (D.C. Cir.
1998) (citing State of Ohio, 880 F.2d at 464). It is clear
beyond doubt that Congress aimed at providing full recovery
of any damages to those persons harmed by the loss of
natural resources. To do that, damages occasioned by lost
human activities must be considered.
The D.C. Circuit’s opinion in State of Ohio, which the
district court acknowledged it did not consider when
dismissing the Tribes’ interim lost use claims, also supports
our holding that CERCLA authorizes damages for the lost
use of injured natural resources including where the lost use
has a cultural component. In State of Ohio, the D.C. Circuit
held that Congress intended the regulations assessing natural
resource damages to “capture fully all aspects of loss[,]” and
to “permit trustees to derive use values for natural resources
by summing up all reliably calculated use values,” including
“‘passive’ use,” or “nonuse” values, like “existence values”
which “reflect utility derived by humans from a resource and
thus, prima facie, ought to be included in a damage
assessment.” 880 F.2d at 463–64, 476 n.77. We agree with
the D.C. Circuit that CERCLA authorizes lost use claims
based on “reliably calculated” values that “reflect utility
derived by humans from a resource,” provided that “the
trustee does not double count [the values.]” Id. at 464.
Under the D.C. Circuit’s interpretation of § 9651(c)(2),
passive uses like “existence values” are an authorized
measure of damages under the statute, and we see no reason
why the Tribes’ lost use claims, which include both active
and passive uses of injured natural resources bearing cultural
significance, would fall outside CERCLA’s broad scope
because their lost uses “reflect utility derived by humans
from a resource.” See id. at 463–64. Whether the Tribes can

18

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

prevail on their damages claims will include questions about
methodology and whether the Tribes’ claims include any
double counting, but these factual issues can only be
properly determined after trial and full consideration of the
evidence, including expert testimony. It was error for the
district court to dismiss the Tribes’ claims as a matter of law
by characterizing the claims as unauthorized under
CERCLA. The fact issues not yet determined require a trial,
not a summary judgment.
Next, we address the two cases the district court relied
upon in its order, which we conclude are unpersuasive:
Coeur d’Alene Tribe v. Asarco Inc., 280 F. Supp. 2d 1094
(D. Idaho 2003) and In re Gold King Mine Release, 669 F.
Supp. 3d 1146 (D.N.M. 2023). Neither case addresses
damages for the interim lost use of injured natural resources
under CERCLA, and therefore, neither case affects our
analysis or conclusion that the Tribes’ damages claims are
authorized under CERCLA.
First, in Coeur d’Alene Tribe, the district court made a
factual finding that reads like a legal conclusion, stating that
“[c]ultural uses of water and soil by the Tribe are not
recoverable as natural resource damages.” 280 F. Supp. 2d
at 1107.
The court did not provide any statutory
interpretation analysis or other reasoning why interference
with cultural uses due to contamination of natural resources
was not a cognizable claim for natural resource damages
under CERCLA. Id. Without any analysis of lost use claims
or discussion of the D.C. Circuit’s opinion in State of Ohio,
this case is unpersuasive.
We also conclude that In re Gold King Mine Release is
not persuasive. In that case, the district court examined the
issue of whether certain “restorative damages claims”

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

19

brought by the Navajo Nation under state tort law were
preempted by CERCLA’s natural resource damages
provisions. 669 F. Supp. 3d at 1159–60. The damages the
Navajo Nation sought were for the stated purpose of
restoring the confidence of the Navajo Nation’s members in
the San Juan River as a natural resource. Id. at 1156. In
holding that the claims were not preempted by CERCLA, the
district court rejected the defendant’s characterization of the
claim as one for natural resource damages and said that,
while the claim was connected to the contamination from a
gold mine spill, the restorative damage claims sought to
remedy “injuries that are distinct from the injury to the
River.” Id. at 1160. Here, determining whether the
Colvilles’ damages claims seek to remedy injuries that are
distinct from the injury to the Upper Columbia River is a
factual question that the district court will need to determine
on remand, but this factual question is separate and apart
from the legal question we are tasked with answering on
appeal: whether CERCLA authorizes damages for the
interim lost use of natural resources when the lost use has a
cultural component. Because In re Gold King Mine Release
does not analyze the scope of natural resource damages
under CERCLA, let alone the recoverability of damages for
the interim lost use of injured natural resources, it too does
not support dismissal of the Tribes’ damages claims at the
summary judgment stage. See id. at 1157–60.
We hold that the district court reversibly erred when it
concluded that the Tribes sought damages for injuries to
cultural resources and that cultural resource damages are not
authorized under CERCLA. Nothing in the statute or in the
caselaw suggests that interim lost uses of injured natural
resources which have a cultural component, either because
cultural perspectives inform the determination of the value

20

CONFEDERATED TRIBES V. TECK COMINCO METALS LTD

of the interim lost use or because the injured natural
resources have cultural uses, should be excluded as a matter
of law from lost use damages authorized by CERCLA under
§ 9651(c)(2). We reverse the district court’s dismissal and
remand the case for trial to determine whether the Tribes
have sustained any damages from lost uses of injured natural
resources.
IV. CONCLUSION
For the reasons stated herein, we reverse the district
court’s grant of summary judgment rejecting the Tribes’
separate claims for natural resource damages and remand the
case for trial.
REVERSED AND REMANDED FOR TRIAL.

