FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS
FOR ETHICAL CARE INC;
ADVOCATES PROTECTING
CHILDREN; PARENT 1A;
PARENT 1B; PARENT 2A;
PARENT 2B; PARENT 3A;
PARENT 3B; PARENT 4A;
PARENT 4B; PARENT 5A;
PARENT 5B,

No. 24-3661
D.C. No.
3:23-cv-05736DGE
OPINION

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
ROBERT FERGUSON, Governor;
NICK BROWN, Attorney General of
Washington; TANA SENN,
Secretary of the Washington
Department of Children, Youth, and
Families, *
Defendants - Appellees.

Pursuant to Fed. R. App. P. 43(c)(2), Robert Ferguson, Nick Brown,
and Tana Senn have been automatically substituted for their
predecessors—Jay Inslee, Robert Ferguson, and Ross Hunter,
respectively.

*

2

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
Robert J. Bryan, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 15, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed July 25, 2025
Before: SIDNEY R. THOMAS, MILAN D. SMITH, JR.,
and DANIEL A. BRESS, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.
SUMMARY **
Article III Standing
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal, for lack
of Article III standing, of an action challenging three
Washington laws regulating the rights and privileges of
Washington minors seeking access to mental health care and
shelter services, particularly minors who are transgender.
The panel held that plaintiffs, two national organizations
and five sets of parents whose children have shown signs of
gender dysphoria, had not pled current or future injuries
sufficient to confer standing.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

3

First, the panel held that the individual plaintiffs lacked
standing based on current injuries because the individual
plaintiffs’ alleged injuries in constraining their ability to
parent, forcing them to censor their speech, and limiting their
access to relevant information about their children are not
cognizable under Article III.
Second, the panel held that the individual plaintiffs
lacked standing based on future injuries. The panel rejected
the individual plaintiffs’ suggestion that, because they have
minor children who experience gender dysphoria and
socially transitioned at school, “one may infer that at least
one child is likely to run away in the future” and therefore
come within reach of the challenged laws. The panel held
that the individual plaintiffs’ amorphous and insufficiently
explained concerns about “some day” injuries were not
enough to satisfy Article III.
Finally, the panel held that the organizational plaintiffs
lacked standing. For the same reasons that the individual
plaintiffs lacked standing, the panel rejected plaintiffs’
argument that International Partners for Ethical Care, Inc.
had associational standing based on the alleged injury
suffered by one of its members, a Washington parent of a
minor child who has struggled with gender
dysphoria. Plaintiffs offered no assertion that the other
organizational plaintiff had any type of standing.
Accordingly, the panel affirmed the district court’s
dismissal of plaintiffs’ action for lack of standing.

4

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

COUNSEL
Gene C. Schaerr (argued) and Edward H. Trent, Schaerr
Jaffe LLP, Washington, D.C.; Jonathan F. Mitchell, Mitchell
Law PLLC, Austin, Texas; James K. Rogers, Nicholas
Barry, and Ian Prior, America First Legal Foundation,
Washington, D.C.; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Cristina Sepe (argued) and Marsha J. Chien, Deputy
Solicitors General; Robert W. Ferguson, Attorney General;
Office of the Washington Attorney General, Olympia,
Washington; Andrew R.W. Hughes, and Lauryn K. Fraas,
Assistant Attorneys General; Office of the Washington
Attorney General, Seattle, Washington; for DefendantsAppellees.
Eric A. Sell, Harmeet K. Dhillon, Mark Trammell, and Josh
W. Dixon, Center for American Liberty, Mount Airy,
Maryland, for Amicus Curiae the Center for American
Liberty.
Jennifer W. Kennedy, Law Office of Jennifer W. Kennedy,
Sierra Madre, California, for Amicus Curiae Our Duty-USA.
Isaac Ruiz and McKean J. Evans, Ruiz & Smart LLP,
Seattle, Washington, for Amicus Curiae Legal Counsel for
Youth and Children.

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

5

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiffs, two national organizations and five sets of
Washington parents, bring constitutional challenges against
three Washington laws regulating the rights and privileges
of Washington minors, particularly minors who are
transgender. The district court dismissed Plaintiffs’ claims
for lack of standing. Plaintiffs timely appeal, contending
that they have standing based on present injuries and future
injuries that are certainly impending. We conclude, like the
district court, that Plaintiffs have not pled current or future
injuries sufficient to confer Article III standing. Because
Plaintiffs lack standing until actual or imminent injuries
occur, we affirm the district court’s dismissal of their action.
LEGAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiffs challenge the constitutionality of three
Washington laws: (1) Wash. Rev. Code § 71.34.530,
(2) Engrossed Substitute Senate Bill 5599 (ESSB 5599), and
(3) Substitute House Bill 1406 (SHB 1406) (collectively, the
Statutes). The effect of these laws is summarized briefly
here.
I. Wash. Rev. Code § 71.34.530
Enacted in 1985, Wash. Rev. Code § 71.34.530 was
passed as part of a comprehensive law “ensur[ing] that
minors in need of mental health care and treatment receive
appropriate care and treatment.” 1985 Wash. Sess. Laws,
ch. 354, § 1. It provides that any minor aged 13 and older
“may request and receive outpatient treatment without the
consent of the adolescent’s parent.” Wash. Rev. Code
§ 71.34.530. Outpatient treatment includes non-residential

6

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

programs offering, inter alia, mental and behavioral health
care. Id. §§ 71.34.020(46), 71.24.025.
Even if children receive outpatient treatment without
parental consent, their parents may still access information
about their care. For example, Washington law provides that
facilities offering mental health services may release
medical information and records about a child to that child’s
parents. Id. §§ 70.02.240(3), 71.34.430. Nevertheless,
“[w]hen an adolescent voluntarily consents to his or her own
mental health treatment under . . . [§] 71.34.530, a mental
health professional shall not proactively exercise his or her
discretion . . . to release information or records related to
solely mental health services received by the adolescent to a
parent of the adolescent, beyond any notification required
under [Washington law], unless the adolescent states a clear
desire to do so[.]” Id. § 70.02.265(1)(a).
II. ESSB 5599
Enacted in 2023, ESSB 5599 approved a set of
amendments to Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082. 2023
Wash. Legis. Serv., ch. 408, § 2 (West). That law, which
was enacted in 1995, sets forth a system of notification
requirements that apply when a licensed youth shelter
“shelters a child and knows at the time of providing the
shelter that the child is away from a lawfully prescribed
residence or home without parental permission.” Wash.
Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i). 1 Upon admitting such a
child, the shelter “must contact the youth’s parent within 72
Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082 also contains separate provisions that
apply to people, unlicensed shelters, and other programs that take in
runaway children. See Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(1)(a). Those
provisions are not at issue here.

1

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

7

hours, but preferably within 24 hours.” Id. 2 However, in the
presence of “compelling reasons,” including any
“[c]ircumstances that indicate that notifying the parent or
legal guardian will subject the minor to abuse or neglect,”
the shelter may forego contacting the child’s parents and
contact the Washington Department of Children, Youth, and
Families (DCYF) instead.
Id. § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i),
(2)(c)(i). Upon contact, DCYF must “make a good faith
attempt to notify the parent that a report has been received
and offer services to the youth and the family designed to
resolve the conflict . . . and accomplish a reunification of the
family.” Id. § 13.32A.082(3)(a).
ESSB 5599 adds to this framework by creating a
notification pathway that is specific to youth “seeking or
receiving protected health care services,” including “genderaffirming treatment” and “reproductive health care
services.” Id. § 13.32A.082(2)(c)(ii), (2)(d). 3 Under the
existing framework set forth in Wash. Rev. Code
§ 13.32A.082, licensed shelters that took in such children
were obligated to notify their parents so long as doing so
would not “subject the minor to abuse or neglect.” Id.
This notification “must include the whereabouts of the youth, a
description of the youth’s physical and emotional condition, and the
circumstances surrounding the youth’s contact with the shelter.” Wash.
Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i).

2

Washington law defines “gender-affirming treatment” as “a service or
product that a health care provider . . . prescribes to an individual to
support and affirm the individual’s gender identity.” Wash. Rev. Code
§ 74.09.675(3). It defines “reproductive health care services” as “any
medical services or treatments, including pharmaceutical and preventive
care service or treatments, directly involved in the reproductive system
and its processes, functions, and organs involved in reproduction, in all
stages of life.” Id. § 74.09.875(4)(c).
3

8

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

§ 13.32A.082(2)(c)(i). ESSB 5599 modifies this framework
by providing that the fact of a child’s “seeking or receiving
protected health care services” creates an additional instance
in which the shelter’s obligation to notify the child’s parents
is voided. Id. § 13.32A.082(2)(c)(ii). In these situations, as
when the shelter fears potential abuse or neglect by the
child’s parents, the shelter may again forego contacting the
child’s parents and contact DCYF instead.
Id.
§ 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i), (2)(c)(ii)
As in a case involving potential abuse or neglect, a
licensed shelter’s report to DCYF will again trigger DCYF’s
good-faith obligation “to notify the parent that a report has
been received and offer services to the youth and the family
designed to resolve the conflict . . . and accomplish a
reunification of the family.” Id. § 13.32A.082(3)(a). ESSB
5599 further specifies that, if a licensed shelter notifies
DCYF that it has taken in a minor seeking or receiving
“protected health care services,” DCYF must specifically
offer two types of services. First, DCYF must “[o]ffer to
make referrals on behalf of the minor for appropriate
behavioral health services.” Id. § 13.32A.082(3)(b)(i).
Second, DCYF must “[o]ffer services designed to resolve
the conflict and accomplish a reunification of the family.”
Id. § 13.32A.082(3)(b)(ii).
III. SHB 1406
Enacted during the same session as ESSB 5599, SHB
1406 implements two additional revisions to the framework
set forth in Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082. 2023 Wash.
Legis. Serv., ch. 151, § 2 (West). First, it creates additional
rules concerning DCYF’s good-faith obligation to notify a
child’s parents and offer services after receiving a report of
a runaway child. Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(3)(a).

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

9

Specifically, in addition to “notify[ing] the parent that a
report has been received,” id., DCYF must offer “family
reconciliation services,” id., which are “services . . .
designed to assess and stabilize the family with the goal of
resolving crisis and building supports, skills, and connection
to
community
networks
and
resources,”
id.
§ 13.32A.030(11). DCYF must offer these services “as soon
as possible, but no later than three days, excluding weekends
and holidays, following the receipt of a report.” Id.
§ 13.32A.082(3)(a).
Second, SHB 1406 expressly recognizes a pathway for
qualifying minors to stay in a licensed shelter for up to 90
days without parental permission.
See id.
§ 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i). This pathway is only available in two
situations: (1) if the shelter “is unable to make contact with
a parent despite their notification efforts” to the parent or
DCYF, id. § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i)(A), or (2) if the shelter
“makes contact with a parent, but the parent does not request
that the child return home,” id. § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i)(B). In
either scenario, the shelter must re-contact DCYF, which
again must offer reconciliation services to the family. Id.
§ 13.32A.082(3).
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiffs are two organizations and five sets of parents
that have challenged the Statutes as unconstitutional. The
organizations—International Partners for Ethical Care, Inc.
(IPEC) and Advocates Protecting Children (APC)
(collectively, the Organizational Plaintiffs)—are national
nonprofits that share a commitment to “stop[ping] the
unethical treatment of children by schools, hospitals, and
mental and medical healthcare providers under the
duplicitous banner of gender identity affirmation.” The

10

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

parents—1A and 1B, 2A and 2B, 3A and 3B, 4A and 4B,
and 5A and 5B (collectively, the Individual Plaintiffs 4)—are
residents or citizens of Washington whose children have
shown signs of gender dysphoria. 5 Their experiences are
summarized briefly here. 6
Parents 1A and 1B have a 14-year-old child, 1C, who has
shown signs of gender dysphoria. After 1C underwent a
social transition at school, 1A and 1B sought treatment for
1C and removed 1C from school. These actions caused 1C’s
“gender confusion [to] ease[] some.” Yet 1A and 1B remain
“concerned” that 1C will again seek to “adopt a gender
identi[t]y inconsistent with [1C’s] biological sex.” They
“fear” that 1C may seek to take advantage of the framework
set forth in the Statutes and worry that “[i]f 1C were to run
away, the [Statutes] would greatly harm [their] ability to care
for and raise” 1C. This concern has made 1A “hesitant to
discipline 1C for fear it will cause a rift that others might
take advantage of.”
Parents 2A and 2B have two children—an 18-year-old,
2C, and a 13-year-old, 2D—who have shown signs of gender
dysphoria. 2C, who has accused 2A and 2B of being
Due to the sensitivity of the Individual Plaintiffs’ experiences and
claims, the district court granted their motion to proceed using
pseudonyms.
4

4A and 4B are the only Individual Plaintiffs whose children have not
shown signs of gender dysphoria. Presumably for this reason, Plaintiffs
do not pursue the claims of 4A and 4B on appeal. We follow Plaintiffs’
lead in focusing on the claims of the other Individual Plaintiffs.
5

This section is based on the allegations in the First Amended Complaint
(FAC). Because the procedural posture is that of a motion to dismiss,
the allegations in the FAC are accepted as true. Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556
U.S. 662, 678 (2008).
6

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

11

“transphobic,” has threatened to take 2D, who underwent a
social transition at school, to a “safe place” where 2D’s
pronouns would be respected. This causes 2A and 2B to
become fearful every time 2D leaves their home with 2C. To
avoid exacerbating tensions with their children, 2A and 2B
have begun to avoid talking about gender around 2C and 2D,
and 2A has also ceased using 2D’s name or pronouns in
public settings. 2A and 2B worry that, “should [2D] run
away to a shelter,” their parental rights would be limited.
Parents 3A and 3B have a 14-year-old child, 3C, who is
autistic and has shown signs of gender dysphoria. 3C has
“experiment[ed] with a new name and . . . pronouns with
friends and at school,” and is “frequently ambivalent
about . . . gender.” When 3C’s older brother experienced
similar signs of gender confusion, “a friend’s family
encouraged [him] to run away and live with them.” 3A and
3B fear that 3C may similarly be encouraged to run away
and worry that, if 3C does, the Statutes will “force[] [them]
to accept ‘gender-affirming treatment’ for” 3C.
Finally, Parents 5A and 5B have a 15-year-old child, 5C,
who has shown signs of gender dysphoria. 5C’s symptoms
came on “rapid[ly]” at age 12, and 5C later underwent a
social transition at school without 5A and 5B’s knowledge.
5C continues to identify as “transgender” at school and has
“had conversations with numerous therapists and behavioral
health specialists about gender identity and ‘transitioning.’”
Because 5C ran away from home once at age 13, and because
5C has since had “hospitalizations” about which 5A and 5B
have limited information, 5A and 5B worry that 5C will run
away again and will rely on the Statutes to seek genderaffirming care.

12

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiffs first filed suit in August 2023, challenging
ESSB 5599 on a facial basis. Their complaint named as
defendants former Washington Governor Jay Inslee, former
Washington Attorney General Robert Ferguson, and DCYF
Secretary Ross Hunter, all in their official capacities
(collectively, the State). The State moved to dismiss for lack
of standing, and Plaintiffs responded by amending their
complaint as of right pursuant to Fed. R. Civ. P. 15(a)(1)(B).
Their First Amended Complaint (FAC) added a new set of
parents—Parents 5A and 5B—and new challenges to SHB
1406 and Wash. Rev. Code § 71.34.530. The FAC asserts
claims under the Due Process Clause, the Free Exercise
Clause, and the Free Speech Clause.
In December 2023, Defendants again moved to dismiss
for lack of standing. This time, Plaintiffs did not seek to
amend the FAC, and the district court proceeded to evaluate
the merits of the motion. It found that Plaintiffs’ alleged
harms were based on a “speculative chain of possibilities.”
The district court thus held that the Individual Plaintiffs had
not suffered concrete injuries sufficient to confer standing.
The district court similarly concluded that the
Organizational Plaintiffs had not sufficiently alleged
organizational standing. The district court dismissed the
action with prejudice for lack of standing and entered final
judgment.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
Meland v. Weber, 2 F.4th 838, 843 (9th Cir. 2021). “We
review questions of standing de novo,” Tyler v. Cuomo, 236
F.3d 1124, 1131 (9th Cir. 2000), construing “all material
allegations of fact in the complaint in favor of the plaintiff,”

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

13

Southcentral Found. v. Alaska Native Tribal Health
Consortium, 983 F.3d 411, 416–17 (9th Cir. 2020).
ANALYSIS
The sole question we must resolve on appeal is whether
Plaintiffs have standing to bring their claims. To establish
Article III standing, a plaintiff must show that he has
suffered or will imminently suffer an injury in fact, i.e., “an
invasion of a legally protected interest which is (a) concrete
and particularized and (b) ‘actual or imminent, not
“conjectural” or “hypothetical.”’” Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife,
504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992) (citations omitted) (quoting
Whitmore v. Arkansas, 495 U.S. 149, 155 (1990)). A
plaintiff must further demonstrate causation and
redressability by showing “that the injury likely was caused
or will be caused by the defendant, and . . . that the injury
likely would be redressed by the requested judicial relief.”
Food & Drug Admin. v. All. for Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S.
367, 368, 380 (2024).
The district court dismissed Plaintiffs’ claims for lack of
standing, specifically concluding that Plaintiffs had not
demonstrated a cognizable injury in fact. Plaintiffs contest
this conclusion, arguing that they can demonstrate three
independent and legally sufficient types of injuries. First,
Plaintiffs contend that some or all of the Individual Plaintiffs
are suffering current injuries. Second, Plaintiffs contend that
some or all of the Individual Plaintiffs are likely to suffer
future injuries that are certainly impending. Finally,
Plaintiffs contend that IPEC, one of the Organizational
Plaintiffs, has associational standing based on the claims of
its member. For the following reasons, we conclude that
Plaintiffs are unable to muster standing under any of these
theories.

14

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

I. The Individual Plaintiffs Lack Standing Based on
Current Injuries.
Plaintiffs first contend that some or all of the Individual
Plaintiffs have standing based on current injuries. They
point to three types of injuries: constraints on their ability to
parent, censored speech, and restrictions on access to
information about their children. The State responds that
these injuries are not cognizable under Article III.
Construing the allegations in the FAC in favor of Plaintiffs,
Pennell v. City of San Jose, 485 U.S. 1, 7 (1988), we agree
with the State that Plaintiffs’ alleged injuries are not
cognizable.
a. Constraints on Parenting
Plaintiffs first argue that the Statutes have injured the
Individual Plaintiffs by forcing them to alter their parenting
styles. This injury is most pertinent to Parents 1A and 1B.
Fearing that their child, 1C, may run away to seek genderaffirming care, 1A and 1B are “hesitant to discipline 1C”
because they do not wish to give 1C any reason to leave
home. This tension further leaves 1A “uncomfortable every
time she has a disagreement with 1C.” Plaintiffs argue that
these types of parenting-related difficulties are practical
injuries that the Individual Plaintiffs have suffered due to the
Statutes.
These injuries are not sufficient to confer standing. As
noted, Article III standing requires that a plaintiff present an
“actual or imminent” injury that is fairly traceable to the
defendant’s conduct. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560 (quoting
Whitmore, 495 U.S. at 155). As a corollary, a plaintiff
“cannot manufacture standing merely by inflicting harm on
themselves based on their fears of hypothetical future harm
that is not certainly impending.” Clapper v. Amnesty Int’l

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

15

USA, 568 U.S. 398, 416 (2013). Stated another way, “[n]o
[plaintiff] can be heard to complain about damage inflicted
by its own hand.” Pennsylvania v. New Jersey, 426 U.S.
660, 664 (1976) (per curiam); see also Nat’l Family Plan. &
Reprod. Health Ass’n v. Gonzales, 468 F.3d 826, 831 (D.C.
Cir. 2006) (“We have consistently held that self-inflicted
harm doesn’t satisfy the basic requirements for standing.
Such harm does not amount to an ‘injury’ cognizable under
Article III.”); Iten v. Los Angeles, 81 F.4th 979, 990 n.1 (9th
Cir. 2023).
Damages “inflicted by [their] own hand” are precisely
what Plaintiffs offer here. Pennsylvania, 426 U.S. at 664.
Critically, Plaintiffs do not allege that their or their
children’s behavior has yet brought them within reach of the
Statutes. Instead, they allege only that the looming “threat”
imposed by the Statutes has led them to alter their parenting
styles so that the Statutes cannot affect them. Such injuries
are self-inflicted because they are the result of “voluntary”
actions that Plaintiffs have taken “in response to” the
Statutes—not because of any actual requirement that the
Statutes impose. See Twitter, Inc. v. Paxton, 56 F.4th 1170,
1176 (9th Cir. 2022) (finding that the plaintiff lacked
standing because the only injuries it suffered were
voluntarily “taken in response to” the challenged action); see
also Maryland v. Louisiana, 451 U.S. 725, 742 n.18 (1981)
(affirming that standing does not arise from an “injury [that]
was voluntarily suffered”). As a result, Plaintiffs’ alleged
injuries do not give rise to standing. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560.
b. Censored Speech
Plaintiffs next argue that the Statutes have injured the
Individual Plaintiffs by forcing them to censor their speech.
This injury is most pertinent to Parents 2A and 2B. Fearing

16

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

that their children may run away if angered or confronted
about their gender dysphoria, 2A and 2B have stopped
talking about gender with or in front of their children.
Similarly, 2A no longer uses 2D’s given name or pronouns
in public settings in order to avoid upsetting 2D. In these
ways, 2A and 2B have “suppress[ed] [their] own speech in
an effort to avoid the consequences of the challenged
provisions.”
Self-censorship may give rise to standing when it is
based on “an actual and well-founded fear that the law will
be enforced against [the plaintiff].” Virginia v. Am.
Booksellers Ass’n, Inc., 484 U.S. 383, 393 (1988); see also
Clapper, 568 U.S. at 417–18; Laird v. Tatum, 408 U.S. 1,
13–14 (1972). However, “such a fear of prosecution will
only inure if the plaintiff’s intended speech arguably falls
within the statute’s reach.” Cal. Pro-Life Council, Inc. v.
Getman, 328 F.3d 1088, 1095 (9th Cir. 2003); Ariz. Right to
Life Pol. Action Comm. v. Bayless, 320 F.3d 1002, 1006 (9th
Cir. 2003); Dombrowski v. Pfister, 380 U.S. 479, 486 (1965).
Plaintiffs cannot make this showing with respect to the
Statutes because the Statutes do not regulate speech: They
set forth rules and systems pertaining to the rights and
privileges of Washington minors, and they have no bearing
on whether and to what extent Plaintiffs are permitted to
speak about topics, such as gender, with or around their
children. This distinction separates Plaintiffs from those
individuals that have been permitted to “hold [their]
tongue[s] and challenge now.” Ariz. Right to Life, 320 F.3d
at 1006. Whereas those individuals sought to challenge
regulations under which they would suffer likely
prosecution, Plaintiffs cannot “reasonably fear[] prosecution
under [the Statutes] for engaging in protected speech”
because the Statutes do not regulate or prosecute speech. Id.

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

17

at 1007. As a result, Plaintiffs lack “an actual and wellfounded fear that [the Statutes] will be enforced against
[them],” and they have accordingly not “suffered the
constitutionally recognized injury of self-censorship.” Cal.
Pro-Life Council, 328 F.3d at 1095 (quoting Virginia, 484
U.S. at 393); see Clapper, 568 U.S. at 417–18.
c. Limited Access to Information
Plaintiffs finally argue that the Statutes have injured the
Individual Plaintiffs by limiting their access to relevant
information about their children. Plaintiffs focus on two
specific harms that are alleged in the FAC.
The first alleged harm concerns efforts by the schools of
Plaintiffs’ children to facilitate social transitions or provide
gender-related counseling without notice to parents. For
example, 1C’s school helped 1C to “socially ‘transition’” 1C
without providing prior notice to 1A and 1B. 5C’s school,
similarly, did not consult 5A and 5B before providing 5C
with a “school counselor” to discuss transitioning. Plaintiffs
argue that these schools’ refusal to seek consent or provide
up-to-date information relating to their children’s gender has
“undermine[d] [their] ability to raise their children,” thereby
imposing injury. But as alleged in the FAC, these incidents
bear no relation to the Statutes, which do not regulate the
conduct of public schools. As a result, these incidents are
neither “fairly traceable to [the State’s] allegedly unlawful
conduct [nor] likely to be redressed by [Plaintiffs’] requested
relief”—a declaration that the Statutes are unconstitutional
and an injunction preventing their enforcement. Allen v.
Wright, 468 U.S. 737, 751 (1984). These gaps are fatal to
standing. See id.
Plaintiffs also point to the fact, as alleged in the FAC,
that 5C has had “hospitalizations, but has refused to talk to

18

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

5A and 5B about the details.” Plaintiffs assert that 5C was
permitted to “ke[ep] [5A and 5B] in the dark” due to Wash.
Rev. Code § 71.34.530, the law that authorizes minors to
receive outpatient mental health treatment without parental
approval. But Wash. Rev. Code § 71.34.530 does not
regulate parental access to medical records, and other
provisions that do, such as Wash. Rev. Code § 70.02.240,
are not challenged in the FAC. Further, the FAC lacks
allegations connecting 5A and 5B’s alleged injury to this
statutory framework. Notably, it does not allege that 5C’s
hospitalizations were for outpatient mental or behavioral
health treatment, that 5A and 5B declined to authorize that
treatment, or that 5A and 5B sought information from 5C’s
medical providers. See Wash. Rev. Code § 71.34.530.
Without those allegations, the FAC fails to tie 5A and 5C’s
alleged injury to any of the challenged provisions of
Washington law.
II. The Individual Plaintiffs Lack Standing Based on
Future Injuries.
Plaintiffs further contend that even if the Individual
Plaintiffs have not suffered cognizable current injuries, they
still have standing to sue based on their likelihood of being
injured in the future. This argument turns on the factual
circumstances presented by the Individual Plaintiffs.
Plaintiffs suggest that, because they have minor children
who experience gender dysphoria and socially transitioned
at school, “one may infer that at least one child is likely to
run away in the future” and therefore come within reach of
the Statutes.
Plaintiffs’ argument distills to the suggestion that,
because Plaintiffs may someday be affected by the Statutes,
Plaintiffs should have standing to challenge the Statutes

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

19

now. A similar argument was put forward in Lujan. There,
environmental organizations sought to challenge a
regulation that limited the geographic scope of the
Endangered Species Act’s consultation requirements.
Lujan, 504 U.S. at 557–58. The organizations conceded that
they were not directly subject to the regulation, but they
insisted that it would harm their members through a tenuous
casual pathway: Because “the lack of consultation . . .
[would] ‘increas[e] the rate of extinction of endangered and
threatened species,’” members of the organizations who
“inten[ded]” to travel the world and appreciate animal
diversity would someday be “deprived of the opportunity to
observe animals of the endangered species” that the
regulation adversely affected. Id. at 562–64.
The Supreme Court rejected this attempt to contrive a
future injury. It explained that, in the absence of a present
injury, plaintiffs may satisfy standing by showing that they
face a future injury that is “imminent,” or “certainly
impending.” Id. at 561, 564 n.2 (quoting Whitmore, 495
U.S. at 158). But it found that the “imminence” requirement
“ha[d] been stretched beyond the breaking point” in the case
of the organizational plaintiffs because they “allege[d] only
an injury at some indefinite future time, and the acts
necessary to make the injury happen [we]re at least partly
within the [organizations’] own control.” Id. at 564 n.2. The
Court noted, for example, that standing would require the
organizations to show “not only that listed species were in
fact being threatened by funded activities abroad, but also
that one or more of [the] members would thereby be
‘directly’ affected[.]” Id. at 563 (quoting Sierra Club v.
Morton, 405 U.S. 727, 735 (1972)). In the absence of that
showing, the Court held that the organizations’ “‘some day’
intentions—without any description of concrete plans, or

20

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

indeed even any specification of when the some day w[ould]
be—d[id] not support a finding of the ‘actual or imminent’
injury that [Article III] require[s].” Id. at 564.
Plaintiffs’ situation is analogous. They contend that,
“[g]iven that there are at least four gender-dysphoric minors
represented by the parent Plaintiffs,” “there is a credible
likelihood that at least one of the parent Plaintiffs’ children
will run away to a shelter and thus trigger the [Statutes].”
But as the district court found, Plaintiffs’ claims rely on an
enormity of “ifs” and “shoulds,” without any detail or
explanation as to when or why these contingencies might
occur. For example, 3A and 3B worry that “[i]f 3C were to
run away and receive counseling to affirm a ‘transgender
identity,’ or receive medical ‘treatment’ to . . . look more
like” the opposite sex, they would fall within the reach of the
Statutes and be adversely impacted. But Plaintiffs present
no allegation that 3C is transgender, has sought genderaffirming treatment, or has expressed an interest in running
away. In the absence of those details, like the plaintiff
organizations in Lujan, Plaintiffs’ amorphous and
insufficiently explained concerns about “some day” injuries
are “simply not enough” to satisfy Article III. See id.
Plaintiffs’ attempt to demonstrate future injury is made
more difficult by the complicated and specific pathway that
is necessary to trigger the Statutes. In Lujan, for example,
the Court found that the organizational plaintiffs would
come into contact with the challenged regulations if two
events occurred: (1) the regulations threatened endangered
species, and (2) that threat directly affected organizational
members. Id. at 563. Here, by contrast, Plaintiffs will come
into contact with the Statutes only if a more convoluted
series of events transpires: (1) one of the Individual
Plaintiffs’ minor children (2) runs away (3) to a licensed

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

21

shelter (4) while actively seeking or receiving genderaffirming care, resulting in (5) the shelter taking in the child
(6) despite knowing that the minor is there without parental
permission. See Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i).
Plaintiffs do not allege that these events have transpired, and
they fail to provide “concrete” details or “specification of
when” they might occur. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 564. 7 Thus,
considered in light of the complex statutory scheme they
challenge, Plaintiffs’ basic “[a]llegations of possible future
injury” are especially insufficient. Clapper, 568 U.S. at 409
(alteration in original) (quoting Whitmore, 495 U.S. at 158).
Plaintiffs attempt to counter this result with three
different arguments, but none is persuasive. They first argue
that, even if their prospect of future injury remains uncertain,
the Statutes have already harmed them by increasing the
likelihood that they will suffer some injury in the future.
Relying on the concept of a “probabilistic harm”—the idea
that “[e]ven a small probability of injury is sufficient to
create a case or controversy”—Plaintiffs assert that they
have demonstrated a sufficient probability of harm to satisfy
standing here. Massachusetts v. EPA, 549 U.S. 497, 525

The closest Plaintiffs come is their allegation that 5A and 5B’s child,
5C, once “ran away from home” at age 13. But Plaintiffs make no claim
that 5C ran away to a licensed shelter, did so without parental permission,
or is seeking or receiving gender-affirming care. See Wash. Rev. Code
§ 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i). In any event, the allegation that 5C ran away
once is not sufficient to suggest that 5C will do so again in the future.
See City of Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 105 (1983) (“That Lyons
may have been illegally choked by the police . . . does nothing to
establish a real and immediate threat that he would again be stopped . . .
by an officer or officers who would illegally choke him into
unconsciousness[.]”).

7

22

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

n.23 (2007) (quoting Village of Elk Grove Village v. Evans,
997 F.3d 328, 329 (7th Cir. 1993)).
We agree that, in light of the “probabilistic” nature of the
injury-in-fact requirement, Cent. Delta Water Agency v.
United States, 306 F.3d 938, 948 (9th Cir. 2002) (quoting
Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Gaston Copper Recycling Corp.,
204 F.3d 149, 160 (4th Cir. 2000) (en banc)), “increased . . .
risk of future harm” may be sufficient to confer standing,
Krottner v. Starbucks Corp., 628 F.3d 1139, 1143 (9th Cir.
2010). See Covington v. Jefferson Cnty., 358 F.3d 626, 638
n.15 (9th Cir. 2004). But Plaintiffs misstate the implications
of this principle. Although probabilistic harm can create
standing, it does not replace the foundational rule that a
future injury must be imminent in order to satisfy the injuryin-fact requirement. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 564 n.2. The notion
of probabilistic harm merely recognizes that a plaintiff may
reach that bar by showing that his likelihood of harm has
significantly increased, bringing his potential for injury from
certainly imaginable to “certainly impending.” Clapper, 568
U.S. at 414; see, e.g., Krottner, 628 F.3d at 1143 (plaintiffs’
“increased [] risk of future harm” created a “credible threat
of real and immediate harm” that was sufficient to create
standing); Covington, 358 F.3d at 641 (same); Nat. Res. Def.
Council v. U.S. EPA, 735 F.3d 873, 878–79 (9th Cir. 2013)
(same); Harris v. Bd. of Supervisors, 366 F.3d 754, 762 (9th
Cir. 2004) (same). For the aforementioned reasons,
Plaintiffs have not made that showing here.
Plaintiffs also argue that they need not demonstrate a
high likelihood of impending injury because the potential
injuries they face are “drastic.” In support of this argument,
Plaintiffs quote Massachusetts for the proposition that “[t]he
more drastic the injury that government action makes more
likely, the lesser the increment in probability to establish

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

23

standing.” 549 U.S. at 525 n.23 (quoting Mountain States
Legal Found. v. Glickman, 92 F.3d 1228, 1234 (D.C. Cir.
1996)). Yet Plaintiffs miscast the context of this comment,
which arose in a discussion about the redressability
requirement,
not
the injury-in-fact
requirement.
Specifically, in Massachusetts, the defendant agency had
argued that the plaintiff states could not demonstrate
redressability because the regulation they challenged
“contribute[d] so insignificantly to [their] injuries that the
Agency [could] not be haled into federal court to answer for
them.” Id. at 523. The Supreme Court relied on the severity
of the states’ injuries only in rejecting this specific argument.
Id. It reasoned that, although vacating the regulation might
not fully redress the states’ injuries, the “potential
consequences” it presented were so drastic that it was worth
litigating the issue. Id. at 525 & n.3. That principle has no
bearing on the question here—whether Plaintiffs have
demonstrated an adequate injury in fact based on future
injuries.
Plaintiffs finally attempt an analogy to pre-enforcement
standing injuries, but this argument is also unavailing.
Article III standing in the pre-enforcement context arises
when an individual is subject to a credible threat of
government action. Susan B. Anthony List v. Driehaus, 573
U.S. 149, 158 (2014). When the threatened enforcement is
sufficiently imminent, “an actual arrest, prosecution, or other
enforcement action is not a prerequisite to challenging the
law.” Id. But Plaintiffs concede that this concept is not
directly applicable here. Moreover, standing in preenforcement cases still requires “circumstances that render
the threatened enforcement sufficiently imminent.” Id. at
159; see also Clark v. City of Seattle, 899 F.3d 802, 813 (9th
Cir. 2018). Because Plaintiffs have not demonstrated that

24

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

their injuries are imminent, their self-described “analog[y]”
to pre-enforcement cases does not help their cause.
III. The Organizational Plaintiffs Lack Standing.
In the alternative, Plaintiffs argue that IPEC, one of the
two Organizational Plaintiff, has standing to pursue its
claims. Plaintiffs specifically contend that IPEC has
associational standing because it has one member who is a
Washington resident with custody of a gender-dysphoric
minor.
Plaintiffs do not contend that IPEC has
organizational standing on its own behalf, and they offer no
assertion that APC, the other Organizational Plaintiff, has
any type of standing.
Associational standing is a form of derivative standing
that allows an organization to bring suit on behalf of its
members. Hunt v. Wash. State Apple Advert. Comm’n, 432
U.S. 333, 342–43 (1977). An organization has associational
standing to bring suit (1) “when its members would
otherwise have standing to sue in their own right,” (2) “the
interests at stake are germane to the organization’s purpose,”
and (3) “neither the claim asserted nor the relief requested
requires the participation of individual members in the
lawsuit.” Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw Env’t Servs.
(TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 181 (2000); see also Ecological
Rts. Found. v. Pac. Lumber Co., 230 F.3d 1141, 1147 (9th
Cir. 2000).
IPEC does not satisfy this standard. As noted, IPEC
claims standing based on the alleged injury suffered by one
of its members, who is “a Washington parent with custody
of a minor child who has struggled with gender dysphoria.”
But this individual IPEC member lacks standing for the same
reasons as the Individual Plaintiffs: He or she has not
suffered a cognizable current injury, and the FAC fails to

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

25

offer allegations showing that a future injury is certainly
impending. Therefore, because IPEC has not demonstrated
that its individual members have standing to sue, its claim to
associational standing fails at the first step. See Friends of
the Earth, 528 U.S. at 181; see, e.g., Wilderness Soc., Inc. v.
Rey, 622 F.3d 1251, 1255–57 (9th Cir. 2010) (finding an
organization lacked associational standing where its member
had not demonstrated a sufficiently specific injury in fact).
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that Plaintiffs
have not demonstrated standing to bring their claims.
Because none of the Individual Plaintiffs has alleged a
cognizable injury that is presently being suffered, Plaintiffs
lack standing on the basis of current injuries. Further,
because none of the Individual Plaintiffs has alleged
sufficient facts to make out a clearly impending injury,
Plaintiffs also lack standing on the basis of future injuries.
IPEC lacks associational standing for the same reasons. As
a result, we agree with the district court that Plaintiffs have
failed to demonstrate standing under Article III, and we
affirm the dismissal of their action.
AFFIRMED.

