FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UGOCHUKWU GOODLUCK
No. 21-36024
NWAUZOR; FERNANDO
AGUIRRE-URBINA, individually and
D.C. No. 3:17-cvon behalf of all those similarly
05769-RJB
situated,
Plaintiffs-Appellees,
v.

ORDER

THE GEO GROUP, INC., a Florida
corporation,
Defendant-Appellant.
STATE OF WASHINGTON,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
THE GEO GROUP, INC.,
Defendant-Appellant.
Filed August 13, 2025

No. 21-36025
D.C. No. 3:17-cv05806-RJB

2

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

Before: Mary H. Murguia, Chief Judge, and William A.
Fletcher and Mark J. Bennett, Circuit Judges.
Order;
Statement by Judges Murguia and W. Fletcher;
Dissent by Judge Bumatay;
Dissent by Judge Collins
SUMMARY *
Washington’s Minimum Wage Act
The panel denied a petition for panel rehearing and a
petition for rehearing en banc in a case in which the panel
affirmed the district court’s judgment in favor of a class of
detainees and Washington State in their consolidated actions
against GEO Group, Inc., which operates the Northwest
Immigration and Customs Enforcement Processing Center
in Tacoma, Washington, for violations of Washington’s
Minimum Wage Act.
Respecting the denial of rehearing en banc, Chief Judge
Murguia and Judge W. Fletcher wrote briefly to emphasize
three points concerning Judge Bumatay’s dissent from
denial of rehearing en banc. First, the majority opinion’s
holding does not discriminate against the federal
government.
The employment of plaintiffs—civil
detainees—was part of a private company’s business model.
The Washington Minimum Wage Act regulates this type of
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

3

private business activity uniformly regardless of whether the
entity is contracting with the federal or state government.
Second, the panel majority disagreed with the new argument
in the dissent from denial of rehearing en banc, not made by
any party or amicus, that plaintiffs were not “employees”
and Washington therefore could not apply its Minimum
Wage Act. Third, the dissent’s equation of the federal
government and its contractors is contrary to long-settled
law.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Bumatay, joined by Judges Callahan and VanDyke, wrote
that this case should be reheard en banc because, in addition
to the reasons cited in Judge Bennett’s dissent, reclassifying
detainees as “employees” and applying the minimum wage
law would interfere with the performance of a federal
operation. The panel majority’s decision sets a dangerous
precedent because it allows any State to impair any federal
policy—no matter how central to the federal government—
so long as the State regulates federal contractors rather than
the federal government itself.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Collins, joined by Judges R. Nelson and Bress, wrote that,
for substantially the reasons set forth in Judge Bennett’s
panel dissent, he agreed that the panel majority’s decision
contravened controlling Ninth Circuit and Supreme Court
precedent applying the doctrines of intergovernmental
immunity and federal preemption.

4

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

ORDER
Chief Judge Murguia and Judge W. Fletcher voted to
deny the petition for panel rehearing. Judge Bennett voted
to grant the petition for panel rehearing. Chief Judge
Murguia voted to deny the petition for rehearing en banc,
and Judge W. Fletcher so recommended. Judge Bennett
voted to grant the petition for rehearing en banc.
The full court has been advised of the petition for
rehearing en banc. A judge requested a vote on whether to
rehear the matter en banc. The matter failed to receive a
majority of votes of the nonrecused active judges in favor of
en banc consideration. Fed. R. App. P. 40(c). Judges
Christen and Miller did not participate in the deliberations or
vote in this case.
Appellant’s Petition for Panel Rehearing or Rehearing
En Banc (Dkt. No. 145) is DENIED.
MURGUIA, Chief Judge, and W. FLETCHER, Circuit
Judge, respecting the denial of rehearing en banc:
Our colleague, Judge Bumatay, dissents from our
Court’s denial of rehearing en banc.
Our majority opinion speaks for itself, and we will not
repeat here everything we wrote in the opinion. We write
briefly to emphasize three points.
First, our colleague contends that our holding
discriminates against the federal government. We strongly
disagree. Our colleague argues that we require GEO to pay
higher wages to its employees than Washington pays its
comparable employees. He compares the wage GEO must

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

5

pay to its detainees to the wage Washington pays to its
“detainees.” He writes, “Washington State’s own policy
caps pay to detainees at its criminal detention facilities at
‘$40 per week,’” a “more than a ‘1500% increase’” over
what GEO is required to pay. Diss. at 11 (first emphasis
added).
Our colleague’s comparison is inapt. The Washington
“detainees” to which he refers are convicted felons held in
state-operated and state-owned prisons. The employment of
these “detainees” is part of Washington’s penal regime. The
plaintiffs in the case before us are civil detainees, held while
their immigration status is determined. They are not
convicted felons.
Through its employment of civil detainees, GEO is able
to avoid hiring about 85 full-time employees. Plaintiffs’
employment was not part of a State’s penal regime. It was
part of a private company’s business model.
The
Washington Minimum Wage Act regulates this type of
private business activity uniformly regardless of whether the
entity is contracting with the federal or state government.
Second, our colleague argues that plaintiffs were not
“employees” and Washington therefore cannot apply its
Minimum Wage Act. This is a new argument, not made by
any party or amicus. Here, too, we strongly disagree. In
support of his argument, our colleague argues that “federal
law prohibits the employment of illegal aliens.” Diss. at 26.
Even if our colleague’s statement of law were applicable to
this case, it ignores the fact that some of the detainees
confined by GEO are not “illegal aliens.” Some detainees
held by GEO are entitled to remain in the United States.
They will be released back into the United States once their
immigration status is determined. Further, our colleague

6

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

ignores the basic facts and law of this case. The Washington
Supreme Court’s reasoned response to our certified question
concluded that “detained workers at a private detention
facility are ‘employees’ within the meaning of the
[Minimum Wage Act].” Nwauzor v. The Geo Grp., Inc., 540
P.3d 93, 104 (2023). Our majority opinion faithfully applied
that holding. However much our colleague would like to see
the matter differently, plaintiffs were, in fact, employees.
They performed work for GEO, and they were paid for
performing that work.
Finally, our colleague again
compares plaintiffs in this case to convicted criminals,
writing that “the State cannot dictate terms about their
employment status any more than it could if the facility
housed federal prisoners serving custodial sentences.” Diss.
at 13. Our colleague continues to ignore the fact that federal
prisoners are convicted criminals, whose employment in
prison is part of their criminal punishment, while plaintiffs
are civil detainees.
Third, our colleague ignores the fundamental distinction
between the federal government and its contractors. He
would require Washington to treat the federal government’s
contractors in the same manner it is required to treat the
federal government itself. He writes, “When a federal
contractor acts on behalf of the federal government to
administer a federal function—like the detention of aliens—
the contractor is not merely a private business; it steps into
the shoes of the federal government for Supremacy Clause
purposes.” Diss. at 14. Again, we strongly disagree.
Our colleague’s equation of the federal government and
its contractors is contrary to long-settled black letter law.
Adoption of his position would allow any government
contractor to refuse to pay state-mandated minimum wage to
its employees. For example, any defense contractor could

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

7

refuse to pay minimum wage. No one in this case, not even
GEO, has suggested that this is the law.
BUMATAY, Circuit Judge, joined by CALLAHAN and
VANDYKE, Circuit Judges, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
State frustration with federal policies is nothing new.
From the very beginning, States have sought to thwart
federal policies. In 1792, Thomas Jefferson was incensed
about the establishment of a national bank. See Thomas
Jefferson, From Thomas Jefferson to James Madison,
Founders Online, Nat’l Archives (Oct. 1, 1792). 1 In his
view, the creation of a bank was left to the States alone, and
the federal government had no authority to erect one. Id.
His opposition to a national bank was so vehement that he
told James Madison that it was “an act of treason against the
state.” Id. Indeed, instead of Virginia creating a competing
bank as suggested by Madison, Jefferson proposed that the
State should “adjudge[]” any employee of the national bank
“guilty of high treason and suffer death accordingly, by the
judgment of the state courts.” Id. He had hope that this
“example”—executing bank employees—would be
followed by other States. Id. To Jefferson, it was this
extreme response or else “nothing should be done.” Id.
Of course, Jefferson’s hyperbole never came to fruition.
But another State, Maryland, did try to interfere with the
Bank of the United States years later by taxing its operations.
See McCulloch v Maryland, 17 U.S. 316, 425 (1819). Even
while recognizing that taxation was within the traditional
1

https://perma.cc/28U9-H7UY.

8

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

sphere of state power, the Supreme Court stopped
Maryland’s tax as violating the Constitution’s Supremacy
Clause. Id. at 436. Simply, “the States have no power, by
taxation or otherwise, to retard, impede, burden, or in any
manner control, the operations of the constitutional laws
enacted by Congress to carry into execution the powers
vested in the general government.” Id.
True, under our federalism, States may generally
regulate businesses within their borders. And it’s largely an
advantage of our constitutional system that each State may
experiment with social and economic policies through its
police powers. See, e.g., New State Ice Co. v. Liebmann, 285
U.S. 262, 311 (1932) (Brandeis, J., dissenting) (“It is one of
the happy incidents of the federal system that a single
courageous state may, if its citizens choose, serve as a
laboratory; and try novel social and economic experiments
without risk to the rest of the country.”).
But by ratifying the Constitution, we placed some limits
on state power. See U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2. Under the
Supremacy Clause, if state law interferes with the operation
of federal law, then federal law trumps—no matter how
strong the state opposition. And States can’t get around that
supremacy by indirect means. Given the explosion of
federal work done by contractors, the Supremacy Clause
would mean little if States could attack federal policies
through regulation of federal contractors. Thus, anytime a
state law “would defeat the legitimate operations” of the
federal government—even if only through the federal
government’s
contractors—it’s
unconstitutional.
McCulloch, 17 U.S. at 427.

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

9

***
Since the 1980s, the federal government has used
privately owned facilities to assist with immigration control.
By 1991, private contractors operated half of the federal
government’s detention facilities. In 2020, the federal
government owned only five detention facilities, and even
those were contractor run. This reflects the federal
government’s belief that contracted facilities better serve its
needs—expanding and contracting more nimbly than
permanent federal institutions as the detainee population
fluctuates. This results in cost savings for the public. Since
2005, Immigration and Customs Enforcement (“ICE”) has
operated one privately owned immigration-detention facility
in the State of Washington—the Northwest ICE Processing
Center in Tacoma (“Northwest ICE Center”).
The
Northwest ICE Center is owned and operated by the GEO
Group, Inc., a private corporation.
It’s no understatement to say that the State of
Washington dislikes the federal government’s use of private
facilities for immigration detention.
In 2021, the
Washington Legislature passed a law prohibiting the
operation of “a private detention facility within the state.”
See Wash. Rev. Code § 70.395.030. Armed with this law,
Washington tried to shut down the Northwest Detention
Center. See Geo Grp., Inc. v. Inslee, 702 F. Supp. 3d 1043,
1046 (W.D. Wash. 2023) (“Inslee I”). But even the State
conceded that its efforts to close the facility violated the
Constitution’s Supremacy Clause. See id. As we’ve said, a
State’s attempt to ban private immigration-detention centers
violates the “foundational limit on state power.” Geo Grp.,
Inc. v. Newsom, 50 F.4th 745, 758 (9th Cir. 2022) (en banc).
Undeterred, in 2023, the Washington Legislature tried again
by enacting onerous requirements on private-detention

10

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

facilities within the State. GEO Grp., Inc. v. Inslee, 720 F.
Supp. 3d 1029, 1037 (W.D. Wash. 2024) (“Inslee II”).
While written broadly, the law’s “history and text ma[d]e
clear that it applie[d] only to” the Northwest ICE Center. Id.
Once again, much of the law was struck down as
discriminating against the federal government. Id. at 1039.
What Washington couldn’t do directly, it now tries
indirectly by attacking ICE’s work program at the facility.
ICE requires its detention facilities to establish a Voluntary
Work Program for detainees. See U.S. Immigr. & Customs
Enf’t, Performance-Based National Detention Standards
2011 § 5.8, at 406 (rev. 2016) (“ICE Detention Standards”). 2
The Voluntary Work Program is important to ICE’s detainee
management. ICE believes that the Program enhances
operations and services “through detainee productivity.” Id.
at 405. It helps mitigate the negative impact of confinement
by decreasing idleness, improving morale, and reducing
disciplinary incidents. Id. In other words, ICE implemented
the Program to improve conditions and safety at detention
facilities for both the detainees and staff. Nothing in ICE’s
guidelines classifies those who participate in the Program as
“employees.” For decades, Congress has blessed these
voluntary work programs—appropriating allowances to pay
“aliens, while held in custody under the immigration laws,
for work performed.” 8 U.S.C. § 1555(d). Given that these
detainees are not “employees,” Congress last set the rate for
these allowances at $1 per day in 1978. See Departments of
State, Justice, and Commerce, the Judiciary, and Related
Agencies Appropriation Act of 1979, Pub. L. No. 95-431, 92
Stat. 1021, 1027 (1978). It has not raised the allowance since
then.
2

https://perma.cc/NY8C-U394.

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

11

GEO’s contract obligates it to run the Voluntary Work
Program at the Northwest ICE Center. Under ICE’s
guidelines, GEO pays detainees the minimum allowance of
$1 per day, as established by Congress. Washington now
seeks to interfere with the operation of the Voluntary Work
Program at the Northwest ICE Center. In 2017, Washington
and a class of detainees sued GEO, arguing that detainees
who participate in the Program are “employees” and thus the
State’s minimum wage law must apply to them. In 2025,
that would mean detainees are owed $16.66 per hour. See
Wash. Rev. Code § 49.46.020. 3 Put differently, the
detention facility would need to pay more than 130 times the
minimum wage set by Congress in an eight-hour day
($133.28 v. $1). By contrast, Washington State’s own policy
caps pay to detainees at its criminal detention facilities at
“$40 per week.” See Nwauzor v. GEO Grp., Inc., 127 F.4th
750, 773 (9th Cir. 2025) (Bennett, J., dissenting). So if a
detainee works for 40 hours in a week, Washington State
would pay the detainee only $40 but the Northwest
Detention Center would have to pay the same detainee
$666—more than a “1500% increase.” See id. Even so, a
jury found that GEO violated the minimum wage law and
awarded more than $17 million in back pay to the detainee
class. After a bench trial, the district court penalized GEO
almost $6 million in unjust enrichment and enjoined GEO
from operating the Voluntary Work Program without paying
detainees Washington’s minimum wage. That represents a
cumulative $23 million in added cost and a mandatory
restructuring of ICE’s program. In response, ICE permitted

Wash. State Dep’t of Labor
https://perma.cc/SAU3-273M.
3

&

Indus.,

Minimum

Wage,

12

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

GEO to shut down the Voluntary Work Program at the
Northwest ICE Center.
On appeal, a divided panel of this court affirmed the
rulings. Id. at 750 (majority opinion). First, the panel
majority rejected GEO’s claim of intergovernmental
immunity on two grounds. Id. at 763. It ruled that the
minimum wage law “neither controls federal operations nor
dictates the terms of the contract between ICE and GEO.”
Id. at 761. And it concluded that the minimum wage law
isn’t discriminatory because it doesn’t treat “private
facilities operated under contract with the federal
government differently from private facilities operated
under contract with the state government.” Id. at 761–63.
Second, the panel majority determined that the minimum
wage law wasn’t preempted by federal law because the state
law “falls squarely within the states’ historic police powers
to establish and require payment of a minimum wage.” Id.
at 768. Finally, the panel majority refused to grant GEO
derivative sovereign immunity because the company’s
contract with ICE didn’t prohibit the company from
complying with the minimum wage law. Id. at 770–71.
Judge Bennett forcefully dissented on two grounds—
each reason enough to reconsider this case en banc. First,
the dissent correctly concluded that Washington’s law
discriminated against the federal government. As the dissent
noted, Washington’s law “punishes the federal government
for its policy choice to use private contractors and treats the
federal government differently from state facilities. That is
the very definition of a state affording itself better treatment
than it affords the United States.” Id. at 774 (Bennett, J.,
dissenting). Second, the dissent made strong arguments that
federal law preempts the minimum wage law’s application
to the Northwest ICE Center. Id. at 778–83. The dissent

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

13

emphasized that “[t]he majority has charted a roadmap for
states to circumvent the Supremacy Clause and Congress’s
authority and force the federal government to meet a higher
standard than the state imposes on itself.” Id. at 778.
On top of the reasons laid out in the dissent, here’s
another—reclassifying the detainees as “employees” and
applying the minimum wage law would interfere with the
performance of a federal operation. Simply, ICE, with the
blessing of Congress, has determined that operating a
Voluntary Work Program at its detention facilities assists in
its immigration-control duties. As part of that operation,
Congress has determined that participants in the program are
not federal employees and should be paid a minimum
allowance of $1 per day. The State of Washington can’t then
countermand that congressional directive by demanding the
restructuring of the Voluntary Work Program and imposing
a higher wage floor. As the Court has said, “because the
Supremacy Clause immunizes the activities of the Federal
Government from state interference, . . . direct state
regulation of federal facilities is allowed only to the extent
that Congress has clearly authorized such regulation.”
Goodyear Atomic Corp. v. Miller, 486 U.S. 174, 180 n.1
(1988). Washington does not have the power to define the
employment status of federal detainees. While the detainees
at the Northwest ICE Center may be housed in a private
facility, they are there because they’re federal detainees in
federal custody. So the State cannot dictate terms about their
employment status any more than it could if the facility
housed federal prisoners serving custodial sentences.
And while Washington’s attempt to impair the
Northwest ICE Center is less draconian than Jefferson’s
suggestion, it’s still interference contravening the
Supremacy Clause. In denying intergovernmental immunity

14

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

on direct-regulation grounds, the panel majority all but
admitted that the minimum wage law would violate the
Supremacy Clause if the federal government had run the ICE
Detention Center “directly.” See Nwauzor, 127 F.4th at 761.
The panel majority didn’t contest the government’s
argument that there would be “no dispute that if the federal
government operated the detention facility and implemented
the Voluntary Work Program directly, principles of
intergovernmental immunity would bar application of state
minimum wage laws to detainees.” Id. Instead, the panel
majority simply brushed away the argument because the
government doesn’t “perform[] those functions” but “GEO,
a private for-profit company,” does. Id.
So the fundamental question here is whether the
Supremacy Clause protects a federal program, performed by
federal contractors, from state regulation. The answer must
be “yes.” When a federal contractor acts on behalf of the
federal government to administer a federal function—like
the detention of aliens—the contractor is not merely a
private business; it steps into the shoes of the federal
government for Supremacy Clause purposes.
The
constitutional directive of federal supremacy shouldn’t turn
on the ownership of the plot of land used to carry out the
federal policy or who provides the immediate paycheck of
those implementing the federal policy. In the end, if a
federal policy is “made in Pursuance” to constitutional law,
U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2, then States can’t “retard, impede,
burden, or in any manner control” that federal policy,
McCulloch, 17 U.S. at 436—even if the federal government
chooses to use contractors to execute it.
Allowing the panel majority’s decision to stand sets a
dangerous precedent. Under this court’s decision, any State
can impair any federal policy—no matter how central to the

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

15

federal government—so long as the State regulates federal
contractors rather than the federal government itself. Doing
so would be unworkable—granting States the power to
undermine federal operations based on policy disagreements
whenever federal contractors are involved. Otherwise, to
avoid all this, the federal government would be forced to
stop using contractors to carry out its work. That
contravenes the constitutional design. We should have taken
this case en banc to correct this error. 4
I respectfully dissent from our decision not to rehear this
case en banc.
I.
The use of private contractors to implement government
policies predates the Founding of our country. Indeed, our
government’s contracting practices trace their origins to the
French and Indian War, when American colonists helped
supply the British Army’s war effort in the Americas. That
conflict served as the colonists’ first introduction to the
challenges of supplying an army during war. James F.
Nagle, A History of Government Contracting Vol. I 10 (3d
ed. 2012). Under the British contracting system, the generals
in charge of an army awarded supply contracts to merchants.
These contracts “were more like carte blanche delegations of
authority” and suppliers were expected to use their own
contacts (and credit) to keep the army supplied. Id. at 11,
13. In return, contractors received a 5% commission on the
supplies they procured for the army. Id. at 11; Theodore
Because the Supremacy Clause is enough to invalidate the application
of Washington’s minimum wage law to the Northwest ICE Center,
there’s no need to discuss the panel majority’s derivative sovereign
immunity ruling. But that doesn’t mean it’s correct.

4

16

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

Thayer, The Army Contractors for the Niagara Campaign,
1755-1756, 14 Wm. & Mary Q. 31, 33 (1957).
Keeping with the British tradition, the use of contractors
continued through the American Revolution. Private
merchants supplied the Continental Army largely on a
commission basis. The Continental Congress appointed the
first commissary general in 1775 and George Washington
appointed a quartermaster general soon after—both
merchants paid by salary or commission. Nagle, History of
Government Contracting Vol. I, at 19. Even then, the
Continental Congress recognized that government functions,
such as supplying the military, benefited from partnerships
with the private sector. After all, “[o]nly a merchant had the
knowledge, the trade connections, and the credit needed to
handle procurement.” Id.; see also E. Wayne Carp, To
Starve the Army at Pleasure: Continental Army
Administration and American Political Culture 1775–1783
at 20–21 (1984) (noting the Continental Congress’s lack of
expertise in organizing and supplying a war effort). After
Independence, our nation continued to depend on private
parties for government functions—offering the same 5%
commission used during the war. Nagle, History of
Government Contracting Vol. I, at 42. The national
government also relied on private parties to transport and
deliver mail—another fundamental government function at
the time. Id. at 42–43.
Things became more formalized after the Constitution’s
ratification. Congress established the Office of Purveyor of
Public Supplies in 1795. See Act to establish the Office of
Purveyor of Public Supplies, ch. 27, 1 Stat. 419 (1795).
Congress placed the Purveyor of Public Supplies under the
Secretary of the Treasury and empowered him “to conduct
the procuring and providing of all arms, military and naval

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

17

stores, provisions, clothing, Indian goods, and, generally, all
articles of supply requisite for the services of the United
States.” Id.
How did government contracting look in the postratification period? Lighthouses are a good early example.
Lighthouses served an important public safety function and
facilitated the flow of commerce—a particular focus of our
early government. According to the National Park Service,
“[i]n one of its first acts after its formation in 1789, the US
Government assumed control of all aids to navigation in the
country.” National Park Service, History of Lighthouses in
the United States (2009). 5 And yet, private parties largely
operated lighthouses—federal contractors built, supplied,
and inspected them. Nagle, History of Government
Contracting Vol. I, at 46. These contractors “virtually
administered the lighthouse organization and exercised wide
discretion in performing their duties” for more than 50 years
after the Founding. Id.
Following the War of 1812, the federal government
made greater efforts to standardize its contracting and
procurement processes. For instance, Congress charged the
Ordnance Department with procuring arms and munitions
for the military, as well as “supervising the government
armories and storage depots.” Id. at 81. This brought about
significant change—most notably the introduction of a
“uniformity system,” which imposed strict quality controls
on contractors. See id. at 85, 87.
The Civil War marked a massive expansion in
government contracting. The federal government expanded
the military rapidly to meet the needs of the war.
5

https://perma.cc/WSN3-XUSX.

18

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

Particularly, the federal government used a combination of
its own production and contracts with private parties who
manufactured or dealt in arms. Id. at 132. The government
contracted with private parties for all sorts of supplies—
everything from weapons and clothing to railroad
transportation and ships. See id. at 130–33, 136, 139, 146–
50. The massive spike in production and contracting during
the Civil War led to the significant increase of private
corporations and further entrenched the government’s
reliance on the private sector to fulfill its most essential
functions. See id. at 157–58.
In the modern era, the federal government’s reliance on
contractors has increased still. Following the World Wars
and the New Deal, the federal government’s activities
expanded into a range of new areas. See James F. Nagle, A
History of Government Contracting Vol. II 149–52 (3d ed.
2012). While the federal government once primarily
contracted for goods—military supplies and the like—it now
increasingly contracts for services. Id. at 170. Service
providers help the government perform various tasks,
including those historically considered quintessentially
government activities. For example, private companies now
directly “train troops, collect and analyze intelligence, and
carry out special operations.” Lindsay Windsor, James
Bond, Inc.: Private Contractors and Covert Action, 101 Geo.
L.J. 1427, 1428 (2013); see also P. W. Singer, Corporate
Warriors: The Rise of the Privatized Military Industry 121,
124, 136, 142–44 (2003) (describing how private contractors
provided instructors for command colleges, developed
training plans and analyses, and supported logistics for
military operations).
So our government has relied on private contractors to
assist with, and indeed sometimes perform, its constitutional

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

19

duties from the very beginning. The partnership with the
private sector offered the federal government the expertise
and efficiency needed to build our country from the ground
up. And today that partnership is as vital as ever. Disturbing
the federal government’s use of private contractors by state
regulation would impair the federal government from
carrying out its duties.
II.
Today, the constitutional directive of federal supremacy
has evolved into two related doctrines—intergovernmental
immunity and preemption. First, under intergovernmental
immunity, the Supremacy Clause “prohibit[s] state laws that
either regulate the United States directly or discriminate
against the Federal Government or those with whom it deals
(e.g., contractors).” United States v. Washington, 596 U.S.
832, 838–39 (2022) (simplified). Second, preemption
occurs when “state and federal law directly conflict,” and
requires that “state law must give way.” PLIVA, Inc. v.
Mensing, 564 U.S. 604, 617 (2011) (simplified).
Judge Bennett’s panel dissent conclusively establishes
how Washington’s minimum wage law singles out the
federal government’s contractors for less favorable
treatment and so violates the Supremacy Clause. See
Nwauzor, 127 F.4th at 771–77 (Bennett, J., dissenting). The
panel dissent also makes strong arguments for preemption of
the state law as applied to the Northwest ICE Center. Id. at
777–83. Those arguments show why we should have taken
this case en banc.
But applying Washington’s minimum wage to the
Northwest ICE Center also violates another facet of the
Supremacy Clause—the direct regulation of the federal
government. Simply, the state law “retard[s], impede[s],

20

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

burden[s]” and “control[s],” McCulloch, 17 U.S. at 436, the
operation of the Voluntary Work Program—a
congressionally approved program to maintain order and
safety at a federal detention center. Thus, even if run by
federal contractors, the state law violates the Supremacy
Clause when applied to the Northwest ICE Center.
A.
Alexander Hamilton observed that the supremacy of
federal law is essential to our constitutional system because,
without it, the Constitution “would otherwise be a mere
treaty, dependent on the good faith of the parties, and not a
government, which is only another word for political power
and supremacy.” The Federalist No. 33 (Alexander
Hamilton). He was right. The Supremacy Clause reads:
This Constitution, and the Laws of the United
States which shall be made in Pursuance
thereof; and all Treaties made, or which shall
be made, under the Authority of the United
States, shall be the supreme Law of the Land;
and the Judges in every State shall be bound
thereby, any Thing in the Constitution or
Laws of any State to the Contrary
notwithstanding.
U.S. Const. art. VI, cl.2. By its own terms, the Supremacy
Clause “creates a rule of decision” that commands courts to
“not give effect to state laws that conflict with federal laws.”
Armstong v. Exceptional Child Ctr., Inc., 575 U.S. 320, 324
(2015). Instead, the Clause establishes that, in the event of
a conflict with state law, state and federal courts “shall”
recognize the federal law as “supreme.” U.S. Const. art. VI,
cl.2. “The Clause, in the standard account of its origins, was

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

21

profoundly nationalistic, rejecting the weakly constructed
union of the Articles of Confederation and creating a true
national government that would prevail in contests with the
states—and indeed enlisting state judges as enforcers of
national power.” Michael D. Ramsey, The Supremacy
Clause, Original Meaning, and Modern Law, 74 Ohio St.
L.J. 559, 575 (2013). 6
McCulloch v. Maryland shows how interference with a
federal objective violates the Supremacy Clause—even if a
private corporation is involved. By 1816, Congress
incorporated the Second Bank of the United States. The
Bank was no federal government agency. Instead, it was
privately owned—taking deposits and loans from both the
federal government and private parties. The Bank proved
unpopular with some—particularly the Jeffersonian
Republicans. In response, the State of Maryland enacted a
seemingly general law—“an act to impose a tax on all banks
. . . in the state of Maryland, not chartered by the [state]
legislature.” McCulloch, 17 U.S. at 320 (quoting from
syllabus). The tax required these banks to pay a 1–2% tax
The constitutional design didn’t leave States without a say in what
became the “supreme Law.” All three sources of “supreme Law”—the
“Constitution,” “the Laws of the United States which shall be made in
pursuance thereof,” and “Treaties made . . . under the Authority of the
United States”—required some buy-in from the States as an original
matter. See Ramsey, The Supremacy Clause, supra, at 565, 598.
Statutes and treaties require approval from the Senate, U.S. Const. art. I,
§ 7—and Senators were originally chosen by state legislatures and were
thus direct representatives of the States’ interests in Congress. See id.
art. I, § 3, cl. 1. The Constitution’s ratification itself needed the approval
of nine States. Id. art. VII. And amendments need to be approved by
three-fourths of States (either by legislatures or ratifying conventions) to
become part of the Constitution. See id. art. V. So States weren’t
powerless in determining the “supreme” law as an original matter.
6

22

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

on bank notes or pay $15,000 to the State in advance. Id. at
321. While broadly written, the tax only targeted the Bank
of the United States. Id. at 392 (“But this tax is levelled
exclusively at the branch of the United States Bank
established in Maryland. There is, in point of fact, a branch
of no other bank within that state, and there can legally be
no other.”) (statement of William Pinkney, attorney for the
Bank, at oral argument).
Under the Supremacy Clause, the Court held that no
State has the power to defeat a constitutional congressional
directive. The Court started with three axioms: (1) the
“power to create implies a power to preserve,” (2) a “power
to destroy, if wielded by a different hand, is hostile to, and
incompatible with these powers to create and to preserve,”
and (3) “where [a] repugnancy exists, that authority which is
supreme must control.” Id. at 426. So, “[i]t is the very
essence of supremacy, [for a supreme government] to
remove all obstacles to its action within its own sphere, and
so to modify every power vested in subordinate
governments, as to exempt its own operations from their own
influence.” Id. at 427. Since Congress had the authority to
establish the Bank under the Necessary and Proper Clause,
Maryland’s tax could not stand. After all, “the power to tax
involves the power to destroy” and that “power to destroy
may defeat and render useless the power to create.” Id. at
431. In sum, “states have no power, by taxation or
otherwise, to retard, impede, burden, or in any manner
control, the operations of the constitutional laws enacted by
Congress to carry into execution the powers vested in the
general government.” Id. at 436.
So it didn’t matter that Maryland imposed the tax on the
Bank and not directly on a federal agency. Instead, it was
enough the bank was an “instrument” “employed by the

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

23

government in the execution of its powers.” Id. at 432.
Thus, as it was argued in McCulloch, the bank could
“equally claim” the federal government’s “protection” as
“proceed[ing] from the supreme power.” Id. at 396
(Pinkney). While States could still tax real property of the
Bank like other real property within their borders, they
couldn’t place a “tax on the operation of an instrument
employed by the government of the Union to carry its
powers into execution.” Id. at 436–37.
B.
It flows directly from McCulloch that the State of
Washington can’t demand treatment of detainees of a federal
detention facility as “employees” and increase the minimum
allowance paid to them to defeat the operation of a federal
work program. First, the federal government’s immigrationdetention policies are entitled to the protection of the
Supremacy Clause. Second, both Congress and the
executive branch have determined that a voluntary work
program will help carry out the government’s duty to detain
certain aliens in removal proceedings. Third, Washington’s
minimum wage law burdens voluntary work programs
because it requires the federal government to treat
immigration detainees as “employees” and given them
concomitant pay. Fourth, it makes no difference that federal
contractors administer the Voluntary Work Program on
behalf of the federal government. The result of all this?
Applying Washington’s minimum wage law to the
Northwest ICE Center violates the Supremacy Clause.
1. Federal policy over immigration detention is entitled
to federal supremacy. “The Government of the United States
has broad, undoubted power over the subject of immigration
and the status of aliens.” Arizona v. United States, 567 U.S.

24

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

387, 394 (2012). And Congress “has plenary power over
immigration matters.” Sale v. Haitian Ctrs. Council, 509
U.S. 155, 201 (1993) (Blackmun, J., dissenting); see U.S.
Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 4 (granting Congress the power to
“establish an uniform Rule of Naturalization”). Under that
authority, Congress mandates that federal officials detain
certain aliens. See, e.g., 8 U.S.C. §§ 1225(b)(1)(B)(ii),
(b)(2)(A), 1226(a), (c)(1), 1231(a)(6). Congress thus
directed that the federal government “shall arrange for
appropriate places of detention for aliens detained pending
removal or a decision on removal.” 8 U.S.C. § 1231(g)(1).
To complete this duty, Congress has authorized the federal
government to “expend . . . amounts necessary to acquire
land and to acquire, build, remodel, repair, and operate
facilities . . . necessary for detention.” See 8 U.S.C.
§ 1231(g)(1).
The federal government has “broad
discretion” to decide where aliens should be detained.
Newsom, 50 F.4th at 751 (simplified).
Given the federal government’s constitutional duty to
oversee immigration detention, any state interference with
federal immigration-detention policy offends the Supremacy
Clause. Simply, no state law can “defeat the legitimate
operations of [the federal] government.” McCulloch, 17
U.S. at 427.
2. ICE’s Voluntary Work Program stems directly from
congressional and executive action. The benefits of the
Voluntary Work Program are obvious. As we recognized
elsewhere, these detention center work programs “occupy
idle prisoners” and “reduce disciplinary problems.” Morgan
v. MacDonald, 41 F.3d 1291, 1293 (9th Cir. 1994)
(simplified). And ICE has found that the Voluntary Work
Program “enhance[s]” the “[e]ssential operations and
services” of a detention facility “through detainee

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

25

productivity.” See ICE Detention Standards § 5.8, at 405.
In ICE’s view, the Program reduces “the negative impact of
confinement . . . through decreased idleness, improved
morale and fewer disciplinary incidents.” Id. So Congress
authorized the Program to promote safety and maintain order
at federal immigration-detention facilities.
Congress decided not to treat detainees who volunteer
for the Program as “employees” entitled to federal minimum
wage laws and other benefits. See 8 U.S.C. § 1324a(1)(A)
(prohibiting employment of illegal aliens); see also Ndambi
v. CoreCivic, Inc., 990 F.3d 369, 371–75 (4th Cir. 2021)
(alien detainees participating in ICE’s work program are not
“employees” under the Fair Labor Standards Act). Instead,
Congress authorized funds for the federal government to
offer “payment of allowances (at such rate as may be
specified from time to time in the appropriation Act
involved) to aliens, while held in custody under the
immigration laws, for work performed.” 8 U.S.C. § 1555(d).
Notice Congress used the term “allowances,” not “wages.”
It then set the rate—“not in excess of $1 per day.” See Pub.
L. No. 95-431, 92 Stat. at 1027. The $1-a-day rate applies
until Congress changes it. And despite efforts over the years,
Congress has stuck with that allowance. See H.R. 4431,
117th Cong. § 221 (2021) (proposing changes to the
minimum allowance which did not become law).
Consistent with that congressional authority, ICE
promulgated detention standards requiring detention facility
contractors to offer detainees the opportunity to participate
in the Voluntary Work Program. See ICE Detention
Standards § 5.8, at 406 (“Detainees shall be provided the
opportunity to participate in a voluntary work program.”).
The detention standard implements detainee allowances—it
must be “at least $1.00 (USD) per day.” Id. at 407.

26

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

Thus, ICE’s Voluntary Work Program, including its
minimum-allowance standard, was enacted “in pursuance”
of a constitutional authority and is entitled to protection
under the Supremacy Clause. See U.S. Const. art. VI, cl. 2.
3. Applying Washington’s minimum wage law to the
Voluntary Work Program interferes with federal
immigration-detention policy.
The Washington law
“frustrate[s] the expressed federal policy” of not treating
detainees as “employees” and providing only a minimal
allowance. See Leslie Miller, Inc. v. Arkansas, 352 U.S. 187,
190 (1956). Congress said that detainees are not employees,
that they should be given an allowance of only $1 a day, and
that no allowance increase was necessary. The State’s
minimum wage law effectively overrides Congress’s
decision on the detainee’s status and the appropriate floor to
pay detainees at immigration-detention facilities. In effect,
Washington stepped in and said, “no, detainees are
employees and they should be paid more than 130 times
more.” Whatever reasons Congress had for its classification
decision and for setting the allowance floor so low, it’s not
up to us or any State to second guess it.
Congress has the exclusive authority to define the status
of aliens present in the United States. See U.S. Const. art. I,
§ 8, cl. 4. And federal law prohibits the employment of
illegal aliens. See 8 U.S.C. § 1324a(1)(A). ICE’s contract
similarly prohibits GEO from both employing illegal aliens
and from using detainees participating in the Voluntary
Work Program “to perform the responsibilities or duties of
an employee of the Contractor.” So GEO cannot treat the
detainees at the Northwest ICE Center as “employees” and
comply with the requirements of federal law or the mandates
of its contract with ICE.

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

27

And restructuring of the Voluntary Work Program
enables the State to control federal operations. As Chief
Justice Marshall noted long ago, “the power to tax involves
the power to destroy.” McCulloch, 17 U.S. at 431. While a
minimum wage is not exactly a tax, the same logic applies
here. McCulloch was concerned that increased costs to the
Bank of the United States through taxation could make bank
services so costly that they would interrupt the Bank’s
operations. In the same way, Washington could set a
minimum wage so high that the Voluntary Work Program
becomes too expensive.
GEO and the federal government say that Washington
has already done so. Under Washington’s minimum wage
law, detainees participating in the Voluntary Work Program
must be paid $16.66 per hour—more than 130 times higher
for an eight-hour period than the $1-per-day rate set by
Congress. That’s on top of the $23 million that GEO owes
for back pay and unjust enrichment. All told, these costs
make the Voluntary Work Program unworkable, according
to GEO and the federal government. Indeed, ICE permitted
the Voluntary Work Program at the Northwest ICE Center
to be shut down because of the district court’s injunction.
And contrary to the panel majority’s view, it doesn’t
matter that GEO has at times given detainees more than the
minimum allowance or that Congress did not set a maximum
allowance rate for detainees. See Nwauzor, 127 F.4th at 761.
When it comes to state interference with federal operations,
“[t]he conflict with federal policy need not be as sharp as
that which must exist for ordinary pre-emption.” Boyle v.
United Techs. Corp., 487 U.S. 500, 507 (1988). The bottom
line is that Congress and the executive branch may decide
how to execute their constitutional authority over
immigration detention. And state law can’t “retard, impede,

28

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

burden, or in any manner control, the operations of” the
federal government’s legitimate immigration-detention
program. McCulloch, 17 U.S. at 436. And there’s no
question that a 130-fold increase in the minimum allowance
burdens immigration-detention policy. Cf. Ry. Mail Ass’n v.
Corsi, 326 U.S. 88, 95–96 (1945) (observing that a state law
would interfere with a federal function if it “burdens” the
government’s “selection of its employees,” “its relations
with them,” or “define[s] the terms of . . . federal
employment or . . . any aspect of it”).
The panel majority brushes away these concerns by
essentially arguing that GEO makes a lot of money.
According to the panel majority, the $17-million back pay
figure represents only $2.5 million a year over seven years.
Nwauzor, 127 F.4th at 763. Meanwhile, the panel majority
observed that GEO makes between $18.6 million to $23.5
million per year in gross profits running the Northwest ICE
Center. Id. So because the panel majority thought that GEO
makes enough money on the facility to pay Washington’s
minimum wage law, the law is constitutional. Even if the
law were really that burdensome, the panel majority thought
that GEO could just renegotiate a higher rate to operate the
Voluntary Work Program. Id. Or, the panel majority would
presumably tell the federal government to just stop using
federal contractors.
But this is not how constitutional law works. We don’t
see if the federal government can afford the state regulation
to decide whether it violates the Supremacy Clause.
Compare this with McCulloch, in which the Court didn’t
engage in a cost-benefit analysis into whether the Bank of
the United States could pay Maryland’s 1% to 2% tax on
bank notes or the $15,000 prepayment requirement. See 17
U.S. at 321. Instead, it was enough that Maryland could tax

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

29

the bank “to the excess of destruction, . . . which[] would
banish that confidence which is essential to all government.”
Id. at 431. So it was the mere contention that Maryland was
“capable of arresting all the measures of the government, and
of prostrating [the federal government] at the foot of the
states” that made the tax unconstitutional. Id. at 432.
Regardless of whether Washington’s current minimum
wage law makes it impossible to run the Voluntary Work
Program now (as GEO and the federal government believe),
it’s an affront to the Supremacy Clause that Washington is
“capable of arresting” the Program at all. See id. If a State
can unilaterally regulate terms at a federal detention facility
against the wishes of Congress, the federal law “would not
be the supreme law of the land” and the State’s actions would
be “an usurpation of power not granted by the
[C]onstitution.” See The Federalist No. 33.
4. And nothing in the historical understanding of the
Supremacy
Clause
excludes
federal
contractors
administering a federal program from the protection of
federal supremacy.
Consider again McCulloch. In that case, Maryland taxed
the Bank of the United States, which was neither a federal
agency nor run by federal employees. Instead, the Bank of
the United States was a private commercial bank that served
both the federal government and the public at large. And the
federal government didn’t directly control the Bank. The
federal government owned only one-fifth of the Bank’s stock
and the President appointed only one-fifth of its directors. 7
So in the foundational Supremacy Clause case, the Court did
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, The Founding of the Fed,
https://perma.cc/R3PA-FMCJ.

7

30

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

not require the federal prerogative to be owned or run by the
federal government. It only mattered that the state tax
impeded the “operation of an instrument employed by the
government of the Union to carry its powers into execution.”
17 U.S. at 436–37.
To put a finer point on it, when Ohio likewise tried to tax
the Bank of the United States, the Court expressly compared
the employees of the Bank to “contractors” and yet still
considered the Bank’s operations to be protected by federal
supremacy. Osborn v. Bank of U.S., 22 U.S. 738, 866
(1824). The Court acknowledged that the bank’s directors
and officers were not “officers of government” and instead
had more “resemblance to contractors.” Id. at 867. Even
then, the Court held that “the right of the State to control [the
Bank’s] operations, if those operations be necessary to its
character, as a machine employed by the government, cannot
be maintained.” Id. at 867. The Court then compared taxing
the Bank to interference with more well-known federal
contractors: “Can a contractor for supplying a military post
with provisions, be restrained from making purchases within
any State, or from transporting the provisions to the place at
which the troops were stationed?” Id. Of course not, said
the Court. “[W]e do not admit that the act of purchasing, or
of conveying the articles purchased, can be under State
control.” Id.
And the understanding that States can’t interfere with
federal contractors in the performance of federal duties has
continued to this day. In Hancock v. Train, Kentucky sought
to enforce against federal agencies a state law requiring all
air-contaminant sources to obtain a state permit. 426 U.S.
167, 172–73 (1976). The Court said that no State may
“[place] a prohibition on the Federal Government”—and it
made no difference that one of the federal facilities was

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

31

operated by a contractor rather than the federal government.
Id. at 174 n.23, 180 (simplified). “Hancock thus establishes
that a federally owned facility performing a federal function
is shielded from direct state regulation, even though the
federal function is carried out by a private contractor, unless
Congress clearly authorizes such regulation.” Goodyear
Atomic Corp., 486 U.S. at 181; see also United States v. New
Mexico, 455 U.S. 720, 735 n.11 (1982) (“[S]tate
[regulations] on contractors are constitutionally invalid if
they . . . substantially interfere with [the Federal
Government’s] activities.”); Boyle, 487 U.S. at 507
(observing that the “[t]he imposition of liability on
Government contractors will directly affect the terms of
Government contracts” either by contractors refusing to
perform for fear of state liability or by raising the costs of
the contractors’ goods or services).
Contrary to the panel majority, it also doesn’t matter that
the state regulation appears to be a “neutral,
nondiscriminatory” law. Nwauzor, 127 F.4th at 761. Recall
that Maryland’s tax, too, was facially neutral—but it only
applied to the Bank of the United States. See McCulloch, 17
U.S. at 317–18, 392. As in McCulloch, Washington’s
minimum wage law applies to no other detention facility in
the State but the Northwest ICE Center. In any case, while
States may enact regulations borne “in common” by others
similarly situated within their border, it still can’t regulate
“the operations” of “an instrument employed by the [federal]
government.” Id. at 436–37. So if a seemingly “neutral,
nondiscriminatory” state regulation impedes a federal
government operation, it violates the Supremacy Clause.
See Hancock, 426 U.S. at 172–73; New Mexico, 455 U.S. at
735 n.11.

32

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

Thus, the panel majority is simply wrong to assert “[t]he
scope of a federal contractor’s protection from state law
under the Supremacy Clause is substantially narrower than
that of a federal employee or other federal instrumentality.”
Nwauzor, 127 F.4th at 760–61 (simplified); see also id. at
761 (“Private contractors do not stand on the same footing
as the federal government, so states can impose many laws
on federal contractors that they could not apply to the federal
government itself.”) (simplified). When a state regulation
interferes with federal operations or when there’s a clear
conflict between state and federal objectives, it makes no
difference that the state law falls only on federal contractors.
See Pub. Utils. Comm’n of Cal. v. United States, 355 U.S.
534, 544 (1958).
The panel majority now claims that following the
Supremacy Clause here would allow government
contractors to refuse to pay state minimum wages to its
employees. But that’s wrong. A state minimum-wage law
on all employees in the State isn’t a regulation on federal
operations, even when applied to federal contractors. As
McCullouch made clear, the general principle “does not
extend” to taxes that are “in common with the other”
taxpayers in the State. 17 U.S. at 436. The heart of the
problem here is that Washington wants to force ICE to
reclassify its “detainees” housed at the Northwest ICE
Center as “employees.” Neither the federal government nor
Congress established them as employees. It’s only after the
forced restructuring of the Voluntary Work Program that
GEO must pay these extra minimum-wage costs. As the
panel majority acknowledges, Washington State doesn’t
treat their own criminal detainees as “employees” and
nothing gives the State the authority to compel the federal
government to classify its immigration detainees as such.

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

33

Thus, States are generally free to impose minimum-wage
laws on federal government employees as long as the law is
neutrally and non-discriminatorily applied to all employees
in the State. What they can’t do is force the federal
government to accept the State’s classification of detainees
to cram down a minimum-wage law.
Here, GEO houses immigration detainees under the
federal government’s exclusive power to detain aliens in
removal proceedings. GEO is tasked by the federal
government to implement its Voluntary Work Program,
which the federal government believes assists with its
federal duties. Washington’s minimum wage law interferes
with GEO’s ability to carry out that federal directive. It
overrides Congress’s determination that detainees are not
employees and need only be paid $1 a day. Thus, the
Supremacy Clause precludes applying Washington’s
minimum wage law to detainees at the Northwest ICE
Center.
In contrast, the panel majority’s position would grant
States near unfettered authority to regulate any federal
operation run by federal contractors. If States may force the
federal government to recognize its detainees at privately run
detention facilities as employees, what’s to stop States from
making the federal government also provide them healthcare
benefits, pensions, and vacation leave as other employees
receive? Even more, because the panel majority provides no
limiting principles, the same rules would also apply to
federal criminal detainees in work programs at contractorrun prisons. The Constitution would not countenance such
interference.

34

NWAUZOR V. THE GEO GROUP, INC.

III.
Whether for the reasons in the panel dissent or in this
dissent, the panel majority got this case wrong. And the
effect of this decision will be widespread. Our court
provides a “roadmap” for States seeking to undermine
federal policies with which they disagree. Nwauzor, 127
F.4th at 778 (Bennett, J., dissenting). Our court’s message
is clear: So long as States focus their regulation on federal
government contractors—rather than on the federal
government itself—the States may frustrate the performance
of any federal government activities they wish. We should
have taken this case en banc to correct this error.
As always, I respectfully dissent.
COLLINS, Circuit Judge, with whom R. NELSON and
BRESS, Circuit Judges, join, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
For substantially the reasons set forth in Judge Bennett’s
panel dissent, see Nwauzor v. GEO Grp., Inc., 127 F.4th 750,
771–83 (9th Cir. 2025) (Bennett, J., dissenting), I agree that
the panel majority’s decision contravenes controlling Ninth
Circuit and Supreme Court precedent applying the doctrines
of intergovernmental immunity and federal preemption.
Accordingly, we should have reheard this case en banc, and
I dissent from our failure to do so.

