FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ANNA BIANI,

No. 24-3949

Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC., a
Delaware corporation; DOE 1,
individual; DOE 2, individual;
SHOWTIME DIGITAL, INC, a
Delaware corporation; JOHN
LOGAN, individual; DAVID
NEVINS,

D.C. No.
2:23-cv-03845DMG-E

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Dolly M. Gee, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 24, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 8, 2025
Before: Jacqueline H. Nguyen and Salvador Mendoza, Jr.,

2

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

Circuit Judges, and Jeremy D. Kernodle, District Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Nguyen
SUMMARY**
Copyright
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal, for
failure to state a claim, of Anna Biani’s action alleging that
the Showtime television series Penny Dreadful infringed on
three original characters that she created as a member of an
online role-playing forum called “Murder & Roses:
Victorian London Crime and Scandals.”
The panel held that to state a claim for copyright
infringement, a plaintiff must plausibly allege that she owns
a valid copyright, and the defendant copied protected aspects
of her work. The second prong contains two separate
components:
factual
copying
and
unlawful
appropriation. The copying component requires either
direct evidence of copying or a showing that the defendant
had access to the plaintiff’s work and that the two works
share similarities probative of copying. Unlawful
appropriation requires proof that the defendant copied
enough of the plaintiff’s protected expression of ideas or
concepts to render the two works substantially similar. In
* The Honorable Jeremy D. Kernodle, United States District Judge for
the Eastern District of Texas, sitting by designation.
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

3

reviewing the district court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss,
the court considers the extrinsic test for unlawful
appropriation, which assesses the objective similarities of
the two works, focusing only on the protectable elements of
the plaintiff’s expression.
As to copying, Biani did not challenge the district court’s
determination that she failed to plausibly allege evidence of
access. Instead, she argued that similarities between the
works were so striking as to preclude the defense of
independent creation. The panel concluded that, in assessing
the plausibility of Biani’s “copying” allegations, the district
court improperly filtered out unprotectable elements of the
works, which is the extrinsic test for unlawful
appropriation. The panel concluded, however, that this error
was harmless because, even considering unprotectable
elements of the two works, Biani’s allegations were
insufficient to plausibly infer copying. Any resemblance
between the characters was not so extensive as to preclude
the possibility of coincidence, independent creation, or prior
common source.
The panel held that Biani’s claim also independently
failed
under
the
“unlawful
appropriation”
analysis. Applying the extrinsic test and filtering out
unprotectable elements, the panel agreed with the district
court that Biani failed to allege substantial similarity in
protectable expression.

4

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

COUNSEL
Raj Gandesha (argued), Michael Hamburger, and Hallie E.
Kiernan, White & Case LLP, New York, New York;
Michael Songer, White & Case LLP, Washington, D.C.; for
Plaintiff-Appellant.
David Halberstadter (argued), Katten Muchin Rosenman
LLP, Los Angeles, California, for Defendants-Appellees

OPINION
NGUYEN, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiff Anna Biani alleges that the television series
Penny Dreadful (the “Show”), which aired for three seasons
on Showtime, infringed on several original characters that
she created as a member of an online role-playing forum
called “Murder & Roses: Victorian London Crime and
Scandals” (the “Forum”). The district court dismissed the
complaint after finding that Biani failed to plausibly allege
infringement. We affirm.
I.
A.
Biani joined the Forum in 2011, three years before the
Show aired. The Forum is a website that allows its members
to write posts and develop stories based on the theme of
crime and scandal in the Victorian era. Members write
stories using canonical characters from the Forum’s theme—
for example, Dorian Gray, Frankenstein, Sweeney Todd—

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

5

or, alternatively, create their own original characters. To
create a new character, a member must post a character
description and name an actor or actress who resembles their
character.
Biani alleges that the Show infringed on three of her
original characters: Charlotte Émilie Benoit (“Charlotte”),
Frederick FitzClarence (“Frederick”), and Landon Otis
Lloyd (“Landon”). Biani copyrighted these characters and
her Forum posts. Biani described Charlotte as a slim, thirtyone-year-old “witch doctor” and “[a]ssassin,” with “magical
healing abilities.” She has long, dark brown, wavy hair and
is often dressed in matching jackets and skirts with a highcollared shirt and a veiled top hat. Charlotte was a disturbed
child and is obsessed with “the fanaticism of occult.” She is
also a feminist who fights for women’s rights. Biani named
Eva Green as the actress who resembles Charlotte.
Frederick is portrayed as an “imposter” who always
“seek[s] reassurance and approval,” is “inappropriately
sexually provocative,” and has “histrionic personality
disorder.” Federick suffers from “seizures” and “dark
thoughts” since childhood, which caused priests to believe
that he was “possessed by evil spirits” and his family to
abandon him.
Landon is a clairvoyant “explorer,” who dreams about
future events and “lives a nomadic lifestyle, constantly
traveling from one country to another,” including exploring
the African continent. Landon’s primary goal in traveling is
to discover other individuals with clairvoyant powers.
Landon leaves his nomadic lifestyle to live in London to find
a lost half-sister and becomes a private investigator who
solves mysteries using his “powers of clairvoyance.”

6

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

B.
The Show began airing on Showtime in 2014. The Show
is set in Victorian-era London and centers on two characters,
Vanessa Malcolm (“Vanessa”) and Sir Malcolm Murray
(“Malcolm”), who grew up near one another. Vanessa is
portrayed as a woman in her late twenties to early thirties
and is played by Eva Green, the same actress whom Biani
identified as resembling Charlotte. Malcolm is portrayed as
a British explorer who has traveled throughout Africa.
Vanessa was close friends with Malcolm’s daughter, Mina.
Their friendship ends after Vanessa discovers an adulterous
relationship between Malcolm and her mother. Vanessa
retaliates by seducing Mina’s fiancé, which fractures their
families’ relationship and causes Vanessa mental anguish
that leads to her being institutionalized. Vanessa is
portrayed as a witch with supernatural abilities, which
manifest as seizures and visions. After returning to London,
Malcolm discovers that Mina is missing and persuades
Vanessa to help search for Mina. The Show’s first season
depicts their search for Mina while they confront canonical
Victorian-era characters and supernatural beings like Count
Dracula.
C.
Biani sued Showtime Networks, Inc., Showtime Digital,
Inc., John Logan, and David Nevins (collectively
“Showtime”), alleging several claims, including copyright
infringement. The complaint alleged that the Show
infringed Biani’s original characters by incorporating
various aspects of her characters into the Show’s characters
of Vanessa and Malcolm. Biani further alleged that
defendants or their agents had access to her work based on
the similarities between her and the Show’s characters.

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

7

Specifically, Biani alleged that Vanessa shared
“substantially and/or strikingly similar” characteristics with
Charlotte, Frederick, and Landon. Charlotte and Vanessa,
for example, are similar in appearance, personality, and
special abilities; they are similar in age, “beautiful,” “pale,”
“seductive,” non-conformist, and witches. Vanessa, like
Frederick, is prone to seizures and plagued by “dark
thoughts” and spirits. Vanessa and Landon have clairvoyant
powers, and Malcolm and Landon are explorers.
D.
The district court granted Showtime’s motion to dismiss
under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) because
Biani failed to “plausibly allege that Defendants had a
reasonable opportunity to copy her work.” Biani v.
Showtime Networks, Inc., 2024 U.S. Dist. LEXIS 64125, at
*11 (cleaned up). In determining that Biani failed to allege
copying, the district court applied the extrinsic test, filtering
out characteristics that it considered to be “stock aspects of
the Victorian-era England genre.” Id. at *14 (cleaned up).
The district court then found that any remaining similarities
between the characters were not “striking” enough to
“preclude the possibility of independent creation.” Id. at
*15. The district court granted leave to amend but later
dismissed the case with prejudice when Biani chose not to
amend. This appeal followed.
II.
A.
To state a claim for copyright infringement, the plaintiff
must plausibly allege that she owns a valid copyright, and
the defendant copied protected aspects of her work.
Skidmore as Tr. for Randy Craig Wolfe Tr. v. Led Zeppelin,

8

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

952 F.3d 1051, 1064 (9th Cir. 2020) (en banc) (citing
Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 883 F.3d at 1116–17 (9th Cir.
2018)).
The second prong contains two separate
components: “copying” (or “factual copying”) and illicit
copying (or “unlawful appropriation”). Rentmeester, 883
F.3d at 1117. While some of our prior cases have caused
confusion by failing to distinguish between factual copying
and unlawful appropriation, they are distinct concepts. 4
Nimmer on Copyright § 13D.08; see Skidmore, 952 F.3d at
1064. We address each in turn.
1.
The copying component focuses on whether the
defendant copied the plaintiff’s protected work. Proof of
actual copying is required because “independent creation is
a complete defense to copyright infringement.” Skidmore,
952 F.3d at 1064. “When the plaintiff lacks direct evidence
of copying, he can attempt to prove it circumstantially by
showing that the defendant had access to the plaintiff’s work
and that the two works share similarities probative of
copying.” Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1117.
A showing of access requires “either evidence of a chain
of events between the plaintiff’s work and defendants’
access to that work or evidence that the plaintiff’s work has
been widely disseminated.” Unicolors, Inc. v. Urb.
Outfitters, Inc., 853 F.3d 980, 985 (9th Cir. 2017) (cleaned
up). Proof of “similarities probative of copying” may
include both protectable and unprotectable elements. See
Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1117. Because the focus at this
stage is whether the defendant actually copied the plaintiff’s
work, any similarity between works may be considered so
long as it is “probative” to this question. See id. (“To prove
copying, the similarities between the two works need not . . .

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

9

involve protected elements of the plaintiff’s work. They just
need to be similarities one would not expect to arise if the
two works had been created independently.”).
If the plaintiff lacks evidence of access, then her claim
survives only if the two works are so “strikingly similar” as
to preclude “the possibility of independent creation.”
Unicolors, 853 F.3d at 985 (cleaned up); see Skidmore, 952
F.3d at 1064 (“This type of probative or striking similarity
shows that the similarities between the two works are due to
copying rather than coincidence, independent creation, or
prior common source.” (cleaned up) (emphasis added)).
This is a high bar. To be “striking,” similarities must appear
in a unique or complex context such that “it is virtually
impossible that the two works could have been
independently created.” 4 Nimmer on Copyright § 13D.07
(emphasis added); see, e.g., Unicolors, 853 F.3d at 985–87
(affirming summary judgment for the plaintiffs despite
limited evidence of access because the dresses at issue
shared “complex patterns with nearly identical orientation,
spacing, and grouping of complicated florets and feathers,”
which made both dresses “so overwhelmingly similar that
the possibility of independent creation is precluded”
(cleaned up)). A showing of striking similarity “creates a
presumption of copying, which the defendant can then
attempt to rebut by proving independent creation.”
Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1117 (citation omitted). For
example, no matter how strikingly similar the two works
appear, the presumption is rebutted “if the plaintiff admits to
having kept his or her creation under lock and key.” Selle v.
Gibb, 741 F.2d 896, 901 (7th Cir. 1984). Here, we consider
both protectable and unprotectable elements as well.

10

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

2.
“[C]opyright law does not forbid all copying.”
Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1117. A plaintiff therefore must
show, in addition to copying, “unlawful appropriation.”
This component requires proof that the defendant copied
enough of the plaintiff’s protected “expression of . . . ideas
or concepts to render the two works ‘substantially similar.’”
Id. (cleaned up).
Our circuit analyzes unlawful
appropriation under the “extrinsic” and “intrinsic” tests. Id.
at 1118.
The extrinsic test “assesses the objective
similarities of the two works, focusing only on the
protectable elements of the plaintiff’s expression,” by
“‘filter[ing] out’ . . . unprotectable elements,” which include
“ideas and concepts, material in the public domain, and
scènes à faire (stock or standard features that are commonly
associated with the treatment of a given subject).” Id. “The
intrinsic test requires a more holistic, subjective comparison
of the works to determine whether they are substantially
similar in total concept and feel.” Id. (cleaned up). The
extrinsic test is “the only test relevant in reviewing the
district court’s ruling on a motion to dismiss,” as the intrinsic
test is left to the fact-finder. Id.
B.
We now turn to the allegations in this case.
1.
Biani does not challenge the district court’s
determination that she failed to plausibly allege evidence of
access. Instead, Biani argues that the “similarities between
the works are so striking as to preclude independent
creation.” She contends that, in assessing the plausibility of
her “copying” allegations, the district court improperly

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

11

filtered out unprotectable elements of the works, which is the
“‘extrinsic test’ for unlawful []appropriation.” We agree,
see supra, but this error is harmless. Even considering
unprotectable elements of the two works, Biani’s allegations
are insufficient to plausibly infer copying.
Biani’s alleged “striking similarities” include Charlotte
and Vanessa’s “common physical appearance, traits and
personalities . . . including their rejection of Victorian norms
for women, their transgressive sexuality, their power to
seduce and control men, their fraught relationships with
religion and the Church, . . . their common vocation as
witches,” their relationships with “strikingly similar”
assistants, and their depiction using the “likeness of Eva
Green.” Biani also alleges that Frederick and Vanessa share
“common histories of seizures and the association of those
seizures with possession by evil spirits,” and Frederick and
Landon share the “common plot arc of an explorer searching
for a missing family member using the powers of
clairvoyance.” Biani essentially argues that Showtime
blended attributes of her various characters in a cauldron to
conjure Vanessa and Malcolm. But any resemblance
between these characters is not so “extensive as to preclude
the possibility” of “coincidence, independent creation, or
prior common source.” 4 Nimmer on Copyright § 13D.07
(cleaned up).
Even a cursory examination of the works’ characters
“exposes many more differences than similarities,” such that
none of the Show’s characters are “strikingly similar” to
their alleged counterparts from Biani’s works. Benay v.
Warner Bros. Ent., 607 F.3d 620, 625 (9th Cir. 2010),
overruled in part on other grounds by Skidmore, 952 F.3d at
1066. For example, although “[t]he most similar characters
in the two works are” Vanessa and Charlotte, “the

12

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

differences between them at least equal the similarities.” Id.
at 626. Biani describes Charlotte as “wearing a man’s
attire,” “never feel[ing] remorse after her homicides,” and
having a “strange habit of being over-protective and clingy
toward newly matured boys and girls” in order to “taint[]
them.” Vanessa is never portrayed in this manner. Vanessa
never murders anyone in the Show and expresses grief when
Malcolm is forced to kill Mina to save Vanessa’s life. On
the surface, the Show’s selection of Eva Green to play
Charlotte appears striking. However, Biani and Showtime
could have both independently identified Eva Green as an
actress who could play a witch, as she played one in a wellpublicized film that preceded both works.1
Biani also argues that “Charlotte and Vanessa both have
relationships with otherworldly assistants . . . William
Talbot in Biani’s works and Fenton in the Show—whose
depictions are strikingly similar.” Biani describes both men
as being “wild and vicious, lanky . . . , with a pale
complexion, gaunt face, untidy hair and dark, deep-set eyes
that indicate madness.” However, William’s relationship
with Charlotte and Fenton’s relationship with Vanessa are
markedly different. William is a “vicious satanist” who
serves “Charlotte as his ‘master’ and helps Charlotte dispose
of corpses.” In contrast, Fenton is captured by Vanessa,

1 See Paul Davidson, Golden Compass Witch Chosen, IGN (Aug. 2,
2006),
https://www.ign.com/articles/2006/08/02/golden-compasswitch-chosen (“Variety reports that actress Eva Green has been selected
to play Serafina, the powerful and beautiful queen of the
witches . . . . It’s another very prominent role for Green.”); The Oscars
2008,
BBC
News
(Feb.
25,
2008),
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/entertainment/7262106.stm (listing The
Golden Compass as winning an Academy Award).

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

13

never assists Vanessa, and refers to Count Dracula as his
master.
Biani also compares Charlotte to Frederick and Landon
to Malcolm. These comparisons fare no better. Unlike
Frederick, Charlotte is not portrayed as an “[i]mposter” and
“[a]ttention whore,” who “constantly pretends to have the
same interests and opinions [as] the person [she] is talking
to.” In Biani’s stories, Landon has clairvoyant powers and
“mostly . . . travels” from “one country to another” “in
search for other people with clairsensing abilities.” “[T]o be
able to make ends meet,” Landon “began working as a
private investigator” and “settle[s] in London in hopes to
find his half-sister.” Malcolm has no clairvoyant powers,
does not travel to find others with clairvoyant abilities, only
travels through Africa, and is wealthy and does not need to
“make ends meet.” There is also no indication that Landon’s
half-sister was taken by supernatural forces, unlike with
Mina.
Aspects of Biani’s characters and the Show’s characters
may be “similar at the abstract level,” but “an actual reading
of the two works reveals greater, more significant
differences and few real similarities.” Funky Films, Inc. v.
Time Warner Ent. Co., L.P., 462 F.3d 1072, 1078 (9th Cir.
2006), overruled in part on other grounds by Skidmore, 952
F.3d at 1066. These differences are fatal to Biani’s claim
that her work and the Show are so “strikingly similar” as to
preclude the possibility of “independent creation,
coincidence, a prior common source, or any source other
than copying.” Unicolors, 853 F.3d at 988 (quoting Baxter
v. MCA, Inc., 812 F.2d 421, 424 n.2 (9th Cir. 1987)).

14

BIANI V. SHOWTIME NETWORKS, INC.

2.
Biani’s claim also independently fails under the
“unlawful appropriation” prong. As the district court
explained, Biani’s alleged similar characteristics are at a
level of generality that is unprotectable. For example, Biani
focuses on Charlotte and Vanessa’s shared characteristics of
being similarly-aged, “strong,” “beautiful,” and “pale
brunettes,” who “dress in Victorian attire,” and engage in
witchcraft and “deviant behavior.” Biani, 2024 U.S. Dist.
LEXIS 64125, at *14. “[B]asic plot ideas,” such as a woman
rejecting the norms of her era (and therefore having fraught
relationships with the church and nonmarital relationships),
are unprotectable. Cavalier v. Random House, Inc., 297
F.3d 815, 824 (9th Cir. 2002); see id. (finding as
unprotectable “the general premise of a child, invited by a
moon-type character, who takes a journey through the night
sky and returns safely to bed to fall asleep”). In sum,
applying the “extrinsic test” and filtering out unprotectable
elements, we agree with the district court that Biani fails to
allege “substantial similarity in protectable expression.”
Skidmore, 952 F.3d at 1064.
AFFIRMED.

