FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
NARGUESS NOOHI, individually,
and on behalf of other members of the
general public similarly situated,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
JOHNSON & JOHNSON
CONSUMER INC.,

No. 23-55190
D.C. No.
2:20-cv-03575TJH-JEM
OPINION

Defendant-Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Terry J. Hatter, Jr., District Judge, Presiding
Argued April 8, 2024
Submission Deferred April 10, 2024
Resubmitted July 18, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed July 25, 2025

2

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

Before: Marsha S. Berzon and Salvador Mendoza, Jr.,
Circuit Judges, and Susan R. Bolton,* District Judge.
Opinion by Judge Berzon
SUMMARY **
Class Certification
The panel affirmed the district court’s order granting
class certification in Narguess Noohi’s putative class action
against Johnson & Johnson Consumer Inc. (“JJCI”), alleging
violations of California deceptive marketing and consumer
protection laws.
Noohi purchased JJCI’s Neutrogena Oil-Free Face
Moisturizer for Sensitive Skin, which she alleged that,
despite the name, contained oils and oil-based
ingredients. The district court certified a class of California
purchasers of the product.
First, JJCI challenged the district court’s reliance on the
proposed damages model of Noohi’s economic expert, Dr.
Wade Roberts, who described his proposed process for
measuring class members’ damages by calculating the
economic value to consumers of the “oil-free”
statement. The panel held that the district court did not
The Honorable Susan R. Bolton, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

3

abuse its discretion in finding that Dr. Roberts’ model could
reliably measure damages on a classwide basis and
adequately for present purposes matched Noohi’s theory of
harm. However, JJCI must be given the opportunity to test
the admissibility and reliability of Dr. Roberts’ model once
it has been fully executed.
Second, JJCI argued that the district court incorrectly
determined that the elements of materiality and reliance were
susceptible to common proof. The panel held that
materiality, and therefore an inference of reliance, can be
established by reference to an objective, reasonable
consumer standard, and so in this case may be proven in a
way common to the class. Although the inference of
reliance is rebuttable, the district court did not abuse its
discretion in determining that JJCI failed to rebut that
inference.
Accordingly, the panel affirmed the district court’s grant
of class certification.

COUNSEL
Adrian Bacon (argued), Meghan E. George, and Todd M.
Friedman, Law Offices of Todd M. Friedman, Woodland
Hills, California, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Hannah Y.S. Chanoine (argued), O'Melveny & Myers LLP,
New York, New York; Matthew D. Powers and Rebecca
Shore, O'Melveny & Myers LLP, San Francisco, California;
Martha F. Hutton, O'Melveny & Myers LLP, Washington,
D.C.; Jason Zarrow, O'Melveny & Myers LLP, Los Angeles,
California; for Defendant-Appellant.

4

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

OPINION
BERZON, Circuit Judge:
Johnson & Johnson Consumer Inc. (“JJCI”) markets and
sells a cosmetic product named “Neutrogena Oil-Free Face
Moisturizer for Sensitive Skin” (“the Product”). 1 In search
of an oil-free skin moisturizer, Narguess Noohi purchased
the Product. Noohi alleges that, despite the name,
Neutrogena Oil-Free Face Moisturizer for Sensitive Skin
contains oils and oil-based ingredients. After discovering
that alleged deception, Noohi brought this putative
consumer class action against JJCI, alleging violations of
California deceptive marketing and consumer protection
laws. The district court certified a class of California
purchasers of the Product. JJCI now appeals that grant of
class certification on two grounds.
First, JJCI challenges the district court’s reliance on the
proposed damages model of Noohi’s economic expert. JJCI
maintains that the district court held Noohi to only a “prima
facie” standard with regard to the damages model and
unduly rejected its evidentiary challenges to the expert’s
testimony. The result, JJCI contends, was that the approved
model was too underdeveloped and preliminary to support
the district court’s finding that common questions
The parties refer to the Product as “Neutrogena Oil-Free Face
Moisturizer for Sensitive Skin.” That wording does not appear on the
front of the bottle or the box it comes in. The back of the box includes
the label “Neutrogena® Oil-Free Moisture for Sensitive Skin.” The
largest, most prominently placed text on the front of the box and bottle
reads simply “oil-free moisture.” “Sensitive skin” appears in smaller text
below, and “ultra-gentle facial moisturizer” appears in even smaller text
below that.

1

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

5

predominated as to injury. JJCI further contends that the
model does not match Noohi’s theory of harm. We reject
JJCI’s challenges to the damages model. In doing so, we
rely on this Court’s recent holding that “class action
plaintiffs may rely on a reliable though not-yet-executed
damages model to demonstrate that damages are susceptible
to common proof so long as the district court finds that the
model is reliable and, if applied to the proposed class, will
be able to calculate damages in a manner common to the
class at trial.” Lytle v. Nutramax Lab’ys, Inc., 114 F.4th
1011, 1019 (9th Cir. 2024). We also conclude that the
district court did not abuse its discretion in finding the
proposed damages model fit Noohi’s theory of harm and was
sufficient for purposes of class certification.
Second, JJCI argues that the district court incorrectly
determined that the elements of materiality and reliance were
susceptible to common proof. We disagree. Materiality, and
therefore an inference of reliance, can be established by
reference to an objective, reasonable consumer standard, and
so in this case may be proven in a way common to the class.
Although the inference of reliance is rebuttable, the district
court did not abuse its discretion in determining that JJCI
failed to rebut that inference.
For these reasons, discussed more fully below, we affirm
the district court’s grant of class certification.
I. BACKGROUND
JJCI develops, markets, and sells Neutrogena Oil-Free
Face Moisturizer for Sensitive Skin. Plaintiff-Appellee
Narguess Noohi purchased this Product because she wanted
an oil-free moisturizer for her skin. Noohi alleges that,
despite the title “oil-free,” the Product contains two
ingredients—ethylhexyl palmitate and soybean sterols—that

6

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

are oils or oil-based compounds. Noohi further alleges that
she would not have purchased the Product had she known it
contained oils.
In her operative complaint, Noohi asserted four claims
against JJCI: (1) violation of California’s False Advertising
Law (“FAL”), Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code §§ 17500 et seq.;
(2) violation of California’s Unfair Competition Law
(“UCL”), id. §§ 17200 et seq.; (3) violation of California’s
Consumers Legal Remedies Act (“CLRA”), Cal. Civ. Code
§§ 1750 et seq.; and (4) common law fraud. Noohi moved
to certify a class under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
23(b)(2) and 23(b)(3) as to her three statutory claims.
In support of her motion for class certification, Noohi
submitted declarations and reports from two experts—Dr.
Michael Hickner, a professor of materials science and
engineering, and Dr. Wade Roberts, an econometrics expert.
In a declaration, Dr. Hickner explained the meaning and
properties of “oil.” Dr. Hickner opined that, although “oil”
lacks a standard scientific definition, the term generally
refers to a “naturally-derived, chemically synthesized, or
petrochemically-refined slippery . . . substance” that is
hydrophobic—meaning that it does not mix with water—and
more viscous than water, but less dense. Dr. Hickner stated
that, based on their chemical structures and physical
properties, ethylhexyl palmitate and soybean sterols are oils
with oil-like physical properties.
In an expert report, Dr. Roberts described his proposed
process for measuring class members’ damages by
calculating the economic value to consumers of the “oilfree” statement. Dr. Roberts described a two-step process.
First, Dr. Roberts would conduct qualitative market research
designed to uncover consumers’ understanding of and

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

7

response to the “oil-free” label. Second, Dr. Roberts would
conduct quantitative surveying and market analysis to
measure the economic value to consumers of the “oil-free”
statement. At the time of class certification, discovery was
still ongoing, and Dr. Roberts had not yet fully developed or
executed his proposed damages model.
In opposition to class certification, JJCI submitted
declarations from its own experts contesting Dr. Hickner’s
classification of the ingredients as oils and raised evidentiary
objections based on Dr. Hickner’s qualifications and
methodology. JJCI also submitted declarations from its own
economic experts contesting the design of Dr. Roberts’
damages model and raised evidentiary objections based on
Dr. Roberts’ qualifications and proposed methodology.
After considering JJCI’s experts’ opinions and its
evidentiary objections, the district court found both Dr.
Hickner and Dr. Roberts qualified and their opinions
sufficiently reliable to be considered for class certification
purposes. 2 The district court rejected JJCI’s evidentiary
objections to Noohi’s experts’ qualifications and their
opinions. The district court further found that Noohi
satisfied the threshold class certification requirements of
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23(a) and the specific
requirements of both Federal Rule of Civil Procedure
The district court found that Dr. Hickner’s declaration was inadmissible
in its current form under Daubert v. Merrell Down Pharms., Inc., 509
U.S. 579 (1993), as Dr. Hickner had failed to demonstrate that his
conclusions were based on past research, peer reviewed, or otherwise
supported by established scientific methods. The district court
nevertheless found Dr. Hickner’s opinion sufficient for purposes of class
certification because it was likely that his opinion could be presented in
an admissible form at trial and would be useful to the trier of fact in
determining whether the Product was deceptive.
2

8

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

23(b)(2) and 23(b)(3). The district court therefore granted
Noohi’s motion for class certification, certifying a class
defined as “all consumers who purchased Neutrogena OilFree Moisture Sensitive Skin in California between April 17,
2016 and November 30, 2022,” the date of class
certification.
JJCI timely sought and obtained permission to file this
interlocutory appeal of the district court’s class certification
order, pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23(f).
II. DISCUSSION
Before it can certify a class, a district court must conduct
a “rigorous analysis” to ensure that the requirements of
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23 are satisfied. Olean
Wholesale Grocery Coop., Inc. v. Bumble Bee Foods LLC,
31 F. 4th 651, 664 (9th Cir. 2022) (en banc) (quoting Gen.
Tel. Co. of the Sw. v. Falcon, 457 U.S. 147, 161 (1982)).
“[P]laintiffs wishing to proceed through a class action must
actually prove—not simply plead—that their proposed class
satisfies each requirement of Rule 23.” Halliburton Co. v.
Erica P. John Fund, Inc., 573 U.S. 258, 275 (2014).
The crux of the dispute here is whether Federal Rule of
Civil Procedure 23(b)(3)’s requirement that “questions of
law or fact common to class members predominate over any
questions affecting only individual members” has been
adequately met. Rule 23(b)(3)’s predominance requirement
“presupposes satisfaction of the commonality requirement
of [Rule] 23(a)(2), which itself tests ‘the capacity of a
classwide proceeding to generate common answers apt to

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

9

drive the resolution of the litigation.’” 3 Lytle, 114 F.4th at
1023 (quoting Alcantar v. Hobart Serv., 800 F.3d 1047, 1052
(9th Cir. 2015)). “But the predominance inquiry goes further
and ‘asks whether the common, aggregation-enabling, issues
in the case are more prevalent or important than the noncommon, aggregation-defeating, individual issues.’” Id.
(quoting Tyson Foods, Inc. v. Bouaphakeo, 577 U.S. 442,
453 (2016)).
Importantly, the inquiry at the class certification stage
differs from that at summary judgment. “A court, when
asked to certify a class, is merely to decide a suitable method
of adjudicating the case and should not ‘turn class
certification into a mini-trial’ on the merits.” Edwards v.
First Am. Corp., 798 F.3d 1172, 1178 (9th Cir. 2015)
(quoting Ellis v. Costco Wholesale Corp., 657 F.3d 970, 983
n.8 (9th Cir. 2011)). “In determining whether the ‘common
question’ prerequisite is met, a district court is limited to
resolving whether the evidence establishes that a common
question is capable of class-wide resolution, not whether the
evidence in fact establishes that plaintiffs would win at trial.”
Olean, 31 F.4th at 666–67.
“With respect to the
predominance inquiry specifically, a district court must
evaluate ‘the method or methods by which plaintiffs propose
3

Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 23(b)(3) provides:
A class action may be maintained if Rule 23(a) is
satisfied and if . . . the court finds that the questions of
law or fact common to class members predominate
over any questions affecting only individual members,
and that a class action is superior to other available
methods for fairly and efficiently adjudicating the
controversy.

Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(b)(3).

10

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

to use the class-wide evidence to prove the common question
in one stroke.’” Lytle, 114 F.4th at 1023 (alteration omitted)
(quoting Olean, 31 F.4th at 666).
“We review the decision to certify a class and ‘any
particular underlying Rule 23 determination involving a
discretionary determination’ for an abuse of discretion.”
Olean, 31 F.4th at 663 (quoting Yokoyama v. Midland Nat’l
Life Ins. Co., 594 F.3d 1087, 1091 (9th Cir. 2010)). We
review de novo “the district court’s determination of
underlying legal questions” and review for clear error “its
determination of underlying factual questions.” Id. “A
district court applying the correct legal standard abuses its
discretion only if ‘it (1) relies on an improper factor,
(2) omits a substantial factor, or (3) commits a clear error of
judgment in weighing the correct mix of factors.’” Sali v.
Corona Reg’l Med. Ctr., 909 F.3d 996, 1002 (9th Cir. 2018)
(quoting Abdullah v. U.S. Sec. Assocs., Inc., 731 F.3d 952,
956 (9th Cir. 2013)). “We review evidentiary rulings for an
abuse of discretion.” Lytle, 114 F.4th at 1023–24.
A.
JJCI’s first argument on appeal is that Dr. Roberts’
proposed damages model was too underdeveloped at the
time of class certification to be admissible or reliable under
Daubert and Federal Rule of Evidence 702. JJCI further
maintains that the district court, in rejecting its evidentiary
challenges to the damages model and finding that the model
demonstrated that damages were capable of measurement on
a classwide basis, failed to engage in the “rigorous analysis”
required under Rule 23. We disagree.
This Court’s recent decision in Lytle, in which the
defendants raised objections similar to those put forward by
JJCI, describes the appropriate inquiry into a damages model

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

11

at class certification. As an initial matter, Lytle holds that
“there is no categorical prohibition on a district court relying
on an unexecuted damages model to certify a class.” 114
F.4th at 1029. Lytle further makes clear “there is no
requirement that the evidence relied upon by Plaintiffs to
support class certification be presented in an admissible form
at the class certification stage.” Id. at 1024–25. Instead, “an
inquiry into the evidence’s ultimate admissibility should go
to the weight that evidence is given at the class certification
stage.” Id. at 1025 (quoting Sali, 909 F.3d at 1006). But
“‘[n]either the possibility that a plaintiff will be unable to
prove his allegations, nor the possibility that the later course
of the suit might unforeseeably prove the original decision
to certify the class wrong, is a basis for declining to certify a
class which apparently satisfies’ Rule 23.” Id. (alteration in
original) (quoting Sali, 909 F.3d at 1004–05).
Additionally, evaluation of an unexecuted damages
model at class certification “requires determining whether
the expert’s methodology is reliable, so that a limited
Daubert analysis may be necessary, but the more full-blown
Daubert assessment of the results of the application of the
model would be premature.” Id. at 1031. Instead, “the court
considers only if expert evidence is useful in evaluating
whether class certification requirements have been met.” Id.
As Lytle emphasizes, in applying this standard to an
unexecuted damages model, “the ultimate inquiry is whether
a proposed model is likely to provide common answers at
trial.” Id. at 1032 n.8.
Here, as in Lytle, the district court’s application of
Daubert at the class certification stage was not an abuse of

12

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

discretion. 4 The district court correctly recognized that the
Plaintiffs were required to “show that damages are capable
of measurement on a class-wide basis.” The court then
considered and explained how Dr. Roberts proposed to do
so, while noting that Noohi “need not show the actual
amount of damages incurred” at the time of class
certification. In determining that Dr. Roberts’ model was
reliable and capable of measuring damages on a classwide
basis, the district court found Dr. Roberts qualified as an
expert in econometrics and relied on the fact that other courts
have approved similar damages models in other CLRA
cases.
JJCI contends that Dr. Roberts’ survey question design
and selection of the final survey population was incomplete
and preliminary, and when further developed and executed,
may bias the results of his model. The contention that Dr.
Roberts’ model was not sufficiently developed to support the
district court’s approval of class certification is
unpersuasive. To be sure, “[m]erely gesturing at a model or
Noohi argues that JJCI did not challenge Dr. Roberts’ expert testimony
under Daubert before the district court and so may not raise a Daubert
challenge now. We do not agree. In the district court, JJCI filed
“Defendant [JJCI’s] Evidentiary Objections to Plaintiff’s Experts Dr.
Hickner and Dr. Roberts in Support of Opposition to Class
Certification,” in which it argued that Dr. Roberts’ analysis did not
“survive[] scrutiny under Daubert” and “should be excluded.” JJCI did
not request a Daubert hearing and none was held. But the district court
did consider JJCI’s evidentiary objections under the Daubert standard to
the extent appropriate at class certification, noting that JJCI’s critiques
did not establish that Dr. Roberts’ model was “inadequate.” See Lytle,
114 F.4th 1024–25, 1031. As the district court’s consideration of JJCI’s
evidentiary objections constituted a discretionary determination, we
review that determination for an abuse of discretion. See Olean, 31 F.4th
at 663.
4

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

13

describing a general method will not suffice . . . . Rather,
plaintiffs—or their expert—must chart out a path to obtain
all necessary data and demonstrate that the proposed method
will be viable as applied to the facts of a given case.” Lytle,
114 F.4th at 1032.
Dr. Roberts did so here. Dr. Roberts is qualified as an
expert in econometrics with experience in survey design and
execution. His expert report explains how, through a
combination of qualitative and quantitative surveying, he
will measure classwide damages. Like the expert in Lytle,
see 114 F.4th at 1032, Dr. Roberts had not yet finally worded
the questions or executed the survey, but he had designed the
survey methodology and identified target respondent
populations.
Lytle held that there was no abuse of discretion where the
district court relied on an expert who presented a model but
“had not yet collected” data, over the defendant’s objection
that “the precise wording of a questionnaire is critical.” Id.
at 1032–33. Similarly, the district court in this case did not
abuse its discretion in finding that JJCI’s challenges to Dr.
Roberts’ opinion evidence were “not ripe” at the class
certification stage. As the Lytle panel explained, “[t]he
speculative possibility that [Dr. Roberts] might slip up in
executing his model, standing alone, is insufficient to defeat
class certification.” Id. at 1033.
JJCI further argues that Dr. Roberts’ proposed damages
model is not consistent with Noohi’s theory of harm, thus
contravening Comcast Corp. v. Behrend, 569 U.S. 27
(2013). We are not persuaded.
Comcast requires that plaintiffs “be able to show that
their damages stemmed from the defendant’s actions that
created the legal liability.” Levya v. Medline Indus. Inc., 716

14

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

F.3d 510, 514 (9th Cir. 2013) (citing Comcast, 569 U.S. at
38). Noohi alleges that JJCI misled consumers, in violation
of the CLRA, UCL, and FAL, by labeling the Product “oilfree.” Noohi’s theory of harm is that class members paid
more for the Product than they would have absent the
misleading title “oil-free.” Under that theory of harm, the
amount of overpayment attributable to the challenged
term—the “price premium”—is the standard measure of
damages under the CLRA and of restitution under the FAL
and UCL. 5 See, e.g., Pulaski & Middleman, LLC v. Google,
Inc., 802 F.3d 979, 988–89 (9th Cir. 2015); Nguyen v. Nissan
N. Am., Inc., 932 F.3d 811, 817–818 (9th Cir. 2019); In re
Vioxx Class Cases, 180 Cal. App. 4th 116, 130–31 (2009).
Dr. Roberts proposed to measure that overpayment. The
quantitative portion of Dr. Roberts’ analysis would involve
a “Van Westendorp price elasticity test.” As Dr. Roberts
described in his expert report, survey participants—a
representative sample of consumers whose selection will be
informed in part by the qualitative survey and JJCI’s internal
data—will be shown the Product and asked at what prices
they would find the Product “too inexpensive to be
considered, a good value, expensive but still worth
considering, and finally, too expensive to be considered.”
Next, Dr. Roberts will introduce information “challenging
the ‘oil-free’ claim.” For example, Dr. Roberts proposed
informing the survey participants that some of the Product’s
ingredients contained extracts of soybean and palm oil.

Plaintiffs may seek damages under the CLRA. Under the FAL and
UCL, plaintiffs are limited to equitable relief, including restitution. See
Colgan v. Leatherman Tool Grp., Inc., 135 Cal. App. 4th 663, 695
(2006).
5

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

15

After sharing that information, Dr. Roberts will again ask the
survey participants the same pricing questions.
Using the difference between participants’ two “good
value” prices—before and after the “exposure” to
information challenging the “oil-free” label—Dr. Roberts
will use regression analysis to determine the percent of the
product’s overall price associated with the phrase “oil-free.”
That coefficient will then be multiplied by the Product’s
actual market price from the class period to calculate the
class members’ “damages (financial losses) directly
measurable from changes in the perceived value of the
product.” As the district court found, courts have approved
of similar “benefit-of-the-bargain” damages models in
deceptive marketing cases under California law. See
Nguyen, 932 F.3d at 818 (collecting cases).
Dr. Roberts also proposed to measure “softer” kinds of
harms consumers might experience, such as changes to
“overall consumer satisfaction, brand loyalty, willingness to
recommend [the Product], and repurchase intent.” To
measure these less “concrete” damages, Dr. Roberts
proposed to ask the survey participants questions about their
attitudes towards and impressions of the Product before and
after the “exposure.” Dr. Roberts will then use “multivariate
statistic[al]” analysis to quantify the changes in respondents’
perceptions of the Product.
Dr. Roberts’ proposal to quantify “soft” damages will
include damages beyond those reflecting Noohi’s theory of
overpayment. According to Dr. Roberts’ own description of
his methodology, the damages associated with changes in a
decline in consumers’ satisfaction, brand loyalty,
willingness to recommend the product, and repurchase intent
would be calculated in addition to the price premium

16

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

measured via the Van Westendorp pricing exercise.
Including an economic value associated with those attributes
in the ultimate damages calculation would inflate damages
beyond the price premium. But that fact alone does not mean
that Dr. Roberts’ model violates Comcast.
The concern in Comcast was not only that the damages
model there proposed to measure damages not associated
with the plaintiffs’ theory of harm, but also that the model
was incapable of separating out those damages from
damages tied to the plaintiff’s theory. 569 U.S. at 36–37.
That problem—key to the Court’s holding in Comcast—is
not present here. The price premium measurement will be
informed by different survey questions than those associated
with the “softer” damages and will be calculated separately
from those harms. No extra work is needed to, in the words
of Comcast, “bridge the difference[]” between the
cognizable and non-cognizable damage measurements. Id.
at 38. Dr. Roberts need only calculate the price premium
without including his separate measurement of the “softer”
damages to produce a measure of damages consistent with
the theory of the class claims.
JJCI further takes issue with Dr. Roberts’ particular
proposed methodology for measuring the price premium.
Rather than comparing what consumers are willing to pay
before and after they learn that the Product is not “oil-fee,”
JJCI argues, Dr. Roberts should compare “what consumers
paid for ‘Neutrogena’s Oil-Free Face Moisturizer for
Sensitive Skin’ and what they would have been willing to
pay for ‘Neutrogena’s Face Moisturizer for Sensitive Skin,’
holding everything else about the product’s performance and
packaging (other than the ‘oil-free’ claim) constant.”
Otherwise, JJCI maintains, Dr. Roberts’ model will
improperly include the “emotional value” that consumers

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

17

associate with learning that the “Product’s label contains a
lie.”
JJCI’s contention relies on an improper understanding of
the measure of the price premium under California consumer
protection law. California law does not prescribe any
specific means of measuring a price premium for purposes
of actual damages or restitution. In fact, “[c]lass wide
damages calculations under the UCL, FAL, and CLRA are
particularly forgiving.” Lambert v. Nutraceutical Corp., 870
F.3d 1170, 1183 (9th Cir. 2017), rev’d on other grounds, 586
U.S. 188 (2019). “California law ‘requires only that some
reasonable basis of computation of damages be used, and the
damages may be computed even if the result reached is an
approximation.’” Id. (quoting Pulaski, 802 F.3d at 989).
There is no talismanic means of measuring damages for
deceptive marketing claims under California consumer
protection law. For example, courts have approved damages
models that use conjoint analysis, which asks survey
respondents to select from a range of similar products that
vary in characteristics like price, labeling, and design. See
Lytle, 114 F.4th at 1033 (collecting cases). Courts have also
deemed “contingent valuation analysis” a “reliable survey
based methodology to determine price premium damages.”
Hilsley v. Ocean Spray Cranberries, Inc., No. 17-CV-2335,
2019 WL 3006465, *3 (S.D. Cal. July 10, 2019) (collecting
cases). That approach, similar to Dr. Roberts’ proposed
methodology, varies the features of a single product by
presenting new information about the product and asks
survey participants to “directly report what they are willing
to pay for it.” Id.
To be sure, a poorly conducted survey might produce
responses that inflate damages. For instance, poorly worded

18

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

survey questions might induce bias in respondents, see Lytle,
114 F.4th at 1033, or survey conditions might not accurately
replicate the conditions faced by consumers in stores, see
Hadley v. Kellogg Sales Co., 324 F. Supp. 3d 1084, 1107–
08 (N.D. Cal. 2018). But Dr. Roberts recognized those risks.
In his deposition, Dr. Roberts stated that leading or
otherwise poorly framed prompts—for example, telling
survey participants “you were lied to”—could lead to
skewed responses. Dr. Roberts also emphasized the need to
conduct the pricing survey in a “neutral” manner. Should
Dr. Roberts’ execution of the survey fall short of that mark,
JJCI may explore that failure at summary judgment, in a
renewed Daubert motion, or during cross-examination at
trial. See, e.g., Lytle, 114 F.4th at 1033–34; Hadley, 324 F.
Supp. 3d at 1108. At the class certification stage, the key
inquiry under Comcast is simply whether Noohi has
“demonstrated the nexus between [her] legal theory . . . and
[her] damages model.” Nguyen, 932 F.3d at 821. As
explained, Dr. Roberts’ proposed damages model was
designed to measure a price premium associated with the
misleading label at the heart of Noohi’s claims. Whether the
proposed calculation of the price premium will prove
accurate is a “merits inquir[y] unrelated to class
certification.” Id.
In sum, the district court did not abuse its discretion in
finding that Dr. Roberts’ model could reliably measure
damages on a classwide basis and adequately for present
purposes matched Noohi’s theory of harm. That said, we
reiterate Lytle’s warning that a “plaintiff may not avoid
ultimate scrutiny of the admissibility of their experts’ final
opinions simply by declining to develop those opinions in
advance of class certification.” 114 F.4th at 1034.
Accordingly, JJCI must be given the opportunity to test the

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

19

admissibility and reliability of Dr. Roberts’ model once it
has been fully executed.
B.
JJCI’s second argument on appeal is that the district
court abused its discretion in finding that common issues
predominate with respect to the elements of materiality and
reliance. Because materiality and reliance are substantive
components of Noohi’s claims, answering whether they
present common issues necessarily requires some overlap
with the merits. We consider such merits questions “to the
extent—but only to the extent—that they are relevant to
determining whether the Rule 23 prerequisites for class
certification are satisfied.” Amgen Inc. v. Conn. Ret. Plans
& Tr. Funds, 568 U.S. 455, 466 (2013).
The UCL prohibits any “unlawful, unfair or fraudulent
business act or practice and unfair, deceptive, untrue or
misleading advertising.” Cal. Bus. & Prof. Code § 17200.
The FAL prohibits “untrue or misleading” statements in the
course of business. Id. § 17500. The UCL and FAL are
“‘broad’ and ‘sweeping’ to ‘protect both consumers and
competitors by promoting fair competition in commercial
markets for goods and services.’” Pulaski, 802 F.3d at 985
(quoting Kwikset Corp. v. Superior Ct., 51 Cal. 4th 310, 320
(2011)). Accordingly, to state a claim under the UCL or the
FAL “based on false advertising or promotional practices, it
is necessary only to show that members of the public are
likely to be deceived.” Id. (quoting In re Tobacco II Cases,
46 Cal. 4th 298, 312 (2009)). Whether a statement is likely
to deceive members of the public is decided by reference to
an objective “reasonable consumer” standard. Ebner v.
Fresh, Inc., 838 F.3d 958, 965 (9th Cir. 2016).

20

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

The CLRA prohibits “unfair methods of competition and
unfair or deceptive acts or practices.” Cal. Civ. Code § 770.
To state a claim under the CLRA, “a plaintiff must show
(1) the defendant engaged in deceptive conduct and (2) the
deception caused [the] plaintiff harm.” Lytle, 114 F.4th at
1034. “[U]nder the CLRA, ‘[c]ausation, on a classwide
basis, may be established by materiality. If the trial court
finds that material misrepresentations have been made to the
entire class, an inference of reliance arises as to the class.’”
Id. (second alteration in original) (quoting Stearns v.
Ticketmaster Corp., 655 F.3d 1013, 1022 (9th Cir. 2011)).
Materiality under the CLRA is determined using a
reasonable consumer standard: a misrepresentation is
material “if a reasonable [consumer] would attach
importance to its existence or nonexistence in determining
his choice of action in the transaction in question.” Stearns,
655 F.3d at 1022 (quoting Steroid Hormone Prod. Cases,
181 Cal. App. 4th 145, 157 (2010)).
“Because materiality (and, hence, in this case reliance)
may be proved by reference to an objective, reasonable
consumer standard, reliance under the CLRA is generally
susceptible to common proof.” Lytle, 114 F.4th at 1034.
The same is true as to whether a statement is likely to deceive
“members of the public” under the FAL and UCL. Pulaski,
902 F.3d at 985 (emphasis added) (quoting In re Tobacco II
Cases, 46 Cal. 4th at 312). Accordingly, deceptive
marketing claims under these California consumer
protection statutes are generally “ideal for class
certification.” Id. (quoting Bradach v. Pharmavite, LLC,
735 F. App’x 251, 255 (9th Cir. 2018)).
There is an important caveat to this reasoning: “while
materiality can support an inference of reliance, that does not
necessarily mean that the inference will hold as to the entire

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

21

class, such that common questions predominate.” Lytle, 114
F.4th at 1034–35. “If the misrepresentation or omission is
not material as to all class members, the issue of reliance
‘would vary from consumer to consumer’ and the class
should not be certified.” Stearns, 655 F.3d at 1022–23
(quoting In re Vioxx Class Cases, 180 Cal. App. 4th at 129).
JJCI contends that the district court ignored the caveat to
the inference of reliance and found materiality and reliance
to be “automatically common questions in false-advertising
cases under California law.” The district court here did not
explicitly mention and apply the caveat to the inference of
reliance. Nevertheless, our review of the district court’s
decision and the record at class certification confirms that
the district court did not abuse its discretion in finding that
the materiality and reliance elements of Noohi’s claims
could be resolved on a classwide basis and that common
issues therefore predominate.
In granting class certification, the district court relied on
the fact that materiality, and therefore reliance, can be shown
by reference to a reasonable consumer standard, avoiding the
need for individualized inquiries. The district court also
relied on the undisputed evidence of classwide exposure to
the “oil-free” language, specifically the fact that the “oilfree” term appears in the Product’s name prominently
displayed on the front of the packaging. In determining
whether a statement is materially misleading under
California law, “the primary evidence . . . is the advertising
itself.” Colgan v. Leatherman Tool Grp., Inc., 135 Cal. App.
4th 663, 679 (2006) (citation omitted). It is hard to imagine
that consumers would purchase a product labeled “Oil-Free
Moisture” without regard to whether the product was free
from oil. If, somehow, the evidence later shows that a
reasonable consumer would not have found the product’s

22

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

name to be material to their purchase decision, “the failure
of proof on the element of materiality would end the case for
one and for all; no claim would remain in which individual
reliance issues could potentially predominate.” Amgen, 568
U.S. at 468.
Given the objective standard for materiality and the
undisputed evidence of classwide exposure, Noohi is
entitled to the inference that reliance can be shown via
common proof. See In re Vioxx Class Cases, 180 Cal. App.
4th at 129.
JJCI’s arguments for why it has rebutted that inference
are not persuasive. JJCI first maintains that materiality is not
subject to common proof here because the understanding of
the phrase “oil-free” may differ across the class. In JJCI’s
telling, consumers might interpret “oil-free” as meaning that
the Product does not contain oils, does not contain
ingredients derived from oils, or does not perform in a way
consumers consider “oily.” Because the materiality of the
phrase “oil-free” depends on what meaning consumers
attach to it, JJCI argues materiality cannot be determined on
a classwide basis. This argument fails for two reasons.
First, JJCI did not offer persuasive evidence to the
district court that the meaning of “oil-free” in fact varies
across the class. Instead, relying on Noohi’s testimony as to
her motivations for purchasing the Product and the expert
report of a dermatologist as to the dermatologic uses of oilfree products, JJCI contends—without any empirical
evidence—that “‘oil-free’ can be interpreted in multiple
ways by consumers” and that consumers generally
“understand and seek out ‘oil-free’ products for a multitude
of reasons.” Beyond that ipse dixit argument, JJCI presents

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

23

no evidence that materiality or reliance actually varies across
the class.
Second, even if JJCI had presented evidence that the
understanding of the phrase “oil-free” varies across the class,
JJCI has not demonstrated why that fact would undermine
the commonality of materiality based on a reasonable
consumer standard, or rebut the inference of reliance. In
Lytle, this Court discussed Stearns, 655 F.3d 1017, In re
Vioxx Class Cases, 180 Cal. App. 4th 116, and Fairbanks v.
Farmers New World Life Insurance Co., 197 Cal. App. 4th
544 (2011), three cases in which courts found materiality
differed across a class and so defeated the inference of
reliance and class certification. See Lytle, 114 F.4th at 1037–
38. JJCI relies on all three cases here. Lytle determined that
the “common theme unifying each of these cases is that a
sizable portion of the class either were not misled by the
statements or would not have found the misrepresentations
to be material had they known the truth.” Id. at 1038.
For example, in Fairbanks, the plaintiffs alleged that the
defendant’s marketing of life insurance policies was
misleading because the defendant marketed the policies as
“permanent” when in fact the policies were not permanent
and were “systematically underfunded.” 197 Cal. App. 4th
at 553. The court found that the materiality of the
“permanent” policy claim was not subject to common proof
because “many, if not most” policy purchasers did not intend
for the policy to be permanent or had no expectation one way
or the other. Id. at 907. For those purchasers, the fact that
the policy was marketed as permanent was immaterial to
their decision to buy it. Id.
In In re Vioxx Class Cases, the plaintiffs alleged Merck
“hid ‘an increased risk of death,’ associated with [the anti-

24

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

inflammatory drug] Vioxx.” 180 Cal. App. 4th at 133. The
court found class treatment inappropriate because of
“overwhelming evidence” that Vioxx did not increase the
risk of death for all patients, and that some patients would
“still take Vioxx today” if it was prescribed and they were
told of the risks. 180 Cal. App. 4th at 103, 133–34. The key
to the courts’ decisions in Fairbanks and Vioxx was that the
class at issue was shown to include a substantial number of
individuals for whom the allegedly deceptive statements
would not have affected their purchase decision and so were
not material.
JJCI’s contention, in contrast, is not that the “oil-free”
title did not affect the purchase decision of—and so was
immaterial to—a portion of the class, but that it affected the
purchase decision of class members—and so was material—
for different reasons. That is, JJCI does not suggest, let alone
point to evidence demonstrating that, a consumer who
thought “oil-free” meant “without oils” was any more or less
likely to be affected in their purchase decision than someone
who thought it meant “without oil derivatives” or not
tactilely “oily.”
So understood, JJCI’s argument, even if true, does not
raise the same concerns regarding the susceptibility of
materiality to common proof as does a showing that a
contested statement was not material at all to some class
members. The baseline inquiry is whether the statement was
material to a reasonable person. An affirmative answer to
that question gives rise to an inference of reliance. A
showing that for some portion of a class that statement was
not in fact material upsets that inference. But a showing that
a statement was material to different class members in
different ways does not.

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

25

Courts addressing CLRA, UCL, and FAL claims have
consistently held that a plaintiff need not establish at the
class certification stage that class members share a uniform
understanding of the contested term. See, e.g., Lytle v.
Nutramax Lab’ys, Inc., No. ED CV 19-0835, 2022 WL
1600047, at *15 (C.D. Cal. May 6, 2022); Bailey v. Rite Aid
Corp., 338 F.R.D. 390, 402 n.12 (N.D. Cal. 2021);
Fitzhenry-Russell v. Dr. Pepper Snapple Grp., Inc., 326
F.R.D. 592, 613 (N.D. Cal. 2018); Elkies v. Johnson &
Johnson Servs., Inc., No. CV 17-7320, 2018 WL 11223465,
at *4 (C.D. Cal. Oct. 18, 2018). 6 For example, the district
court in Lytle (which we affirmed) rejected the argument that
the plaintiff there had to show the class shared a common
understanding of the term “Joint Health Supplement” at the
class certification stage. Lytle, 2022 WL 1600047, at *15.
Similarly, the district court in Bailey found “no controlling
authority” to support the contention that class members had
to share a common definition of the term “rapid release.”
Bailey, 338 F.R.D. at 402 n.12.

6
JJCI cites In re 5-Hour Energy Mktg. & Sales Pracs. Litig., No. ML
13-2438, 2017 WL 2559615, at *8–9 (C.D. Cal. June 7, 2017), in support
of its argument that the lack of a common definition for an allegedly
deceptive term undermines predominance as to materiality. In re 5-Hour
Energy is neither controlling nor persuasive. The plaintiffs in In re 5Hour Energy alleged that the term at issue there, “energy,” was material
based on a narrow definition of the term as “caloric energy.” In re 5Hour Energy, 2017 WL 2559615, at *9. The district court determined
that evidence showed that a reasonable consumer would not share the
plaintiffs’ particular understanding of the inherently ambiguous term—
the only understanding under which the plaintiffs argued the term was
material. Id. JJCI has not suggested that a portion of the class here—or
a hypothetical reasonable consumer—would understand “oil-free” in a
way that would make that phrase immaterial to their purchase decision.

26

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

In sum, the district court’s decision that materiality, and
so the inference of reliance therefrom, are subject to
common proof even if the class understood “oil-fee” in
slightly different ways was not an abuse of discretion.
JJCI further contends that it rebutted the inference of
reliance by pointing to its positive customer reviews and
internal purchasing data demonstrating that 30% of the
Products’ purchasers were repeat buyers. The existence of
repeat purchasers does not defeat the inference of reliance.
There is no indication that the repeat purchasers knew that
the Product was not oil-free and purchased it anyway. Cf. In
re Vioxx Class Cases, 180 Cal. App. 4th at 133–34. The
existence of positive reviews or other product attributes that
purchasers found desirable is similarly insufficient to defeat
materiality or the inference of reliance. To establish reliance
under the CLRA, UCL, and FAL, a misrepresentation need
not be “the sole or even the decisive cause of the injuryproducing conduct.” Moore v. Mars Petcare US, Inc., 966
F.3d 1007, 1020 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting Kwikset, 51 Cal.
4th at 327).
For all these reasons, the district court did not abuse its
discretion in finding that common issues predominate with
respect to materiality and reliance. 7

JJCI argues that should we find materiality susceptible to common
proof, we must decide whether Stearns’ holding that UCL plaintiffs need
not show reliance as to absent class members is good law in light of the
Supreme Court’s holding in TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U.S. 413
(2021), that all class members must have standing to recover damages.
We need not decide that point here. Our holding is that Noohi has
demonstrated that reliance is susceptible to common proof as to the entire
class. We do not rely on the contested portion of Stearns to conclude
that class certification was appropriate.
7

NOOHI V. JOHNSON & JOHNSON CONSUMER, INC.

27

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district court’s
grant of class certification.
AFFIRMED.

