FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.
MARK LEROY DENCKLAU,

No. 22-30068
D.C. No. 3:18-cr00319-MO-1
OPINION

Defendant-Appellant.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff-Appellee,
v.

No. 22-30069
D.C. No. 3:18-cr00319-MO-6

CHAD LEROY ERICKSON,
Defendant-Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Michael W. Mosman, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 7, 2025
Portland, Oregon

2

USA V. DENCKLAU

Filed November 28, 2025
Before: MILAN D. SMITH, JR., JACQUELINE H.
NGUYEN, and HOLLY A. THOMAS, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.
SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed Mark Leroy Dencklau’s and Chad
Leroy Erickson’s convictions and life sentences for offenses
arising from the kidnapping and murder of a former fellow
member of the Gypsy Joker Motorcycle Club (GJMC).
Dencklau and Erickson were both convicted of murder
in violation of the Violent Crimes in Aid of Racketeering
statute (VICAR) (Count 2), VICAR kidnapping resulting in
death (Count 3), kidnapping resulting in death (Count 4), and
conspiracy to commit kidnapping resulting in death (Count
5). Dencklau was also convicted of racketeering conspiracy
(Count 1).
Affirming the district court’s denial of the dismissal of
Counts 2 and 3, the panel held that where a VICAR
indictment tracks the VICAR statute’s language, it
sufficiently informs the defendant of his charge, even if it

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. DENCKLAU

3

does not enumerate the elements of the predicate state law
claim.
Rejecting Dencklau’s arguments that the district court
erred in three evidentiary rulings related to coconspirator
Tiler Pribbernow, another GJMC associate, the panel held
that the district court did not err in excluding evidence of
Pribbernow’s reputation for violence under Fed. R. Evid.
404, in excluding evidence of Pribbernow’s past violent acts
under Fed. R. Evid. 403 and 404, or in barring Dencklau
from re-cross-examining Pribbernow about his military
discharge.
The panel rejected Erickson’s arguments that the district
court abused its discretion under Fed. R. Evid. 702 and 403
by excluding expert testimony as to his alleged mental
deficits and that the exclusion violated his Fifth and Sixth
Amendment right to present his defense.
The panel held that the district court did not abuse its
discretion or plainly err by allowing the Government and its
witnesses to use the word “gang” to describe the GJMC, by
admitting evidence regarding GJMC’s “culture of
misogyny,” or by allowing the prosecutors’ use of racebased evidence to show the GJMC’s cohesion.
The panel held that an isolated comment by a witness
stating that Erickson’s counsel was lying about phone calls
made by Dencklau after he was robbed survives plain error
review.
The panel held that there was no error in the district
court’s VICAR-purpose jury instruction, which required the
enterprise-related purpose to be substantial, but not
necessarily primary.

4

USA V. DENCKLAU

The panel held that the district court did not err by
instructing the jury on the proper consideration of potential
punishment faced by the defendants or cooperating
witnesses. The totality of the instructions illustrates the
district court’s good faith attempt to keep the jury in their
assigned lane: focused on the facts, the evidence, and the
witnesses’ credibility. This approach aligns with the
purpose behind the general rule against instructions related
to potential punishment and did not constitute an abuse of
discretion.
Finally, the panel held that circuit precedent forecloses
any argument that a mandatory sentence of life without the
possibility of parole violates the Eighth Amendment.

COUNSEL
Sangita K. Rao (argued), Attorney, Appellate Section;
Matthew R. Galeotti, Head of Criminal Division; United
States Department of Justice, Washington D.C.; Leah K.
Bolstad, and Steven T. Mygrant, Assistant United States
Attorneys; Suzanne Miles, Chief, Criminal Appeals Section;
William M. Narus, Acting United States Attorney; Office of
the United States Attorney, United States Department of
Justice, Portland, Oregon; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Elizabeth G. Daily (argued), Assistant Federal Public
Defender, Office of the Federal Public Defender, Portland,
Oregon; Laura Graser (argued), Portland, Oregon; Ryan T.
O’Connor, O’Connor Weber LLC, Portland, Oregon; for
Defendants-Appellants.

USA V. DENCKLAU

5

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
Members of a motorcycle club kidnapped and murdered
one of their former associates. Two of those members were
convicted on murder and racketeering charges and now
appeal their convictions and sentences, arguing that the
district court violated the Federal Rules of Evidence (Rules)
and the Constitution prior to and throughout their trials. We
disagree, and we affirm.
FACTS AND PRIOR PROCEEDINGS
Defendants-Appellants Mark Leroy Dencklau and Chad
Leroy Erickson appeal their convictions and sentences of life
imprisonment for murder in violation of the Violent Crimes
in Aid of Racketeering statute (VICAR), 18 U.S.C.
§ 1959(a)(1); VICAR kidnapping resulting in death in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a)(1); kidnapping resulting in
death in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(1); and conspiracy
to commit kidnapping resulting in death, in violation of 18
U.S.C. §§ 1201(a)(1) and (c). Dencklau was also convicted
of racketeering conspiracy, in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1962(d).
I. Factual Background
a. The Gypsy Joker Motorcycle Club
Both Dencklau and Erickson were members of the
Gypsy Joker Motorcycle Club (GJMC). The GJMC is an
international motorcycle club with chapters in Australia,
Germany, Norway, and the Northwest United States,
including the States of Oregon and Washington. The club
self-identifies as a “one percent” club, referring to the

6

USA V. DENCKLAU

supposed “one percent” of motorcycle drivers who do not
follow the law. The GJMC is hierarchical, with a national
leadership team and local chapters with their own leadership
structures.
Joining a GJMC chapter requires following a prescribed
process, beginning with a trial period known as a “hang
around,” and then a prospecting period of increasing
involvement, before full membership. Members pay dues,
attend weekly meetings known as Church, and participate in
club events. Club members also undertake various criminal
activities, such as buying and selling drugs, robbery, and
assault. Prospective members are expected to participate in
all GJMC activities, criminal and otherwise.
Defendant-Appellant Dencklau was president of
GJMC’s Portland chapter at the time of his arrest. As
president, he directed various criminal activities, which
included engaging in violence and drug trafficking.
Defendant-Appellant Erickson began “prospecting” for the
Portland chapter in 2013 and became a full member in
September 2014.
b. The Kidnapping and Murder of Gypsy Joker
Member Robert Huggins
On July 1, 2015, former GJMC member Robert Huggins
(also known as “Bagger”) was found dead, beaten, and
mutilated in a field in Ridgefield, Washington. His death
was officially deemed a “homicide.”
Huggins was kicked out of GJMC in 2014 for stealing
money. When Huggins was kicked out of the club, multiple
members of the Portland chapter, including Dencklau and
Erickson, beat him. He was only released from the beating
after signing over his motorcycle and a girlfriend’s vehicle,

USA V. DENCKLAU

7

and having his estranged wife bring money to the clubhouse.
Huggins was considered “out bad,” meaning he left in bad
standing due to the theft and was to be harmed by GJMC
members if they subsequently saw him.
The next year, Huggins robbed Dencklau’s home—
seemingly in retaliation for the beating—while Dencklau’s
then-girlfriend Nicole Stephens was home. Huggins and two
associates zip-tied Stephens and stole televisions and
firearms. After finding out about the robbery, Dencklau told
GJMC associates to make it known that the club was looking
for Huggins. After a series of leads, Dencklau and four other
GJMC associates tracked Huggins to a home in Northeast
Portland. Dencklau and others turned their phones off or did
not bring them while they looked for Huggins. Dencklau
and his group forcibly took Huggins from a car parked at the
home and drove him to a property in Woodland,
Washington, where Erickson and another GJMC associate
met them. The group moved Huggins to a shed on the
property, then tortured him over the course of several hours
with fists, bats, knives, kicks, and waterboarding. At the end
of the beatings, Dencklau ordered one of the GJMC
associates to smash Huggins’ hands and hit him in the head
with a baseball bat. The GJMC associates then loaded
Huggins into a car and dumped his body in a field in
Ridgefield, Washington, where he was later found deceased.
II. Procedural History
Dencklau was arrested on state charges for Huggins’
murder, alongside two other GJMC associates, but not
Erickson. Federal prosecutors later obtained an indictment
from a federal grand jury charging Dencklau, Erickson, and
four other GJMC codefendants with conspiracy pursuant to
the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act

8

USA V. DENCKLAU

(RICO), 18 U.S.C. §§ 1961–68. The indictment also
charged Dencklau, Erickson, and three of the codefendants
with four counts involving Huggins’ kidnapping and
murder. That is the operative indictment in this case.
The indictment charged Dencklau, Erickson, and others
with racketeering conspiracy, in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1962(d) (Count 1); VICAR murder, in violation of 18
U.S.C. § 1959(a)(1) (Count 2); VICAR kidnapping resulting
in death, in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a)(1) (Count 3);
kidnapping resulting in death, in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1201(a)(1) (Count 4); and conspiracy to commit
kidnapping resulting in death, in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1201(a)(1) and (c) (Count 5). The grand jury made special
findings in support of the death penalty for Counts 2 and 4.
Most of the defendants took plea deals, while Dencklau,
Erickson, and one other co-defendant were jointly tried. The
jury found Dencklau guilty on all counts and Erickson guilty
on all but Count 1, on which the jury acquitted him. The
district court sentenced both Defendant-Appellants to
concurrent life terms on each count.
Both defendants appeal, challenging various district
court decisions at trial. We have jurisdiction pursuant to 18
U.S.C. § 3742 and 28 U.S.C. § 1291, and we affirm.
ANALYSIS
Defendants offer eight arguments challenging the
proceedings at the district court. We reject each in turn.
I. Sufficiency of the VICAR Indictments
Because Counts 2 and 3 of the indictments adequately
recited the elements of the VICAR offense, they were legally

USA V. DENCKLAU

9

sufficient. 1 We review the legal sufficiency of an indictment
de novo. United States v. Awad, 551 F.3d 930, 935 (9th Cir.
2009). “An indictment is sufficient if it contains the
elements of the charged crime in adequate detail to inform
the defendant of the charge and to enable him to plead double
jeopardy.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). “The test
for sufficiency of the indictment is not whether it could have
been framed in a more satisfactory manner, but whether it
conforms to minimal constitutional standards.” Id. (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The Violent Crime in Aid of Racketeering (VICAR)
statute “punishes murder and other crimes committed ‘for
the purpose of gaining entrance to or maintaining or
increasing position in an enterprise engaged in racketeering
Count 2 alleges, in relevant part: “On or between June 30 and July 1,
2015, in the District of Oregon, and Western District of Washington, for
the purpose of maintaining and increasing position in the GJOMC, an
enterprise engaged in racketeering activity, the defendants, MARK
LEROY DENCKLAU [and] CHAD LEROY ERICKSON . . . aiding
and abetting each other, unlawfully and knowingly committed, and aided
and abetted the commission of, the murder of Robert Huggins, in
violation of Oregon Revised Statutes 161.155 (aid and abet),
163.115(l)(a) (Murder) and 163.115(1)(b) (Felony Murder); and
Washington Revised Statutes 9A.08.020 (Liability for conduct of
another—Complicity), and 9A.32.030 (Murder in first degree/Felony
Murder); All in violation of Title 18, United States Code, Sections
1959(a)(1) and 2.”

1

Count 3 alleges, in relevant part: “On or between June 30 and July 1,
2015, in the District of Oregon, and Western District of Washington, for
the purpose of maintaining and increasing position in the GJOMC, an
enterprise engaged in racketeering activity, the defendants, MARK
LEROY DENCKLAU [and] CHAD LEROY ERICKSON . . . aiding
and abetting each other, unlawfully and knowingly kidnapped Robert
Higgins, in violation of United States Code Sections 1201(a)(1) and 2;
All in violation of 18 U.S.C. Section 1959(a)(1) and 2.”

10

USA V. DENCKLAU

activity.’” United States v. Manning, 151 F.4th 1144, 1148
(9th Cir. 2025) (quoting 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a)). The statute
has four mandatory elements: “(1) that the criminal
organization exists; (2) that the organization is a
racketeering enterprise; (3) that the defendant[ ] committed
a violent crime; and (4) that [the defendant] acted for the
purpose of promoting [his] position in a racketeering
enterprise.” United States v. Banks, 514 F.3d 959, 964 (9th
Cir. 2008) (alterations in original) (quoting United States v.
Bracy, 67 F.3d 1421, 1429 (9th Cir.1995)).
Our circuit has not yet ruled directly on whether a
VICAR indictment must also include the elements of the
predicate violent offenses. We previously have held that an
indictment that tracks the charging statute is generally
sufficient. See United States v. Alsop, 479 F.2d 65, 66 (9th
Cir. 1973). And in United States v. Fernandez, we
confirmed that an indictment that “expressly alleged the
required elements” of a VICAR violation itself was
“sufficient,” even where it did not allege the elements of the
predicate offenses.
388 F.3d 1199, 1220 (9th Cir.
2004), modified, 425 F.3d 1248 (9th Cir. 2005).
More directly, the Second Circuit has instructed that
“only a generic definition of an underlying state crime is
required in a RICO indictment, as distinguished from the
elements of the penal codes of the various states where acts
of racketeering occurred.” United States v. Orena, 32 F.3d
704, 714 (2d Cir. 1994) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Other circuits have reached similar conclusions. See, e.g.,
United States v. Frumento, 563 F.2d 1083, 1087 (3rd Cir.
1977) (the “gravamen” of a RICO charge “is a violation of
federal law and reference to state law is necessary only to
identify the type of unlawful activity in which the defendant
intended to engage” (internal quotation marks omitted));

USA V. DENCKLAU

11

United States v. Davenport, No. 22-4660, 2025 WL 400720,
at *2 (4th Cir. Feb. 5, 2025) (per curiam) (VICAR
indictment “is not deficient for failing to list each element of
the predicate under state law”). And at least two district
courts in this circuit have followed suit. See United States v.
Garcia, No. 11–cr–68–EJL, 2012 WL 6623984, at *8 (D.
Idaho Dec. 19, 2012) (“[M]ost courts addressing the
question have concluded that a more generic description in
the indictment is sufficient—notwithstanding that the
elements of the predicate acts must be proved at trial.”);
United States v. York, 1:16-cr-00069-LJO-SKO-11 2017
WL 3581711, at *2 (E.D. Cal. Aug. 18, 2017) (noting only
the “essential elements” of the VICAR offense are needed in
the indictment, not elements of the predicate offense). We
are persuaded by the reasoning of our sister circuits in
holding that where a VICAR indictment tracks the VICAR
statute’s language, it sufficiently informs the defendant of
his charge, even if it does not also enumerate the elements of
the predicate state law crime, and so hold.
Defendants’ arguments to the contrary are unavailing.
As a general matter, Defendants rely primarily on caselaw
and circuit materials discussing the sufficiency of jury
instructions and what the Government must prove at trial,
not the sufficiency of an indictment. See Ninth Circuit
Manual of Model Criminal Jury Instructions § 18.8 (2022
ed., updated June 2024); United States v. Adkins, 883 F.3d
1207, 1211 (9th Cir. 2018). But as the Defendants’ own
cited case explains, the requirements for an indictment are
not the same as for jury instructions or the Government’s
ultimate case. See United States v. Carrillo, 229 F.3d 177,
183 (2d Cir. 2000) (“The[] purposes and requirements of the
indictment are irrelevant to whether the government must
prove, and the jury must be charged on, the elements of the

12

USA V. DENCKLAU

offense.”). This follows from the difference in purpose
between an indictment and jury instructions.
The
requirements for jury instructions, then, cannot be imported
to the indictment context in these circumstances.
Because Counts 2 and 3 sufficiently set out the essential
elements of a VICAR crime, we affirm the district court’s
denial of dismissal of those Counts. 2
II. Pribbernow’s Testimony
“We review a district court’s evidentiary rulings under
the deferential abuse of discretion standard.” United States
v. Saini, 23 F.4th 1155, 1160 (9th Cir. 2022). De novo
review only applies if that exclusion precludes presentation
of a defense. United States v. Ross, 206 F.3d 896, 898–99
(9th Cir. 2000).
Dencklau argues that the district court erred in three
evidentiary rulings related to coconspirator Tiler
Pribbernow, another GJMC associate: (1) excluding
evidence of Pribbernow’s reputation for violence under Rule
404, (2) excluding evidence of Pribbenow’s past violent acts
under Rules 403 and 404, and (3) barring Dencklau’s recross-examination of Pribbernow. Each of those arguments
fails.
First, the district court did not err in excluding evidence
of Pribbernow’s reputation for violence because Dencklau’s
proffered evidence was inadmissible propensity evidence
pursuant to Rule 404. Dencklau nominally argues that Rule
404(a) permits evidence as to a witness’s reputation for
Given the grand jury’s special findings that appellants “[i]ntentionally
killed” Huggins and “[i]ntentionally” committed acts resulting in death,
we also reject appellants’ claim that the indictment misstated the mens
rea for VICAR murder.

2

USA V. DENCKLAU

13

violence “[w]hen reputation for violence is probative of a
defendant’s defense.” But Dencklau’s cited case dealt with
Rule 404(a)’s exception for evidence as to victims, not
witnesses; Rule 404(a)’s exception for witnesses is narrower
and inapplicable here. See Fed. R. Evid. 404(a); see also
United States v. Keiser, 57 F.3d 847, 853–54 (9th Cir. 1995).
Beyond general propositions, Dencklau offers no caselaw
supporting a Sixth Amendment right to present this character
evidence. Additionally, because Pribbernow testified that he
had a reputation for violence and “could fight” prior to
joining the GJMC, the jury was presented with substantial
evidence of Pribbernow’s reputation for violence. Given
that he was otherwise able to impeach Pribbernow through a
variety of other testimony and absent support in the
exceptions to Rule 404’s general prohibition or the Sixth
Amendment, Dencklau’s argument fails.
Second, the district court did not err in excluding
evidence of Pribbernow’s past violent acts. Dencklau argues
that this proposed evidence was not meant to show
Pribbernow’s propensity for violence, as barred by Rule
404(b), but instead to discount elements of the conspiracy
charges and to dispute Dencklau’s role in the murder.
Specifically, Dencklau claims that evidence of Pribbernow’s
past violent acts that predate his association with GJMC
would rebut the Government’s argument that GJMC was a
violent organization and that Dencklau caused Pribbernow
to engage in violence as part of the GJMC enterprise.
Dencklau claims that this evidence was important because
“[a] large part of the trial turned on the jury’s view of the
character of the GJMC and its members,” and GJMC’s
alleged overall pattern of violence. Such evidence, however,
would still go to Pribbernow’s propensity for violence. See
United States v. Lynch, 437 F.3d 902, 914–15 (9th Cir.

14

USA V. DENCKLAU

2006), overruled on other grounds, United States v. Lucas,
101 F.4th 1158 (9th Cir. 2024). Furthermore, Pribbernow
testified that he had a reputation for violence prior to joining
the GJMC and that he “sometimes” committed crimes that
nobody in the GJMC told him to commit. Therefore,
because the jury was already aware of Pribbernow’s violent
character through other testimony, the district court also
reasonably excluded the proposed past-violent-acts evidence
as substantially more prejudicial than probative pursuant to
Rule 403, especially where the past conduct was not
particularly relevant to the conduct at issue.
Third, the district court did not err in barring Dencklau
from re-cross-examining Pribbernow about his military
discharge. Dencklau argues that the Sixth Amendment
required the district court to allow re-cross-examination
because Pribbernow’s military discharge was materially new
information the Government elicited on redirect. While
Dencklau is correct that the Sixth Amendment’s
Confrontation Clause may require district courts to allow recross-examination “where new matter is elicited on redirect
examination,” testimony is not “new matter” if it merely
“expand[s] or elaborate[s] on the witness’ previous
testimony.” United States v. Baker, 10 F.3d 1374, 1404–05
(9th Cir. 1993), overruled on other grounds, United States v.
Nordby, 225 F.3d 1053 (9th Cir. 2000). Here, Dencklau had
already raised Pribbernow’s military discharge during crossexamination. Because Dencklau already addressed that
topic, it was not a “new matter” for Confrontation Clause
purposes. United States v. Croft, 124 F.3d 1109, 1121 (9th
Cir. 1997). The district court, accordingly, did not err in
barring re-cross-examination.

USA V. DENCKLAU

15

Because the district court’s evidentiary rulings regarding
Pribbernow were in accordance with the Rules and the Sixth
Amendment, we reject Dencklau’s claims.
III. Expert Evidence Regarding Erickson’s Mental
Deficits
We review claims for exclusion of expert testimony for
abuse of discretion. Messick v. Novartis Pharms. Corp., 747
F.3d 1193, 1196 (9th Cir. 2014). Review on Fifth and Sixth
Amendment presentation-of-defense grounds is de novo.
See Ross, 206 F.3d at 898–99.
Erickson claims that the district court abused its
discretion by excluding expert testimony as to his alleged
mental deficits and that the exclusion violated his Fifth and
Sixth Amendment right to present his defense. He offers
three main arguments, each of which fails.
First, Erickson argues that the district court erred in
barring the expert evidence pursuant to Rule 702’s relevance
prong because it applied the wrong standard for evaluating
evidence as to diminished mental capacity. See Fed. R. Evid.
702(a) (expert evidence is admissible only if it “will help the
trier of fact to understand the evidence or to determine a fact
in issue”). In Erickson’s view, the district court mistakenly
focused only on whether the expert evidence “could show
that Erickson ‘was incapable of forming the specific intent
required by the charged offense.’” He argues that instead,
the district court should merely have evaluated whether the
evidence would be helpful to the jury in determining
“whether the defendant committed the offense with the
required mental state.” But this recounting is inaccurate.
The district court, in its written opinion, recognized that
under the limitations imposed by the Insanity Defense
Reform Act, diminished capacity defenses are limited—only

16

USA V. DENCKLAU

evidence that “tends to negate the mens rea required for the
crime charged” is admissible. This was the appropriate
standard for the district court to apply. And, applied to the
proposed expert evidence, the district court did not abuse its
discretion in determining that evidence was not relevant
pursuant to Rule 702. At best, most of the evidence went to
general cognitive impairments too abstracted from the
relevant mens rea inquiry at hand to be relevant.
Second, Erickson argues that the district court erred in
additionally barring the expert evidence on Rule 403
grounds because, in his view, the expert evidence was
“highly probative” and not “unduly complex.” But, as the
district court held, “[e]ven if the diminished capacity
testimony had some relevance, its probative value would
nevertheless be substantially outweighed by its potential to
mislead the jury[.]” Psychological and neuroscience
evidence is particularly vulnerable to jury misunderstanding
and misuse. Where, as discussed above, the probative value
of such evidence is limited, the risk of misleading the jury
supports its exclusion under Rule 403.
Third, Erickson offers a partial Fifth and Sixth
Amendment presentation-of-defense argument against the
expert evidence’s exclusion. Erickson seems to argue that
the exclusion of the expert evidence prevented him from
offering a complete defense regarding his mental state, in
violation of due process. As a general matter, Erickson is
correct that “the Constitution guarantees criminal defendants
a meaningful opportunity to present a complete defense.”
Crane v. Kentucky, 476 U.S. 683, 690 (1986) (internal
quotation marks omitted). But a “valid state justification”
may preclude introduction of certain evidence, including if
it is not “competent” or “reliable.” Id.; see also Clark v.
Arizona, 548 U.S. 735, 770 (2006) (“[T]he right to introduce

USA V. DENCKLAU

17

relevant evidence can be curtailed if there is a good reason
for doing that.”).
In determining whether the exclusion presents a
constitutional problem, the court may consider “the
probative value of the evidence on the central issue; its
reliability; whether it is capable of evaluation by the trier of
fact; whether it is the sole evidence on the issue or merely
cumulative; and whether it constitutes a major part of the
attempted defense.” United States v. Stever, 603 F.3d 747,
756 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting Alcala v. Woodward, 334 F.3d
862, 877 (9th Cir. 2003)). Here, the excluded evidence is of
limited probative value and was likely not capable of quality
evaluation by the jury. Its exclusion therefore was not a
constitutional violation. See Clark, 548 U.S. at 770
(excluding evidence to avoid the “potential to mislead the
jury” does not violate the Constitution (quoting Holmes v.
South Carolina, 547 U.S. 319, 326 (2006))).
We accordingly affirm the district court’s exclusion of
the expert evidence as to Erickson’s alleged mental
incapacity.
IV. Evidence on Purportedly Inflammatory Topics
We review the district court’s evidentiary rulings for
abuse of discretion but review de novo its interpretation of
the Rules. United States v. Boulware, 384 F.3d 794, 800–01
(9th Cir. 2004). If “a party did not object to the district
court’s admission on Rule 403 grounds,” we review for plain
error. United States v. Rizk, 660 F.3d 1125, 1132 (9th Cir.
2011). Plain error in admitting evidence under Rule 403 is
the “rare exception.” Id. (quoting United States v. Plunk,
153 F.3d 1011, 1019 n.7 (9th Cir. 1998)).

18

USA V. DENCKLAU

Defendants argue that the district court erred by allowing
argument and evidence related to the GJMC in three
categories. First, Defendants argue that the Government’s
and Government witnesses’ use of the word “gang” to
describe the GJMC was unduly prejudicial and had minimal
probative value because “[i]t offered no objective evidence
relating to the club’s purpose, structure, or activities.”
Second, Defendants argue that any discussion of a “culture
of misogyny” in the GJMC “was not relevant to whether the
enterprise was engaged in a pattern of racketeering activity”
and instead “inflame[d] the jury against the GJMC
members.” Third, Defendants argue that prosecutors’ use of
race-based evidence to show the GJMC’s cohesion was
unduly prejudicial. Each of these claims fails on the
deferential review afforded to the district court for its
evidentiary rulings.
The district court determined that any “marginal undue
or unfair prejudice” arising from the use of the word “gang”
in the trial was outweighed by the probative value of the
otherwise admissible evidence being heard in full as it
related to describing the nature of the GJMC enterprise. 3
While Defendants cite to several cases where district courts
barred the word “gang” from trial, the Government points to
another case reaching the opposite conclusion and highlights
that these different outcomes reflect the case-by-case nature
of these evidentiary rulings. Though Defendants claim that
the use of “gang” “may have influenced the jury to
improperly impute knowledge of criminal acts to the
defendants,” they provide no evidence of their own to
substantiate that claim. Instead, as the Government notes,
The nature and existence of the enterprise was a central issue to the
RICO conspiracy and the VICAR crimes.
3

USA V. DENCKLAU

19

that “the jury acquitted Hause and partially acquitted
Erickson” suggests it closely considered the competing
evidence.
Defendants’ claim as to the evidence regarding GJMC’s
treatment of women fares no better. Unlike the Defendants’
cited cases, here the treatment of women was a part of the
Government’s description of the nature of the enterprise, not
just an impeachment of the defendants’ character.
Defendants cite United States v. Hazelwood, but the court
there determined that the proffered evidence of misogyny
would not “make it more likely that [the defendant]
committed” the crime at issue. 979 F.3d 398, 408–12 (6th
Cir. 2020). Similarly, in United States v. Ham, the court
determined that the evidence of misogyny “had no relevance
except possibly as impeachment evidence.” 998 F.2d 1247,
1253 (4th Cir. 1993). By contrast, the way the GJMC treated
women was part of the Government’s case in proving the
nature of the enterprise for RICO and VICAR purposes.
Defendants’ argument as to the GJMC’s racially
exclusionary policies fails on similar grounds. Under plain
error review, which the parties agree applies to this
subclaim, reversal is warranted only if “(1) there was error;
(2) it was plain; (3) it affected the defendant’s substantial
rights; and (4) viewed in the context of the entire trial, the
impropriety seriously affected the fairness, integrity, or
public reputation of judicial proceedings.” United States v.
Alcantara-Castillo, 788 F.3d 1186, 1190–91 (9th Cir. 2015)
(internal quotation marks omitted). As a threshold matter,
given the “inherently fact-specific nature of the Rule 403
balancing inquiry,” Rizk, 660 F.3d at 1132 (citation omitted),
it is difficult to say that the district court allowing the
Government to use some evidence of GJMC’s racially
exclusionary policies was error, or that any such error was

20

USA V. DENCKLAU

plain. That the district court excluded some of the evidence
as cumulative suggests it was closely monitoring the Rule
403 balance. As Defendants’ own cited case recognizes,
racially exclusionary policies can be relevant even where no
race-based crime is at issue if “it tend[s] to show the
uniformity of the . . . enterprise.” United States v. Bowman,
302 F.3d 1228, 1239–40 (11th Cir. 2002). While the
Bowman court determined the membership policy evidence
there was cumulative and unfairly prejudicial, it ultimately
declined to find error because the overwhelming evidence
against the defendant prevented the error from affecting his
substantial rights. Id. at 1240. The district court here, by
contrast, determined that some evidence of racially
exclusionary policies was more probative than prejudicial.
But similarly to Bowman, that determination was not plainly
erroneous, given the other, uncontested evidence of the
GJMC’s use of racist symbols and, more generally, the
breadth of evidence as to the nature of the GJMC enterprise.
Because Defendants fail to show how the district court
abused its discretion or plainly erred in any of these
evidentiary rulings, and the rulings are similarly not error
when considered cumulatively, we affirm the district court.
V. Comments About Defense Counsel
The parties agree that the district court’s handling of the
Government’s question to a witness, and the witness’s
isolated response about defense counsel’s veracity should be
reviewed for plain error. And, under that deferential
standard, the district court did not plainly err.
In brief, the alleged error at issue involved the
Government and a key witness, Detective James Lawrence,
implying that counsel for Erickson had lied when
questioning Lawrence about calls Dencklau made after he

USA V. DENCKLAU

21

was robbed. At the time, neither defense counsel objected.
Instead, weeks later, Erickson’s counsel introduced a new
call log exhibit purportedly showing that it was the witness
who was incorrect about the calls, not defense counsel.
Though the district court expressed concern that Erickson’s
counsel might have waited to introduce a group of new
exhibits, including the call log, as a tactical move, it
nonetheless allowed the alternative phone log into evidence.
The single, isolated comment by Lawrence, a witness,
stating that defense counsel was lying about the phone calls
survives plain error review. Defendants argue that an attack
on defense counsel’s truthfulness “undermines the
defendant’s right to a fair trial.” To Defendants, this
accusation by the Government had “far-reaching impact
unless corrected by the judge.” In the Government’s view,
such an isolated incident, remedied by the introduction of the
alternative call log exhibit, does not warrant reversal,
especially where defense counsel did not ask for the court to
strike the testimony.
The Government has the better argument, as illustrated
by its review of the Defendants’ cited cases. In each of those
cases, there were “multiple errors,” a “combination” of
misstatements and slander, or “extensive” improper
comments. United States v. Rodrigues, 159 F.3d 439, 451
(9th Cir. 1998) (“combination”), Bruno v. Rushen, 721 F.2d
1193, 1195 (9th Cir. 1983) (“extensive”). For example, in
Rodrigues, the Government misstated the applicable law and
“slander[ed]” the defense counsel by claiming he “tried to
deceive” the jury. 159 F.3d at 449–51. And, in United States
v. Sanchez, “the prosecutor vouched for the Government’s
witnesses and denigrated the defense as a sham.” 176 F.3d
1214, 1224 (9th Cir. 1999). By contrast, Defendants here
highlight only a single comment that they themselves did not

22

USA V. DENCKLAU

object to in the moment. Nor did the prosecutor “vouch” for
the witness. Absent further prosecutorial misconduct or
instances of the Government calling defense counsel’s
truthfulness into question, it is unlikely the single question
and comment “seriously affected the fairness, integrity, or
public reputation of” the trial. Alcantara-Castillo, 788 F.3d
at 1190–91. We thus reject the Defendants’ claim as to that
comment.
VI. Purpose Element of the VICAR Offenses
Dencklau and the Government agree that the district
court’s jury instruction on VICAR’s purpose requirement
should be reviewed for plain error. 4 They also agree that the
district court’s instruction on VICAR purpose mirrored
Model Instruction 8.154, but disagree on whether that model
instruction accurately conveyed the VICAR purpose
standard. 5 “To prove VICAR purpose—that the murder was
‘for the purpose of gaining entrance to or maintaining or
increasing position in an enterprise engaged in racketeering
activity,’ 18 U.S.C. § 1959(a)—the ‘gang or racketeering
4

Erickson does not raise this claim.

5

The district court provided the following instruction:
With respect to the fourth element, the government
must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the
defendant’s purpose was to gain entrance to or to
maintain or to increase position in the enterprise. It is
not necessary for the government to prove that this
motive was the sole purpose or even the primary
purpose of the defendant in committing the charged
crime. You need only find that enhancing his status in
the Gypsy Joker Motorcycle Club was a substantial
purpose of the defendant or that he committed the
charged crime as an integral aspect of membership in
the Gypsy Joker Motorcycle Club.

USA V. DENCKLAU

23

enterprise purpose does not have to be the only purpose or
the main purpose of the murder or assault. But it does have
to be a substantial purpose.’” Manning, 151 F.4th at 1149
(second quote from Banks, 514 F.3d at 969).
Dencklau primarily relies on United States v. Banks,
which critiqued the use of qualifying phrases like “one of,”
“at least one of,” or “at least in part” when describing
enterprise-related purpose for VICAR liability. 514 F.3d at
964–70. Dencklau attempts to read Banks to stand for the
proposition that any qualifying language in a jury instruction
can taint that instruction by potentially suggesting a lower
burden to the jury. The jury instruction in Banks, though,
did not contain any language about the enterprise-related
purpose being a “substantial,” “integral,” or “general”
purpose for committing the predicate VICAR crime. Id. at
969. Such a broad reading of Banks has no basis in VICAR
law or the facts of that case itself. The district court’s jury
instruction in the instant case clearly communicated the
required VICAR purpose—i.e., substantial, but not
necessarily primary—and there was therefore no error. We
affirm the district court.
VII. Jury Instruction on Potential Punishment
The district court did not err by instructing the jury on
the proper consideration of potential punishment faced by
Defendants or cooperating witnesses. The court reviews the
“‘language and formulation’ of a jury instruction for abuse
of discretion.” United States v. Rodriguez, 971 F.3d 1005,
1012 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting United States v. Cortes, 757
F.3d 850, 857 (9th Cir. 2014)). “Jury instructions must be
evaluated as a whole, and in context, rather than in
piecemeal,” id. at 1012 (internal quotation marks omitted),
to determine whether they “were misleading or inadequate

24

USA V. DENCKLAU

to guide the jury’s deliberation,” United States v. Tuan Ngoc
Luong, 965 F.3d 973, 986 (9th Cir. 2020) (cleaned up).
Here, the parties all requested that the district judge
instruct the jury with Ninth Circuit Model Criminal
Instruction 7.4 (2010), which provides: “The punishment
provided by law for a crime is for the court to decide. You
may not consider a defendant’s potential punishment in
deciding whether the government has proved its case against
the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.” Throughout the
trial, the district court provided the following relevant
instructions:
•

6

It modified the model instruction to make
clear that the Defendants were not facing the
death penalty, given defense counsel’s plan
to cross-examine the cooperating witnesses
about the threat of the death penalty at the
time of their cooperation. 6

The district court gave the following modified preliminary instruction:
The punishment provided by law for a crime is for the
Court to decide. Four of the government’s witnesses
face the death penalty as a result of their participation
in crimes related to this case. The punishment that
these witnesses face is not necessarily the same
punishment that the defendants will face, even if you
find that they participated in the same crime. In fact,
none of the defendants here is currently facing the
death penalty. You may not consider punishment in
deciding whether the government has proved its case
against the defendant beyond a reasonable doubt.

The district court’s final instruction mirrored the substance of this
preliminary instruction.

USA V. DENCKLAU

•

It gave another instruction in the middle of
the trial, reminding the jury that sentencing
was the judge’s job, not theirs.

•

It gave the model jury instruction on witness
credibility, indicating the jury could consider
“the witness’s interest in the outcome of the
case, if any, [and] the witness’s bias or
prejudice.”

•

It also made clear in its final jury instructions
that the jury could and should consider the
cooperating defendants’ plea agreements and
favorable treatment when evaluating their
testimony.

25

The parties dispute whether these instructions constitute
reversible error. Defendants first argue that the district
court’s instructions violated the general rule against
instructing the jury about the Defendants’ potential
sentences, citing our decision in United States v. Frank, 956
F.2d 872, 879 (9th Cir. 1991) (explaining that “it is
inappropriate for a jury to consider or be informed of the
consequences of their verdict”). Discussing the rule in the
context of insanity verdicts, we explained that the purpose of
this rule is to ensure that the jury is focused on its role as
factfinder and the evidence before it, not factors beyond the
evidence. See id. However, three years later in Shannon v.
United States, the Supreme Court clarified, again in the
context of insanity verdicts, that “an instruction of some
form” as to the consequences of a verdict “may be necessary
under certain limited circumstances,” making clear that there
is no “absolute prohibition on instructing the jury with
regard to the consequences of” a verdict. 512 U.S. 573, 587–
88 (1994).

26

USA V. DENCKLAU

Viewing the entire set of the relevant jury instructions in
light of the general rule’s purpose—keeping the jury focused
on its factfinding mission—the district court did not err in
modifying the model jury instruction. The totality of the
district court’s various instructions evinces an attempt to
balance effectively communicating to the jury that they
should view the cooperating witnesses’ testimony through
the lens of their plea agreements with the need to remind the
jury that they should not consider the Defendants’ potential
sentences as part of their fact-finding role. Taking a
categorical approach in either direction would have entirely
frustrated one of these goals. Instead, the district court
created guardrails around both key areas: it allowed for
cross-examination of the cooperating witnesses and made
clear that the jury should bear the plea deals in mind when
evaluating those witnesses, while also ensuring that the
evaluation of the witnesses’ sentences did not create undue
fixation on the Defendants’ potential sentences. The totality
of the instructions illustrates the district court’s good faith
attempt to keep the jury in their assigned lane: focused on
the facts, the evidence, and the witnesses’ credibility. This
approach aligns with Frank’s explanation of the purpose
behind the general rule against instructions related to
potential punishment and did not constitute an abuse of
discretion.
We accordingly reject Defendants’ challenges to these
jury instructions. We note, however, that this holding does
not alter the general prohibition against informing the jury
of sentencing consequences, as outlined in Frank and
Shannon, outside of this particular, limited circumstance.

USA V. DENCKLAU

27

VIII. Erickson’s Eighth Amendment Claim
Erickson challenges his mandatory life sentence as a
violation of the Eighth Amendment. But our precedent
forecloses any argument that a mandatory sentence of life
without the possibility of parole violates the Eighth
Amendment. In United States v. LaFleur, we rejected an
Eighth Amendment challenge to a mandatory minimum life
sentence for murder, ruling that an individual assessment
was not necessary to determine “the appropriateness of a life
sentence,” as it is for a capital sentence. 971 F.2d 200, 211
(9th Cir. 1991). We made clear that “a mandatory life
sentence for murder does not constitute cruel and unusual
punishment.” Id. That conclusion followed a Supreme
Court case from the same year similarly holding that
individualized assessments were not constitutionally
necessary outside the capital context. See Harmelin v.
Michigan, 501 U.S. 957, 994–96 (1991) (refusing to extend
the “individualized capital sentencing doctrine” to
mandatory life in prison without parole sentences for cocaine
possession).
Erikson does not dispute this precedent. Indeed,
Erickson’s counsel recognized that they were asking the
district court “to extend the law beyond where it is now.”
But this panel cannot contravene prior Circuit precedent, nor
that of the Supreme Court. Though, as the sentencing judge
recognized, the mandatory minimum would be beyond what
the court would otherwise have imposed when considering
Erickson’s role in the conspiracy, precedent forecloses a
constitutional challenge to the mandatory minimum
sentence. We therefore affirm the district court’s sentence.

28

USA V. DENCKLAU

CONCLUSION
The district court did not err in its rulings on any of the
constitutional or Rules-based grounds Defendants raise. We
accordingly AFFIRM their convictions and sentences.

