FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JESSICA GARZA, individually and
on behalf of all persons similarly
situated; KEVIN TERRELL,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
ROB WOODS, in his individual and
official capacities as Director of
Arizona Department of Revenue;
WILLIAM NAGEL, in his official
capacity as Unclaimed Property
Administrator of Arizona Department
of Revenue,

No. 24-1064
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-01310JJT

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
John Joseph Tuchi, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted February 5, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 25, 2025

2

GARZA V. WOODS

Before: M. Margaret McKeown, Danielle J. Forrest, and
Gabriel P. Sanchez, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Forrest
SUMMARY *
Standing / Due Process
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s dismissal of plaintiffs’ action alleging that the
Director of the Arizona Department of Revenue
(Department) and the Department’s Unclaimed Property
Administrator unlawfully took possession of plaintiffs’
unclaimed funds.
Plaintiffs assert that the Department possesses several
checks belonging to them issued by various
businesses. Under Arizona’s Unclaimed Property Act
(UPA), the Department may take “custody” of property that
is presumed abandoned. Arizona is required to operate a
website listing unclaimed property in its possession, but it is
not required to provide actual notice to apparent owners that
it is in possession of their property. Plaintiffs contend that
Arizona’s possession of their property is an unlawful taking,
in violation of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments, and
that they were deprived of their property without due process
of law, in violation of the Fourteenth Amendment.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

GARZA V. WOODS

3

The panel held that plaintiffs had Article III standing—a
challenge raised for the first time on appeal—because they
sufficiently alleged that they have a legal interest in checks
that are being held without their consent and were deprived
of due process or just compensation. Sovereign immunity
did not protect defendants because plaintiffs sought
injunctive relief and alleged that the Department’s actions
concerning their property were unconstitutional.
On the merits, the panel held that plaintiffs’ takings
claim failed as a matter of law because where unclaimed
property is held in trust by the state, the property has not been
taken. However, plaintiffs stated a viable due process claim
because they plausibly alleged a property interest in the
unclaimed property and under Taylor v. Westly, 488 F.3d
1197 (9th Cir. 2007), they plausibly alleged that they were
deprived of that interest without receiving adequate
notice. Because plaintiffs’ due process claim survived
defendants’ motion to dismiss, the panel reversed, in part,
the district court’s dismissal and remanded for further
proceedings.

COUNSEL
Richard M. Paul III (argued), Laura C. Fellows, and David
W. Bodenheimer, Paul LLP, Kansas City, Missouri; Elliot
C. Stratton, Amy Sells, and William M. Fischbach III,
Tiffany & Bosco PA, Phoenix, Arizona; Christopher Ross
and Jonathan Greiner, Greiner & Associates PLLC, San
Antonio, Texas; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Hannah H. Porter (argued), Kevin E. O'Malley, and Mark A.
Fuller, Gallagher & Kennedy PA, Phoenix, Arizona; Scot G.

4

GARZA V. WOODS

Teasdale, Tax Unit Chief, Office of the Arizona Attorney
General, Phoenix, Arizona; for Defendants-Appellees.
Emily A. Ward, Fennemore Craig PC, Phoenix, Arizona, for
Amicus Curiae National Association of Unclaimed Property
Administrators.

OPINION
FORREST, Circuit Judge:
Every state has a law governing what to do with property
held by third parties that the owner has not claimed. This
case concerns the constitutionality of Arizona’s Unclaimed
Property Act (UPA). Plaintiffs Jessica Garza and Kevin
Terrell had unclaimed funds they were owed by various
businesses. They allege that Arizona unlawfully took
possession of their funds because the UPA does not provide
for constitutionally sufficient notice to property owners.
Plaintiffs sued the Director of the Arizona Department of
Revenue (Department)—the agency that manages the
unclaimed-property program—and the Department’s
Unclaimed Property Administrator, seeking the return of
their property, a declaration that the UPA is facially
unconstitutional, and an injunction preventing Defendants
from taking further unlawful action under the UPA, among
other things.
The district court dismissed this case, concluding that
Defendants are protected by the state’s sovereign immunity
and that Plaintiffs did not state a viable claim for relief. We
affirm in part and reverse in part. We conclude that Plaintiffs
have Article III standing, a challenge raised for the first time

GARZA V. WOODS

5

on appeal, and that sovereign immunity does not protect the
Defendants. On the merits, we conclude that Plaintiffs have
stated a viable due-process claim, but that their takings claim
fails as a matter of law.
BACKGROUND
I. Arizona’s Unclaimed Property Law
Under the UPA, the Department may take “custody” of
property that is “presumed abandoned.” Ariz. Rev. Stat.
§ 44-304; see also id. § 44-310(A). “Property is presumed
abandoned if it is unclaimed by the apparent owner” for a
defined period—usually one to three years, depending on the
type of property. Id. § 44-302(A). Property is “unclaimed” if
the apparent owner does not “indicate[] an interest in the
property” within the prescribed period. Id. § 44-302(C); see
also id. § 44-302(D) (outlining the ways in which an owner
may indicate interest).
The UPA establishes notice requirements and details
how unclaimed property must be delivered to the
Department.
Generally,
once
property
becomes
presumptively abandoned, the holder—the individual or
entity in actual possession of the property, see id. § 44301(8)—must “send a written notice to the apparent owner”
that the holder is in possession of property subject to the
UPA, id. § 44-307(E). After waiting at least 120 days
following such notice, the holder must send a report to the
Department that describes the property. Id. § 44-307(A), (B),
(E). When the report is filed, the holder must also deliver the
unclaimed property or pay it to the Department. Id. § 44308(A).
Arizona is required to operate a website that lists the
unclaimed property in its possession, and the website must

6

GARZA V. WOODS

be advertised via various media. Id. § 44-309(A); see also
id. § 44-309(B). But Arizona’s statute does not mandate that
the state provide actual notice to apparent owners that it is in
possession of their property.
The UPA also prescribes how Arizona must use the
unclaimed property it receives from holders. With limited
exceptions, the Department must deposit “in the state
general fund all monies received” under the UPA. Id. § 44313(A). But the Department must also “retain in a separate
trust fund at least one hundred thousand dollars from which
[it] shall pay claims” to unclaimed-property claimants. Id.
§ 44-313(D). Claims to unclaimed property must be made
within 35 years of the fiscal year in which the Department
received the property. Id. § 44-317(E).
II. Plaintiffs’ Unclaimed-Property Claims
Garza alleges that she lived in Arizona from 2008 to
2011, and again from 2014 to 2016. Terrell alleges that he
has lived in Arizona since 2010. Both Plaintiffs assert that
the Department possesses several checks belonging to them
issued by various businesses like healthcare providers,
financial institutions, and car dealers.
Plaintiffs claim that Arizona’s possession of their
property is an unlawful taking, in violation of the Fifth and
Fourteenth Amendments, and that they were deprived of
their property without due process of law, in violation of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Plaintiffs sued Defendants Rob
Wood, Director of the Department, and William Nagel, the
Unclaimed Property Administrator, in their official
capacities. Plaintiffs seek return of their property and
declaratory and injunctive relief. They also sought to
represent a purported class.

GARZA V. WOODS

7

The district court dismissed Plaintiffs’ claims, reasoning
that Defendants’ sovereign immunity barred Plaintiffs’
claim for retrospective relief and that Plaintiffs failed to state
a claim for prospective relief. Plaintiffs timely appealed.
DISCUSSION
I. Subject-Matter Jurisdiction
On appeal, Defendants make two jurisdictional
arguments: (A) that Plaintiffs lack standing; and (B) that
sovereign immunity bars Plaintiffs’ claims. “Dismissals
under Rule 12(b)(1) are reviewed de novo.” Thomas v.
County of Humboldt, 124 F.4th 1179, 1186 (9th Cir. 2024).
Although Defendants did not raise standing to the district
court, this challenge may be raised for the first time on
appeal. Laub v. U.S. Dep’t of Interior, 342 F.3d 1080, 1085
(9th Cir. 2003). And where Defendants facially attack the
adequacy of Plaintiffs’ jurisdictional allegations, we accept
the allegations as true and draw all reasonable inferences in
favor of Plaintiffs to determine whether subject-matter
jurisdiction has been plausibly alleged. Leite v. Crane Co.,
749 F.3d 1117, 1121 (9th Cir. 2014).
A. Standing
Article III standing requires Plaintiffs to allege an injury
in fact, caused by Defendants, that is redressable by the
court. Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560–61
(1992). Defendants argue that Plaintiffs have not suffered an
Article III injury.
An Article III injury is “an invasion of a legally protected
interest which is (a) concrete and particularized and
(b) actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical.”
Lujan, 504 U.S. at 560 (citation modified). An injury is
“concrete” if it “actually exist[s],” but “concrete” is not

8

GARZA V. WOODS

“necessarily synonymous with ‘tangible.’ Although tangible
injuries are perhaps easier to recognize,” the Supreme Court
has confirmed that “intangible injuries can nevertheless be
concrete.” Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins, 578 U.S. 330, 340 (2016).
“[A] classic pocketbook injury” is both concrete and
tangible. See Tyler v. Hennepin County, 598 U.S. 631, 636
(2023) (holding that the plaintiff sufficiently alleged an
Article III injury when she alleged that a county “illegally
appropriated [a] $25,000 surplus” in a tax sale of her real
property).
Defendants suggest Plaintiffs have not alleged an injuryin-fact because Plaintiffs did not possess or use the
unclaimed property at issue before Arizona took possession.
Similarly, Defendants assert that no injury was inflicted on
Plaintiffs by the transfer of possession from the holder to the
Department. Both arguments misunderstand Article III.
For purposes of standing, when someone—even the
government—possesses property lawfully owned by another
without the owner’s consent, an invasion of the owner’s
legally protected interest has occurred. See, e.g., United
States v. $133,420.00 in U.S. Currency, 672 F.3d 629, 638
(9th Cir. 2012) (“Article III’s standing requirement is
thereby satisfied because an owner or possessor of property
that has been seized necessarily suffers an injury that can be
redressed at least in part by the return of the seized property.”
(citation omitted)). Arizona law—including the UPA—
recognizes that Plaintiffs have a legally protected interest in
their unclaimed property irrespective of actual possession or
use. See, e.g., Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 44-301(13) (“‘Owner’
means a person who has a legal or equitable interest in
property that is subject to [the UPA].”).

GARZA V. WOODS

9

In their complaint, Plaintiffs allege that they have a legal
interest in their checks that are being held by the Department
without their consent. Those allegations state a concrete
invasion of a legally protected interest. 1 We do not
myopically focus on whether the transfer of the checks from
the holder to the Department itself inflicted a greater or
different invasion of the owner’s property interest than
existed when the checks were possessed by the holder. See,
e.g., Taylor v. Westly (Taylor II), 488 F.3d 1197, 1199 (9th
Cir. 2007) (per curiam) (recognizing plaintiffs’ Article III
injuries as “those attendant to having their property
escheated without notice,” among other things). 2
Defendants also suggest that Plaintiffs have not suffered
a concrete injury because they do not allege that they filed a
claim under the UPA for the return of their property.
Defendants point to no caselaw suggesting that an owner
Indeed, below we conclude that Plaintiffs have alleged a “deprivation”
of property under the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment,
which is a cognizable Article III injury. See FDA v. All. for Hippocratic
Med., 602 U.S. 367, 381 (2024) (“An injury in fact can be a physical
injury, a monetary injury, an injury to one’s property, or an injury to
one’s constitutional rights, to take just a few examples.”); cf. Knellinger
v. Young, 134 F.4th 1034, 1042 (10th Cir. 2025) (holding standing and
takings claim “entirely overlap” since there was no “question that an
uncompensated taking of valuable property would be a ‘financial harm,’
indeed a ‘classic pocketbook injury,’ sufficient to confer standing”
(quoting Tyler, 598 U.S. at 636 ).
1

Although the plaintiffs in the Taylor cases suffered additional harms
under California’s Unclaimed Property Law, which required the state to
liquidate the plaintiffs’ securities after a brief period following transfer
to the state, our standing analysis in Taylor II was not limited to such
instances. See 488 F.3d at 1199‒200 (listing injuries that “include[d]”
“the permanent deprivation of their property subsequent to California’s
sale of that property”).

2

10

GARZA V. WOODS

must request that a government actor return property being
held before a cognizable injury to property interests can be
shown. Although the Supreme Court has outlined a “finality
requirement” for some regulatory-takings claims, that
requirement does not prevent a claim when the government
has already assumed physical possession of one’s property.
See Pakdel v. City & County of San Francisco, 594 U.S. 474,
478–81 (2021) (holding that “failure to properly pursue
administrative procedures may render a claim unripe if
avenues still remain for the government to clarify or change
its decision” and that “all a plaintiff must show is that there
is no question about how the regulations at issue will apply
to the particular land in question” (citation modified)
(citation omitted)); Williamson Cnty. Reg’l Planning
Comm’n v. Hamilton Bank of Johnson City, 473 U.S. 172,
187–93 (1985) (noting that “the finality requirement is
concerned with whether the initial decisionmaker has arrived
at a definitive position on the issue that inflicts an actual,
concrete injury” and compiling cases); see also Fuentes v.
Shevin, 407 U.S. 67, 85 (1972).
When the government assumes physical possession of
another’s unclaimed property, there is no ambiguity as to its
position on the status of that property. And when it does so
without providing due process or just compensation, the
owner has suffered sufficient injury to confer standing to
challenge the government’s action. Of course, that is not to
say the owner will prevail in claiming that the government
acted unlawfully, only that the owner has a sufficiently
concrete stake in the dispute to satisfy Article III. Cf. FDA v.
All. for Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. 367, 381 (2024) (noting
that a concrete injury is required to “screen[] out plaintiffs
who might only have a general legal, moral, ideological, or
policy objection to a particular government action”). We are

GARZA V. WOODS

11

not alone in reaching this conclusion. The Tenth Circuit
recently rejected that an owner must “file an administrative
claim with [the state] prior to proceeding in federal court” on
a challenge to the state’s unclaimed property system. See
Knellinger v. Young, 134 F.4th 1034, 1044–45 (10th Cir.
2025).
A simple example illustrates the flaw in Defendants’
position. Imagine a plaintiff who realized that she never
received a check due from an insurance company and that
the insurance company was holding the funds. She would
have Article III standing to pursue legal recourse against the
insurance company because her right to the funds would
have been concretely injured by its failing to send her check
and retaining her money. It matters not, for Article III’s
purposes, that the plaintiff could just ask the insurance
company for the check. Nor does it matter that, if she did so,
the insurance company might simply hand over the money.
These practicalities counsel against the wisdom of filing suit,
but they do not undermine the plaintiff’s constitutional
standing to sue.
B. Sovereign Immunity
Sovereign immunity bars suit against a state official
when “the state is the real, substantial party in interest.”
Pennhurst State Sch. & Hosp. v. Halderman, 465 U.S. 89,
101 (1984) (citation omitted). Generally, the state is the real
party in interest where any “decree would operate against the
[state].” Id. One example of this is when a money judgment
would be paid from the state treasury. Id. at 101 n.11;
Edelman v. Jordan, 415 U.S. 651, 663 (1974). There are two
related exceptions to this rule that are relevant here.
First, under Ex parte Young, a claim challenging the
constitutionality of a state official’s action that is asserted

12

GARZA V. WOODS

against the official in their official capacity is not barred by
sovereign immunity so far as it seeks prospective injunctive
relief. See 209 U.S. 123, 159–60 (1908); see also Pennhurst,
465 U.S. at 102–03. Here, the parties agreed before the
district court that to the extent Plaintiffs’ claims seek
injunctive relief, they are not barred by sovereign immunity
under Ex parte Young. This is correct.
Second, when officials acting on behalf of the sovereign
hold others’ property, a suit seeking return of the property is
not barred by sovereign immunity when the plaintiff alleges
that “the taking of the property or the injury to it was not the
action of the sovereign because [it was] unconstitutional or
beyond the officer’s statutory powers.” Larson v. Domestic
& Foreign Com. Corp., 337 U.S. 682, 698 (1949) (footnote
omitted); accord Malone v. Bowdoin, 369 U.S. 643, 647–48
(1962).
We applied this rule in Taylor v. Westly (Taylor I) and
held that a suit against the California Controller to recover
stock certificates seized as unclaimed property was not
barred by sovereign immunity because the complaint alleged
that the seizure was an ultra vires act and that the Controller
violated due process. 402 F.3d 924, 926, 930–35 (9th Cir.
2005). We emphasized that Edelman did not apply because
in that case “the plaintiffs unquestionably sought money that
belonged to the government” rather than “seek[ing]
reinstatement of possession of property they owned,”
whereas the plaintiffs in Taylor I indisputably “own[ed] the
stock that the state took.” Id. at 935; accord Suever v.
Connell, 439 F.3d 1142, 1147 (9th Cir. 2006) (“[A]lthough
[sovereign immunity] ordinarily bars claims primarily
requesting funds held in the State’s coffers, sovereign
immunity does not apply to claims alleging such funds are

GARZA V. WOODS

13

individuals’ property that the State improperly seized
through ultra vires or unconstitutional acts.”).
Taylor I controls here. Plaintiffs allege that the
Department possesses their property, they seek its return,
and they allege unconstitutional acts led to its seizure. This
is sufficient to defeat Defendants’ motion to dismiss under
Rule 12(b)(1).
Defendants argue that Taylor I is inapplicable because
Arizona does not hold unclaimed property on behalf of
owners and instead deposits it into the state treasury. That
argument is unavailing. The UPA plainly requires the
Department to hold unclaimed property for the benefit of
owners for 35 years and to keep at least $100,000 available
to pay claims. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. §§ 44-304, -310(A), 313(D), -317(E). Defendants concede as much at multiple
points throughout their briefing. Therefore, Defendants’
efforts to distinguish Taylor I are unpersuasive, and the
district court erred in dismissing Plaintiffs’ claims seeking
the return of their property.
II. Failure to State a Claim
Next, we address Defendants’ arguments that Plaintiffs
have failed to state a claim on either of their theories for
relief: (A) taking of property without just compensation and
(B) procedural due process. To overcome a Rule 12(b)(6)
“motion to dismiss, a complaint must contain sufficient
factual matter, accepted as true, to ‘state a claim to relief that
is plausible on its face.’” Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662,
678 (2009) (quoting Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550
U.S. 544, 570 (2007)). A claim is plausible “when the
plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to draw
the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for the
misconduct alleged.” Id. We review this question de novo.

14

GARZA V. WOODS

Faulkner v. ADT Sec. Servs., Inc., 706 F.3d 1017, 1019 (9th
Cir. 2013).
A. Uncompensated Taking
Plaintiffs’ takings claim is easily resolved under our
precedent. The Fifth Amendment guarantees that “private
property [shall not] be taken for public use, without just
compensation.” U.S. Const. amend. V. This guarantee is
enforceable against the states. Sheetz v. County of El
Dorado, 601 U.S. 267, 276 (2024) (recognizing that the
Takings Clause is incorporated against the states via the
Fourteenth Amendment). To state a takings claim, a plaintiff
must allege: (1) that the plaintiff owns “private property”;
(2) that the private property was “taken” for “public use”;
and (3) that the taking entity did not pay “just compensation”
for it. Zeyen v. Bonneville Joint Dist., No. 93, 114 F.4th
1129, 1139 (9th Cir. 2024). The district court held that
Plaintiffs did not allege the second element. We agree.
In Taylor I, we held that where unclaimed property is
“held in trust” by the state, the property “has not been taken
at all.” 402 F.3d at 936. Plaintiffs allege that the Department
holds their unclaimed property in custody for their benefit.
Therefore, per Taylor I, Plaintiffs have failed to state a
takings claim. 3
B. Due Process
The Fourteenth Amendment prohibits states from
“depriv[ing] any person of life, liberty, or property, without
We acknowledge the recent Tenth Circuit decision reaching the
opposite conclusion. See Knellinger, 134 F.4th at 1043–45. But we are
bound by Taylor I absent intervening higher authority that irreconcilably
conflicts with our circuit precedent. See Miller v. Gammie, 335 F.3d 889,
900 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc).
3

GARZA V. WOODS

15

due process of law.” U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1. As
relevant here, a procedural due-process claim requires
allegations of: (1) a protected property interest; (2) a
deprivation of that interest by state action; and
(3) inadequate process for the deprivation. See Reed v.
Goertz, 598 U.S. 230, 236 (2023). The district court held that
Plaintiffs failed to allege the second element. On appeal,
Defendants challenge Plaintiffs’ pleading as to all three
elements.
1. Property Interest
Property rights are primarily created and defined not by
the Constitution but by “an independent source such as state
law.” Bd. of Regents of State Colls. v. Roth, 408 U.S. 564,
577 (1972). Defendants assert that Arizona law does not
establish a property interest “to insist that unclaimed
property be held by a third party for the rest of time.” This
argument misconceives both the Fourteenth Amendment
and Plaintiffs’ claim. Plaintiffs do not allege a property
interest in preventing a transfer from the holder to the
Department; they allege an interest in their unclaimed
property. To accept Defendants’ argument would turn the
analysis into a circular mess. Plaintiffs would be required to
allege a deprivation of their property interest in preventing a
deprivation of their property. Unsurprisingly, Defendants
cite no caselaw supporting this approach.
Next, Defendants argue that Plaintiffs lack a property
interest because “it is undisputed that [they] did not possess,
and were not using, the [presumptively] abandoned property
they may own.” But no authority suggests that possession
and use are prerequisites to a property interest under Arizona
law. Instead, as discussed previously, the UPA itself
recognizes that owners have a property interest in

16

GARZA V. WOODS

presumptively abandoned property, Ariz. Rev. Stat.
§ 44-301(13), and it allows owners to file a claim to that
property for 35 years after the Department takes possession,
id. § 44-317(E). Defendants themselves recognize that
Plaintiffs allegedly “own” property in the possession of the
Department. That is sufficient to plausibly allege this
element.
2. Deprivation
“Any significant taking of property by the State is within
the purview of the Due Process Clause.” Fuentes, 407 U.S.
at 86. This includes “temporary, nonfinal” deprivations. Id.
at 85. In Taylor II, we held that plaintiffs whose stocks had
been escheated to California and sold without notice were
likely to succeed on their due-process claim. 488 F.3d at
1201 ; see also Taylor I, 402 F.3d at 926–29 (explaining the
case background). Defendants argue that Taylor II
establishes a “deprivation” occurred only after California
sold the stocks at issue and that it did not address whether
mere transfer of custody requires notice. To the contrary, in
Taylor II we addressed this precise question and held that the
plaintiffs had been “deprived” of their property because their
“control” of the property was “disturbed.” Taylor II, 488
F.3d at 1201. Indeed, the final case in the Taylor saga
observed that “this Court’s focus in Taylor II . . . was on
notice being provided by the Controller before the property
was transferred to the State.” Taylor v. Yee (Taylor IV), 780
F.3d 928, 938 (9th Cir. 2015) (second emphasis added).
Therefore, Taylor II controls this question.
Next, Defendants argue that Plaintiffs have not been
“deprived” of their property because they can claim it within
35 years and only “final, irreversible” seizures trigger dueprocess protections. This is incorrect. Again, the Supreme

GARZA V. WOODS

17

Court has held that even “a temporary, nonfinal deprivation
of property is nonetheless a ‘deprivation’ in the terms of the
Fourteenth Amendment.” Fuentes, 407 U.S. at 85. Indeed,
as an example, we have previously held that a deprivation of
a protected property interest occurred when a municipality
towed a car, notwithstanding that the owner could later
retrieve it. See Clement v. City of Glendale, 518 F.3d 1090,
1092–96 (9th Cir. 2008); Scofield v. City of Hillsborough,
862 F.2d 759, 762–64 (9th Cir. 1988). Defendants do not
make any persuasive argument that Fuentes or our own cases
do not apply.
Finally, Defendants direct our attention to two state
supreme court cases. First, in Dani v. Miller, the Oklahoma
Supreme Court held that “due process is not offended by the
automatic transfer of abandoned property into the custody of
the State Treasurer.” 374 P.3d 779, 796 (Okla. 2016). Dani
relies on Texaco, Inc. v. Short, 454 U.S. 516 (1982), for this
proposition. But Texaco resolved a different issue. There, an
Indiana statute established the period after which a mineral
interest would be considered abandoned and automatically
lapse to the surface owner. Id. at 518. The Supreme Court
held that no “deprivation” requiring due process had
occurred simply upon the passage of the statute or upon the
triggering of the conditions of abandonment. See id. at 531–
37. It first reasoned that the legislature “need do nothing
more than enact and publish the law, and afford the citizenry
a reasonable opportunity to familiarize itself with its terms
and to comply.” Id. at 532. And while “no specific notice
need be given of an impending lapse . . . [i]t is undisputed
that, before judgment could be entered in a quiet title action
that would determine conclusively that a mineral interest has
reverted to the surface owner, the full procedural protections
of the Due Process Clause . . . must be provided.” Id. at 533–

18

GARZA V. WOODS

34. Texaco, therefore, does not answer whether a
“deprivation” has occurred where the state requires a thirdparty holder to transfer presumptively abandoned property
to the state itself.
Moreover, where a transfer to the state occurs in as little
as a year’s time of non-activity, individuals may go about
their daily lives without any indication that their property has
changed possession. The 20-year duration of abandonment
required under the Indiana statute at issue in Texaco stands
in stark contrast to the timelines prescribed by Arizona in the
UPA. See Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 44-302. Thus, Texaco’s use-itor-lose-it reasoning is far less applicable to situations, such
as here, where the non-use of one’s property can easily occur
without any neglect or implied intent of abandonment. See
454 U.S. at 526 (recognizing states long had “the power to
permit unused or abandoned interests in property to revert to
another after the passage of time” (emphasis added)); see
also id. at 535 n.28 (leaving open whether states may adopt
background principles of abandonment with shorter periods
of nonuse).
Second, in Hall v. State, the Supreme Court of Minnesota
held that Minnesota’s unclaimed property act “does not
deprive [the plaintiffs] of a protected property interest
because it merely results in the substitution of the
[government] as the holder of their unclaimed property.” 908
N.W.2d 345, 358 (Minn. 2018). This reasoning was based
on Anderson National Bank v. Luckett, 321 U.S. 233 (1944).
There, the Supreme Court rejected a due-process challenge
to a Kentucky unclaimed-property law that required predeprivation notice and a judicial determination of
abandonment. See id. at 236–38, 240–47. Although the
Court suggested that substituting the state for the holder did
not deprive owners of their property, it made clear that the

GARZA V. WOODS

19

transfer of accounts to the state remained “subject to the
requirements of procedural due process.” Id. at 241–42; see
also id. at 240 (observing that a state “may compel the
surrender to it of” presumably abandoned bank accounts “by
a procedure satisfying constitutional requirements”). Indeed,
in addressing whether the plaintiff bank could allege a due
process violation, the Court concluded that the pre-transfer
procedure the state utilized to take possession of the funds at
issue “was upon adequate notice to [owners] and opportunity
for them to be heard.” Id. at 243. Thus, despite its suggestion
that the deprivation element was not satisfied as to the
property owners, Anderson, consistent with Taylor II,
suggests that the transfer of property from holder to the state
must be accompanied with constitutionally sufficient
process.
And in any event, we are bound by Taylor II. We have
no power to overrule a prior decision of this court absent
“intervening higher authority” that “undercut[s] the theory
or reasoning underlying the prior circuit precedent in such a
way that the cases are clearly irreconcilable.” Miller v.
Gammie, 335 F.3d 889, 900 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc). Taylor
II post-dated both Texaco and Anderson National Bank, and
state supreme court decisions—though persuasive at
times—obviously are not “higher authority” on issues of
federal law. Defendants point to no other cases that undercut
Taylor II’s reasoning, so it remains the law of this circuit.
Plaintiffs have therefore plausibly alleged that they were
deprived of a protected property interest.
3. Adequacy of Process
As a general matter, in determining what process is due,
courts must balance the public and private interests involved.
See Mathews v. Eldridge, 424 U.S. 319, 335 (1976). Pre-

20

GARZA V. WOODS

deprivation notice typically is required absent “a strong
justification” from the government. Clement, 518 F.3d at
1094. And if notice is required, it must be “reasonably
calculated, under all the circumstances, to apprise interested
parties of the pendency of the action and afford them an
opportunity to present their objections.” Mullane v. Cent.
Hanover Bank & Tr. Co., 339 U.S. 306, 314 (1950); see also
Jones v. Flowers, 547 U.S. 220, 226 (2006). Put succinctly,
“Mathews governs the question of whether and when due
process requirements, including notice, [are] required, but
Mullane governs [the] adequacy of notice.” Grimm v. City of
Portland, 971 F.3d 1060, 1067 (9th Cir. 2020).
In Taylor II, we held that California’s unclaimedproperty law likely did not provide adequate process because
notice by publication and notice provided by a third party,
such as the holder, are insufficient in this context. 488 F.3d
at 1201. Defendants’ only arguments on this point amount to
an effort to overrule Taylor II. But as discussed, we lack that
power. See Miller, 335 F.3d at 900.
Plaintiffs allege that the notice was inadequate here
because the UPA does not require pre-deprivation notice
sent by Arizona and post-deprivation notice by newspaper
publication is insufficient. Indeed, Arizona’s law only
requires that pre-deprivation notice be given by the holder:
at least 120 days before the holder files an unclaimedproperty report and transfers the property to the Department,
it must, subject to some exceptions, “send a written notice to
the apparent owner that states that the holder is in possession
of the [unclaimed] property.” Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 44-307(E).
And after the Department receives unclaimed property, the
UPA requires only that the Department “publish a notice at
least semiannually . . . directing the public to the
department’s website regarding abandoned property . . . .”

GARZA V. WOODS

21

Id. § 44-309(A). The Department’s website must list the
apparent owner’s name and last known address and describe
the property. Id. Under Taylor II, Plaintiffs have plausibly
alleged that they did not receive adequate process.
Accordingly, we conclude that they have sufficiently stated
a due-process claim to survive a motion to dismiss. 4
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, AND
REMANDED. 5

To the extent that Plaintiffs are facially challenging the UPA, that
challenge also survives because Plaintiffs plausibly alleged that the
statute’s notice provisions fail to meet the minimum constitutional
standard in all cases. See Moody v. NetChoice, LLC, 603 U.S. 707, 724
(2024) (“A plaintiff cannot succeed on a facial challenge unless he
‘establishes that no set of circumstances exists under which the law
would be valid,’ or he shows that the law lacks a ‘plainly legitimate
sweep.’” (citation modified) (quoting United States v. Salerno, 481 U.S.
739, 745 (1987); Wash. State Grange v. Wash. State Republican Party,
552 U.S. 442, 449 (2008))).
4

5

Defendants shall bear the costs on appeal. Fed. R. App. P. 39(a)(4).

