FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
INDUSTRIAL PARK CENTER
LLC, an Arizona limited liability
company doing business as
Mainspring Capital Group,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
GREAT NORTHERN INSURANCE
COMPANY, a foreign insurer,
Defendant - Appellee.

Nos. 24-4788
25-295
D.C. No.
2:22-cv-01196MTL
ORDER
CERTIFYING
QUESTION TO
THE
ARIZONA
SUPREME
COURT

Filed December 23, 2025
Before: Susan P. Graber, Richard C. Tallman, and Bridget
S. Bade, Circuit Judges.

2

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

SUMMARY *
Certification to Arizona Supreme Court
The panel certified to the Arizona Supreme Court the
following question:
Is damage to property a “fortuitous” loss
when, based on the insured’s knowledge at
the time the insurance policy issued, it was
reasonably foreseeable that such damage was
almost certain to occur if certain preventative
measures were not taken?

ORDER
This appeal asks us to decide an issue of first impression
under Arizona law. For the reasons discussed below, we
certify the following question to the Arizona Supreme Court:
Is damage to property a “fortuitous” loss
when, based on the insured’s knowledge at
the time the insurance policy issued, it was
reasonably foreseeable that such damage was
almost certain to occur if certain preventative
measures were not taken?
Plaintiff-Appellant Industrial Park Center LLC, d/b/a
Mainspring Capital Group (“Mainspring”), owns a
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

3

commercial building in Tempe, Arizona which, at the
relevant time, was insured under an all-risk property
insurance policy issued by Defendant-Appellee Great
Northern Insurance Company (“Great Northern”). While
that policy was in effect, Mainspring discovered that the
building’s structural integrity had been compromised by the
routine business practices of one of its tenants, a wholesale
seafood distributor, and submitted a claim of loss to Great
Northern for the damage. After Great Northern denied
Mainspring’s claim, Mainspring sued Great Northern for
breach of the insurance contract and for breach of the
implied covenant of good faith and fair dealing.
The certified issue in this case is whether Mainspring’s
loss was “fortuitous,” which is a requirement for coverage
under an all-risk policy. See Pac. Indem. Co. v. Kohlhase,
455 P.2d 277, 278 n.1 (Ariz. Ct. App. 1969). In granting
summary judgment to Great Northern, the district court ruled
that Mainspring’s loss was not fortuitous because the loss
was “reasonably foreseeable and almost certain to occur” as
a result of the tenant’s longstanding business practices and
Mainspring’s failure to implement measures to prevent
water damage. We find no controlling precedent defining
fortuity in the decisions of Arizona’s appellate courts.
Because the answer has “important public policy
ramifications” for the State of Arizona and “will have broad
application” to a wide variety of contracts within the state,
we respectfully certify this question to the Arizona Supreme
Court under Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 12-1861. Kremen v. Cohen,
325 F.3d 1035, 1037–38 (9th Cir. 2003). If the Arizona
Supreme Court decides not to accept certification, we will
resolve this question based on our best understanding of
Arizona law.

4

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

I
A
Starting in 1990, Mainspring leased part of the property
to nonparty Star Fisheries, Inc., a wholesale seafood
distributor. As part of its routine business practices, Star
Fisheries would hose down the building’s slab-on-grade
foundation and exterior concrete staircase with fresh water
throughout each workday. That practice twice resulted in
significant damage to Mainspring’s building.
1
The first discovery of damage resulting from Star
Fisheries’ tenancy occurred in 2010. A Mainspring
executive had noticed signs of potential damage to the
concrete walls and stairs at the Star Fisheries suite, and
Mainspring decided to retain an engineering firm, Meyer,
Borgman & Johnson (“MBJ”), to investigate the potential
damage and recommend any necessary repairs.
After an initial site visit, MBJ issued a report dated
August 6, 2010, finding that the building had been damaged
in three respects. First, MBJ noted that there was “severe
deterioration of the concrete stairs servicing Star Fisheries,”
which showed signs of “spalling and cracking” and had steel
reinforcing bars that “were clearly visible and appeared
corroded.” Second, MBJ observed some minor cracking in
the interior slab-on-grade, but noted that this damage was
“not a life safety issue” because the slab-on-grade was “not
a structural element” of the building. Third, on the exterior
wall, MBJ “found cracks, spalling concrete, peeling and
delaminating paint and discoloring of both the paint and
concrete,” with the damage to the wall being mostly “limited
to the area of the wall that is below the slab-on-grade and
appears to be retaining soil.” MBJ believed that the damage

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

5

was caused by high moisture levels in the subgrade soil,
which resulted from Star Fisheries’ daily water use.
Mainspring then retained the geotechnical engineering
firm Speedie & Associates to test MBJ’s hypothesis.
Speedie took three soil samples from under the Star Fisheries
suite: two along the east wall (Samples 1 and 2), and one
along the south wall within the cooler section (Sample 3).
Speedie found that the moisture levels for Samples 1 and 2
“were about normal,” whereas the soil in Sample 3 was
“very moist, at or above the plastic limit.” Because moist
soil tends to expand, which can create “increased uplift
pressure under the slab and against the dock high tilt panel
walls” and “contribut[e] to wall and slab movement,”
Speedie concluded that “the observed distresses [in the
concrete] are related to the increase[d] moisture levels within
the subgrade soils.” Speedie noted two possible causes of
the abnormal moisture levels: (1) possible leaks or defects in
the installed floor drains; and (2) cracks and control joints
that were not “properly sealed to prevent water seepage
through the slabs.”
MBJ then issued a final report dated October 28, 2010,
recommending a five-step remediation program. First, MBJ
recommended that Mainspring “determine how water is
migrating into the subgrade,” with a specific focus on
whether “installed floor drains are not working properly, are
leaking or [are not] correctly tied to a final drain.” Second,
MBJ recommended that “weep holes be installed in the
exterior walls of the building, below finished floor
elevation,” to drain existing moisture from the soil and
alleviate existing hydrostatic pressure on the walls. Third,
MBJ recommended that all cracks, control joints, and saw
cuts in the slab-on-grade be sealed “to prevent further
damages to the concrete slab or the building walls.” As part

6

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

of the third step of the remediation program, MBJ also
recommended optional preventative measures to further
mitigate against future damage: (1) installation of “a water
proof floor coating,” which would “completely prevent
future infiltration of moisture into the subgrade”;
(2) removal and replacement of “large sections of concrete
slab” and installation of “a 4-inch layer of [aggregate base
course] subgrade and a vapor barrier system below the
concrete slab”; and (3) installation of “an additional drain
tile system . . . along the southwest interior perimeter of the
building to catch and release any surface moisture placed
near the concrete wall panels if future moisture infiltration
exists.” 1 Fourth, MBJ recommended that the exterior
concrete stairs be demolished and rebuilt, as they were so
degraded that repair was not feasible.
Fifth, MBJ
recommended that the southern concrete tilt-walls be
repaired after moisture mitigation was completed.
In 2011, Mainspring did almost everything that MBJ had
recommended: it inspected and tested all trench drain
locations and replaced faulty systems, installed weep holes
in the concrete tilt wall panels, sealed all major cracks in the
flooring, and repaired all concrete tilt wall panels and stair
locations after moisture mitigation was completed.
Mainspring did not, however, take any of the optional
measures described in the third step of MBJ’s remediation
program—installing a waterproof floor coating, a barrier
between the slab-on-grade and the soil, or an additional drain
system.

As the primary author of the report testified in deposition, MBJ laid out
these alternatives “to provide the owner different pricing options” of
ways “to mitigate moisture intrusion through a slab-on-grade floor.”
1

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

7

Shortly after MBJ issued its final report, Mainspring
amended its lease with Star Fisheries to make Star Fisheries
responsible for the costs of remediating the damages caused.
And in 2014, Mainspring included a provision in Star
Fisheries’ lease that made Star Fisheries responsible for
certain restoration obligations—effective upon surrender of
the property—related to its “perpetual use of the Premises as
(1) a ‘wet environment’ and (2) to house freezer/cooler
units.”
2
The second discovery of damage resulting from Star
Fisheries’ tenancy occurred in 2021. The first signs of
damage—cracking and spalling in concrete wall panels and
stairs near the Star Fisheries docking bay—were discovered
by Robert Vallelonga & Associates, an engineering firm that
Mainspring had hired to perform unrelated, routine concrete
repairs at the building. Further investigation suggested that
there was deterioration in the concrete panels near the Star
Fisheries suite, at least some of which was due to water
damage. In September 2021, Mainspring retained R. Lloyd
Hamblin, a civil engineer, to inspect the site further.
Hamblin confirmed the presence of “[c]racked and
delaminated concrete tilt panel walls” and that the concrete
stairs had “cracked, delaminated and settled under stoop.”
Hamblin recommended repairing or replacing the damaged
walls and alerted Mainspring to the possibility that the
concrete’s reinforcing steel may have been compromised,
which would require further investigation and more
intensive repairs.
In January 2022, while replacing the stairs as Hamblin
recommended, Mainspring discovered that the concrete tilt
panels behind the stairs had degraded to such an extent that

8

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

the building’s structural integrity was compromised.
Mainspring sent a notice of loss to Great Northern.
3
After receiving Mainspring’s notice of loss, Great
Northern retained Nelson Forensics, LLC, an engineering
consulting firm, to investigate and determine the cause of the
damage to Mainspring’s property. In its investigation,
Nelson observed significant concrete delamination,
cracking, and spalling of tilt wall panels along the east
exterior wall consistent with those panels having been
“subjected to a corrosive environment for many
years/decades.” Although the deterioration was “most
severe” by the Star Fisheries suite, the “pattern of concrete
distress was present along the full length of the east exterior
wall.” Because Nelson could not identify “[any] means for
water/salt spillage at the Star Fisheries suite to affect the tilt
wall panels at the north portion of the structure’s east
elevation,” Nelson concluded that, although Star Fisheries’
water and salt use “may have exacerbated” the damage at the
southern portion of the building, it was not related to the
damage elsewhere in the building.
After receiving Nelson’s report, Great Northern denied
coverage for the loss. Its denial letter to Mainspring, dated
March 18, 2022, explained that, based on the results of
Nelson’s investigation, Great Northern had determined that
the property “was damaged as a result of poor/inadequate
soil preparation and compaction, settlement, and long-term
corrosion,” a loss which it believed fell within the policy’s
inherent-vice, faulty-workmanship, settling, and wear-andtear exclusions. The letter closed by offering Mainspring an
opportunity to respond.

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

9

In April 2022, Mainspring requested reconsideration,
arguing that Nelson’s conclusions were based on an
inadequate investigation and that subsequent remediation
work suggested that Star Fisheries’ water use caused the
loss. Alongside its request, Mainspring included a counterreport from R. Lloyd Hamblin, the engineer who had first
inspected the property the previous September. Hamblin
contended that Nelson’s conclusions were “based on
speculation” and “contradicted by the actual conditions at
the [property].” Hamblin insisted, based on his observations
and testing, that the delamination of the concrete tilt panel
walls was caused by corrosion of the reinforcing steel within
the concrete due to water infiltrating the concrete, and he
asserted that the source of this water was Star Fisheries.
After receiving Mainspring’s request, Great Northern
had Nelson conduct a second site visit and issue a
supplemental report with revised conclusions.
After
revisiting the site and reevaluating the evidence, Nelson
agreed with Hamblin that the damage was “consistent with
being caused by long-term, repetitive exposure to excess
moisture” and that “[t]he source of excess moisture affecting
the soils and tilt wall panels [was] long-term, repetitive
water/mineral use and/or spillage at the Star Fisheries suite.”
Notwithstanding Nelson’s revised conclusions, Great
Northern again denied coverage for Mainspring’s claim of
loss. Great Northern asserted that this cause of loss was
expressly excluded from coverage by the wear-and-tear and
settling exclusions, and that the water exception to the wearand-tear exclusion did not apply because “there [was] no
evidence of any ensuing damage [caused by water]” because
the “damage [itself] is the wear and deterioration.”
Accordingly, Great Northern concluded that “no coverage
for the repair of the Building exist[ed].”

10

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

B
Mainspring filed suit in the Superior Court for Maricopa
County, claiming that Great Northern (1) breached the terms
of the insurance policy by denying coverage and payment
for the damage to Mainspring’s property and (2) breached its
duty of good faith and fair dealing as an insurer by failing to
act reasonably in processing Mainspring’s claim. The case
was then removed to federal court based on diversity of
citizenship.
In January 2024, Great Northern moved for summary
judgment on both claims, and Mainspring moved for
summary judgment on the breach of contract claim only.
The district court granted Great Northern’s motion for
summary judgment on both claims, denied Mainspring’s
motion for partial summary judgment on the breach of
contract claim, and awarded Great Northern $198,234 in
attorneys’ fees.
On the breach of contract claim, the district court
concluded that Mainspring failed to show that its loss was
fortuitous, which is a necessary condition for coverage under
the all-risk policy. Although the district court found that
nothing in the record suggested that Mainspring knew the
loss would occur at the time of contracting or that
Mainspring intentionally caused the loss to occur, the district
court reasoned that the loss was not fortuitous because it
“was reasonably foreseeable and almost certain to occur.”
Specifically, the district court noted that Mainspring took
only the measures that MBJ recommended “to mitigate
future moisture intrusion,” not the measures recommended
to “prevent it.” So long as Star Fisheries continued to lease
the space, its “continued practice of washing down the
concrete slab and its use of sub-zero freezers would almost

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

11

certainly continue to introduce moisture into the soil and
eventually affect the building’s infrastructure.”
Moreover, the clause in Star Fisheries’ lease shifting the
cost of any repair to the tenant upon surrender suggested that
Mainspring anticipated “that future damage may occur as a
result of Star Fisheries’ occupancy,” making such damage
“reasonably foreseeable.” Accordingly, “the risk was not
covered by the all-risk policy,” and Great Northern therefore
did not breach the contract.
Mainspring appealed both the judgment and the fee
award, and these appeals were consolidated in May 2025.
II
A
The primary issue is whether Mainspring’s loss was
“fortuitous.” See Kohlhase, 455 P.2d at 278 n.1. When
recovery is sought under an all-risk property insurance
policy, the insured must show that the loss was fortuitous to
“establish a prima facie case” of coverage. Id. at 279. Once
this showing is made, the burden shifts to the insurer to show
“that the loss was within a policy exclusion.” Id.
Accordingly, the fortuity of Mainspring’s loss is potentially
dispositive of its breach of contract claim. 2 Whether a loss
was fortuitous “is a legal question for the court.” Intermetal
Mexicana, S.A. v. Ins. Co. of N. Am., 866 F.2d 71, 77 (3d Cir.
1989); accord Univ. of Cincinnati v. Arkwright Mut. Ins.
Co., 51 F.3d 1277, 1281 (6th Cir. 1995); Stephen A. Cozen
The issue of fortuity does not, however, bear on Mainspring’s bad faith
claim—Great Northern did not rely on fortuity in denying Mainspring’s
claim of loss, and it is not necessary to show breach of contract to
establish an insurer’s bad faith under Arizona law. See Zilisch v. State
Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 995 P.2d 276, 279–80 (Ariz. 2000); Deese v.
State Farm Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 838 P.2d 1265, 1269 (Ariz. 1992).

2

12

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

& Richard C. Bennett, Fortuity: The Unnamed Exclusion, 20
Forum 222, 231 (1985).
The parties agree that Arizona’s appellate courts have yet
to define the parameters of when a loss is fortuitous. We
likewise have been unable to find any published appellate
decisions that would guide us on this issue.
Accordingly, this issue is eligible for certification. See
Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 12-1861 (permitting certification of
questions of state law “which may be determinative of the
cause” and for which it appears “there is no controlling
precedent in the decisions of the supreme court and the
intermediate appellate courts of [Arizona]”). “We invoke
the certification process only after careful consideration and
do not do so lightly.” Murray v. BEJ Mins., LLC, 924 F.3d
1070, 1072 (9th Cir. 2019) (en banc) (quoting Kremen, 325
F.3d at 1037). We believe that this issue warrants
certification for the following reasons.
First, “the issue is [novel], substantial, and of broad
application.” Id. The fortuity requirement is not limited to
all-risk policies like the one at issue in this case. Rather,
fortuity is “[i]mplicit in the concept of insurance,” 7 Couch
on Insurance § 102:7 (3d ed. 2025), and indeed in all
contracts involving “aleatory” promises, see Restatement
(First) of Contracts § 291 & cmt. a (1932) (defining an
“aleatory promise” as one that is “conditional on the
happening of a fortuitous event, or an event supposed by the
parties to be fortuitous”). Accordingly, any decision
defining fortuity under Arizona law will implicate not only
every such insurance policy in the state, but may also
implicate every other aleatory promise under Arizona law,
such as betting contracts, suretyship agreements, guaranties,
covenants of title, and warranties of goods. 8 Corbin on

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

13

Contracts § 38.1 & n.26 (rev. ed. 2025). Given the sweeping
breadth of the doctrine’s application and the lack of
precedent from the Arizona courts, “the spirit of comity and
federalism cause us to seek certification.” Kremen, 325 F.3d
at 1038; cf. U.S. Fid. & Guar. Co. v. Lee Invs. LLC, 641 F.3d
1126, 1133 (9th Cir. 2011) (“[O]ne of the goals in deciding
state law questions is to do no harm to state jurisprudence.”).
Second, the issue involves competing public policy
considerations that are best resolved by the state’s highest
court. Murray, 924 F.3d at 1072; McKesson v. Doe, 592
U.S. 1, 5–6 (2020) (per curiam). The principle that insurance
may cover only the risk of fortuitous loss is one of the few
“mandatory rules” of insurance law—a rule that is
considered to “protect interests or further goals that are
sufficiently important to supplant freedom of contract.”
Kenneth S. Abraham, Peril and Fortuity in Property and
Liability Insurance, 36 Tort & Ins. L.J. 777, 780 (2001). It
has been suggested that allowing coverage for a nonfortuitous event would tend to encourage fraud and reward
the intentional destruction of insured property, both of which
are contrary to public policy in Arizona. Cozen & Bennett,
supra, at 222, 233–34; Abraham, supra, at 791; cf. In re
Rose’s Estate, 493 P.2d 112, 115 (Ariz. 1972) (discussing
the equitable principle that “no one can take advantage of his
own wrong” and the “sound public policy requiring that the
law should not become the instrument of designing persons
to be used for the purpose of fraud” (quoting Honk v.
Karlsson, 292 P.2d 455, 457 (Ariz. 1956))).
These weighty considerations are counterbalanced by
“Arizona’s longstanding public policy favoring freedom of
contract,” which would suggest that mandatory rules should
ordinarily be construed narrowly. Pointe 16 Cmty. Ass’n v.
GTIS-HOV Pointe 16, LLC, 575 P.3d 368, 372–73 (Ariz.

14

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

2025). How these competing public policy considerations
bear on the doctrine of fortuity is a question that the Arizona
Supreme Court should have an opportunity to address in the
first instance. Cf. Rattagan v. Uber Techs., Inc., 19 F.4th
1188, 1192–93 (9th Cir. 2021) (certifying to the California
Supreme Court a question implicating similar competing
public policy concerns).
Certification is also important to ensure that future cases
in our circuit are decided in accordance with Arizona law. If
we were to interpret the scope of fortuity ourselves in a
published opinion, that interpretation would be binding on
district courts in the Ninth Circuit—even if it were contrary
to Arizona’s public policy. Therefore, the “spirit of comity
and federalism” counsels us to certify this issue to the
Arizona Supreme Court to establish a rule for us to follow in
future diversity cases. Murray, 924 F.3d at 1072.
B
Accordingly, we certify the question set forth at the
beginning of this order to the Arizona Supreme Court and
respectfully ask the Court to accept certification under Ariz.
Rev. Stat. § 12-1861. Our phrasing of the question should
not restrict the Court’s consideration of the issues involved.
The Court is not limited to the particular question outlined
above, and it may modify or expand upon that question as it
deems appropriate. If the Court decides not to accept
certification, we will decide the question as we believe an
Arizona court would. See Kohler v. Inter-Tel Techs., 244
F.3d 1167, 1171 (9th Cir. 2001).
III
The Clerk will file a certified copy of this order with
the Arizona Supreme Court under Arizona Supreme Court

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

15

Rule 27. This consolidated appeal is withdrawn from
submission and will be resubmitted following the conclusion
of any proceedings in the Arizona Supreme Court. The
Clerk is directed to administratively close these dockets,
pending further order. We retain jurisdiction over any
further proceedings in our court. The parties will notify the
Clerk within fourteen days after the Arizona Supreme Court
accepts or rejects certification and again within fourteen
days after an opinion is rendered. A list of counsel appearing
in this matter, together with their addresses and telephone
numbers, is included below.
Counsel for Plaintiff-Appellant Industrial Park Center,
LLC, d/b/a Mainspring Capital Group:
Chad L. Schexnayder
cls@jkwlawyers.com
Laurence R. Sharlot
lrs@jkwlawyers.com
Joseph A. Brophy
jab@jkwlawyers.com
Jennings Haug Keleher McLeod Waterfall
2800 N. Central Ave., Suite 1800
Phoenix, AZ 85004
(602) 234-7800
Counsel for Defendant-Appellee
Insurance Company:
Douglas J. Collodel
douglas.collodel@clydeco.us
Clyde & Co. US LLP
355 S. Grand Ave., Suite 1400

Great

Northern

16

INDUS. PARK CTR. LLC V. GREAT NORTHERN INS. CO.

Los Angeles, California 90071
(213) 358-7600
Amy M. Samberg
amy.samberg@clydeco.us
Amanda R. Hough
amanda.hough@clydeco.us
Clyde & Co. US LLP
1 N. Central Ave., Suite 1030
Phoenix, Arizona 85004
(480) 746-4580
IT IS SO ORDERED.
/s/ Bridget S. Bade
Bridget S. Bade,
United States Circuit Judge, Presiding

