FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
DOUGLAS CAMPBELL
THOMSON; JOHN ANTHONY
HELLIWELL; ROBERT LAYNE
SIEBENBERG,

No. 24-2858
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-08124AB-MRW

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.

OPINION

CHARLES ROGER POMFRET
HODGSON, AKA Roger Hodgson;
DELICATE MUSIC, a California
general partnership,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
André Birotte, Jr., District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 23, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed August 20, 2025
Before: Kim McLane Wardlaw and John B. Owens, Circuit

2

THOMSON V. HODGSON

Judges, and John Charles Hinderaker, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Wardlaw
SUMMARY **
California Contract Law
The panel reversed the district court’s judgment, after a
jury trial, in favor of the defendants in a breach of contract
action brought by former members of the rock band
Supertramp against their former bandmates and a publishing
company.
In 1977, the parties entered into a publishing agreement
that allocated specific percentages of songwriting royalties
among the band members and their manager. The royalties
were distributed in the manner prescribed by the agreement
until 2018, when defendants stopped paying the royalties
due the plaintiffs. The district court ruled as a matter of law
that defendants were entitled to unilaterally terminate the
agreement after a “reasonable time.”
The panel explained that California courts conduct a
three-step analysis to determine a contract’s duration. First,
courts examine whether the contract contains an express
duration. Second, if the contract does not contain an express
The Honorable John Charles Hinderaker, United States District Judge
for the District of Arizona, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

THOMSON V. HODGSON

3

duration, courts ask whether one can be implied from the
nature and surrounding circumstances of the contract. Third,
if the contract contains no express or implied duration, the
court construes the duration to be a reasonable time. Here,
at step one, the panel agreed with the district court that there
was no express duration to the contract. At step two,
however, the panel concluded that a duration could be
implied: when the copyrights in the works cease generating
publishing royalties because they fall into the public
domain. Thus, the panel held that the district court erred at
step two and should not have reached step three, and there
was no issue remaining for the jury to decide. The panel
therefore reversed the district court and remanded with
instructions to enter judgment in plaintiffs’ favor on the issue
of liability, and for any further proceedings consistent with
this opinion.

COUNSEL
David L. Burg (argued) and Anjani Mandavia, Mandavia
Ephraim & Burg LLP, Los Angeles, California, for
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Robin Meadow (argued) and Tina Kuang, Greines Martin
Stein & Richland LLP, Los Angeles, California; Alan S.
Gutman and Matthew E. Hess, Gutman Law, Beverly Hills,
California; for Defendants-Appellees.

4

THOMSON V. HODGSON

OPINION
WARDLAW, Circuit Judge:
Douglas Thomson, John Helliwell, and Robert
Siebenberg (“Plaintiffs”), former members of the worldrenowned rock band Supertramp, brought this breach of
contract action against their former bandmates Rodger
Hodgson and Rick Davies, as well as Delicate Music, a subpublishing company formed by Hodgson and Davies
(“Defendants”). In 1977, the parties entered into a
publishing agreement which allocated specific percentages
of songwriting royalties among the band members and their
manager, David Margereson. The royalties were distributed
in the manner prescribed by the agreement until 2018, when
Hodgson
and
Davies—Supertramp’s
principal
songwriters—said “Goodbye Stranger,” 1 and abruptly
stopped paying the songwriting royalties due Plaintiffs. The
ensuing dispute proceeded to a jury trial, during which the
district court ruled as a matter of law that Defendants were
legally entitled to unilaterally terminate the agreement after
a “reasonable time” because “the contract contains no
express duration nor has sufficient evidence been presented
that there can be an implied duration based on the
surrounding circumstances, including execution of or the
nature of the ’77 agreement specifically.”
On appeal, Plaintiffs ask that Defendants continue to
“Give A Little Bit” 2 of Supertramp’s songwriting royalties
until the band’s songs cease generating revenue. But
1

Supertramp, Breakfast in America (A&M Records Mar. 16, 1979).

Supertramp, Even in the Quietest Moments… (A&M Records Apr. 8,
1977).
2

THOMSON V. HODGSON

5

Defendants believe that “From Now On,” 3 they are no
longer obligated to share royalties because the publishing
agreement was terminable after a reasonable time. We agree
with Plaintiffs, and reverse and remand with instructions to
enter judgment in Plaintiffs’ favor on the question of
liability.
I.
A.
Douglas Thomson, John Helliwell, Robert Siebenberg,
Rodger Hodgson, and Rick Davies made up the iconic rock
band Supertramp, a music group at the height of its
popularity from the mid-1970s into the early 1980s.
Hodgson and Davies were the principal songwriters in
Supertramp and credited as the authors of Supertramp’s
songs. Supertramp’s records generate two distinct streams
of revenue: (1) “record royalties,” which are generated from
the sale of the album itself or the CD or the cassette itself,
and (2) songwriting or publishing royalties, which is the
revenue that is generated by the publishing of those songs
that are contained on those records. The band shared the
record royalties equally, but only Hodgson and Davies, as
songwriters, were entitled to the publishing royalties.
Supertramp’s label A&M Records provided and paid for
the expenses that the band couldn’t afford to pay in their
early years, and then recouped its money from Supertramp’s
record royalties. The band members would not earn any
record royalties until their debts to A&M were repaid.
Unlike the record royalties, the publishing royalties were the
Supertramp, Even in the Quietest Moments… (A&M Records Apr. 8,
1977).
3

6

THOMSON V. HODGSON

only unencumbered stream of revenue that wasn’t owed
back to A&M while Supertramp was still in debt.
As a result of this arrangement, Plaintiffs found
themselves hurting financially during the 1970s despite
Supertramp’s success, while Hodgson and Davies found
their financial situations improving. At some point before
January 1977, Plaintiffs expressed their concern to
Defendants that, although the band had released two bestselling albums, and despite the importance of Plaintiffs’
contribution to Supertramp’s success, Plaintiffs were
receiving no payment for their efforts because all recording
royalties and tour revenues were used to reimburse A&M
Records for the band’s expenses. In response to these
concerns, Supertramp’s manager David Margereson
presented the band with a publishing agreement (“the 1977
Agreement”), which allocated specific percentages of
publishing royalties among the band members and
Margereson. The 1977 Agreement contained the following
key provisions:
2. The parties hereby agree that effective
January 1, 1977, all song writing and
publishing royalties (and/or other income)
derived from the parties’ songwriting and/or
publishing activities shall be allocated in the
following manner: . . .
(b) On any compositions recorded by the
performing group Supertramp the net writing
and publishing income derived from said
recordings (herein, the “shared publishing
income”), without any management
commission payable to David Margereson,

THOMSON V. HODGSON

7

shall be paid to each of the undersigned in the
following proportions:
Roger Hodgson
Richard Davies
Douglas Campbell Thomson
John Anthony Helliwell
Robert Layne Siebenberg
David Margereson

27%
27%
11.5%
11.5%
11.5%
11.5%

The band members and Margereson agreed that the
publishing royalties would be collected, administered, and
distributed by Delicate Music, Hodgson and Davies’s joint
sub-publishing company. Hodgson testified that he agreed
to allocate the publishing royalties because he wanted “[t]o
keep the band functioning and happy” and “want[ed] the
band to be successful” and to keep “[t]ouring.” Siebenberg,
however, testified that there was no discussion that “the song
income sharing was only going to last until record royalties
started being paid” during or after the January 1977 meeting
in which Margereson presented the 1977 Agreement to the
band, or during the December 1977 meeting in which the
1977 Agreement was ultimately signed.
The 1977
Agreement did not designate an end date or indicate that it
would continue in perpetuity.
In 1979, the band released its fourth album, Breakfast in
America, which sold over 30 million copies worldwide. On
the heels of the album’s success, Supertramp entered into the
most lucrative record deal in Supertramp’s history with
A&M. It was only after Breakfast in America’s release that
the band members finally began earning recording royalties.
Following the success of the album, the band orally amended

8

THOMSON V. HODGSON

the 1977 Agreement in 1983 to provide that Hodgson and
Davies would each receive 32.15% of the publishing
revenue, and Plaintiffs and Russel Pope, the band’s sound
engineer, would each receive 7.14% of the publishing
revenues from the exploitation of the songs on the band’s
most recent album, Famous Last Words. The revenue splits
for the earlier albums remained the same.
In 1983, Hodgson, Margereson, and Pope left
Supertramp. As part of Margereson’s exit, he and his
management company entered into a written agreement with
the band setting forth the band’s “continuing obligation” to
share certain percentages of its revenues and assets with
Margereson’s management company. The parties agreed
that Margereson’s management company would be entitled
to receive “in perpetuity” 7.14% of all publishing royalties
derived from songs on Famous Last Words, and 11.5% of
publishing royalties derived from the band’s other
recordings. These percentages were the same percentages
owed to Margereson under the 1977 Agreement. Similarly,
Pope entered into a withdrawal agreement that also included
his right to “continue to receive from Delicate, in perpetuity”
the same percentage specified in the amended 1977
Agreement—7.14%. Hodgson’s withdrawal agreement
(“1984 Agreement”) also stated that he would continue to
receive the publishing royalties allocated to him under the
1977 Agreement.
Paragraph 7.5 of the 1984 Agreement required Hodgson
to pay to Delicate Music all publishing revenue paid directly
to Hodgson for the exploitation of the “Delicate
Compositions”—i.e., the songs subject to the 1977
Agreement—to facilitate the distribution of publishing
revenue allocated to the other parties by the 1977 Agreement
as amended.

THOMSON V. HODGSON

9

In 1991, the parties entered into an agreement (“1991
Agreement”) modifying certain aspects of the songwriting
and publishing royalties owed to them under the previous
agreements. The 1991 Agreement confirmed the share of
songwriting and publishing royalties due to Plaintiffs under
the 1977 and 1984 Agreements. The 1991 Agreement also
provided that the publishing royalty allocations payable to
each party under the 1991 Agreement would remain the
same “in perpetuity” as their contractual allocations under
the amended 1977 Agreement.
B.
The publishing royalties were allocated in a manner
pursuant to the 1977 Agreement until 2018, when
Defendants suddenly stopped paying Plaintiffs their
contractual share of the publishing royalties. 4
Plaintiffs initially filed a complaint in California state
court, but the action was removed by Davies 5 to the Central
District of California based on his affirmative defenses and
counterclaims under the Copyright Act. Plaintiffs alleged
that Defendants had breached three contracts: the 1977
Agreement, the 1984 Agreement, and the 1991 Agreement.
The 1977 Agreement is the only contract at issue on appeal.
Plaintiffs moved for summary adjudication, arguing,
among other things, that they were contractually entitled to
continue receiving “payment under and according to the
terms of the parties’ valid and enforceable Participation
Agreement,” which was defined as including the 1977
Hodgson made a single one-time payment in 2021 in an attempt to
prevent litigation.

4

Plaintiffs and Davies reached a settlement in April 2023, leaving
Delicate Music and Hodgson as the remaining defendants.
5

10

THOMSON V. HODGSON

Agreement, the 1984 Agreement, and the 1991 Agreement.
The district court granted Plaintiffs’ motion in part and
denied it in part. In doing so, the court identified one
remaining issue for trial: “Is (or was) Defendants’ obligation
to pay Plaintiffs royalty interests (1) terminable at-will; or
(2) conferred in perpetuity.”
The case proceeded to a jury trial on February 20, 2024,
which lasted six days. Defendants filed a motion for
judgment as a matter of law under Fed. R. Civ. P. 50 after
Plaintiffs rested, and Plaintiffs filed a Rule 50 motion after
Defendants rested. Plaintiffs’ Rule 50 motion argued that
the agreement had an implied end date: “the point at which
the composition copyrights at issue cease to generate
income.” Relevant here, 6 the district court denied Plaintiffs’
Rule 50 motion in its entirety and denied Defendants’ Rule
50 motion with respect to the 1977 Agreement. In making
these rulings, the court stated that it had made the “judicial
determination that the contract contains no express duration
nor has sufficient evidence been presented that there can be
an implied duration based on the surrounding circumstances,
including execution of or the nature of the ’77 agreement
specifically.” Thus, the district court determined that the
only question to be presented to the jury was whether
Defendants “terminated the contract at will, after a
reasonable time.” The jury answered yes, and judgment was

The court also ruled that the 1984 Agreement did not affirmatively
obligate Hodgson to distribute publishing revenue to Plaintiffs, and that
Delicate Music’s obligation in the 1984 Agreement to distribute funds
“in perpetuity” applied only to its obligation to pay Hodgson. The court
also ruled that Delicate Music was not a party to the 1991 Agreement,
nor was Hodgson personally bound by the 1991 Agreement. Plaintiffs
do not challenge these rulings in this appeal.
6

THOMSON V. HODGSON

11

entered against Plaintiffs on April 2, 2024. Plaintiffs timely
appeal.
II.
We review the denial of a motion for judgment as a
matter of law de novo. Cochran v. City of Los Angeles, 222
F.3d 1195, 1199 (9th Cir. 2000). Questions of law raised
before the case went to the jury are reviewed de novo, even
following a jury verdict. Id. at 1200; Marcy v. Delta
Airlines, 166 F.3d 1279, 1282 (9th Cir. 1999). The
construction and enforcement of contracts by federal courts
is governed by state law. United Com. Ins. Serv., Inc. v.
Paymaster Corp., 962 F.2d 853, 856 (9th Cir. 1992); Caltex
Plastics, Inc. v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 824 F.3d 1156,
1159 (9th Cir. 2016) (“contract law is usually a matter of
state law”). In California, contract interpretation is a matter
of law, and “solely a judicial function, unless the
interpretation turns on the credibility of extrinsic evidence.” 7
GGIS Ins. Servs., Inc. v. Super. Ct., 168 Cal. App. 4th 1493,
1507 (2008).
III.
A.
Under California contract law, the court’s “mission in
every contract case is to discern and effectuate the
contracting parties’ mutual intent.” RMR Equip. Rental, Inc.
v. Residential Fund 1347, LLC, 65 Cal. App. 5th 383, 392
(2021). If possible, intent should be determined solely from
the words of the contract. But where ambiguity exists, courts
may also consider the nature of the contract and the
surrounding circumstances to inform the contract’s words.
7

This appeal does not involve disputed extrinsic evidence.

12

THOMSON V. HODGSON

Id. (citing Consol. Theatres, Inc. v. Theatrical Stage Emps.
Union, Loc. 16, 69 Cal.2d 713, 725–31 (1968)
(“Consolidated Theatres”)). We may also consider a party’s
performance under the contract prior to any dispute as
evidence of that party’s intent and understanding at the time
that it entered into the contract. City of Hope Nat’l Med. Ctr.
v. Genentech, Inc., 43 Cal. 4th 375, 393–94 (2008).
Plaintiffs contend that the district court erred in ruling as
a matter of law that the 1977 Agreement could be
unilaterally terminated after a “reasonable time,” because its
nature and purpose—a royalty sharing agreement—
establishes that Defendants are obligated to share publishing
and songwriting revenues for as long as the subject
Supertramp songs continue to generate these revenues.
Construing the 1977 Agreement in light of California law,
we agree.
California courts conduct a three-step analysis to
determine a contract’s duration. First, courts examine
whether the contract contains an express duration provision.
Consol. Theatres, 69 Cal.2d at 727. Second, if the contract
does not contain an express duration provision, courts
determine whether one can be implied from the nature and
surrounding circumstances of the contract. Id. Third, if the
“nature of the contract and the totality of surrounding
circumstances give no suggestion as to any ascertainable
term,” the court construes the term of duration to be a
reasonable time. Id. at 727–28 (emphasis added). Thus, it
is well-established under California law that if a contract
contains no express term of duration, and the nature and
surrounding circumstances of the contract do not permit the
court to imply a term of duration, the contract is construed
as terminable at will after a reasonable time. Id. at 727–29.

THOMSON V. HODGSON

13

The three-step analysis outlined above is drawn from the
California Supreme Court’s decision in Consolidated
Theatres. There, the court was asked to interpret a labor
agreement for the employment of musicians for live stage
performances in San Francisco movie theaters. Id. at 717.
The parties entered into the labor agreement at a time when
silent films were typically accompanied by live musicians.
Id. at 729–30. As “talkies” proliferated and the need for live
musicians at movie theaters waned, the parties agreed that
Consolidated Theatres would be required to employ one
musician-turned-stagehand “if any stage presentations are
offered for the public” at one of its theaters. Id. at 718.
Thirty-two years after the initial agreement, the parties
disputed whether the agreement was still in effect. At step
one, the court determined that there was no express end to
the contract. Id. at 730. But at step two, the court determined
that a duration could be implied from the nature and
surrounding circumstances of the contract: “[I]t was the
intention of the parties contracting in 1931 to create
reciprocal obligations binding upon them as long as there
existed a real possibility that the theatres owned and
operated by Consolidated might undertake to present live
stage performances—and no longer.” Id. at 730. In other
words, the contract obligations continued only so long as the
contract’s
intended
subject
matter—live
music
performances—existed.
Here, at step one, the district court determined that the
contract contained “no express duration.” At step two, the
district court determined that no end date could be implied
from the nature and “surrounding circumstances” of the
contract. Thus, the court proceeded to step three and referred
to the jury the question whether Defendants terminated the
contract “after a reasonable time.” Although the jury entered

14

THOMSON V. HODGSON

a verdict for Defendants at step three, we hold that the
court’s determination at step two constituted legal error, and
thus the court should not have reached step three, Cochran,
222 F.3d at 1200, and there was no issue remaining for the
jury to decide.
Defendants argue the case could not be resolved at step
two because, unlike the labor agreement in Consolidated
Theatres, “the nature and totality of the circumstances
surrounding [the 1977 Agreement] can reasonably imply
several conflicting terms of duration—resulting in no
ascertainable term that can be measured in a reasonable
manner.”
Specifically, Defendants contend that the
undisputed evidence demonstrates that the parties may have
entered into the 1977 Agreement for any number of reasons,
all of which could imply a different term of duration. The
Defendants offer the following potential durational terms:
•

Until Plaintiffs began earning record
royalties.

•

For as long as Supertramp continued to
exist.

•

Until the copyrights expired.

•

For as long as publishing royalties exist.

But Consolidated Theatres does not require that a
contract have only one possible term of duration. Rather, its
test asks whether “the nature of the contract and the totality
of surrounding circumstances [suggest] any ascertainable
term.” Consol. Theatres, 69 Cal.2d at 727 (emphasis
added). Moreover, subsequent California caselaw has
clarified that the proper inquiry is not whether an
ascertainable event could imply termination, but whether

THOMSON V. HODGSON

15

that event “necessarily implies termination.” Lura v.
Multaplex, 129 Cal. App. 3d 410, 415 (1982) (emphasis
added).
In Lura, the parties entered into an agreement stating that
the plaintiff would receive a five percent commission on
shipments to business accounts that had been procured by
the plaintiff. Id. at 412. The agreement made no mention of
duration, and the parties had not discussed nor reached an
understanding as to the contract’s duration. Id. Several
years later, the defendant attempted to unilaterally terminate
the commission payments. Id. The trial court found that the
agreement was of indefinite duration and therefore could be
terminated by either party after a reasonable time. Id. at 413.
Reversing the trial court, the court of appeal rejected the
defendant’s contention that the agreement’s silence as to
duration meant that it extended only for a reasonable time,
explaining that “[s]ince [defendant’s] obligation to appellant
is contingent upon its sales to the accounts he secured, the
agreement is of a limited duration—until [defendant] stops
selling to those accounts.” Id. (emphasis added). In
determining the agreement’s duration, the court recognized:
The important factor, then, is not whether the
contract fails to specify a termination date,
but whether there is an ascertainable event
which necessarily implies termination . . . .
[W]here an obligation is conditioned upon an
event connected with the subject matter of the

16

THOMSON V. HODGSON

contract, the obligation continues until that
event occurs.
Id. at 414–15. The agreement in question in Lura contained
such an event: the cessation of sales to the accounts procured
by the plaintiff. Id. at 415.
So too here. While the various other “ascertainable
events” suggested by Defendants—such as when the
Plaintiffs began earning record royalties or so long as
Supertramp continued to exist—could imply termination of
the 1977 Agreement, they do not necessarily imply
termination as the events in Consolidated, Lura, or as the
cessation of royalties altogether would. See also WarnerLambert Pharm. Co. v. John J. Reynolds, Inc., 178 F. Supp.
655, 661 (S.D.N.Y. 1959) (“Contracts which provide no
fixed date for the termination of the promisor’s obligation
but condition the obligation upon an event which would
necessarily terminate the contract” are not of unlimited
duration and thus are not subject to unilateral termination.).
Thus, we are persuaded by Plaintiffs’ argument that the
nature of the 1977 Agreement establishes that the parties’
obligations under the contract will exist so long as the “song
writing and publishing royalties (and/or other income)
derived from the parties’ songwriting and/or publishing
activities” continue to flow.
Defendants incorrectly characterize this implied
durational term as a “perpetual obligation.” Not so. At some
point in the future, the copyrights in the works covered by
the 1977 Agreement will expire, and the works will fall into
the public domain. At this point, the copyrights will cease
to generate publishing royalties, and the obligations created
by the 1977 Agreement will terminate. See Consol.
Theatres, 69 Cal.2d at 730 (The parties’ agreement “was

THOMSON V. HODGSON

17

impliedly conditioned as to duration upon the continued
possibility of live stage presentations [and] the
disappearance of that possibility terminated all obligations
under the contract.”). True, this may be many years down
the line—but the “mere fact that an obligation under a
contract may continue for a very long time is no reason in
itself for declaring the contract to exist in perpetuity or for
giving it a construction which would do violence to the
expressed intent of the parties.” Lura, 129 Cal. App. 3d at
413–14 (quoting Warner-Lambert, 178 F. Supp. at 661).
Thus, we conclude that Defendants have a continuing
obligation to share songwriting and publishing royalties with
Plaintiffs in accordance with the percentage allocations set
forth in the 1977 Agreement, so long as such royalties
continue to exist.
B.
Although the purpose and nature of the 1977 Agreement
alone establish its implied duration as a matter of law, we
agree with Plaintiffs that Defendants’ predispute,
postcontracting conduct further supports that the parties
intended and understood that they would continue to share
in publishing and songwriting revenues for as long as the
subject Supertramp songs continue to generate such
revenues. “[A] party’s predispute, postcontracting conduct
is powerful evidence of that party’s intent and understanding
of the contract at the time it entered into the agreement.”
Gilkyson v. Disney Enters., Inc., 66 Cal. App. 5th 900, 920
(2021) (citation omitted). And here, Defendants paid
Plaintiffs their contractual share of the publishing royalties
for over forty years without any suggestion that they
believed the 1977 Agreement to be terminable at will.

18

THOMSON V. HODGSON

This is telling, as there were multiple occasions at which
it would have been a natural point for Defendants to
terminate the 1977 Agreement if they truly believed it to be
terminable at will, such as: (1) when the band began
receiving record royalties in 1981; (2) when the band
renegotiated their deal with A&M Records in what was the
most lucrative deal that A&M had offered a recording artist
up to that date; or (3) when Margereson, Pope, or Hodgson
left Supertramp. 8 And yet, despite Hodgson’s purported
belief that the 1977 Agreement could be unilaterally
terminated, neither he, Davies, nor Delicate Music took the
opportunity to do so until 2018.
Indeed, perhaps the most obvious point at which the
1977 Agreement would have been terminated had
Defendants truly believed it to be terminable at will was
when Hodgson left Supertramp in 1984. Based on trial
testimony, his exit from the band was not amicable—rather,
Hodgson testified that he felt that he was “forced out.” But
rather than terminate the royalty payments to Plaintiffs to
receive 50% of the publishing revenue moving forward,
Hodgson instead reaffirmed his contractual obligation to
Plaintiffs by merely seeking out the band’s commitment that
he would “continue” to receive 32.15% of Famous Last
Words’ publishing royalties and 27% of Supertramp’s earlier
albums’ publishing royalties—in other words, what he was
already entitled to under the 1977 Agreement. Moreover,
the 1984 Agreement used the term “in perpetuity” to
describe Hodgson’s continuing right to receive his
When Hodgson left Supertramp, a Withdrawal Agreement was signed
stating that Delicate Music’s income was to be allocated “in accordance
with that certain Memorandum of Agreement publishing [sic] dated as
of January 18 of 1977.”

8

THOMSON V. HODGSON

19

contractual share of the publishing revenue allocated to him
under the 1977 Agreement. This supports that the parties
mutually understood that the allocations set forth in the 1977
Agreement were not terminable at will as Defendants
suggest.
Plaintiffs point to several other examples of predispute,
postcontracting behavior that is inconsistent with Hodgson’s
purported belief that he had the right to terminate the 1977
Agreement at will. For example, Hodgson also agreed to pay
to Delicate Music any publishing revenue for the
exploitation of the Supertramp songs subject to the 1977
Agreement “[i]mmediately upon receipt” in the 1984
Agreement, even though, if the 1977 Agreement were truly
terminable at will, he could have retained full control over
the publishing revenue by simply terminating the 1977
Agreement. Similarly, in 1988, Hodgson directed ASCAP9
to change the allocation of publishing revenue from 50% to
Hodgson and 50% to Davies to 32.15% to Hodgson and 73%
to Davies, so that Hodgson could receive his contractual
share of the revenue directly without going through Delicate
Music, and so that Davies and Delicate Music could pay
Plaintiffs from Davies’ increased allocation of the
publishing revenues owed to them under the 1977
Agreement. But by terminating the 1977 Agreement,
Hodgson instead could have directed 50% of all royalties to
himself. However, there is no indication that he ever
contemplated doing so before 2018.
We thus conclude that the parties’ predispute,
postcontracting behavior is, when considered along with the
ASCAP is the acronym for the American Society of Composers,
Authors, and Publishers, an organization that collects and distributes
performance royalties to member songwriters.
9

20

THOMSON V. HODGSON

nature and circumstances of the contract, consistent with a
mutual understanding that the 1977 Agreement was not
terminable at will.
CONCLUSION
Accordingly, we hold that the district court erred in its
judicial determination that the 1977 Agreement was
unilaterally terminable after a “reasonable time.” We
REVERSE and REMAND, with instructions to enter
judgment in Plaintiffs’ favor on the issue of liability, and for
any further proceedings consistent with this opinion.

