FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
DEANA FARLEY,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE
COMPANY,

No. 23-16224
D.C. No.
2:20-cv-02485KJM-DB
OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of California
Kimberly J. Mueller, District Judge
Argued and Submitted January 14, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed August 29, 2025
Before: JOHNNIE B. RAWLINSON and MILAN D.
SMITH, JR., Circuit Judges, and JED S. RAKOFF, District
Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Jed S. Rakoff
The Honorable Jed S. Rakoff, United States District Judge for the
Southern District of New York, sitting by designation.

*

2

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

SUMMARY **
Class Certification
The panel reversed the district court’s class-certification
order in an action brought by Deanna Farley, on behalf of a
putative class, alleging that Lincoln Benefit Life Company
failed to comply with consumer-protection provisions of the
California Insurance Code requiring life-insurance
companies to provide policyholders with certain kinds of
notice and protections before a policy lapses because of the
failure to pay a premium.
Farley, whose life insurance policy terminated after she
inadvertently missed payments, alleged that Lincoln did not
provide her with proper statutory notice prior to termination
and that her own experience mirrored that of many other
Californians. The district court found that the requirements
of Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(a) were satisfied, and determined that
certification was appropriate under Rule 23(b)(2) for the
declaratory and injunctive relief sought by Farley. The
certified class covered all policy owners, or beneficiaries
upon a death of the insured, whose policies lapsed for nonpayment without sufficient notice. The court appointed
Farley as a class representative.
The panel held that this court’s intervening decision in
Small v. Allianz Life Insurance Co. of North America, 122
F.4th 1182 (9th Cir. 2024), required reversal of the class
certification order. Small, involving the same legal issues,
identified a critical threshold inquiry to be resolved before
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

3

evaluating Rule 23’s requirements: to make out a claim, a
plaintiff must not only show that California statutes were
violated but must also show that the violation caused them
harm.
Here, Farley was not an adequate representative under
Rule 23(a) because she could not represent the interests of
beneficiaries of lapsed life insurance policies. Moreover, as
in Small, Farley’s claims were atypical of other class
members who allowed their policies to lapse intentionally
and therefore had not been harmed by the same course of
conduct. For such members, class-wide injunctive relief of
policy reinstatement would be inappropriate and declaratory
relief would serve no useful purpose. Because Small
dictated the resolution of this case, the panel reversed the
district court’s class-certification order and remanded for
further proceedings.

4

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

COUNSEL
Benjamin I. Siminou (argued) and Jonna D. Lothyan,
Singleton Schreiber LLP, San Diego, California; Sarah Ball
and Jack B. Winters Jr., Winters & Associates, La Mesa,
California; Craig Nicholas and Alex Tomasevic, Nicholas &
Tomasevic LLP, San Diego, California; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Linda T. Coberly (argued), Winston & Strawn LLP,
Chicago, Illinois; Mark D. Taticchi and Katherine L.
Villanueva, Faegre Drinker Biddle & Reath LLP,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; for Defendant-Appellant.
Jaime Santos and Benjamin Hayes, Goodwin Procter LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Jennifer B. Dickey, U.S. Chamber of
Commerce Litigation Center, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus
Curiae the Chamber of Commerce.
Katherine B. Wellington, Hogan Lovells US LLP, Boston,
Massachusetts; Nathaniel A.G. Zelinsky, Hogan Lovells US
LLP, Washington, D.C.; Vanessa O. Wells, Hogan Lovells
US LLP, Redwood City, California; for Amici Curiae
Association of California Life and Health Insurance
Companies and the American Council of Life Insurers.
Brian J. Malloy, Brandi Law Firm, San Francisco,
California; David M. Arbogast, Arbogast Law, San Carlos,
California; for Amicus Curiae Consumer Attorneys of
California.
Julie Nepveu, William A. Rivera, and Mary Wiliam, AARP
Foundation, Washington, D.C., for Amici Curiae AARP and
AARP Foundation.

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

5

OPINION
RAKOFF, District Judge:
Plaintiff Deana Farley filed a complaint in the United
States District Court for the Eastern District of California,
suing, on behalf of a putative class, defendant Lincoln
Benefit Life Company (“Lincoln Benefit”) for declaratory
relief, breach of contract, and violations of California’s
Unfair Competition Law. 1 Her claims relate to consumerprotection provisions of the California Insurance Code—
specifically, Sections 10113.71 and 10113.72 (the
“Statutes”)—that require life-insurance companies to
provide policyholders with certain kinds of notice and
protections before a policy lapses because of the failure to
pay a premium. For example, Section 10113.71(a) mandates
that “[e]ach life insurance policy issued or delivered in this
state shall contain a provision for a grace period of not less
than 60 days from the premium due date.” Other provisions
require an insurer to provide 30 days’ notice to the
policyholder before terminating a policy for nonpayment,
see Section 10113.71(b), grant a policyholder the right to
designate another person to receive this notice, see Section
10113.72(a), and compel insurers to notify a policyholder
annually of her right to change her designee, see section
10113.72(b).
Farley alleges that Lincoln Benefit has “since January 1,
2013, . . . failed to comply with the Statutes.” 2 She suggests
1

Jurisdiction is predicated on 28 U.S.C. § 1332.

Enacted in 2012, the Statutes took effect on January 1, 2013. Initially,
there existed uncertainty in California law as to whether the Statutes’
requirements applied to policies already in existence at that time. But in

2

6

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

that her own experience with Lincoln Benefit mirrors that of
many other Californians. Farley had purchased a lifeinsurance policy on behalf of her then-minor son and timely
submitted the policy’s required quarterly payments. But,
Farley alleges, Lincoln Benefit “did not provide a proper 30
day notice, or the right to designate a third party to receive
such notice to [her] prior to termination of the policy”—both
requirements under the Statutes. Farley inadvertently missed
a premium payment in 2016 that caused the policy to lapse,
and after reinstatement of the policy, she missed another
payment in 2018, at which point the policy terminated. She
argues that “termination of the policy was ineffective and the
policy remains in force” because of Lincoln Benefit’s failure
to comply with the Statutes’ requirements.
Over Lincoln Benefit’s objection, the district court
granted in part Farley’s motion for class certification. After
finding that the requirements of Rule 23(a) of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure were satisfied, 3 the court
determined that certification was appropriate under Rule
23(b)(2) for the declaratory and injunctive relief sought by

2021, the California Supreme Court held that the Statutes “apply to all
life insurance policies in force when [the Statutes] went into effect,
regardless of when the policies were originally issued.” McHugh v.
Protective Life Ins. Co. (McHugh II), 494 P.3d 24, 27 (Cal. 2021).
Rule 23(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure imposes four
“[p]rerequisites” for the certification of a class action, including that
(1) “the class is so numerous that joinder of all members is
impracticable”; (2) “there are questions of law or fact common to the
class”; (3) “the claims or defenses of the representative parties are typical
of the claims or defenses of the class”; and (4) “the representative parties
will fairly and adequately protect the interests of the class.”

3

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

7

Farley. 4 The court denied, without prejudice, certification
for monetary relief under Rule 23(b)(3). 5 The class certified
by the district court covered:
All owners, or beneficiaries upon a death of
the insured, of Defendant’s individual life
insurance policies issued in California before
2013 that Defendant lapsed or terminated for
the non-payment of premium in or after 2013
without first providing all the notices, grace
periods, and offers of designation required by
Insurance Code Sections 10113.71 and
10113.72.
The court appointed Farley as class representative.
We subsequently granted Lincoln Benefit’s petition for
permission to appeal the district court’s class-certification
order under Rule 23(f). Lincoln Benefit’s opening brief
challenged class certification on multiple fronts, arguing
that: (1) “commonality was lacking” (because the class
included claimants who alleged violations of different notice
provisions); (2) Farley’s claim is “atypical” of the other
claims in the class (both because some class members chose
Rule 23(b)(2) provides that “[a] class action may be maintained if . . .
the party opposing the class has acted or refused to act on grounds that
apply generally to the class, so that final injunctive relief or
corresponding declaratory relief is appropriate respecting the class as a
whole.”

4

Rule 23(b)(3) provides that “[a] class action may be maintained if . . .
the court finds that the questions of law or fact common to class members
predominate over any questions affecting only individual members, and
that a class action is superior to other available methods for fairly and
efficiently adjudicating the controversy.”

5

8

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

to allow their insurance to lapse and because the class
includes claimants seeking recovery of a death benefit);
(3) Farley is an inadequate class representative (for many of
the same reasons that Lincoln Benefit argued her claims are
atypical); and (4) the district court abused its discretion in
finding that the requirements of Rule 23(b)(2) were satisfied
(in part because a “uniform, indivisible declaration or
injunction is not available”). Amici curiae also submitted
briefs in support of one side or the other.
After the appeal was fully briefed, Lincoln Benefit
initially moved to continue oral argument based on a related
action, in which another panel had heard argument on
October 21, 2024. That panel then issued its decision, Small
v. Allianz Life Insurance Co. of North America, 122 F.4th
1182 (9th Cir. 2024). Recognizing that Small “may impact
the issues presented by this appeal,” we ordered the parties
to submit supplemental letter briefs by January 6, 2025. We
then held oral argument on January 14, 2025.
We “review the decision to certify a class and ‘any
particular underlying Rule 23 determination involving a
discretionary determination’ for an abuse of discretion.”
Oleon Wholesale Grocery Coop., Inc. v. Bumble Bee Foods
LLC, 31 F.4th 651, 663 (9th Cir. 2022) (en banc) (quoting
Yokoyama v. Midland Nat’l Life Ins. Co., 594 F.3d 1087,
1091 (9th Cir. 2010)). “[T]he district court abuses its
discretion if it ‘applie[s] an incorrect legal rule or if its
application of the correct legal rule [i]s based on a factual
finding that was illogical, implausible, or without support in
inferences that may be drawn from facts in the record.’”
White v. Symetra Assigned Benefits Serv. Co., 104 F.4th
1182, 1191 (9th Cir. 2024) (alteration in original) (quoting
Jimenez v. Allstate Ins. Co., 765 F.3d 1161, 1164 (9th Cir.
2014)).

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

9

This appeal initially presented complicated questions
regarding the interplay of the Statutes and the requirements
of Rule 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. But after
the decision in Small, this case turns on a much narrower
question: Does Small require reversal of the district court’s
class-certification order? As explained below, our answer is,
yes.
In Small, plaintiff LaWanda Small, like Farley here, sued
a life-insurance company—Allianz Life Insurance Co. of
North America (“Allianz”)—“for declaratory relief, breach
of contract, and violations of California’s Unfair
Competition Law . . . alleging that Allianz failed to comply
with the . . . notice requirements [in California Insurance
Code sections 10113.71 and 10113.72].” Small, 122 F.4th at
1189. And like the district court in this case, the district court
in Small certified “a class brought by universal and term life
insurance policyholders and beneficiaries alleging breach of
contract by Allianz.” Id. at 1188. The district court in Small,
however, “sua sponte divided the class into two subclasses”:
(1) “[t]he first . . . defined as ‘owners of policies with
currently living Insureds’ seeking ‘to have their policies
reinstated’” (the “Living Insured Subclass”); (2) “[t]he
second . . . defined as ‘beneficiaries of policies with
deceased Insureds,’ seeking ‘breach of contract money
damages in the amount of the death benefit’” (the
“Beneficiary Subclass”). Id. at 1189. After finding that both
subclasses satisfied Rule 23(a)’s requirements, the district
court certified the Living Insured Subclass seeking equitable
relief under Rule 23(b)(2) and the Beneficiary Subclass
under Rule 23(b)(3). Id. at 1189–90.
In reviewing the district court’s class-certification order,
Small identified a critical threshold inquiry to be resolved
before evaluating Rule 23’s requirements: “To determine

10

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

whether the class can be certified under federal law we must
first determine what [p]laintiffs must show to recover for
alleged violations of the Statutes under California law.” Id.
at 1191 (emphasis added). This question had divided the
district courts; some had concluded that “to make out a
claim, a plaintiff need only show the Statutes were violated,”
while others held that “a plaintiff must also show that the
violation caused them harm.” Id.; see also, e.g., Grundstrom
v. Wilco Life Ins. Co., No. 20-cv-3445, 2023 WL 5723674,
at *1 (N.D. Cal. Sep. 5, 2023); Wollam v. Transamerica Life
Ins. Co., No. 21-cv-9134, 2024 WL 1117050, at *6 (N.D.
Cal. Mar. 13, 2024). In simpler terms, our court in Small
described the two approaches as the “‘violation-only’
theory” and the “‘causation’ theory.” Id. at 1192.
We found unpersuasive the arguments in support of the
“violation-only” theory. Although California state courts
had endorsed a similar theory for statutory notice regimes
governing “short-term policies like auto and homeowner
insurance,” we identified an important distinction grounded
in a unique “life insurance industry norm” whereby
“policyholders intentionally cancel their policies (or
intentionally allow the policies to lapse) before the Insured
dies and the death benefit is payable.” Id. at 1191, 1193–94.
Accordingly, we “d[id] not think that the Statutes were
designed to protect this class of Insureds.” Id. at 1194.
Similarly unpersuasive was our earlier “unpublished
decision” in Thomas v. State Farm Life Insurance Co., No.
20-55231, 2021 WL 4596286 (9th Cir. Oct. 6, 2021). Small,
122 F.4th at 1194. We explained that “[a]s an unpublished
disposition, Thomas [was] not a binding interpretation of the
theory of recovery under the Statutes,” and noted that “its

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

11

truncated reasoning did not fully analyze the issues.” Id. at
1195. 6
Instead, we reasoned “that the California Supreme Court
would adopt the ‘causation’ theory.” Id. at 1192. In support
of this determination, we relied on “the California Court of
Appeal and Supreme Court McHugh cases interpreting the
Statutes at issue.” Id. at 1195. While the California courts in
those cases had not explicitly adopted either theory of
recovery, we determined that several indicia—including the
California Court of Appeal’s rejection of plaintiffs’ reliance
on the short-term policy cases—indicated that the California
Supreme Court would favor the “causation” theory. Id. at
1195–96. This part of our opinion closed by summarizing six
points supporting our conclusion about the “causation”
theory:
(1) the Statutes contain no private cause of
action and thus require a breach of contract
theory for which causation is a key element;
(2) McHugh I–III suggest that California
favors the “causation” theory; (3) there are no
California Supreme Court or Court of Appeal
cases adopting the “violation-only” theory
for the Statutes; (4) several federal district
We also rejected Small’s reliance on an unenacted amendment to the
Statutes, SB 1320, that “did not make it to a vote and was withdrawn.”
Small, 122 F.4th at 1194 n.4. Likewise, in this case, Farley argues that
SB 1320 “was expressly intended to abrogate [McHugh II and Thomas]
by amending the Statutes to do what Small did: Inject a causation
requirement in the Statutes.” In Small, we “afford[ed] the evidence little
weight” because an “‘unenacted bill’ provides ‘little clarity.’” Id.
(quoting Lara v. First Nat’l Ins. Co., 25 F.4th 1134, 1140 (9th Cir.
2022)). We decline to disturb the Small panel’s evaluation of SB 1320
on materially indistinguishable facts, as explained infra.
6

12

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

courts have adopted the “causation” theory
for the same reasons we do; (5) district courts
that have adopted the “violation-only” theory
predominantly rely on non-precedential
Thomas; and (6) public policy favors the
“causation” theory and weighs against the
“violation-only” theory given the realities of
the life insurance industry.
Id. at 1197.
Our analysis of the requirements of Rule 23 ultimately
depended on our conclusion about “the elements of the
underlying cause of action.” Id. (quoting Erica P. John
Fund, Inc. v. Halliburton Co., 563 U.S. 804, 809 (2011)).
Starting with Rule 23(b)(2), 7 we concluded that “[t]he
district court erred when it certified the Living Insured
Subclass by holding that it was entitled to class-wide
equitable relief as provided in Rule 23(b)(2).” Id. at 1200.
Evidence that many class members “knowingly let their
policies lapse as a means of termination” presented two
obstacles to certification under Rule 23(b)(2). Id. First, the
“injunctive relief of reinstating policies [was] not
‘appropriate’” because “forced reinstatement” would mean
“reinstating policies for Insureds who intentionally
cancelled and who cannot show that the inadvertent policy
lapse caused harm.” Id. at 1200–01. We noted that
reinstatement would also “mean that all members of the
Subclass must pay back lost premiums for the policies to be
We also concluded in Small that the damages class did not satisfy Rule
23(b)(3) because the predominance requirement was not satisfied. Id. at
1199–1200; see also supra note 5. Here, the district court did not certify
a damages class, so we need not address that part of the Small decision
to resolve this case.

7

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

13

reinstated.” Id. at 1201. Second, declaratory relief would not
serve a “useful purpose.” Id. The district court had ordered
that the Living Insured Subclass was “entitled to a
declaration that their life insurance policies were improperly
lapsed by Allianz because it failed to strictly comply with
the Statutes before it lapsed those policies.” Id. But we
explained that the declaration “improperly adjudicate[d] the
breach of contract claim before [p]laintiffs established
causation and damages by declaring that the policies
‘improperly lapsed’ because Allianz failed to comply with
the Statutes.” Id.
Turning to Rule 23(a), we concluded that “Small is not
an adequate representative with typical questions to
represent both Subclasses.” Id. On adequacy, we stated that
“Small cannot adequately represent a Subclass to which she
does not belong” because, as a beneficiary of her deceased
husband’s life insurance policy, she did not “‘possess the
same interest’ or ‘suffer the same injury’ as the Living
Insured Subclass.” Id. at 1203 (quoting Amchem Prod., Inc.
v. Windsor, 521 U.S. 591, 625–26 (1997)). On typicality, the
“‘causation’ theory [led] to the conclusion that Small, who
alleges her policy lapsed inadvertently, [did] not have typical
questions of members whose policies lapsed intentionally
because they do not ‘have the same or similar injury,’ the
action is ‘based on conduct which is [] unique to the named
plaintiff[],’ and ‘other class members have [not] been injured
by the same course of conduct.’” Id. (quoting Torres v.
Mercer Canyons Inc., 835 F.3d 1125, 1141 (9th Cir. 2016)).
In this case, both parties acknowledge that Small decided
the same legal issues presented by this appeal. And with
good reason—the facts presented and legal questions briefed
by the parties in this case are nearly identical to those in
Small. In both cases, the plaintiffs, representing a diverse

14

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

class of policyholders for alleged violations of the Statutes,
seek nearly identical declaratory and injunctive relief under
Rule 23(b)(2). And while the district court in this case did
not divide the class into Beneficiary and Living Insured
Subclasses, the reasoning justifying our holdings on
adequacy and typicality in Small applies with equal force
here. On adequacy, Farley cannot represent the interests of
the beneficiaries (included in the district court’s class
definition), just as Small could not adequately represent the
interests of the living insured. 8 And on typicality, Farley
does not have typical questions of members who allowed
their policies to lapse intentionally. 9
Farley’s explicit acknowledgment that Small “involved
the same controlling question of state law” comes close to
resolving this appeal. Certainly, we are bound by the prior
panel’s decision in Small. See Balla v. Idaho, 29 F.4th 1019,
1028 (9th Cir. 2022) (“We are bound by the law of our
circuit, and only an en banc court or the U.S. Supreme Court
Farley asserts that adequacy is not at issue in her case because “the
district court only certified a class of policy owners under Rule 23(b)(2),
and Farley is a policy owner.” Indeed, the district court denied
certification of a Rule 23(b)(3) class of beneficiaries seeking monetary
relief on adequacy grounds. Still, the court included beneficiaries in the
class definition. On the one hand, Farley no longer seeks to represent a
Rule 23(b)(3) beneficiary class seeking monetary relief, while Small (a
beneficiary) did represent a Rule 23(b)(2) living insured class seeking
injunctive relief. But, on the other hand, the class here includes
beneficiaries, which Small suggests do not “possess the same interest”
or “suffer the same injury” as the living insured. Small, 122 F.4th at 1203
(quoting Amchem Prod., Inc. v. Windsor, 521 U.S. 591, 625–26 (1997)).
Ultimately, adequacy is not critical here because Farley’s claims are not
typical for the same reasons described in Small.
8

The record in this case includes similar expert evidence about the
presence of class members who intentionally lapsed their policies.

9

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

15

can overrule a prior panel decision.”). And that well-settled
proposition dispatches Farley’s argument that “Small is not
yet binding.” To be sure, Farley is correct that Small’s
deadline to petition for rehearing had not yet passed at the
time supplemental briefing was submitted in this appeal. See
Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc. v. Cnty. of Los Angeles, 725 F.3d
1194, 1203 (9th Cir. 2013) (“No opinion of this circuit
becomes final until the mandate issues.”) (quoting Carver v.
Lehman, 558 F.3d 869, 878 (9th Cir. 2009)). But Farley does
not cite any authority that would allow this panel to disregard
the reasoned opinion of the Small panel on that basis.
Farley’s challenges on the merits, which make up the
majority of her supplemental brief, fail for the same reason:
They rehash arguments already rejected in Small. So too for
Farley’s request that this panel certify the question of state
law to the California Supreme Court. Small settled the
interpretation of the statutes in our circuit, and Farley
identifies no authority that would allow us to circumvent that
decision by certifying the issue to the California Supreme
Court. 10
10
Farley cites Troester v. Starbucks Corp., 680 F. App’x 511, 513 (9th
Cir. 2016), for the proposition that “[e]ven a binding decision does not
stop a panel from certifying a question to a state court of last resort.” But
Troester did not involve a binding decision, see id. at 513 (“A panel of
this Circuit, in an unpublished disposition, predicted that the California
Supreme Court would decide the doctrine is applicable to such claims.”)
(emphasis added), and the Court in Troester added that “recent authority
from the California Supreme Court . . . was not before that panel,” id.
Additionally, Farley cites our decision in Pitt v. Metropolitan Tower Life
Insurance Co., 129 F.4th 583 (9th Cir. 2025), to certify a question
regarding the Statutes to the California Supreme Court as grounds for
certification here. That case, however, involves an entirely different
question about whether the Statutes “apply to life insurance policies
originally issued or delivered in another state.” Id. at 585. Farley does

16

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

To be sure, Farley raises one argument in her
supplemental brief that deserves closer attention.
Contending that Small is distinguishable, she argues that
“Farley expressly limited class relief to a letter giving class
members the option to reinstate their policy, obviating
concerns about members who did not want their policies.”11
While Farley’s argument has intuitive appeal—particularly
because it addresses the intentional-lapse issue that appears
to have motivated much of the analysis in Small—it faces
legal, logical, and practical hurdles.
As a legal matter, the Supreme Court has explained that
“Rule 23(b)(2) applies only when a single injunction or
declaratory judgment would provide relief to each member
of the class.” Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. v. Dukes, 564 U.S. 338,
360 (2011) (emphasis added); see also id. (“The key to the
(b)(2) class is the indivisible nature of the injunctive or
declaratory remedy warranted—the notion that the conduct
is such that it can be enjoined or declared unlawful only as
to all of the class members or as to none of them.”) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted) (emphasis added). But
class members who allowed their policies to lapse are, under
our interpretation in Small, not entitled to relief and, at the
very least, would not benefit from the requested injunction.
As a logical matter, Farley’s argument is also at odds
with her theory of the case. If we were to accept her theory
that the insurance policies never terminated (because of
not cite any authority that would allow us to certify the question
presented in this case, when we have already ruled on that issue in Small.
Farley does not cite record support for this assertion, and the district
court’s class-certification decision does not include any such limitation.
Nevertheless, for purposes of resolving her argument, we accept her
position as true.
11

FARLEY V. LINCOLN BENEFIT LIFE COMPANY

17

Lincoln Benefit’s violation of the Statutes), then it would be
strange to allow class members to choose to reinstate
policies that, on Farley’s theory, never lapsed. Finally, as a
practical matter, Farley requested nearly identical relief in
this case as the plaintiff in Small, see supra pp. 13-14, so it
is difficult to justify a different outcome here. And even if
Farley could satisfy Rule 23(b)(2) on this theory, her
argument does not resolve the Rule 23(a) problems—
particularly typicality—that she faces after Small.
For the reasons already explained, our decision in Small
dictates the resolution of this case. Although we note that the
district court’s certification order carefully resolved a
difficult issue that had divided courts in our circuit, “a
district court abuses its discretion when it makes an error of
law,” United States v. Hinkson, 585 F.3d 1247, 1261 (9th
Cir. 2009) (en banc), and thus our intervening decision in
Small requires us to conclude that the class-certification
order is REVERSED and the case is REMANDED to the
district court for further proceedings.

