FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
DOUGLAS ELIGHA TAYLOR,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 24-1244
D.C. No.
2:95-cr-01094PA-1

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Percy Anderson, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 14, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 3, 2025
Before: Sandra S. Ikuta, Ryan D. Nelson, and Kenneth K.
Lee, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Ikuta

2

USA V. TAYLOR

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed the sentence imposed upon
revocation of Douglas Eligha’s Taylor’s supervised release.
Taylor argued that the district court committed plain
procedural error and imposed a substantively unreasonable
sentence.
The panel summarized governing precedent. A district
court imposing a modification or revocation of a term of
supervised release may not punish the defendant for the
original crime of conviction. Esteras v. United States, 145
S. Ct. 2031, 2040 (2025). Moreover, a court may not punish
a defendant who has violated the terms of supervised release
by engaging in criminal conduct. See United States v.
Miqbel, 444 F.3d 1173, 1182 (9th Cir. 2006); United States
v. Simtob, 485 F.3d 1058, 1062 (9th Cir. 2007). However,
the court may consider a violation of criminal law
underlying the supervised release violation in its evaluation
of the criminal history of the defendant, the risk of
recidivism, and the violator’s breach of the court’s trust.
Applying that precedent, the panel rejected Taylor’s
arguments that the district court committed plain procedural
error. The panel held that the district court adequately
explained its reasons for imposing an above-Guidelines
sentence upon revocation of supervised release, and
sufficiently addressed Taylor’s nonfrivolous arguments for
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. TAYLOR

3

a lower sentence. The district court did not improperly
punish Taylor for the criminal conduct underlying the
revocation by calling Taylor’s conduct “egregious.” Read in
context, the court’s statement that Taylor had “engaged in
egregious conduct that is a danger not only to himself but to
the public” is consistent with 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(C),
which requires the court to consider the need “to protect the
public from further crimes of the defendant.” The district
court thus properly looked to and considered the conduct
underlying the revocation as one of many acts contributing
to the severity of Taylor’s breach of trust, so as to fully
understand his history and risk of recidivism, and did not
discuss retribution or punishment for Taylor’s violation of
the conditions of his supervised release.
The panel rejected Taylor’s argument that the degree of
the upward variance rendered the revocation sentence
substantively unreasonable. Taylor’s personal history and
characteristics justified an above-Guidelines sentence, and
the district court did not rest its sentence on clearly erroneous
factual findings.

COUNSEL
Rajesh R. Srinivasan (argued), Thi H. Ho, and Sue Bai,
Assistant United States Attorneys; Lindsay G. Dotson,
Assistant United States Attorney, Chief, Criminal Division;
E. Martin Estrada, United States Attorney; Office of the
United States Attorney, United States Department of Justice,
Los Angeles, California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Caroline S. Platt (argued), Deputy Federal Public Defender;
Cuauhtémoc Ortega, Federal Public Defender; Office of the

4

USA V. TAYLOR

Federal Public Defender, Los Angeles, California; for
Defendant-Appellant.

OPINION
IKUTA, Circuit Judge:
Douglas Eligha Taylor was sentenced upon revocation
of supervised release to 60 months of imprisonment. We
hold that the district court did not commit plain procedural
error in sentencing upon revocation of supervised release,
and we hold that Taylor’s sentence is substantively
reasonable. Therefore, we affirm Taylor’s sentence.
I
In October 1995, Taylor robbed four banks across Los
Angeles (the “underlying criminal offense”). Taylor pleaded
guilty to five counts, comprising two counts of bank robbery
under 18 U.S.C. § 2113(a) (Counts 1 and 4), two counts of
armed bank robbery under § 2113(a), (d) (Counts 2 and 5),
and one count of using a firearm during a crime of violence
under § 924(c) (Count 3). In April 1996, the district court
sentenced Taylor to 147 months of imprisonment for the
underlying criminal offense. The court also imposed a fiveyear term of supervised release for the underlying criminal
offense, subject to conditions.
In April 2007, Taylor’s term of supervised release began
upon his release from prison. In August 2008, Taylor used
a handgun to rob a bank. Taylor was prosecuted in state
court, and received 17 years of imprisonment in state
custody. In December 2018, while still in state custody,

USA V. TAYLOR

5

Taylor stabbed another inmate with a knife. Taylor received
four years of imprisonment in state custody for charges
arising out of the stabbing, to run consecutively with
Taylor’s existing 17-year sentence. From 2016 to 2023,
Taylor was cited for 17 rules violations while in state
custody, some of which involved violence.
In November 2023, Taylor completed his state term of
imprisonment and was transferred to federal custody.
Previously, the United States Probation Office (Probation)
had filed a petition for revocation of supervised release,
alleging that Taylor’s August 2008 conduct violated the
conditions of his supervised release. In December 2023,
Probation amended its petition for revocation of supervised
release.
Given Taylor’s criminal history, Probation
calculated a revocation imprisonment range of 18–24
months. 1 Taylor admitted all allegations in the amended
petition. The district court accepted Taylor’s admissions.
In February 2024, upon revoking Taylor’s supervised
release, the district court sentenced Taylor to an aboveGuidelines sentence of 60 months of imprisonment,
followed by 24 months of supervised release. 2 The district
court described its findings and reasons, in full, as follows:
The Court has considered the Chapter 7
policy statements [in the Guidelines] and
At that time, Taylor’s most serious violation was Grade A, and his
criminal history category was III. Thus, the United States Sentencing
Guidelines (Guidelines) provided an applicable range of imprisonment
of 18–24 months. U.S.S.G. § 7B1.4(a).

1

The sentence comprised 36 months on Count 2 and 24 months on Count
1, to run consecutively, followed by 24 months of supervised release on
each of Counts 3 and 4, to run concurrently after the new prison term.

2

6

USA V. TAYLOR

taken those factors into consideration, which
includes the fact that the offender has not
responded favorably to sanctions or
attempted interventions aimed at addressing
his shortcomings.
The Court finds the defendant has violated
the terms and conditions of supervised
release, violated the Court’s trust, has
violated repeatedly the terms and conditions
of supervised release since being placed on
supervision, has engaged in egregious
conduct that is a danger not only to himself
but to the public. He’s shown that he’s not
deterred from future criminal behavior by his
previous term of imprisonment or the term of
supervised release. And in the Court’s view,
there’s a serious risk of recidivism and a risk
of an inability to integrate peacefully back
into the community.
Taylor timely appealed from the sentence imposed upon
revocation of supervised release.
On appeal, Taylor argues that the district court
committed plain procedural error in sentencing him upon
revocation of supervised release, and imposing a
substantively unreasonable sentence. First, Taylor asserts
that the district court failed to give an adequate reason for
imposing an above-Guidelines sentence upon revocation,
and that it erred in saying that Taylor had violated
“repeatedly” the conditions of his supervised release.
Second, Taylor contends that the district court failed to
address Taylor’s nonfrivolous arguments for a lower
sentence, including that Taylor struggled during his

USA V. TAYLOR

7

incarceration, experienced mental health issues, and had
since developed concrete and productive future plans for his
post-release life. Third, Taylor argues that the district court
improperly considered the seriousness of Taylor’s prior state
convictions to punish Taylor by calling his conduct
“egregious” during its explanation. Finally, Taylor contends
that his sentence upon revocation is substantively
unreasonable.
II
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
We review “all sentencing decisions” under an “abuse of
discretion standard,” “whether the sentence is inside the
Guidelines range or outside of it.” United States v. Carty,
520 F.3d 984, 993 (9th Cir. 2008) (en banc).
Because each of Taylor’s procedural error claims are
“raised for the first time on appeal,” we review them “for
plain error.” United States v. Rangel, 697 F.3d 795, 800 (9th
Cir. 2012). 3 “Plain error is (1) error, (2) that is plain, and
(3) that affects substantial rights.” United States v. Williams,
5 F.4th 973, 978 (9th Cir. 2021) (citation omitted). “If these
three conditions are met, we may then exercise our discretion
to grant relief if the error seriously affects the fairness,
integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.” Id.
(citation modified).

By contrast, Taylor preserved his substantive claim that an aboveGuideline sentence is unreasonable by advocating “for a sentence shorter
than the one ultimately imposed.” Holguin-Hernandez v. United States,
589 U.S. 169, 173 (2020).

3

8

USA V. TAYLOR

III
A
At sentencing for a criminal offense, a court must
consider ten factors set forth in 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(1)–(7). 4
Section 3553(a)(2) requires the court to consider “the need
for the sentence imposed—(A) to reflect the seriousness of
the offense, to promote respect for the law, and to provide
4

Those ten required § 3553(a) factors are as follows:
(1) the nature and circumstances of the offense and the
history and characteristics of the defendant;
(2) the need for the sentence imposed—
(A) to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to
promote respect for the law, and to provide just
punishment for the offense;
(B) to afford adequate deterrence to criminal
conduct;
(C) to protect the public from further crimes of the
defendant; and
(D) to provide the defendant with needed
educational or vocational training, medical care, or
other correctional treatment in the most effective
manner;
(3) the kinds of sentences available;
(4) the kinds of sentence and the sentencing range
established for—[applicable categories of offenses
and defendants];
(5) any pertinent policy statement—[issued by the
United States Sentencing Commission in effect on the
date of the defendant’s sentencing;]
(6) the need to avoid unwarranted sentence disparities
among defendants with similar records who have been
found guilty of similar conduct; and
(7) the need to provide restitution to any victims of the
offense.

18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(1)–(7).

USA V. TAYLOR

9

just punishment for the offense; (B) to afford adequate
deterrence to criminal conduct; (C) to protect the public
from further crimes of the defendant; and (D) to provide the
defendant with needed educational or vocational training,
medical care, or other correctional treatment in the most
effective manner.” Id. § 3553(a)(2). The court must also
consider “the kinds of sentences available.”
Id.
§ 3553(a)(3). The court “shall state in open court the
reasons” for imposing the particular sentence, and if the
sentence is “outside the range” of sentences established in
the Guidelines, then the court must state “the specific
reason” for imposing an out-of-range sentence.
Id.
§ 3553(c)(2).
In addition to imposing a term of
imprisonment, the court may also impose a term of
supervised release after imprisonment. Id. § 3583(c).
A court may subsequently revoke a term of supervised
release, and impose a sentence of imprisonment upon
revocation of supervised release, if the court “finds by a
preponderance of the evidence that the defendant violated a
condition of supervised release.” Id. § 3583(e)(3). Before
doing so, the court must consider “the factors set forth in
section 3553(a)(1), (a)(2)(B), (a)(2)(C), (a)(2)(D), (a)(4),
(a)(5), (a)(6), and (a)(7).” Id. § 3583(e). These subsections
are the same as the § 3553(a) subsections that the court must
consider before imposing a term of imprisonment, with the
exception of two subsections. The list of subsections in
§ 3583(e) does not include § 3553(a)(2)(A), which requires
the court to consider “the need for the sentence imposed—
(A) to reflect the seriousness of the offense, to promote
respect for the law, and to provide just punishment for the
offense.” Id. § 3553(a)(2), (a)(2)(A). Nor does the list of
revocation factors cover § 3553(a)(3), which requires the
court to consider “the kinds of sentences available.” Id.

10

USA V. TAYLOR

§ 3553(a)(3).
By contrast, the list does include
§ 3553(a)(4)(B) and (a)(5), which require a court to consider
the Guidelines or pertinent policy statements issued by the
United States Sentencing Commission. Id. §§ 3583(e),
3553(a)(4)(B), (a)(5).
B
In sentencing, the court commits “significant procedural
error” by “failing to adequately explain the chosen
sentence—including an explanation for any deviation from
the Guidelines range.” Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38,
51 (2007). The requirement to state “the reasons” for
imposing a particular sentence also applies to sentencing
upon revocation of supervised release. United States v.
Miqbel, 444 F.3d 1173, 1178 (9th Cir. 2006).
“What constitutes a sufficient explanation will
necessarily vary depending upon the complexity of the
particular case, whether the sentence chosen is inside or
outside the Guidelines, and the strength and seriousness of
the proffered reasons for imposing a sentence that differs
from the Guidelines range.” Carty, 520 F.3d at 992.
“[A]dequate explanation in some cases may also be inferred
from the PSR [the presentence report] or the record as a
whole.” Id.
C
“[W]hen a party raises a specific, nonfrivolous argument
tethered to a relevant § 3553(a) factor in support of a
requested sentence, then the judge should normally explain
why he accepts or rejects the party’s position.” Id. at 992–
93. The requirement to address nonfrivolous arguments also
applies to sentencing upon revocation of supervised release.

USA V. TAYLOR

11

See United States v. Cate, 971 F.3d 1054, 1059 (9th Cir.
2020).
When a defendant presents nonfrivolous and “fairly
extensive” arguments, United States v. Trujillo, 713 F.3d
1003, 1009 (9th Cir. 2013), the court errs by “not at all
explain[ing] the reasons for rejecting them.” Id. at 1011.
However, the “district court need not tick off each of the
§ 3553(a) factors to show that it has considered them,” as
“[w]e assume that district judges know the law and
understand their obligation to consider all of the § 3553(a)
factors.” Carty, 520 F.3d at 992. For arguments that are
“straight-forward and uncomplicated,” the district court
need not give “explicit reasons” on the record for rejecting
the defendant’s arguments for a lower sentence. Id. at 995.
D
The Supreme Court has addressed the question whether
a district court revoking a term of supervised release may
consider the factors listed in § 3553(a)(2)(A) despite that
subsection’s omission from § 3583(e). Esteras v United
States, 145 S. Ct. 2031, 2037–38 (2025).
Esteras concluded that the court could not address this
subsection. 5 Id. at 2045. First, Esteras reasoned, the plain
text of § 3553(a)(2)(A) makes it inapplicable to violations of
supervised release. Section 3553(a)(2)(A) “references the
need for the sentence ‘to reflect the seriousness of the
offense’ and to ‘provide just punishment for the offense.’” Id.
Esteras also held that a court could not consider § 3553(a)(3) (“the
kinds of sentences available”), stating that the reasons for its exclusion
were “self-evident.” Id. at 2039. “When a district court decides whether
to revoke a term of supervised release, there is no need to consider ‘the
kinds of sentences available,’ because supervised release is the only
matter at issue.” Id.

5

12

USA V. TAYLOR

at 2040 (quoting § 3553(a)(2)(A)). But, “[i]n the context of
a revocation hearing, the ‘offense’ is the underlying crime of
conviction, not the violation of the supervised-release
conditions.” Id. Likewise, Esteras held that the principle
“expressing one item of [an] associated group or series
excludes another left unmentioned,” indicates that Congress
did not intend for courts to consider § 3553(a)(2)(A) or
(a)(3) in revoking a term of supervised release. Id. at 2040–
41 (citation modified).
Second, the purpose of
§ 3553(a)(2)(A) is not applicable to a violation of supervised
release. According to the Court, § 3553(a)(2)(A) covers
“retribution” for the defendant’s underlying criminal
offense. Id. at 2041. Congress’s decision to exclude
§ 3553(a)(2)(A) from the list of factors in § 3583(e) is
consistent with supervised release, which is intended to
fulfill rehabilitative ends, not retribution. Id. “[W]hen a
defendant violates the conditions of his supervised release,
it makes sense that a court must consider the forwardlooking ends of sentencing (deterrence, incapacitation, and
rehabilitation), but may not consider the backward-looking
purpose of retribution.” Id. Finally, Esteras explained that
its conclusion was consistent with precedent. See id. at 2044
(first citing Tapia v. United States, 564 U.S. 319, 326 (2011);
and then citing Concepcion v. United States, 597 U.S. 481,
494 (2022)).
Therefore, because § 3553(a)(2)(A) “speaks only to the
‘offense,’ and ‘offense’ here can mean only the underlying
criminal conviction,” id. at 2040 n.5, a court may not
consider retribution for the underlying criminal conviction
in revoking supervised release.
In so concluding, Esteras expressly did not address a
related issue: whether when revoking a term of supervised
release under § 3583(e), a court can consider “retribution for

USA V. TAYLOR

13

the violation of the conditions of the supervised release.” Id.
Esteras noted the government’s argument that § 3583 allows
a district court to consider § 3553(a)(4)(B) and (a)(5), which
require the district court to consider certain policy statements
issued by the Sentencing Commission. Id. The relevant
policy statements include Chapter 7 of the Guidelines, which
state that “at revocation the court should sanction primarily
the defendant’s breach of trust, while taking into account, to
a limited degree, the seriousness of the underlying violation
and the criminal history of the violator.” U.S.S.G. ch. 7, pt.
A, intro 3(b). According to Esteras, “[t]he Commission has
adopted the view that ‘the sentence imposed upon revocation
[is] intended to sanction the violator for failing to abide by
the conditions of the court-ordered supervision.’” 145 S. Ct.
at 2040 n.5 (citing U.S.S.G. ch. 7, pt. A, intro. 3(b) (Nov.
2024)). Rather than address this issue, Esteras took “no
position on whether this is a permissible consideration.” Id.
Although Esteras left open whether the court can
consider the seriousness of a violation of the conditions of
supervised release, we have previously addressed whether a
court revoking supervised release can consider “the need for
the sentence imposed . . . to reflect the seriousness” of the
violation. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(2)(A). See Miqbel, 444 F.3d
at 1182; United States v. Simtob, 485 F.3d 1058, 1062 (9th
Cir. 2007).
In Miqbel, a defendant pleaded guilty to a conspiracy
charge and was sentenced to a term of imprisonment and a
term of supervised release. 444 F.4th at 1174. After his
release from prison, the defendant used illicit drugs in
violation of the conditions of his release. Id. at 1175.
Following a revocation hearing, the court sentenced the
defendant above the Guidelines range, based on the
Sentencing Commission’s Chapter 7 policy statement and to

14

USA V. TAYLOR

provide “punishment” to promote respect for the law and
provide just punishment for the violation. 6 Id. We held that
the court failed to provide sufficiently specific reasons for
imposing an out-of-Guidelines sentence. Id. at 1181. In
dicta, we stated that a court could not rely on the factors set
forth in § 3553(a)(2)(A), because that subsection was “a
factor that Congress deliberately omitted from the list
applicable to revocation sentencing.” Id. at 1182. We held
that pursuant to the Chapter 7 policy statements, a court may
properly punish a violator for his “breach of trust,” but “may
not punish him for the criminal conduct underlying the
revocation.” Id.
We clarified this ruling in Simtob. In Simtob, the
defendant claimed that his revocation sentence was
unreasonable “because the court relied on the seriousness of
the offense underlying the revocation, in contravention of
Miqbel.” 485 F.3d at 1061. Following Miqbel, we held that
a court may not punish a defendant “for the criminal conduct
underlying the revocation” of his supervised release. Id. at
1062 (quoting Miqbel, 444 F.3d at 1182). Nevertheless,
Miqbel “did not set forth a blanket proposition that a court in
no circumstances may consider the seriousness of the
criminal offense underlying the revocation.” Id. Rather,
consistent with the Sentencing Commission’s Chapter 7
policy statement, the seriousness of the violation underlying
the revocation “may be considered to a lesser degree as part
of the criminal history of the violator.” Id. We explained
that the violation underlying the revocation has bearing on
the likelihood of recidivism of the defendant, because it is a
Although the district court referred to “punishment for the offense,” the
offense at issue was not the underlying crime of conviction, but the
violation of the supervised release. Miqbel, 444 F.3d at 1175.

6

USA V. TAYLOR

15

“key predictor of a violator’s potential for reintroduction into
society without relapse.” Id. Further, the court could
consider the nature and severity of the violation of the
conditions of supervised release “to punish the violator for
the violator’s full breach of trust.” Id. at 1063. “A violator
who, after committing an offense and being placed on
supervised release for that offense, again commits a similar
offense is not only more likely to continue on that path, but
also has demonstrated to the court that the violator has little
respect for its command.” Id. Where there has been a breach
of trust, “greater sanctions may be required to deter future
criminal activity.” Id.
In sum, a district court imposing a modification or
revocation of a term of supervised release may not punish
the defendant for the original crime of conviction. Esteras,
145 S. Ct. at 2040. Moreover, a court may not punish a
defendant who has violated the terms of supervised release
by engaging in criminal conduct. See Miqbel, 444 F.3d at
1182; Simtob, 485 F.3d at 1062. However, the court may
consider a violation of criminal law underlying the
supervised release violation in its evaluation of the criminal
history of the defendant, the risk of recidivism, and the
violator’s breach of the court’s trust.
E
In “determining substantive reasonableness” of a
criminal sentence, the court should “consider the totality of
the circumstances.” Carty, 520 F.3d at 993. The
requirement for the sentence to be substantively reasonable
also applies to sentences imposed upon revocation of
supervised release. See United States v. Spangle, 626 F.3d
488, 497 (9th Cir. 2010).

16

USA V. TAYLOR

For a non-Guidelines sentence, we are to “give due
deference to the district court’s decision that the § 3553(a)
factors, on a whole, justify the extent of the variance.” Id. at
498 (quoting Gall, 552 U.S. at 51). “We cannot presume
that a sentence is unreasonable only because it falls outside
the” Guidelines range. Id. A sentence may be substantively
unreasonable when the court applies “the Guidelines
sentence without considering the defendant-specific facts
that made the resulting sentence unreasonable,” United
States v. Amezcua-Vasquez, 567 F.3d 1050, 1057 (9th Cir.
2009), or when the court’s factual findings were “clearly
erroneous,” United States v. Ressam, 679 F.3d 1069, 1092–
93, 1097 (9th Cir. 2012) (en banc).
IV
A
Taylor argues that the district court committed plain
procedural error in three ways on sentencing upon
revocation of supervised release. See supra, at 6–7. Those
arguments are unavailing.
1
First, the district court adequately explained its reasons
for imposing an above-Guidelines sentence upon revocation
of supervised release. Unlike in Miqbel, where the entirety
of the district court’s explanation for an above-Guidelines
sentence was that a Guidelines sentence “would be
insufficient to meet the purposes of sentences under these
circumstances,” 444 F.3d at 1179, the district court here
provided “sufficient explanation” tailored to the
“complexity of the particular case.” Carty, 520 F.3d at 992.
Moreover, the district court’s adequate explanation may
“be inferred from the PSR or the record as a whole,” id., as,

USA V. TAYLOR

17

in light of the record, the district court’s explanation
connected to permissible statutory sentencing factors under
§ 3553(a). First, the court stated that Taylor “violated the
Court’s trust” and “violated repeatedly the terms and
conditions of supervised release since being placed on
supervision,” which bears on Taylor’s “history and
characteristics” and the “nature and circumstances of the
offense” under § 3553(a)(1). The amended petition set forth
those violations, and Taylor admitted to them. Second, the
court stated that Taylor “engaged in egregious conduct that
is a danger not only to himself but to the public,” which bears
on the need “to protect the public from further crimes of the
defendant” under § 3553(a)(2)(C). The amended petition
described the dangerous conduct in which Taylor engaged in
August 2008. Third, the court stated that Taylor had not
been “deterred from future criminal behavior by his previous
term of imprisonment or the term of supervised release,” and
that he had “not responded favorably to sanctions or
attempted interventions aimed at addressing his
shortcomings,” 7 which bear on the need for the sentence “to
afford adequate deterrence to criminal conduct” under
§ 3553(a)(2)(B).
The record reflects Taylor’s prior
sanctions and recidivist behavior. Fourth, the court stated
that it had “considered the Chapter 7 policy statements,”
pursuant to § 3553(a)(5).
Taylor contends that the district court plainly erred in
stating that Taylor “violated repeatedly the terms and
conditions of supervised release since being placed on
7
Though Taylor argues that this conclusion was inaccurate, the record
belies that contention. According to Probation, though Taylor “appeared
to be making great strides” after his release in April 2007, he “suddenly
began a downward spiral” in August 2008, which resulted in criminal
behavior.

18

USA V. TAYLOR

supervision.” Even if that statement were erroneous, it did
not “seriously affect[] the fairness, integrity, or public
reputation of judicial proceedings” to warrant vacatur of
Taylor’s sentence. Williams, 5 F.4th at 978 (citations
omitted). Rather, the district court’s explanation showed
ample understanding of Taylor’s history.
2
Second, the district court sufficiently addressed Taylor’s
nonfrivolous arguments for a lower sentence. Though
Taylor characterizes his briefing as “lengthy and detailed,”
his argument to the district court comprised fewer than three
complete pages, and it did not require substantial
engagement by the district court.
Taylor sought to prevent the district court from relying
on his 2018 “incarceration misconduct” in imposing its
sentence, as that conduct occurred while Taylor’s
supervision was tolled. 8 In accordance with Taylor’s
argument, the district court did not expressly rely on
Taylor’s December 2018 stabbing incident in imposing its
sentence. Rather, the district court’s reasons and explanation
made no mention of Taylor’s 2018 incarceration
misconduct. The district court did not commit procedural
error through omission.
Taylor also presented the district court evidence
regarding his struggles while incarcerated, his mental health
treatment, and his productive plans for post-release life.
Taylor’s term of supervised release was tolled during his time in state
custody. See 18 U.S.C. § 3624(e) (“A term of supervised release does
not run during any period in which the person is imprisoned in
connection with a conviction for a Federal, State, or local crime unless
the imprisonment is for a period of less than 30 consecutive days.”).

8

USA V. TAYLOR

19

However, Taylor presented neither “extensive arguments
and evidence” concerning his personal characteristics under
§ 3553(a)(1), nor precedent-backed arguments regarding
unwarranted sentencing disparities under § 3553(a)(6).
Contra Trujillo, 713 F.3d at 1009. Unlike in Trujillo, where
the district court “did not at all explain the reasons for
rejecting” the defendant’s well-supported and nonfrivolous
arguments, id. at 1011, the district court did not procedurally
err in considering Taylor’s arguments. Rather, the district
court noted that it had “received, read, and considered the
parties’ sentencing memoranda as well as letters received on
behalf of” Taylor, and that it found Taylor’s own letter “very
thoughtful.” For “straight-forward and uncomplicated”
arguments, such as those Taylor presented before the district
court, the district court did not need to give “explicit
reasons” for rejecting them on the record to avoid procedural
error. Carty, 520 F.3d at 995.
3
Third, the district court did not improperly punish Taylor
for the criminal conduct underlying the revocation by calling
Taylor’s conduct “egregious.” Rather, the district court
acted permissibly under our precedent.
As Taylor recognizes, “Esteras does not change the law
applicable to this case.” Before the district court and on
appeal, Taylor did not argue that the district court improperly
punished Taylor for the underlying criminal offense (i.e., the
October 1995 bank robberies) when sentencing upon
revocation of supervised release. We agree that Esteras is
inapplicable on these facts. 145 S. Ct. at 2040 n.5
(addressing “only whether § 3583(e) precludes the court
from considering retribution for the underlying criminal
conviction.”).

20

USA V. TAYLOR

Taylor argues that the district court improperly punished
Taylor for his August 2008 conduct under Miqbel and
Simtob, by stating that his conduct was “egregious.” We
disagree. Unlike in Miqbel, 444 F.3d at 1183, the court did
not improperly cite § 3553(a)(2)(A) in stating the reasons for
its sentence. Rather, the court considered the appropriate
factors, including that Taylor had violated the terms and
conditions of supervised release, see § 3553(a)(1) (requiring
the court to consider “the nature and circumstances of the
offense and the history and characteristics of the
defendant”), and that Taylor had not responded to sanctions
or attempted interventions, see id. § 3553(a)(2)(B) (requiring
consideration of “adequate deterrence”). Read in context,
the court’s statement that Taylor had “engaged in egregious
conduct that is a danger not only to himself but to the public”
is consistent with § 3553(a)(2)(C), which requires the court
to consider the need “to protect the public from further
crimes of the defendant.” As Simtob allows, the district
court considered Taylor’s criminal history, the “similar[ity]
to [Taylor’s] past transgressions,” and Taylor’s “propensity
for recidivism and inability to integrate peacefully into a
community.” 485 F.3d at 1062. Moreover, the court noted
that Taylor violated the court’s trust and was unable to
integrate peacefully back into the community. See Esteras,
145 S. Ct. at 2040 n.5 (taking “no position on whether this is
a permissible consideration.”)
The district court thus “properly look[ed] to and
consider[ed] the conduct underlying the revocation as one of
many acts contributing to the severity of” Taylor’s breach of
trust, so as to fully understand Taylor’s history and risk of
recidivism. Simtob, 485 F.3d at 1063. The district court did
not discuss retribution or punishment for Taylor’s violation
of the conditions of his supervised release. Cf. Miqbel, 444

USA V. TAYLOR

21

F.3d at 1182–83; Simtob, 485 F.3d at 1062–63. Thus, the
district court did not procedurally err on this ground, much
less plainly err.
In sum, the district court did not commit plain procedural
error by considering Taylor’s circumstances and arguments
and imposing a 60-month above-Guidelines sentence at the
revocation sentencing hearing.
B
Finally, Taylor’s sentence was not substantively
unreasonable. See Carty, 520 F.3d at 993. Taylor argues
that the “degree of the upward variance” here rendered
unreasonable the sentence upon revocation. We disagree.
Taylor’s personal “history and characteristics” justified
an above-Guidelines sentence. 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(1).
Unlike in Amezcua-Vazquez, 567 F.3d at 1057, the court
considered the “defendant-specific facts” in the record that
rendered Taylor’s sentence reasonable. And, unlike in
Ressam, 679 F.3d at 1097, the court did not rest its sentence
on clearly erroneous factual findings.
These same
considerations guide our analysis of the substantive
reasonableness of a sentence imposed upon revocation of
supervised release. See Spangle, 626 F.3d at 497.
Here, Taylor’s underlying criminal offense (robbing four
banks) mirrored Taylor’s August 2008 conduct which
resulted in the supervised-release violation (robbing another
bank). While in state custody, Taylor stabbed another
inmate with a knife and received 17 rules violations. These
defendant-specific facts amply justify Taylor’s aboveGuidelines sentence, and Taylor does not contend that any
of these facts are clearly erroneous.

22

USA V. TAYLOR

V
We affirm Taylor’s sentence. The district court did not
commit plain procedural error in sentencing upon revocation
of supervised release. It adequately explained its reasons for
imposing an above-Guidelines sentence, sufficiently
addressed Taylor’s nonfrivolous arguments for a lower
sentence, and properly considered the severity of the
criminal conduct underlying Taylor’s revocation of
supervised release. The district court’s sentence was also
substantively reasonable.
AFFIRMED.

