FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ZAKIA JACKLINE RAJABIAN;
DULCERIA LA BONITA
WHOLESALE LLC, an Arizona
corporation,

No. 24-3000
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00168MTL

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
OPINION
v.
MERCEDES-BENZ USA, LLC;
PHOENIX MOTOR COMPANY
INCORPORATED, an Arizona
Corporation doing business as
Mercedes-Benz of Scottsdale; VERN
FOUTZ;JEFF NOWAK; GUS
GONZALES; JANE DOES, Spouses;
Foutz, Nowak, Gonzales;
LIONHEART SECURITY
INTERNATIONAL CONSULTING
LLC, an Arizona limited liability
company; GERALD SCHEIBLY,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
Michael T. Liburdi, District Judge, Presiding

2

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

Argued and Submitted March 25, 2025
Phoenix, Arizona
Filed September 17, 2025
Before: Susan P. Graber and Mark J. Bennett, Circuit
Judges, and John R. Tunheim, District Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Graber;
Concurrence by Judge Tunheim
SUMMARY**
Stay of Proceedings / Appellate Jurisdiction
The panel (1) affirmed the district court’s order denying
a motion to lift a Colorado River stay of a federal case
pending state court litigation; and (2) dismissed as untimely
plaintiffs’ appeal to the extent that it challenged the initial
stay.
As to appellate jurisdiction, the panel held that an order
staying a federal case under the Colorado River doctrine is
an appealable final order under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Under
Fed. R. App. P. 4(a)(1)(A), a notice of appeal in a civil case
must be filed with the district clerk within 30 days after entry

*

The Honorable John R. Tunheim, United States District Judge for the
District of Minnesota, sitting by designation.
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

3

of the judgment or order appealed from. Fed. R. Civ. P.
58(c) provides that a judgment is entered:
(1) if a separate document is not required,
when the judgment is entered in the civil
docket under Rule 79(a); or
(2) if a separate document is required, when
the judgment is entered in the civil docket
under Rule 79(a) and the earlier of these
events occurs:
(A) it is set out in a separate document; or
(B) 150 days have run from the entry in
the civil docket.
The panel held that the judgment at issue required a
separate document. The district court granted the stay on
November 22, 2023, and later formally imposed the stay in
a text-only minute order on December 19, 2023. The panel
held that the minute order qualified as a separate document
because it clearly signaled, in unadorned fashion, that the
matter was fully closed. The minute order therefore started
the 30-day appeal clock, and so plaintiffs’ notice of appeal,
filed on May 6, 2024, was untimely as to the initial stay.
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of
plaintiffs’ motion to lift the stay. Joining other circuits, the
panel held that the denial of a motion to lift a stay is reviewed
for an abuse of discretion. The panel concluded that the
district court did not abuse its discretion because, in
imposing the stay, the court engaged in a thorough analysis
under the Colorado River doctrine, stating the proper legal
standard and following it carefully, and there were not any
later material changes of law or fact that could have

4

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

undermined the continued propriety of the court’s initial
analysis.
Concurring, District Judge Tunheim wrote separately to
emphasize the ambiguity in Fed. R. Civ. P. 58 in the age of
exclusive digital filing and communication.

COUNSEL
Rob Somers (argued), Aaron M. Finter, and Michael A.
Schern, Schern Richardson Finter PLC, Mesa, Arizona, for
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Carl J. Mudd (argued) and Matthew D. Kleifield, Lewis
Brisbois Bisgaard & Smith LLP, Phoenix, Arizona; Larry J.
Cohen (argued), Cohen Law Firm, Phoenix, Arizona;
Brendan A. Murphy, Hendricks Murphy PLLC, Phoenix,
Arizona; Jill Ormond, Gordon Rees Scully Mansukhani
LLP, Phoenix, Arizona; Steven D. Crocchi, Clyde & Co
LLP, Phoenix, Arizona; for Defendants-Appellees.

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

5

OPINION
GRABER, Circuit Judge:
Several parties dispute ownership of a particular
Mercedes-Benz car. A lawsuit was brought in a state court,
and then—almost a year later—another action was brought
in a federal district court. Both proceedings sought to
answer the same question: who was the car’s rightful owner?
The district court stayed the federal case under the doctrine
described in Colorado River Water Conservation District v.
United States, 424 U.S. 800 (1976). Plaintiffs did not appeal
that stay. But they filed a motion to lift the stay months later.
The district court denied Plaintiffs’ motion, and Plaintiffs
appeal. We affirm the district court’s denial of the motion
to lift the stay and dismiss as untimely the appeal to the
extent that it challenges the initial stay.
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
A. Purchase and Possession of the Vehicle
Phoenix Motor Company (“PMC”) is a car dealership
that does business as Mercedes-Benz of Scottsdale. In
October 2021, PMC paid Wholesale Exotics, an automobile
wholesaler, $274,800 for a 2021 Mercedes-Benz G63.
Wholesale Exotics deposited PMC’s check and sent the
funds to Fredrick Aljundi, who agreed to pick up the car and
deliver it to PMC on behalf of Wholesale Exotics. Aljundi,
along with two of his colleagues, used those funds to
purchase the vehicle from Mercedes-Benz Chandler.
Then things went awry. Instead of delivering the car to
PMC, Aljundi traded it in to another dealership, MercedesBenz of North Scottsdale. When PMC inquired into the
car’s location, one of Aljundi’s associates explained that

6

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

Aljundi planned to “refund [PMC’s] money and profits”
rather than deliver the car.
In February 2022, Zakia J. Rajabian and Dulceria La
Bonita Wholesale (collectively, “Dulceria”) bought the car
from Mercedes-Benz of North Scottsdale, receiving title to
it later that month. After gaining possession of the car,
Dulceria locked it away in a storage locker, keeping the car’s
door open to disengage the built-in Mercedes-Benz tracking
system. Nevertheless, PMC, with the help of MercedesBenz USA, allegedly used the “Mercedes Me Connect”
technology to locate the car in Dulceria’s storage locker on
March 15, 2022.
B. State Court Litigation
Perhaps unsurprisingly, a flurry of litigation followed.
On March 18, 2022, PMC filed a complaint in Maricopa
County Superior Court, alleging claims for breach of
contract, breach of the implied covenant of good faith and
fair dealing, and conversion against Dulceria, Wholesale
Exotics, Aljundi, his company, and various other employees
and agents. PMC also took possession of the car after
requesting and receiving a preliminary order from the state
court requiring delivery of the car. 1 Dulceria answered
PMC’s complaint and brought counterclaims for abuse of
process, invasion of privacy, and intentional interference
with contractual relations.2
Litigation in the state court continued with motions for
dismissal and summary judgment, in which both PMC and
1
2

The Supreme Court of Arizona later dissolved the preliminary order.

Dulceria later amended its answer to add a counterclaim that MercedesBenz USA and PMC violated Arizona Revised Statutes section 13-2316,
which prohibits various forms of computer tampering.

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

7

Dulceria argued over who had superior title to the car. On
January 30, 2023, the state trial court found PMC to be the
rightful owner of the car.
C. Federal Court Litigation
Only five days before the state court found PMC to be
the rightful owner of the car—and nearly a year after the
state-court litigation began—Dulceria filed this action in
federal district court against PMC, Mercedes-Benz USA,
and several of their employees. The operative complaint
lists several causes of action including, among others, claims
for invasion of privacy, breach of implied contract, a
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2511, and a violation of Arizona
Revised Statutes section 13-2316.
PMC filed a motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction, seeking either a dismissal or a stay pursuant to
the Colorado River doctrine. The court granted PMC’s
request for a stay, explaining in an order dated November
22, 2023, that the relevant factors weighed strongly in favor
of a Colorado River stay. On December 19, 2023, the district
court held a hearing and formally ordered the stay in the form
of a text-entry minute order. The relevant portion of that
minute order provides:
Document Number: 79 (No document
attached)
....
MINUTE ENTRY for proceedings held
before Judge Michael T. Liburdi: Status
Conference held on 12/19/2023. . . . IT IS
ORDERED staying [sic] the case on all

8

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

claims pending the outcome of the state court
litigation. . . .
. . . This is a TEXT ENTRY ONLY.
There is no PDF document associated with
this entry. (LMR)
2:23-cv-00168-MTL Notice has been
electronically mailed to: [the attorneys of
record].
(Underlined emphasis added.)3
D. Post-Stay Developments
After the district court stayed the case, Dulceria sought
leave from the state court to add four counterclaims against
PMC—violation of Arizona’s consumer fraud act,
negligence, violation of 18 U.S.C. § 2511, and violation of
18 U.S.C. § 2701—and to add new parties and claims
included in the federal case but not yet included in the state
case. The state court allowed Dulceria to add new claims
against PMC, but denied Dulceria’s request to bring in new
claims against new parties. The court reasoned that Dulceria
“knew about these parties and [its] allegations against them”
and that Dulceria “made a conscious, informed decision not
to sue these individuals/entities in this action.”
On March 20, 2024, Dulceria filed a motion in the
district court seeking to lift the stay. The district court
denied the motion on April 30, 2024. Dulceria appealed the
3

The minute order included some additional text but, during oral
argument, Dulceria affirmatively waived any argument that the
additional text has any bearing on the outcome of this appeal. We
therefore treat the minute order as if it included only the text blockquoted above.

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

9

district court’s denial of its motion to lift the stay on May 6,
2024, within 30 days of its issuance. But Dulceria did not
file a notice of appeal regarding the district court’s initial
stay order. On June 11, 2024, the state court dismissed
several of Dulceria’s claims, including the federal
wiretapping claim (18 U.S.C. § 2511).
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review de novo questions of jurisdiction, Hooper v.
Brnovich, 56 F.4th 619, 624 (9th Cir. 2022) (per curiam),
including whether the facts of a case satisfy the requirements
of the Colorado River doctrine, Seneca Ins. Co. v. Strange
Land, Inc., 862 F.3d 835, 840 (9th Cir. 2017). When those
requirements are satisfied, we review for abuse of discretion
a district court’s decision to impose such a stay. Id.
Application of the Colorado River doctrine is the exception,
not the rule, and there is a strong presumption against its
application. Id. at 841.
Although we have not yet said so in a published opinion,
only in an unpublished memorandum disposition, Johnson v.
Inos, 619 F. App’x 651 (9th Cir. 2015), we review for abuse
of discretion a district court’s denial of a motion to lift a stay.
Id. at 651. A motion to lift a stay resembles a motion for
reconsideration of the court’s grant of a stay. Marti v.
Iberostar Hoteles y Apartamentos S.L., 54 F.4th 641, 646
(11th Cir. 2022). And we review for abuse of discretion a
district court’s denial of a motion to reconsider. Do Sung
Uhm v. Humana, Inc., 620 F.3d 1134, 1140 (9th Cir. 2010).
We thus join the other circuits that review the denial of a
motion to lift a stay for abuse of discretion. See, e.g., United
States v. Acorn Tech. Fund, L.P., 429 F.3d 438, 444–45 (3d
Cir. 2005); SEC v. Vescor Cap. Corp., 599 F.3d 1189, 1196

10

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

(10th Cir. 2010); Marti, 54 F.4th at 646; Murata Mach. USA
v. Daifuku Co., 830 F.3d 1357, 1361 (Fed. Cir. 2016).
DISCUSSION
Dulceria challenges both (A) the merits of the district
court’s initial order imposing the stay and (B) the court’s
denial of the motion to lift the stay. We address each issue
in turn.
A. We Lack Jurisdiction to Review the District Court’s
Initial Stay Because Dulceria Did Not Appeal in
Time.
The parties dispute, on timeliness grounds, whether we
have jurisdiction to consider the merits of the initial stay. An
order staying a federal case under the Colorado River
doctrine constitutes an appealable final order under 28
U.S.C. § 1291. Nakash v. Marciano, 882 F.2d 1411, 1413
(9th Cir. 1989); see Fed. R. Civ. P. 54(a) (“‘Judgment’ as
used in these rules includes a decree and any order from
which an appeal lies.”).4 “In a civil case . . . the notice of
appeal . . . must be filed with the district clerk within 30 days
after entry of the judgment or order appealed from.” Fed. R.
App. P. 4(a)(1)(A). The question here, then, is when the
district court entered the order staying the case.

4

Our recent opinion in McNeil v. Gittere, No. 23-3080 (9th Cir. Sep. 2,
2025), is distinguishable. There, the defendants appealed from a
collateral order—the district court’s denial of qualified immunity—
whereas Plaintiffs here appeal a stay under the Colorado River doctrine,
which our court treats as a final order. Nakash, 882 F.2d at 1413; see
Moses H. Cone Mem’l Hosp. v. Mercury Constr. Corp., 460 U.S. 1, 10
(1983) (“[A stay under the Colorado River doctrine] amounts to a
dismissal of the suit.”).

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

11

That question is less straightforward than one might
think. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58(c) provides that a
“judgment is entered”:
(1) if a separate document is not required,
when the judgment is entered in the civil
docket under Rule 79(a); or
(2) if a separate document is required, when
the judgment is entered in the civil docket
under Rule 79(a) and the earlier of these
events occurs:
(A) it is set out in a separate
document; or
(B) 150 days have run from the entry
in the civil docket.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 58(c).5 The judgment at issue here requires
a “separate document.” See Fed. R. Civ. P. 58(a) (providing
that all judgments, with some exceptions not relevant here,
require a separate document). The timeliness of Dulceria’s
appeal, then, hinges on whether the December 19, 2023,
minute order satisfies the requirements of a “separate
document.” If so, Dulceria’s 30-day “appeal” clock began
ticking on December 19, 2023. Otherwise, Dulceria’s 30day window did not begin until 150 days after that date.
The rule itself is ambiguous as to what qualifies as a
“separate document,” including whether a minute order can
5

This rule was amended in 2002, in part to fix a wrinkle that existed in
the pre-2002 version of Rule 58. Harmston v. City & County of San
Francisco, 627 F.3d 1273, 1279–80 (9th Cir. 2010). By changing the
rules and adding the 150-day provision, Congress chose “to avoid giving
parties ‘forever to appeal.’” Id. at 1280.

12

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

constitute a “separate document” for purposes of Rule 58.
But we have already held that minute orders can do exactly
that. See Brown v. Wilshire Credit Corp. (In re Brown), 484
F.3d 1116, 1121–22 (9th Cir. 2007) (holding, after the 2002
amendment to the rules, that minute orders can constitute a
“separate document” that starts the appeal clock); Ingram v.
ACandS, Inc., 977 F.2d 1332, 1339 (9th Cir. 1992) (holding
that, under the pre-2002 rules, two separate minute orders
denying post-trial motions each started the appeal clock).
To determine whether a particular minute order has that
effect, we ask whether there has been a “clear and
unequivocal manifestation by the trial court of its belief that
the decision made, so far as it is concerned, is the end of the
case.” In re Brown, 484 F.3d at 1122 (citation and internal
quotation marks omitted). Otherwise, parties might “be
misled about when their time to appeal begins to run.” Id.
As we and other courts have explained, that clear signal is
lacking when the district court’s minute order signals that the
case is not fully closed or when the order contains significant
reasoning and, therefore, is not “separate.” Id. at 1122–23;
see also In re Cedant Corp. Secs. Litig., 454 F.3d 235, 241
(3d Cir. 2006) (“[A]n order will be treated as a separate
document if it meets three criteria: first, the order must be
self-contained and separate from the opinion; second, the
order must note the relief granted; and third, the order must
omit (or at least substantially omit) the District Court’s
reasons for disposing of the parties’ claims.”).
Here, the district court’s November 22, 2023, order set
forth its reasoning in full for implementing the stay. Then,
the court separately entered a minute order on December 19,
2023, which clearly signaled, in unadorned fashion, that the
matter was fully closed. Indeed, the court’s order stated
without elaboration: “IT IS ORDERED staying the case on

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

13

all claims pending the outcome of the state court litigation.”
The district court’s entry of that order into the docket
automatically generated a “Notice of Electronic Filing,”
which the court mailed electronically to the parties with the
entire text of the minute order. The electronic docket also
automatically designated the order as “Document Number:
79.”
We have, in the past, considered whether an order had
been mailed to the parties. See Ingram, 977 F.2d at 1338.
When the parties accept electronic notices from the court, we
see no relevant difference between mailing through the post
office and electronic mailing. Nor does any party argue
otherwise. Additionally, actual receipt of the document in
either physical or electronic form is sufficient. All parties
here actually received copies of the electronic filing.
In the circumstances, the December 19, 2023, minute
order constituted a “separate document” for purposes of Rule
58(c) and, therefore, started the 30-day appeal clock.
The conduct of the parties confirms the finality of the
minute order. See In re Brown, 484 F.3d at 1120
(considering the parties’ conduct). The first motion filed in
federal court after the court imposed the stay on December
19, 2023, was Dulceria’s March 20, 2024, motion to lift the
stay. By contrast, during the preceding months, active
litigation continued in the state court. That conduct is
entirely consistent with the parties’ understanding that the
minute order fully stayed the case.
Dulceria argues that the minute order did not start the
appeal clock because it was a “text entry only” and there was
“no document attached,” that is, “no PDF document
associated” with the docket entry. Notably, Dulceria takes
no issue with the content of the minute order as it relates to

14

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

finality. Indeed, Dulceria’s lawyer stated during oral
argument that the appeal clock would have started had the
exact text of the minute order appeared in PDF format. In
other words, Dulceria asks us to elevate form above function
by requiring a particular document type. We are not aware
of any case law, either from our court or from any other
circuits, supporting the adoption of such a rigid rule.
Dulceria also contends that our decisions in Comedy
Club, Inc. v. Improv West Associates, 553 F.3d 1277 (9th
Cir. 2009), and Harmston, 627 F.3d 1273, compel us to hold
that its appeal was timely. But those cases did not involve,
as here, an unadorned minute order that clearly and
unequivocally took the case out of federal court in a
document separate from the court’s reasoning.
In sum, Dulceria had 30 days after December 19, 2023,
to appeal the initial stay. Dulceria’s appeal came too late,
and we therefore lack jurisdiction to review the initial stay.
B. The District Court Did Not Err in Refusing to Lift the
Stay.
Although Dulceria did not timely appeal the district
court’s stay, it did timely appeal the district court’s denial of
its motion to lift the stay. Accordingly, we have jurisdiction
to review that order. But we conclude that the district court
did not abuse its discretion in declining to lift the stay.
A stay under the Colorado River doctrine is a “narrow
exception to ‘the virtually unflagging obligation of the
federal courts to exercise the jurisdiction given them.’”
Holder v. Holder, 305 F.3d 854, 867 (9th Cir. 2002) (quoting
Colorado River, 424 U.S. at 817). Such a stay is not
appropriate where there is substantial doubt that the
resolution of the state proceedings will resolve the federal

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

15

case. Id. at 868. The state and federal cases must be parallel,
but the doctrine does not require exact parallelism so long as
“the two proceedings are substantially similar.” Nakash, 882
F.2d at 1416 (internal quotation marks omitted); see id.
(holding that two proceedings were substantially similar
where both disputes concerned the parties’ actions after one
party purchased interest in a company).
The district court must consider whether eight factors
point in favor of a stay. R.R. St. & Co. v. Transp. Ins. Co.,
656 F.3d 966, 978–79 (9th Cir. 2011). Those factors are:
(1) which court first assumed jurisdiction
over any property at stake; (2) the
inconvenience of the federal forum; (3) the
desire to avoid piecemeal litigation; (4) the
order in which the forums obtained
jurisdiction; (5) whether federal law or state
law provides the rule of decision on the
merits; (6) whether the state court
proceedings can adequately protect the rights
of the federal litigants; (7) the desire to avoid
forum shopping; and (8) whether the state
court proceedings will resolve all issues
before the federal court.
Id.
Dulceria did not identify, nor do we discern, any material
legal or factual error committed by the district court in its
Colorado River analysis, which could have warranted lifting
the stay. In its initial decision, which the district court
implicitly adopted in declining to lift the stay, the district
court engaged in a thorough analysis under the Colorado
River doctrine. The district court stated the proper legal

16

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

standard and followed it carefully. The district court’s eightfactor analysis considered the reluctance to stay the exercise
of federal jurisdiction required by the Colorado River
doctrine and permissibly decided to impose a stay. Having
applied the proper test, the district court ultimately found
that six of the eight factors favored a stay. Of those six
factors, one—the risk of piecemeal litigation—“strongly”
favored a stay. Of the two factors that did not favor a stay,
one factor—whether state or federal law is at issue—was
neutral, and only a single factor—whether the federal forum
was convenient—weighed against a stay.
Nor were there any material changes of law or fact after
the district court granted the stay, which could undermine
the continued propriety of its initial analysis. Dulceria points
to only one changed circumstance: The state court denied
Dulceria’s attempt to add parties that are in the federal
proceeding but not in the state proceeding. But those parties
were not a part of the state proceeding when the district court
granted the stay, and they are not parties to the state
proceeding now. Thus, Dulceria’s alleged change in
circumstance is not a change at all. Moreover, a stay
pursuant to the Colorado River doctrine, by definition,
contemplates continued litigation in state court. Even
granting Dulceria’s premise that the state court’s denial of
its request to add parties constituted a change in
circumstances, we see no abuse of discretion in the district
court’s conclusion that this minor change did not warrant
lifting the stay.
AFFIRMED IN PART and DISMISSED IN PART.

RAJABIAN V. MERCEDES-BENZ USA

17

Tunheim, District Judge, concurring:
I concur in the opinion but write separately to emphasize
the ambiguity in Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 58. The
aim of Rule 58 is clarity, but the term “separate document”
is anything but clear. In the age of exclusive digital filing
and communication, Rule 58 is ripe for an amendment to
resolve the current disputes about what constitutes a
“separate document.”

