FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
RENE LEMUS-ESCOBAR,
Petitioner,
v.
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney General,
Respondent.

Nos.

18-73423
19-71892

Agency No.
A029-182-463
ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

On Petition for Review of an Order of the
Board of Immigration Appeals
Argued and Submitted February 13, 2025
Submission Withdrawn February 13, 2025
Resubmitted March 26, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed June 16, 2025
Amended November 10, 2025
Before: Susan P. Graber and John B. Owens, Circuit
Judges, and Jack Zouhary, * District Judge.

The Honorable Jack Zouhary, United States District Judge for the
Northern District of Ohio, sitting by designation.
*

2

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

Order;
Opinion by Judge Graber;
Partial Concurrence and Partial Dissent by Judge Zouhary
SUMMARY **
Immigration
The panel filed (1) an order amending the opinion filed
June 16, 2025, and stating that the petitions for rehearing are
otherwise denied and no further petitions for rehearing will
be accepted; (2) an amended opinion dismissing in part,
denying in part, and granting in part Rene Lemus-Escobar’s
petition for review of the Board of Immigration Appeals’
decision denying relief from removal, and his petition for
review of the BIA’s denial of his motion to reopen, and
remanding; and (3) a partial concurrence and partial dissent.
Addressing the initial denial of relief, the panel began by
clarifying the court’s jurisdictional rules in light of recent
Supreme Court decisions affecting cases such as this one,
where Petitioner was denied cancellation of removal under 8
U.S.C. § 1229b(b)(1) and cancellation of removal under the
Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief Act
(“NACARA”): Wilkinson v. Garland, 601 U.S. 209 (2024);
Patel v. Garland, 596 U.S. 328 (2022); and GuerreroLasprilla v. Barr, 589 U.S. 221 (2020).

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

3

In light of those decisions, the panel explained that the
court has jurisdiction over constitutional claims and
questions of law under 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(D), including
fact-intensive mixed questions of law; the court thus has
jurisdiction
over
determinations
of
statutory
eligibility. However, under 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i), the
court lacks jurisdiction over purely factual findings, such as
an adverse credibility determination or a finding of historical
fact; and the court lacks jurisdiction over purely
discretionary determinations, such as the agency’s denial of
cancellation as a matter of discretion.
Next, the panel concluded that the court’s precedent
foreclosed Petitioner’s argument that the agency lacked
jurisdiction because the initial notice to appear did not
specify the time and place to appear, and that Petitioner’s
new non-jurisdictional argument was unexhausted.
Addressing Petitioner’ mental competency, the panel
concluded that the BIA abused its discretion by holding that
the record contained insufficient indicia of incompetence to
mandate remand to the IJ. In light of the indicia here—head
trauma, severe alcohol abuse, dementia, anxiety, depression,
memory disturbance, significant medical prescriptions,
family testimony about forgetfulness and mental problems,
inability to work due to disability, some confusing
testimony, and inability to understand some questions—the
panel granted and remanded on this issue. However, for
efficiency, the panel addressed Petitioner’s remaining
arguments, on the assumption that Petitioner was competent.
As to asylum and related relief, the panel concluded that
the BIA permissibly concluded that Petitioner had
withdrawn his asylum application before the IJ.

4

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

Next, the panel concluded that the BIA did not err in
concluding that Petitioner was ineligible for cancellation of
removal on the ground that his conviction under California
Penal Code section 246, for shooting a firearm at an
inhabited dwelling, is categorically a crime involving moral
turpitude. Explaining that the state offense requires an
intentional shooting of a firearm, that is, the use of a deadly
weapon, in circumstances that necessarily pose a significant
risk of bodily harm to another, the panel concluded that the
state offense falls within the generic definition of a crime
involving moral turpitude. The panel noted that the Supreme
Court’s decision in Loper Bright Enterprises v. Raimondo,
603 U.S. 369 (2024), had no effect on its analysis.
As to NACARA cancellation, the panel concluded that
Petitioner forfeited and then affirmatively waived any
challenge to the BIA’s denial of that relief.
Turning to the BIA’s denial of Petitioner’s motion to
reopen, the panel began by clarifying the court’s jurisdiction
over challenges to the BIA’s denial of a motion to reopen an
application for cancellation of removal, NACARA
cancellation of removal, or other forms of relief listed in
§ 1252(a)(2)(B)(i). The panel concluded that the court has
jurisdiction over the denial of such a motion for a procedural
reason (e.g., untimeliness or failure to attach new evidence)
and over a denial on the ground that the petitioner has not
established a prima facie case of statutory eligibility for
relief. But the court lacks jurisdiction when the BIA rules
that the petitioner failed to establish that the new evidence
would likely change the determination that the petitioner
does not warrant a favorable exercise of discretion. And the
court always retains jurisdiction over constitutional claims
and questions of law. In reaching these conclusions, the
panel recognized, as overruled, this court’s holding in

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

5

Fernandez v. Gonzales, 439 F.3d 592 (9th Cir. 2006),
concerning jurisdiction over challenges to the denial of
reopening with respect to statutory eligibility.
As to the BIA’s denial of reopening to seek NACARA
cancellation, the panel concluded that the BIA committed no
legal error, and the court lacks jurisdiction to review the
BIA’s holding that it would deny as a matter of discretion.
Finally, the panel addressed the BIA’s denial of
reopening to seek asylum and related relief based on
Petitioner’s fears of being removed to Guatemala. The BIA
denied reopening for two reasons: failure to submit “new”
evidence; and failure to establish a prima facie case. As to
the BIA’s ruling that the evidence was not “new” because it
could have been discovered after the merits hearing but
before the appeal to the BIA, the panel concluded this was
legal error because evidence is “new” if it was not available
at the former hearing before the IJ.
As to the BIA’s ruling that Petitioner failed to establish
a prima facie case for asylum, withholding of removal and
CAT relief, the panel concluded that the BIA did not err by
focusing on the time of Petitioner’s past harm in concluding
that
Petitioner
was
unlikely
to
prove
past
persecution. Likewise, the BIA reasonably concluded that
the record contained no meaningful evidence that a gang
member or drug trafficker would harm him today.
However, the panel concluded that the BIA abused its
discretion in denying reopening with respect to Petitioner’
claim related to his mental illness. Petitioner fears that,
because of his age (68) and significant mental health
problems, he will be hospitalized in Federico Mora National
Hospital for Mental Health, where he will be abused and
tortured. Explaining that Petitioner fears direct physical

6

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

violence while institutionalized, and that his claim is
supported by specific and credible reports, the panel
concluded that Petitioner established at least a “reasonable
likelihood” that he would establish a reasonable fear of
future harm. The BIA illogically concluded otherwise only
by misunderstanding (or mischaracterizing) the nature of his
claim as being about generalized healthcare conditions in the
country as a whole. The panel also concluded that the same
error affected the BIA’s analysis of Petitioner’s CAT claim.
Concurring in part and dissenting in part, Judge Zouhary
wrote that he agreed with the majority on all points except
the decision to remand on competency. In Judge Zouhary’s
view, this was not a case in which Petitioner did not
rationally understand his proceedings; rather, he attempted
to minimize certain aspects of his claim. Judge Zouhary
wrote that remanding cases that lack a legitimate question of
competency undermines the finality of proceedings,
encourages delay, and further strains our already
overburdened immigration courts.
Judge Zouhary reluctantly agreed with the conclusion to
remand on fear of future harm. Noting that the record did
not reflect that Petitioner is likely to be hospitalized or that
he likely belongs to a particular social group, the BIA did
not make that finding, and this court cannot affirm the BIA
on a ground upon which it did not rely. Judge Zouhary
observed that in the decades since Petitioner filed for asylum
in 1992, this case has included thousands of pages of
documents, dozens of hearings, and multiple appeals, and
now, another unfortunate snag in the country’s congested
and broken immigration system.

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

7

COUNSEL
Thomas Perkinson (argued) and Enrique Arevalo, Law
Office of Enrique Arevalo, South Pasadena, California, for
Petitioner.
Claire L. Workman (argued), Senior Litigation Counsel;
Melissa Neiman-Kelting, John W. Blakeley, and Keith I.
McManus, Assistant Directors; Office of Immigration
Litigation; Jeffery B. Clark, Acting Assistant Attorney
General; Brett A. Shumate, Assistant Attorney General;
Brian M. Boynton, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney
General; Civil Division, United States Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.; for Respondent.

ORDER
The Opinion filed June 16, 2025, is amended as follows:
On slip opinion page 28, footnote 4 is revised to read in
full: <We conclude independently, without reliance on our
precedents at this step, that Petitioner was convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude.>
On slip opinion page 48, the existing tagline is replaced
with: <PETITIONS DISMISSED IN PART, DENIED
IN
PART,
AND
GRANTED
IN
PART;
REMANDED. The parties shall bear their own costs on
appeal.>
The petitions for rehearing are otherwise DENIED. No
further petitions for rehearing will be accepted.

8

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

OPINION
GRABER, Circuit Judge:
Petitioner Rene Lemus-Escobar left his native
Guatemala in 1985 and entered the United States without
admission or parole. In removal proceedings decades later,
he conceded removability but sought several forms of relief,
including asylum, withholding of removal, relief under the
Convention Against Torture (“CAT”), cancellation of
removal under 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(b)(1), and relief pursuant to
the Nicaraguan Adjustment and Central American Relief
Act (“NACARA”). An immigration judge (“IJ”) denied all
forms of relief, and the Board of Immigration Appeals
(“BIA”) upheld the removal order in 2018. Petitioner timely
filed a motion to reopen proceedings, but the BIA denied
reopening in 2019. Petitioner timely sought review of both
decisions.
Since then, the Supreme Court has issued decisions
affecting our jurisdiction in cases such as this one, where
Petitioner seeks cancellation of removal and NACARA
relief. Wilkinson v. Garland, 601 U.S. 209 (2024); Patel v.
Garland, 596 U.S. 328 (2022); Guerrero-Lasprilla v. Barr,
589 U.S. 221 (2020). In light of those intervening decisions,
we recognize as overruled several aspects of our existing
precedents, and we clarify the jurisdictional rules going
forward. Applying those rules, we conclude that we lack
jurisdiction over some of the agency’s decisions, so we
dismiss the petitions in part. Assessing the merits where we
do have jurisdiction, we deny the petitions in most respects
but grant the petitions in part.

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

9

FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL HISTORY
Petitioner is a 67-year-old native and citizen of
Guatemala who, as noted, entered the United States in 1985.
In the decades following his arrival, he applied for several
forms of relief. In 1992, he applied for asylum, withholding
of removal, and CAT relief. In 2000, he applied for
cancellation of removal pursuant to NACARA. And in
2008, after the government initiated removal proceedings, he
applied for cancellation of removal pursuant to 8 U.S.C.
§ 1229b(b)(1).
At a series of merits hearings spanning the period from
2011 to 2013, Petitioner, his wife, and three of his children
testified. The IJ declined to issue an immediate decision, in
part because annual limits on grants of cancellation of
removal had been met. In 2017, a new IJ took over the case
and issued a written decision denying all forms of relief and
ordering Petitioner removed to Guatemala.
The IJ found credible the testimony of Petitioner’s
children, but she found not credible the testimony of
Petitioner and his wife. The IJ concluded that Petitioner had
withdrawn his application for asylum, withholding of
removal, and CAT relief.
The IJ denied ordinary
cancellation of removal because Petitioner had committed at
least one crime involving moral turpitude. In particular, the
IJ concluded that two of Petitioner’s criminal convictions—
for shooting at an inhabited house in 1988, in violation of
California Penal Code section 246, and for causing a
corporal injury of a spouse in 1993, in violation of California
Penal Code section 273.5(a)—were crimes involving moral
turpitude.
Finally, the IJ denied NACARA relief,
concluding that Petitioner had not demonstrated exceptional
and extremely unusual hardship and that, in the alternative,

10

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

she would deny NACARA relief in the exercise of
discretion, primarily because of Petitioner’s “multiple
criminal convictions and [his] failure to take responsibility
for his crimes.”
Petitioner hired a new lawyer and appealed to the BIA.
In addition to challenging the issues addressed by the IJ,
Petitioner argued that the notice to appear was legally
deficient and that, because the record contained many indicia
of incompetency, the BIA must remand to the IJ for a
competency evaluation.
In late 2018, the BIA dismissed the appeal. The BIA
upheld the IJ’s credibility determinations; rejected the
argument concerning the notice to appear; concluded that the
record “does not contain sufficient indicia of incompetency
such that remand is necessary for the [IJ] to conduct a
competency evaluation”; and denied Petitioner’s request that
the case be remanded for consideration of asylum and related
relief. The BIA affirmed the IJ’s conclusion that Petitioner
was ineligible for ordinary cancellation of removal because
he had been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.
Specifically, the BIA held that Petitioner’s 1988 conviction
for shooting at an inhabited house was a crime involving
moral turpitude and declined to reach, as unnecessary,
whether Petitioner’s 1993 crime also involved moral
turpitude. Finally, the BIA denied NACARA relief,
agreeing with the IJ both that Petitioner failed to establish
that his removal would result in exceptional and extremely
unusual hardship and that, in the alternative, Petitioner “does
not merit a favorable exercise of discretion.”
In early 2019, Petitioner timely filed a motion to reopen
with the BIA. Petitioner attached hundreds of pages of
evidence related to his declining health and to his fear of

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

11

future harm. He sought to reopen his application for
NACARA relief due to additional evidence of hardship to
him and his family members. And he sought to reopen his
applications for asylum, withholding of removal, and CAT
relief both because of evidence that he feared harm if
removed to Guatemala and because of evidence that he, in
fact, had not withdrawn those applications.
In June 2019, the BIA denied the motion to reopen.
Assessing the evidence pertaining to NACARA relief, the
BIA held that some of the evidence could have been
discovered or presented earlier and that, in any event,
Petitioner failed to show that the evidence would likely
change the BIA’s discretionary denial of relief. With respect
to asylum, withholding, and CAT relief, the BIA held that
the evidence was not “new” and that Petitioner was not
prima facie eligible for the requested relief.
Petitioner timely filed petitions for review of both the
2018 denial of relief on the merits and the 2019 denial of
reopening.
We consolidated the cases and ordered
supplemental briefing on the effect of intervening decisions
by the Supreme Court and by this court.
STANDARDS OF REVIEW
We review de novo questions of law. Ruiz-Colmenares
v. Garland, 25 F.4th 742, 748 (9th Cir. 2022). We review
for abuse of discretion the BIA’s denial of reopening. Bent
v. Garland, 115 F.4th 934, 939 (9th Cir. 2024). The BIA
abuses its discretion when it acts “arbitrarily, irrationally, or
contrary to the law,” or “when it fails to provide a reasoned
explanation for its actions.” Id. (citations and internal
quotation marks omitted).

12

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

DISCUSSION
We first consider Petitioner’s challenge to the initial
denial of relief in 2018, before turning to Petitioner’s
challenge to the denial of reopening in 2019.
A. The BIA’s Initial Denial of Relief in 2018
We address the following issues related to the BIA’s
initial denial of relief from removal: (1) our jurisdiction;
(2) arguments pertaining to the notice to appear;
(3) Petitioner’s competency; (4) asylum, withholding of
removal, and CAT relief; (5) cancellation of removal; and
(6) NACARA cancellation of removal.
1. Our Jurisdiction
Recent cases have affected our jurisdiction to decide
challenges to the BIA’s denial of cancellation of removal
under 8 U.S.C. § 1229b and cancellation of removal under
NACARA. We clarify our caselaw at the outset.
Title 8 U.S.C. § 1229b authorizes the BIA to cancel the
removal of a petitioner. The analysis proceeds in two steps.
Step one concerns statutory eligibility. A nonpermanent
resident is statutorily eligible for cancellation of removal if
four elements are met: (A) physical presence for ten years;
(B) good moral character; (C) no conviction for certain
categories of crimes, including crimes involving moral
turpitude; and (D) exceptional and extremely unusual
hardship. 8 U.S.C. § 1229b(b)(1). Even if a person is
statutorily eligible for cancellation of removal at step one,
the BIA nevertheless may deny cancellation of removal, as
a matter of discretion, at step two. See id. § 1229a(c)(4)(A)
(authorizing most relief from removal if the person “(i)
satisfies the applicable eligibility requirements; and (ii) . . .
merits a favorable exercise of discretion”).

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

13

Cancellation of removal under NACARA has similar,
but not identical, requirements. As relevant here, a person
convicted of a crime of moral turpitude remains eligible for
NACARA cancellation of removal if the other three
requirements listed above are met (physical presence, good
moral character, and hardship). 8 C.F.R. § 1240.66(c). And,
as with cancellation of removal pursuant to § 1229b(b)(1),
even if the person is statutorily eligible at step one, the BIA
retains discretion, at step two, to deny NACARA
cancellation of removal. 8 C.F.R. § 1240.64(a); Monroy v.
Lynch, 821 F.3d 1175, 1177 (9th Cir. 2016).
Under 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i), we lack jurisdiction
over “any judgment regarding the granting of relief under”
five statutory sections, including the cancellation of removal
statute, § 1229b. We thus lack jurisdiction over “any
judgment regarding the granting of” cancellation of removal.
Id. That rule applies equally to NACARA cancellation of
removal because NACARA builds expressly on the
procedural and substantive provisions of § 1229b. Monroy,
821 F.3d at 1177. In sum, then, we lack jurisdiction over
any judgment regarding cancellation of removal or
NACARA cancellation of removal.
In Patel, the Supreme Court interpreted broadly
§ 1252(a)(2)(B)(i)’s jurisdiction-stripping phrase, “any
judgment regarding the granting of relief under” the five
listed statutory sections. 596 U.S. at 338–39. The use of the
word “‘any’ means that the provision applies to judgments
of whatever kind.” Id. at 338 (citation and some internal
quotation marks omitted). And the word “regarding”
similarly “has a broadening effect, ensuring that the scope of
a provision covers not only its subject but also matters
relating to that subject.” Id. at 339 (citation and internal
quotation marks omitted).
“Thus, § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i)

14

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

encompasses not just ‘the granting of relief’ but also any
judgment relating to the granting of relief,” including the
agency’s underlying factual findings. Id.; see also Figueroa
Ochoa v. Garland, 91 F.4th 1289, 1294–95 (9th Cir. 2024)
(describing Patel).
Notably, however, § 1252(a)(2)(D) restores our
jurisdiction over “constitutional claims” and, as relevant
here, “questions of law.” On the topic of what constitutes a
“question of law,” the Supreme Court issued important
rulings in Guerrero-Lasprilla and Wilkinson. In both cases,
the Court made clear that the phrase “questions of law” in
§ 1252(a)(2)(D) encompasses all pure questions of law and
mixed questions of law and fact, even very fact-intensive
inquiries.
In Guerrero-Lasprilla, the BIA held that the petitioners
failed to establish due diligence, which is required to warrant
equitable tolling of the deadline for filing a motion to reopen.
589 U.S. at 226. “[T]he underlying facts were not in
dispute,” but the Fifth Circuit held that diligence is an
unreviewable factual question. Id. The Supreme Court
disagreed, holding that “whether a given set of facts meets a
particular legal standard” is a “question of law” for purposes
of § 1252(a)(2)(D). Id. at 227.
In Wilkinson, the IJ concluded that the petitioner was
ineligible for cancellation of removal because he failed to
establish “exceptional and extremely unusual hardship,” and
the BIA affirmed. 601 U.S. at 216. Some circuit courts,
including ours, had held that the hardship determination was
unreviewable because it was a “subjective, discretionary
judgment.” Romero-Torres v. Ashcroft, 327 F.3d 887, 888
(9th Cir. 2003); see Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 217 n.2
(collecting cases). The Supreme Court disagreed with that

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

15

interpretation, holding that the hardship inquiry is an
ordinary application of a legal standard to a set of facts.
Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 221–22. “Mixed questions of law
and fact, even when they are primarily factual, fall within the
statutory definition of ‘questions of law’ in § 1252(a)(2)(D)
and are therefore reviewable.” Id. at 225.
Those cases make clear that the step-one statutory
eligibility requirements—including hardship—present
“questions of law” for purposes of § 1252(a)(2)(D) and that,
consequently, we have jurisdiction to review the agency’s
determination that a particular set of facts does not meet
those requirements. 1 We therefore recognize, as overruled,
our holding in Romero-Torres that the hardship
determination is unreviewable. See Miller v. Gammie, 335
F.3d 889, 900 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc) (holding that we may
recognize, as overruled, an earlier holding that conflicts with
an intervening Supreme Court decision); see also GonzalezJuarez v. Bondi, No. 21-927, 2025 WL 1440220, at *3 (9th
Cir. May 20, 2025) (reaching this same conclusion). Other
cases that applied Romero-Torres’s holding, such as
Fernandez v. Gonzales, 439 F.3d 592, 596 (9th Cir. 2006),
and Martinez-Rosas v. Gonzales, 424 F.3d 926, 929–30 (9th
Cir. 2005), likewise are no longer good law in that respect.

Because the agency’s determination of facts remains unreviewable, the
reviewability of the statutory eligibility standards in some cases may, as
a practical matter, have little effect. For example, where the only dispute
about continuous physical presence concerns the petitioner’s arrival date,
the agency’s factual finding on that point may mean that this court has
no meaningful legal question to review. Similarly, where the agency
disbelieves a petitioner’s testimony as to hardship, the unreviewable
adverse-credibility determination may leave little evidence of hardship
for this court to consider.
1

16

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

Before moving on, we note two additional points from
Wilkinson. First, even though a fact-intensive mixed
question is a “question of law” for the purpose of
§ 1252(a)(2)(D), those questions still warrant “deferential”
review by the circuit court. Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 225. We
recently concluded that we review for substantial evidence
fact-intensive mixed questions of this sort. Gonzalez-Juarez,
2025 WL 1440220, at *3–5. Second, “if the IJ decides a
noncitizen is eligible for cancellation of removal at step one,
his step-two discretionary determination on whether or not
to grant cancellation of removal in the particular case is not
reviewable as a question of law.” Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at
225 n.4. In other words, purely discretionary decisions, like
underlying factual determinations, remain unreviewable.
Gonzalez-Juarez, 2025 WL 1440220, at *3 n.2.
The overall jurisdictional rule that emerges is
straightforward. For challenges to the agency’s denial of
cancellation of removal or NACARA cancellation of
removal, we have jurisdiction over all constitutional claims
and questions of law, including fact-intensive mixed
questions of law; we thus have jurisdiction over step-one
determinations of statutory eligibility.
But we lack
jurisdiction over purely factual findings, such as an adverse
credibility determination or a finding of historical fact; and
we lack jurisdiction over purely discretionary
determinations, such as the agency’s step-two determination
that it would deny cancellation as a matter of discretion.
2. The Notice to Appear
Petitioner argues, as he did before the BIA, that the
agency lacked jurisdiction because the initial notice to
appear did not specify the time and place to appear, even
though Petitioner received that information in a later notice.

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

17

Our precedent forecloses that argument. United States v.
Bastide-Hernandez, 39 F.4th 1187, 1193–94 (9th Cir. 2022)
(en banc).
Before us, Petitioner also raises a new, non-jurisdictional
argument pertaining to the notice to appear. Because
Petitioner raised to the BIA only a jurisdictional argument
pertaining to the notice to appear, Petitioner failed to exhaust
the new argument. Umana-Escobar v. Garland, 69 F.4th
544, 550 (9th Cir. 2023). We therefore deny this portion of
the petition. Id.
3. Petitioner’s Competency
Competency for immigration purposes means having “a
rational and factual understanding of the nature and object
of the proceedings,” an ability to consult with one’s lawyer
or representative, and “a reasonable opportunity to examine
and present evidence and to cross-examine witnesses.”
Matter of M-A-M-, 25 I&N Dec. 474, 479 (BIA 2011). In
Matter of M-A-M-, the BIA set forth the applicable
framework for determining competency in immigration
proceedings, which stems from the due process rights of the
petitioner. Id. We have approved of, and applied, Matter of
M-A-M- in several cases. Salgado v. Sessions, 889 F.3d 982
(9th Cir. 2018); Calderon-Rodriguez v. Sessions, 878 F.3d
1179 (9th Cir. 2018); Mejia v. Sessions, 868 F.3d 1118 (9th
Cir. 2017).
A petitioner is presumed to be competent and, “[a]bsent
indicia of mental incompetency, an Immigration Judge is
under no obligation to analyze [a petitioner’s] competency.”
Matter of M-A-M-, 25 I&N Dec. at 477. But “[w]hen there
are indicia of incompetency, an Immigration Judge must
take measures to determine whether a [petitioner] is
competent to participate in proceedings.” Id. at 480.

18

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

“Indicia of incompetency include a wide variety of
observations and evidence,” including an inability to
understand questions, a high level of distraction, evidence of
mental illness or incompetency, medical reports or
assessments from past medical treatment related to
competency, and testimony of friends and family members
concerning that topic. Id. at 479–80. If indicia of
incompetency are present, the IJ must determine competency
and “must . . . articulate” the competency determination and
the IJ’s reasons. Id. at 481. If a petitioner lacks “sufficient
competency,” the IJ must consider imposing procedural
safeguards to ensure that the proceeding is fair. Id. at 481–
83.
Before the IJ, neither Petitioner nor his lawyer raised the
issue of competency, and the IJ did not address it sua sponte.
On appeal to the BIA, Petitioner’s new lawyer argued that
the IJ erred by failing to inquire into the issue. The BIA
rejected the argument, concluding that the record contained
no indicia of incompetency. Petitioner argues that the BIA
abused its discretion in concluding that the record contains
no indicia of incompetency. 2
Whether the BIA permissibly concluded that the record
contains no indicia of incompetency asks whether a
particular set of facts meets a legal standard; accordingly, it
is a “question of law” for purposes of 8 U.S.C.
§ 1252(a)(2)(D). Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 225. We therefore
We reject Petitioner’s other two arguments concerning competency.
The BIA did not allocate the burden of proving competency improperly.
Nor is the BIA always required to remand competency challenges to the
IJ. Instead, as the BIA properly recognized, it must determine whether
the record contains “sufficient indicia of incompetency such that remand
is necessary for the [IJ] to conduct a competency evaluation.”

2

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

19

have jurisdiction to review Petitioner’s argument. But the
question is a fact-intensive one that warrants deferential
review. Id. Reflecting that deference, we review for abuse
of discretion whether the BIA permissibly concluded that the
record contains no indicia of incompetency. Salgado, 889
F.3d at 987 (citing Mejia, 868 F.3d at 1121).
Petitioner points to the following facts in the record. He
suffered a significant head injury from a motorcycle accident
many years ago, causing a large scar on the back of his head.
That accident, along with past alcohol abuse, has damaged
his memory, causing what doctors described as “memory
loss,” “significant memory impairment,” and an “inability to
recall numerous events.” Doctors have diagnosed him with
memory disturbance; daily occipital headaches; and
Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome, a form of dementia. One
symptom of the Syndrome is “confabulation,” a tendency to
make up information that the person cannot recall. The
person is not lying in any meaningful sense; the person truly
believes the self-fabricated memory. Petitioner testified that
one of his present-day doctors “wanted to do surgery on my
head, but I didn’t accept that.” Doctors also have diagnosed
him with mental illness, including anxiety and depression,
along with concentration difficulties. He takes a wide array
of prescription medications, including pain medications,
Xanax to treat anxiety and depression, and Donepezil, an
anti-dementia drug. He is disabled and unable to work. His
wife and son testified about his forgetfulness and his
“serious mental problems.” Petitioner gave confusing
testimony at times, and he was unable to understand some
questions. Indeed, at one point, the IJ opined that Petitioner
was simply “guessing,” rather than remembering.
Considering the totality of the circumstances, the BIA
abused its discretion by holding that the record contains

20

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

insufficient indicia of incompetence to mandate further
inquiry into competency by the IJ. It is true that each of
those pieces of evidence, by itself, may not trigger an IJ’s
duty to inquire into competency. For example, “there are
many types of mental illness that, even though serious,
would not prevent a [petitioner] from meaningfully
participating in immigration proceedings.” Matter of M-AM-, 25 I&N Dec. at 480. And the evidence does not mean
that Petitioner necessarily was incompetent. Moreover, the
standard of review—abuse of discretion—gives the BIA
some leeway in determining whether the record contains
sufficient indicia of incompetency.
But taken in the aggregate, the evidence in the record
clearly contains, at a minimum, indicia of incompetence
warranting further inquiry by the IJ pursuant to Matter of MA-M-. Each of the types of evidence described above is
precisely the type of evidence that Matter of M-A-M- held
can be an indicium of incompetence. See id. at 479–80 (“the
inability to understand and respond to questions,” “evidence
of mental illness,” “medical reports,” “evidence of
applications for disability benefits,” “testimony from . . .
family members”). The indicia of incompetence here—head
trauma, severe alcohol abuse, dementia, anxiety, depression,
memory disturbance, significant medical prescriptions,
testimony by family members about forgetfulness and
mental problems, an inability to work due to disability, some
confusing testimony, and an inability to understand some
questions—plainly warranted further inquiry by the IJ
pursuant to Matter of M-A-M-.
The BIA concluded otherwise primarily because
Petitioner testified “coherently” during part of his testimony.
But, as the BIA acknowledged, Petitioner’s testimony was
far from coherent when testifying—at length—about two

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

21

key topics: the events surrounding his 1988 crime and the
circumstances of his signing a declaration. Given the
extensive and varied evidence of potential incompetence, the
BIA’s conclusion that the record contains no indicia of
incompetency was irrational. We therefore hold that the BIA
abused its discretion.
Caselaw supports our conclusion. In Mejia, we held that
the BIA abused its discretion by not remanding the matter to
the IJ, where the petitioner had fairly significant mental
illness. 868 F.3d at 1121–22. We reasoned:
Here, there were clear indicia of
Petitioner’s incompetency. He has a history
of serious mental illness, including
hallucinations, bipolar disorder, and major
depression with psychotic features. During
hearings before the IJ, Petitioner testified that
he was not taking his medications and was
feeling unwell. He said he was experiencing
symptoms of mental illness and felt a “very
strong pressure” in his head. He had
difficulty following the IJ’s questions, and
many of his responses were confused and
disjointed. Under In re M-A-M-, those
indicia triggered the IJ’s duty to explain
whether Petitioner was competent and
whether procedural safeguards were needed.
Id. In some ways, the evidence of incompetency in this case
is not quite as extreme as the evidence in Mejia, because the
petitioner in Mejia suffered from more significant mental
illness. But, in other ways, the evidence of incompetency
here is greater; the evidence such as past head trauma, a form

22

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

of dementia that leads to fabricated memories, and testimony
by family members of mental issues is more varied than in
Mejia. Either way, here, just as in Mejia, the record contains
“clear indicia of Petitioner’s incompetency” such that the
BIA abused its discretion in concluding that the record
contained no indicia of incompetency. Id. at 1121.
Petitioner was represented by counsel before the IJ, but
that fact does not resolve whether the record contains indicia
of incompetency warranting further proceedings. The
petitioner in Mejia, too, was represented by counsel before
the IJ, but we concluded that the BIA had abused its
discretion. Id. at 1120–21. Whether or not the petitioner has
counsel, the BIA has placed an affirmative duty on the IJ to
make a competency determination whenever the record
contains sufficient indicia of incompetency. 3 Matter of MA-M-, 25 I&N Dec. at 479–80.
In arguing to the contrary, the government leans heavily
on Salgado, where we held that the BIA had not erred in
upholding the IJ’s determination that the petitioner was
competent. 889 F.3d at 987–89. In that case, the petitioner’s
only potential indicium of incompetency was that he had
been involved in a minor car collision—the police were not
called, the damage to the cars was minimal, he suffered no
physical injuries and did not go to the hospital, and he did
not tell his lawyer about the incident. Id. at 985–86. The
In other circumstances, it might be troubling that Petitioner’s lawyer
failed to raise the issue of competency before the IJ, only to raise the
issue on appeal to the BIA; that tactic could be seen as gamesmanship.
Here, though, Petitioner hired a new lawyer after proceedings with the
IJ, and that lawyer spotted the issue when reviewing the record.
Everyone—including the IJ and the government’s lawyer—can avoid the
potential inefficiency of a remand by noticing the issue during
proceedings before the IJ and by requesting an evaluation.
3

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

23

petitioner stated that he was a little confused and was having
some memory problems after the accident. Id. We held that
“[t]his is a case of poor memory at the most.” Id. at 988.
“The mere inability to recall some events, a common
weakness, and other similar mental lapses, are not sufficient
to show mental incompetency.” Id. at 989.
This case differs greatly from Salgado, both procedurally
and factually. Procedurally, and by contrast to the IJ’s
determination in Salgado that the petitioner was competent,
the IJ here never made a finding of competency. On the
facts, Petitioner presented extensive medical evidence of
significant diagnoses and prescriptions, along with
testimony by family members, whereas the petitioner in
Salgado presented no medical evidence at all and no
testimony from family members. Unlike the minor car
collision at issue in Salgado, the motorcycle crash here
resulted in a head injury and a large scar, and Petitioner
engaged in severe alcohol abuse for years, causing a form of
dementia and medically diagnosed memory impairment. In
short, this is not a simple case of poor memory.
A failure to remand to the IJ can be harmless. Id. The
government here wisely does not argue that any error here is
harmless, likely because the record demonstrates that, had
the IJ followed procedural safeguards, the outcome may
have been different. For example, had the IJ verified with
Petitioner that he truly intended to withdraw his claims of
asylum, withholding of removal, and CAT relief, Petitioner
may have told the IJ that his lawyer was mistaken. As
another example, had the IJ been sensitive to Petitioner’s
medical conditions, the IJ may have taken steps to ensure
that Petitioner was not, as the IJ speculated, merely
“guessing.” (Instead, the IJ found his confusing testimony
not credible and ultimately denied discretionary relief due to

24

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

Petitioner’s lack of remorse and lack of forthright
testimony.) In any event, the government has forfeited any
argument about harmlessness. Iraheta-Martinez v. Garland,
12 F.4th 942, 959 (9th Cir. 2021).
We hold that the BIA abused its discretion by declining
to remand to the IJ for a competency determination. We
therefore grant this portion of the petition and remand for
further proceedings. For efficiency, we address the
remaining arguments presented by Petitioner, on the
assumption that Petitioner was competent. Should the IJ
determine that Petitioner’s condition warrants procedural
safeguards pursuant to Matter of M-A-M-, we leave it to the
agency to determine, in the first instance, the effect of that
ruling on the forms of relief sought by Petitioner and on the
issues raised in the motion to reopen.
4. Asylum, Withholding of Removal, and CAT Relief
Petitioner submitted an asylum application in 1992, but
Petitioner’s lawyer withdrew that application during a
hearing in 2017. The IJ noted that Petitioner had withdrawn
that application. On appeal to the BIA, Petitioner argued that
the IJ erred by failing to reach the merits of the asylum
application. The BIA disagreed, noting that the record
contained no evidence that Petitioner’s lawyer did not
discuss the withdrawal with him or that Petitioner “was
unaware of or opposed to the withdrawal.” Petitioner
challenges that determination under several headings,
including due process.
Assuming that Petitioner was competent, we reject
Petitioner’s argument under any standard of review. In
2017, Petitioner’s lawyer expressly stated on the record that
the asylum application was “withdrawn.”
The IJ
immediately asked, “Withdrawn?” and Petitioner’s lawyer

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

25

responded, “Yes.” Petitioner generally is bound by the acts
of his lawyer. Garcia v. INS, 222 F.3d 1208, 1209 (9th Cir.
2000) (per curiam). Moreover, during the merits hearings,
Petitioner did not present any significant testimony or other
evidence in favor of his application for asylum or related
relief. The testimony and the focus of the merits hearings
were on Petitioner’s applications for cancellation of removal
and NACARA cancellation of removal.
In the
circumstances, the BIA permissibly concluded that
Petitioner had withdrawn the asylum application.
5. Cancellation of Removal
To be statutorily eligible for cancellation of removal,
Petitioner must prove that he has not been convicted of a
crime involving moral turpitude.
8 U.S.C.
§§ 1229b(b)(1)(C), 1182(a)(2)(A)(i)(I); Flores-Vasquez v.
Garland, 80 F.4th 921, 924 (9th Cir. 2023). The BIA held
that Petitioner’s conviction under California Penal Code
section 246, for shooting a firearm at an inhabited dwelling,
categorically qualified as a crime involving moral turpitude.
The BIA accordingly upheld the denial of cancellation of
removal. Petitioner challenges that conclusion on appeal.
Whether a state statute categorically defines a crime
involving moral turpitude is a question of law that we review
de novo. Walcott v. Garland, 21 F.4th 590, 593 (9th Cir.
2021). We therefore have jurisdiction to review the BIA’s
determination. 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(D).
In some circumstances in the past, we deferred, pursuant
to Chevron USA v. Natural Resources Defense Council,
Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), to the agency’s assessment of
whether a crime involves moral turpitude. E.g., Silva v.
Garland, 993 F.3d 705, 713 (9th Cir. 2021). Just last year,
the Supreme Court overruled Chevron in Loper Bright

26

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

Enterprises v. Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369 (2024). For the
reasons that follow, however, we conclude that Loper Bright
has no effect on our analysis here.
When assessing whether a state crime categorically
involves moral turpitude, we first “identify the elements of
the statute of conviction.” Safaryan v. Barr, 975 F.3d 976,
983–84 (9th Cir. 2020) (citations and internal quotation
marks omitted). We have always reviewed this legal
question de novo, without any deference to the agency.
Barrera-Lima v. Sessions, 901 F.3d 1108, 1114 (9th Cir.
2018). Loper Bright thus has no effect on this step of the
analysis.
California Penal Code section 246 punishes “[a]ny
person who shall maliciously and willfully discharge a
firearm at an inhabited dwelling house, occupied building,
occupied motor vehicle, occupied aircraft, inhabited
housecar, . . . or inhabited camper.” Cal. Penal Code § 246.
The statute defines “inhabited” as “currently being used for
dwelling purposes, whether occupied or not.” Id. The
requisite state of mind is recklessness with respect to hitting
a target, but it requires intentionally (“maliciously and
willfully”) shooting a firearm. Covarrubias Teposte v.
Holder, 632 F.3d 1049, 1053–54 (9th Cir. 2011). The statute
requires, at a minimum, that the perpetrator “intentionally
discharged a gun with reckless disregard as to whether the
bullet would hit an inhabited vehicle or dwelling.” Id. at
1054. The statute “proscribes shooting either directly at or
in close proximity to an inhabited or occupied target under
circumstances showing a conscious disregard for the
probability that one or more bullets will strike the target or
persons in or around it.” People v. Overman, 24 Cal. Rptr.
3d 798, 805 (Ct. App. 2005).

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

27

Having defined the elements of the state statute, we next
ask whether the offense “falls within the generic federal
definition of a crime involving moral turpitude.” Safaryan,
975 F.3d at 985 (alteration adopted) (citation and internal
quotation marks omitted). “To involve moral turpitude, a
crime requires two essential elements: reprehensible
conduct and a culpable mental state.” Matter of SilvaTrevino, 26 I&N Dec. 826, 834 (BIA 2016). We have
adopted that definition as our own, independent of any
deference to the agency. See Safaryan, 975 F.3d at 981
(holding that Chevron deference “is ultimately of ‘no
practical significance,’ because ‘we have noted that our
understanding of the phrase does not differ materially from
the BIA’s’” (quoting Marmolejo-Campos v. Holder, 558
F.3d 903, 910 (9th Cir. 2009) (en banc))) (alterations
adopted). For that reason, Loper Bright has no effect on the
general definition of moral turpitude.
We consider the actus reus and the mens rea “in concert”
and on “a sliding scale.” Id. at 981–82. For a more
egregious actus reus, a lesser mens rea suffices; and for a
more intentional mens rea, a lesser actus reus suffices. Id.
But there are minimum requirements for both aspects: in
general, a recklessness mens rea and some reprehensible
conduct are required. Id. at 982. “[W]e presume the
conviction rested upon nothing more than the least of the acts
criminalized.” Ramirez-Contreras v. Sessions, 858 F.3d
1298, 1302 (9th Cir. 2017).
Most of the crimes involving this flavor of moral
turpitude have, as an element, a direct risk to the safety of a
person. See, e.g., Leal v. Holder, 771 F.3d 1140, 1146 (9th
Cir. 2014) (evaluating a statute that required proof of actual
and substantial risk of imminent death). Indeed, we have
summarized that “non-fraudulent crimes of moral turpitude

28

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

almost always involve an intent to harm someone, the actual
infliction of harm upon someone, or an action that affects a
protected class of victim.” Nunez v. Holder, 594 F.3d 1124,
1131 (9th Cir. 2010), superseded in other part as stated in
Betansos v. Barr, 928 F.3d 1133, 1135–36 (9th Cir. 2019).
But, although most turpitudinous crimes have an element of
an intent to harm or substantial risk of harm, not all
turpitudinous crimes do—a point that we have stated
expressly. See id. at 1131 n.4 (“We do not suggest that every
crime that has been held by us to involve moral turpitude
falls within this grouping. There are a number of exceptions
or outliers.”); see also Murillo-Chavez v. Bondi, 128 F.4th
1076, 1088–89 (9th Cir. 2025) (holding that a “specific
intent to cause harm ‘is not required for a crime to involve
moral turpitude’” (quoting United States v. Santacruz, 563
F.3d 894, 897 (9th Cir. 2009) (per curiam))). The relevant
test examines the mens rea and actus reus in concert to
determine the overall culpability required by the crime.
Safaryan, 975 F.3d at 981.
Before Loper Bright, we applied Chevron deference to a
BIA’s published decision concerning what crimes involve
moral turpitude. Lopez v. Garland, 116 F.4th 1032, 1039
(9th Cir. 2024). Now, whether or not the BIA published its
decision, “our task is to evaluate the statute independently
under Skidmore[ v. Swift & Co, 323 U.S. 134 (1944)],
giving ‘due respect,’ but not binding deference[,] to the
agency’s interpretation.” Id. (citation omitted). We
therefore apply Skidmore deference here. 4 The weight given
to an agency’s interpretation under Skidmore depends on the
thoroughness, consistency, and persuasiveness of the
We conclude independently, without reliance on our precedents at this
step, that Petitioner was convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude.

4

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

29

decision itself. See id. (summarizing Skidmore deference).
“[W]e have upheld BIA interpretations under Skidmore
when the BIA confronted an issue germane to the eventual
resolution of the case and resolved it after reasoned
consideration.” Id. (all alterations adopted) (citations and
internal quotation marks omitted).
Looking first to the mens rea, the statute requires an
intentional shooting, “an elevated mens rea.” Moran v. Barr,
960 F.3d 1158, 1162 (9th Cir. 2020). With respect to hitting
a building or person, though, the statute requires only
recklessness, the lowest possible mens rea that could qualify
as a crime involving moral turpitude. Safaryan, 975 F.3d at
982.
Looking next to the actus reus, Petitioner emphasizes
that the statute requires neither harm to a person nor an intent
to harm nor even a reckless disregard of the probability of
harming a person. Considering the least of the acts required
by the statute for a conviction, the perpetrator could target
an unoccupied, albeit “inhabited,” building, and the
perpetrator could recklessly disregard the risk of harming the
building itself, rather than harming a person.
The California courts convincingly have explained why
a conviction for violating section 246 necessarily entails a
substantial risk of bodily harm. The California Court of
Appeal rejected, as “disingenuous,” the same argument
advanced by Petitioner here: that, “since a person could be
convicted of Penal Code section 246 by shooting at a
building which was actually unoccupied at the time the shot
was fired, the least adjudicated element would simply
consist of maliciously shooting at an unoccupied building
without the intent or likelihood of committing serious bodily

30

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

injury.” People v. White, 6 Cal. Rptr. 2d 259, 261 (Ct. App.
1992). The court reasoned:
It is elementary, yet essential to this
analysis, to note that inhabited is defined as
“lived in.” By definition then, inhabitants are
generally in or around the premises. From
this, we can readily perceive the inherent
danger in one firing a weapon at an inhabited
dwelling. Such an act is done with reckless
disregard of probable consequences
(someone being struck).
Id. (citations omitted). The California Supreme Court
followed the same reasoning in concluding that the crime
“inherently involves a danger to human life.” People v.
Hansen, 885 P.2d 1022, 1027 (Cal. 1994), overruled in other
part by People v. Chun, 203 P.3d 425, 442 (Cal. 2009).
In firing a gun at [an inhabited house], there
always will exist a significant likelihood that
an occupant may be present. Although it is
true that a defendant may be guilty of this
felony even if, at the time of the shooting, the
residents of the inhabited dwelling happen to
be absent, the offense nonetheless is one that,
viewed in the abstract—as shooting at a
structure that currently is used for dwelling
purposes—poses a great risk . . . of death.
Id. (internal citation omitted); see also Chun, 203 P.3d at 434
(“[S]hooting at an ‘inhabited dwelling house’ under section
246 is inherently dangerous even though the inhabited

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

31

dwelling house does not have to be actually occupied at the
time of the shooting.”).
Relatedly, we note that a conviction requires the
shooting of a deadly weapon. We repeatedly have held that
“the ‘use of a deadly or dangerous weapon or instrument’
has been treated as a significant aggravating factor in
assessing moral turpitude [because] it ‘magnifies the danger
posed by the perpetrator and demonstrates his or her
heightened propensity for violence and indifference to
human life.’” Safaryan, 975 F.3d at 988 (quoting Matter of
Wu, 27 I&N Dec. 8, 11 (BIA 2017)). We do not suggest that
every crime committed by using a deadly weapon
necessarily involves moral turpitude. But it is undeniably an
aggravating factor, particularly here because the statute
requires an intentional shooting.
Putting it all together, California Penal Code section 246
requires an intentional shooting of a firearm, that is, the use
of a deadly weapon, in circumstances that necessarily pose a
significant risk of bodily harm to another. We hold that the
BIA correctly concluded that section 246 categorically
qualifies as a crime involving moral turpitude. Accordingly,
the BIA did not err in denying cancellation of removal.
6. NACARA Cancellation of Removal
Petitioner forfeited and then affirmatively waived any
challenge to the BIA’s denial of NACARA cancellation of
removal. In his opening brief, Petitioner failed to challenge
the denial of NACARA relief, thus forfeiting the issue.
Iraheta-Martinez, 12 F.4th at 959.
Then, after the
government pointed out the forfeiture, Petitioner
emphatically disclaimed any challenge to NACARA relief:
“Lemus does not petition for review of the NACARA
denial.” Petitioner’s Reply Brief at 3 (bold emphasis in

32

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

original). We conclude that no discretionary exception to
forfeiture or waiver is warranted here. We therefore do not
consider the BIA’s initial denial of NACARA cancellation
of removal. 5
B. The BIA’s Denial of Reopening in 2019
We address the following issues related to the BIA’s
denial of reopening: (1) our jurisdiction; (2) NACARA
cancellation of removal; and (3) asylum, withholding of
removal, and CAT protection.
1. Our Jurisdiction
As with review of the initial denial of relief, the Supreme
Court’s recent cases have affected our jurisdiction over
challenges to the BIA’s denial of a motion to reopen an
application for cancellation of removal. Once again, we
clarify our jurisdiction at the outset.
Congress authorized motions to reopen proceedings. 8
U.S.C. § 1229a(c)(7)(A). “The motion to reopen is an
important safeguard intended to ensure a proper and lawful
disposition of immigration proceedings.” Kucana v. Holder,
558 U.S. 233, 242 (2010) (citations and internal quotation
marks omitted). “The motion to reopen shall state the new
facts that will be proven at a hearing to be held if the motion
is granted, and shall be supported by affidavits or other
evidentiary material.” 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(c)(7)(B). A motion
generally must be filed within 90 days of the entry of a final
order of removal. Id. § 1229a(c)(7)(C)(i).

Because credibility pertained solely to the BIA’s denial of NACARA
cancellation of removal, we also do not address Petitioner’s arguments,
some of which he casts as legal challenges, concerning the agency’s
adverse-credibility determination.

5

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

33

The BIA may deny a motion to reopen for three reasons:
(a) if the motion is deficient for a preliminary procedural
reason, such as untimeliness or a failure to attach new
evidence; (b) if the motion does not establish a prima facie
case for the underlying relief sought; or (c) if the BIA
determines that, even if a prima facie case is established for
a form of discretionary relief, the BIA nevertheless would
deny relief as a matter of discretion. 6 Fernandez, 439 F.3d
at 599; INS v. Abudu, 485 U.S. 94, 104–05 (1988).
Our defining precedent in this context was our 2006
ruling in Fernandez, 439 F.3d 592, which arose from a denial
of reopening of an application for cancellation of removal.
We are guided as well by the relevant statutory provisions
and the Supreme Court’s recent decisions. As we detailed in
Part A-1, 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i) provides that we lack
jurisdiction over “any judgment regarding the granting of”
several forms of relief, including cancellation of removal,
and the Supreme Court gave an expansive interpretation of
that phrase in Patel, 596 U.S. at 338–39.
But
§ 1252(a)(2)(D) grants jurisdiction over all constitutional
questions and “questions of law,” including all mixed
questions of fact and law, no matter how fact-intensive,
Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 225.

Because the BIA cannot find facts, 8 C.F.R. § 1003.1(d)(3)(iv);
Rodriguez v. Holder, 683 F.3d 1164, 1173 (9th Cir. 2012), the potential
jurisdictional bar on purely factual findings does not arise in a BIA’s
denial of a motion to reopen, see Figueroa Ochoa, 91 F.4th at 1293
(holding, in a case challenging the IJ’s denial of a continuance and the
BIA’s denial of a remand, that we lack jurisdiction over purely factual
findings by an IJ).
6

34

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

a. Preliminary Procedural Denial
In Fernandez, we held that we have jurisdiction when
“the agency’s denial of a motion to reopen applies a
procedural statute, regulation, or rule.” 439 F.3d at 602. We
agree with that result, though our reasoning in light of recent
Supreme Court decisions is much more straightforward. A
ruling by the BIA that the facts do not meet the legal
requirements of a particular procedural statute or regulation
is a “question[] of law,” 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(D), over
which we have jurisdiction. Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 225. We
therefore have jurisdiction.
The BIA’s determination here—that certain evidence is
not “new”—clearly constitutes a decision that a particular set
of facts does not meet a legal standard. The set of facts
includes the circumstances of the BIA’s original decision
and the origin and discovery of the proffered evidence. The
legal standard is whether the evidence is “new,” as that term
was used by Congress, 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(c)(7)(B), and as
that term has been interpreted by the agency in its
regulations, 8 C.F.R. § 1003.2(c)(1). Whether the facts meet
the legal standard is a “question[] of law” under
§ 1252(a)(2)(D). Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 225. We therefore
have jurisdiction to review a BIA’s denial of a motion to
reopen on the ground that the proffered evidence is not
“new.” See also Mata v. Lynch, 576 U.S. 143, 148 (2015)
(holding that courts have jurisdiction over a BIA’s
preliminary ruling that a motion to reopen is untimely or
“falls short in some other respect”); Kucana, 558 U.S. at
242–53 (holding that courts have jurisdiction over the BIA’s
preliminary ruling that the petitioner failed to establish
changed country conditions to excuse the procedural defects
in a second motion to reopen); Magana-Magana v. Bondi,
129 F.4th 557, 566–71 (9th Cir. 2025) (concluding that we

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

35

have jurisdiction to review whether “extraordinary
circumstances” excused a late motion to reopen).
b. Prima Facie Case of Statutory Eligibility
For the same reasons, we conclude that we also have
jurisdiction to review the second category of denials. The
BIA’s determination that the evidence, accepted as true, does
not establish a prima facie case for relief constitutes a
decision that a particular set of facts does not meet a legal
standard. The set of facts includes the proffered evidence,
accepted as true, and the remaining evidence in the record.
The legal standard is two-fold: a petitioner must establish a
prima facie case, which means a “reasonable likelihood that
the statutory requirements for relief have been satisfied,”
Salim v. Lynch, 831 F.3d 1133, 1139 (9th Cir. 2016)
(citation and internal quotation marks omitted); and the
eligibility requirements for the specific type of relief sought
provide the underlying legal standards. For example, here,
Petitioner sought to reopen the application for NACARA
cancellation of removal, so he had to establish a reasonable
likelihood, id., of demonstrating physical presence for ten
years, good moral character, and the requisite hardship, 8
C.F.R. § 1240.66(c). Accordingly, we have jurisdiction to
review a BIA’s denial of a motion to reopen on the ground
that a petitioner failed to establish a prima facie case of
statutory eligibility for relief.
In Fernandez, we engaged in a lengthy discussion about
whether we had jurisdiction to review denials of this sort,
ultimately concluding that we had jurisdiction over most—
but not all—challenges to these denials. 439 F.3d at 599–
603; see also id. at 596–99 (describing at length the
background statutory and case law). The reason for the
complexity was our starting premise that a step-one hardship

36

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

determination was a discretionary judgment over which we
lacked jurisdiction. Id. at 596. But Wilkinson overruled that
starting premise by, as we have explained, clarifying that
whether a particular set of facts meets a statutory eligibility
requirement is a question of law, not a discretionary
judgment. 601 U.S. at 222.
Because Fernandez’s reasoning is clearly irreconcilable
with Wilkinson, we recognize, as overruled, Fernandez’s
holding concerning our jurisdiction over challenges to the
BIA’s denial of reopening with respect to statutory
eligibility. Miller, 335 F.3d at 893. After the Supreme
Court’s recent decisions, we have jurisdiction to review a
decision by the BIA that the petitioner failed to present a
prima facie case of statutory eligibility. See Martinez v.
Garland, 98 F.4th 1018, 1020–21 (10th Cir. 2024) (holding
that the court had jurisdiction to review the BIA’s denial of
reopening, where the BIA ruled that the petitioner failed to
establish a prima facie case of statutory eligibility for
cancellation of removal); Cruz-Velasco v. Garland, 58 F.4th
900, 902–03 (7th Cir. 2023) (same); Llanas-Trejo v.
Garland, 53 F.4th 458, 461–62 (8th Cir. 2022) (same).
c. Discretionary Denial
The final category of denial is a determination by the
BIA that, accepting the facts as true and assuming that the
petitioner is statutorily eligible for a discretionary form of
relief such as NACARA cancellation of removal, the
petitioner has not established that the BIA would likely
change its discretionary denial. In Fernandez, we held that
courts lack jurisdiction over this category of denials because
such decisions are judgments relating to the granting of
discretionary relief pursuant to § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i). 439 F.3d
at 599 n.5.

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

37

Fernandez remains good law in that respect because its
holding is not clearly irreconcilable with any of the Supreme
Court’s later cases. Miller, 335 F.3d at 899–900. To the
contrary, the Court’s later decision in Patel supports
Fernandez’s holding. Patel emphasized the expansive scope
of § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i)’s stripping of jurisdiction over “any
judgment regarding the granting of” discretionary relief such
as cancellation of removal. 596 U.S. at 338–39. A
discretionary judgment regarding the granting of
cancellation that causes the denial of a motion to reopen
likely remains a judgment regarding the granting of
cancellation. See id. at 339 (holding that “§ 1252(a)(2)(B)(i)
encompasses not just ‘the granting of relief’ but also any
judgment relating to the granting of relief”); see also
Figueroa Ochoa, 91 F.4th at 1294 (holding, primarily
because of Patel, that § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i) encompasses the
denial of a continuance and the denial of a remand where the
underlying relief sought was one of the five statutory
provisions listed in § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i)).
That conclusion is confirmed by the rule that, where the
immigration statutes provide the BIA unbounded discretion
to deny relief, we have no meaningful legal standard to
apply. See, e.g., Medina-Morales v. Ashcroft, 371 F.3d 520,
528 (9th Cir. 2004) (referring to decisions of this sort as an
exercise of “pure discretion unguided by legal standards or
statutory guidelines”); see also Ekimian v. INS, 303 F.3d
1153, 1159 (9th Cir. 2002) (holding that we lack jurisdiction
to review the BIA’s denial of sua sponte reopening because
“we cannot discover a sufficiently meaningful standard
against which to judge the BIA’s decision not to reopen”).
For the same reason, the BIA’s discretionary judgment
call is not a “question of law” for the purpose of
§ 1252(a)(2)(D). The BIA considers whether the new

38

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

evidence “would likely change” its original determination
that discretionary relief was unwarranted. Fonseca-Fonseca
v. Garland, 76 F.4th 1176, 1181 (9th Cir. 2023). The “would
likely change” standard is a legal one, but is incomplete on
its own. The full inquiry is whether the evidence would
likely change the BIA’s purely discretionary judgment. We
have no meaningful ability to review that judgment, and it
falls outside the scope of § 1252(a)(2)(D).
In Kucana, the Supreme Court held, in a case involving
untimeliness, that courts generally have jurisdiction to
review the BIA’s denial of reopening. 558 U.S. at 242–53;
see also Mata, 576 U.S. at 147–48 (reaffirming, in a context
divorced from § 1252(a)(2)(B)(i), Kucana’s holding that
courts generally have jurisdiction to review denials of
reopening due to untimeliness). But the Court expressly left
open the question “whether review of a reopening denial
would be precluded if the court would lack jurisdiction over
the [petitioner’s] underlying claim for relief.” Kucana, 558
U.S. at 250 n.17. Here, we would lack jurisdiction over a
decision by the BIA that, as a matter of discretion, Petitioner
does not warrant NACARA cancellation of removal.
Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 222. Neither Kucana nor any other
intervening case is clearly irreconcilable with Fernandez’s
holding that we lack jurisdiction over this category of
denials.
In sum, we lack jurisdiction over a BIA’s denial of
reopening on the ground that it would deny cancellation of
removal as a matter of discretion. We reiterate that we
always retain jurisdiction to review constitutional claims and
questions of law. 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(D). Even where the
BIA states that it would deny relief as a matter of discretion,
we retain jurisdiction over legal arguments that the BIA, for
example, applied the wrong preliminary law, failed to accept

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

39

the proffered evidence as true, or misapplied its regulations.
Cf. Fonseca-Fonseca, 76 F.4th at 1181–83 (reviewing
whether the BIA applied the correct legal standard when it
asked whether the new evidence “would likely change” its
decision on statutory eligibility). We lack jurisdiction only
over the BIA’s purely discretionary judgment that it would
deny relief as a matter of discretion. See Moreno v. Garland,
51 F.4th 40, 47 (1st Cir. 2022) (holding, in a case involving
a discretionary denial of reopening, that “because we cannot
discern any error of law in the BIA’s explanation of its
conclusion, we have no authority to review the BIA’s
exercise of discretion”).
d. Summary
In a case where the petitioner seeks to reopen
applications for cancellation of removal, NACARA
cancellation of removal, or other forms of relief listed in
§ 1252(a)(2)(B)(i), we conclude as follows. 7 We have
jurisdiction over a denial for a preliminary procedural reason
and over a denial on the ground that the petitioner has not
established a prima facie case of statutory eligibility for
relief. But we lack jurisdiction when the BIA rules that the
petitioner failed to establish that the new evidence would
likely change the BIA’s determination that the petitioner
does not warrant a favorable exercise of discretion. We
always retain jurisdiction over constitutional claims and
questions of law.
Although we expect these rules to apply in nearly all cases, additional
considerations may come into play in other cases, such as jurisdictional
bars found in 8 U.S.C. § 1252(a)(2)(A), (B)(ii), & (C). Cf. Bouarfa v.
Mayorkas, 604 U.S. 6, 9 (2025) (holding that § 1252(a)(2)(B)(ii)
precludes judicial review of revocation of a visa approval). We do not
reach those issues.
7

40

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

2. NACARA Cancellation of Removal
The BIA originally denied NACARA cancellation of
removal for two alternative reasons: because Petitioner
failed to establish the requisite hardship and because, even if
he met the statutory eligibility requirements, he does not
warrant a favorable exercise of discretion. In his motion to
reopen this claim, Petitioner submitted extensive documents,
including medical evidence of his own health conditions,
medical evidence of his wife’s health conditions, and
declarations from family members. Petitioner asserted that
the evidence tipped the scales with respect to both hardship
and discretion.
The BIA denied reopening. The BIA first held that much
of the evidence was not “new” within the meaning of the
statute. But the BIA also held, in the alternative, that
Petitioner had not met his burden of establishing that the
evidence would likely change the BIA’s denial of relief as a
matter of discretion.
Applying the analysis in Part B-1, above, we reach the
following conclusions as to our jurisdiction. The BIA’s
ruling that some of the evidence was not new presents a
mixed question of fact and law over which we have
jurisdiction. Wilkinson, 601 U.S. at 212. But we need not,
and do not, reach that question, because we lack jurisdiction
to review the BIA’s alternative, dispositive holding that it
would deny NACARA relief as a matter of discretion.
Fernandez, 439 F.3d at 599 n.5. Even if the BIA erred in
ruling that some evidence was not new, that conclusion
would have no effect on the BIA’s alternative denial as a
matter of discretion, which considered all the evidence.
Petitioner does raise a legal argument over which we
have jurisdiction: he argues that, when making its

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

41

discretionary judgment, the BIA failed to consider the
evidence in the aggregate. See Franco-Rosendo v. Gonzales,
454 F.3d 965, 966 (9th Cir. 2006) (holding that the BIA must
consider the evidence cumulatively in making a
discretionary determination). We reject that claim as
unsupported by the record. Nothing suggests that the BIA
disregarded any evidence or otherwise misapplied the law.
See Kohli v. Gonzales, 473 F.3d 1061, 1068 (9th Cir. 2007)
(holding that the BIA is presumed to apply the law
correctly).
In sum, in assessing the motion to reopen the NACARA
application, the BIA committed no legal error, and we lack
jurisdiction to review the BIA’s discretionary denial of
relief. See Moreno, 51 F.4th at 47 (“[B]ecause we cannot
discern any error of law in the BIA’s explanation of its
conclusion, we have no authority to review the BIA’s
exercise of discretion.”).
3. Asylum, Withholding of Removal, and CAT Relief
The BIA originally declined to consider Petitioner’s
applications for asylum, withholding, and CAT relief. The
BIA held Petitioner to his first lawyer’s express withdrawal
of those applications, noting that Petitioner had not
submitted a declaration that his lawyer had erred. In his
motion to reopen, Petitioner attached a declaration that he
never authorized his lawyer to withdraw those applications
and evidence that he filed a complaint with the California
State Bar. Concerning his fear of harm, he submitted a
declaration and evidence of conditions in Guatemala.
The BIA acknowledged that Petitioner had now
complied with the procedural requirements of Matter of
Lozada, 19 I&N Dec. 637 (BIA 1988), concerning his
original lawyer’s ineffectiveness. But the BIA denied

42

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

reopening of these claims for two reasons: failure to submit
“new” evidence that was not previously available, 8 U.S.C.
§ 1229a(c)(7)(B), 8 C.F.R. § 1003.2(c)(1); and, even
accepting the evidence, failure to establish a prima facie
case.
The BIA legally erred in its evidentiary ruling. Petitioner
hired his current lawyer after the hearings before the IJ had
concluded. The BIA held that the evidence of Petitioner’s
lawyer’s ineffectiveness could have been discovered after
the merits hearings but before the appeal to the BIA;
accordingly, the evidence was not “new.” That ruling is
contrary to law:
[B]oth the statute and the regulation indicate
that the evidence must not have been
available to be presented “at the former
hearing.” 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(c)(6)(B); 8
C.F.R. § 1003.2(c)(1).
The proffered
testimony concerns events that happened
after the “former hearing” before the IJ. The
government’s argument that the information
was previously available because it became
available during the pendency of the appeal
to the Board does not comport with the statute
and regulation.
Bhasin v. Gonzales, 423 F.3d 977, 987 (9th Cir. 2005)
(emphasis omitted). 8 Bhasin controls here. The BIA erred
8
The statute no longer contains the “at the former hearing” wording,
requiring instead only the assertion of “new facts.” 8 U.S.C.
§ 1229a(c)(7)(B). The regulation continues to define that term as
evidence that “could not have been discovered or presented at the former
hearing.” 8 C.F.R. § 1003.2(c)(1) (emphasis added). The government

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

43

as a matter of law by ruling that the evidence was not new
because it became available after the hearing before the IJ.
We therefore consider the BIA’s alternative ruling that
Petitioner failed to establish a prima facie case of statutory
eligibility. Petitioner expressed a fear of harm from
guerrillas and drug traffickers due to events that occurred in
the early 1980s, and he asserted that, because of his severe
mental illness, he will be institutionalized and harmed.
a. Fear of Harm From Guerrillas and Drug Traffickers
The BIA ruled that Petitioner was unlikely to prove past
persecution because he failed to show that, at the time of the
past harm, the Guatemalan government was either unable or
unwilling to protect him from the harm. The BIA did not
abuse its discretion in assessing the evidence in the record of
Guatemala’s willingness to protect him from harm in the
early 1980s.
Nor did the BIA legally err by focusing on that
timeframe. When assessing whether a petitioner has
established past persecution, the relevant inquiry focuses on
the government’s actions at that time. See Truong v. Holder,
613 F.3d 938, 941 (9th Cir. 2010) (per curiam) (holding that
a petitioner must show that “the persecution was committed
either by the government or by forces that the government
was unable or unwilling to control” and assessing that prong
by considering how the government responded at the time of
the past harm (quoting Gormley v. Ashcroft, 364 F.3d 1172,
accordingly does not argue that Bhasin is no longer good law. To the
contrary, the government affirmatively states, after quoting the relevant
regulatory text, that “[t]he statutory language requiring ‘new facts’ does
not abrogate the preexisting regulatory requirement that appropriately
elaborates on what that means.” Gov’t’s Response Brief at 62.

44

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

1177 (9th Cir. 2004)) (emphasis added)). Petitioner cites no
legal support for the proposition that one measures past
persecution by considering how the foreign government
today would act.
The BIA also did not abuse its discretion in concluding
that Petitioner was unlikely to prevail in establishing an
objectively reasonable fear of future harm due to events that
occurred more than 30 years earlier. The BIA reasonably
concluded that the record contains no meaningful evidence
that a gang member or drug trafficker would harm him
today.
b. Mental Illness
Petitioner submitted considerable evidence that
institutionalized mentally ill persons in Guatemala are
significantly mistreated. The Human Rights Report for
Guatemala written by the U.S. State Department states:
The Federico Mora National Hospital for
Mental Health, the only public healthcare
provider for persons with mental illness,
lacked basic supplies, equipment, hygienic
living conditions, and adequate professional
staff.
Media reported mistreatment of
residents, including physical, psychological,
and sexual violence by other residents,
guards, and hospital staff, especially with
respect to women and children with
disabilities. Multiple legal actions were
pending against the hospital.
A nonprofit organization concluded from its investigation
that “Federico Mora [is] one of the most violen[t] and

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

45

dangerous facilities anywhere in the world. Staff and
detainees have reported that rape, violence, and other forms
of abuse are routine within the facility.” Another document
reported:
The actions of the Government often
perpetuated segregation and discrimination
against persons with disabilities. The country
Rapporteur expressed her grave concern
about the serious violations of the human
rights of persons with disabilities detained in
the Federico Mora mental health
hospital . . . .
Serious human rights
violations, including torture and ill treatment
of persons with disabilities detained in this
hospital, had been reported[.]
In sum, Federico Mora is the only public mental health
hospital in the country, and there are many reports of abuse
and torture of patients. Petitioner asserted that, because of
his age and significant mental health problems, he will be
hospitalized in Federico Mora, and then abused and tortured.
In asserting asylum and withholding claims, he argued that
he belonged to a particular social group of “mentally ill and
disabled” persons.
The BIA did not hold that Petitioner was unlikely to be
hospitalized or that he likely does not belong to a particular
social group. The BIA held, instead, that Petitioner was
unlikely to prevail on the merits of his asylum and
withholding claims for one reason only: “Evidence that
Guatemala has an inadequate healthcare system is not
evidence of persecution on account of a protected ground.”
(Citing Mendoza-Alvarez v. Holder, 714 F.3d 1161, 1165 &

46

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

n.2. (9th Cir. 2013) (per curiam)). We conclude that the BIA
abused its discretion.
In Mendoza-Alvarez, we held that an inadequate
healthcare system that broadly affects many persons by
failing to provide sufficient medication such as insulin
cannot support an asylum or withholding claim. Id. at 1165.
Petitioner’s claim here is far more specific: he fears being
hospitalized at one particular hospital, where patients are
“routine[ly]” abused. Petitioner’s claim is not a nationwide,
generalized claim of inadequate access to medication; he
fears direct physical violence while institutionalized, and his
claim is supported by specific reports from credible entities.
Under any sensible assessment of the record at the motionto-reopen stage, Petitioner established at least a “reasonable
likelihood” that he would prevail in establishing a reasonable
fear of future harm. Fonseca-Fonseca, 76 F.4th at 1179. The
BIA illogically concluded otherwise only by
misunderstanding (or mischaracterizing) the nature of his
claim as being about generalized healthcare conditions in the
country as a whole.
That same error affected the BIA’s analysis of
Petitioner’s CAT claim. The BIA held that, “although
[Petitioner] has submitted evidence of abusive conditions in
mental health institutions in Guatemala, this evidence does
not establish a prima facie showing for protection against
torture.” The BIA reasoned that “abusive and squalid
conditions in mental health institutions will not constitute
torture where the evidence plausibly establishes that the
conditions are the result of neglect, a lack of resources, or
insufficient training and education, rather than a specific
intent to cause severe pain and suffering.” Again, the BIA
misunderstood Petitioner’s claim. He does not fear
generalized harm from an inadequate healthcare system or

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

47

from generally poor conditions in the hospital; he fears that
he will be locked in the hospital and will experience what
has reportedly happened to many others, specifically violent
abuse, rape, and torture caused by those with a specific intent
to harm.
A comparison to Villegas v. Mukasey, 523 F.3d 984 (9th
Cir. 2008), is instructive. There, the petitioner pointed to
poor conditions in some Mexican mental hospitals, and we
upheld the BIA’s determination that no one had a specific
intent to harm. Id. at 989. By contrast to the evidence here—
detailed reports of significant mistreatment at the sole public
mental health hospital in the country, including violence and
torture caused by those with an intent to harm, not mere
squalor or neglect—the evidence in Villegas generally
concerned terrible conditions in hospitals. See id. (“While
Villegas is correct that a variety of evidence showed that
Mexican mental patients are housed in terrible squalor,
nothing indicates that Mexican officials (or private actors to
whom officials have acquiesced) created these conditions for
the specific purpose of inflicting suffering upon the
patients.”). Moreover, unlike in Villegas, the BIA here was
considering only whether there was a reasonable likelihood
that Petitioner would prevail on his CAT claim; in Villegas,
the petitioner received a full hearing on the claim, and the IJ
and the BIA ruled on the merits of the claim. Id. at 986–87.
We conclude that, under any reasonable consideration of the
record at the motion-to-reopen stage, Petitioner established
a “reasonable likelihood” that he would prevail in
establishing a likelihood of future torture. Fonseca-Fonseca,
76 F.4th at 1179.
For its part, the government errs in two respects. First, it
refers to the reports of abuse as arising in “only one
psychiatric hospital in Guatemala where abuse has

48

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

occurred,” suggesting that Petitioner might avoid the same
fate as other mentally ill patients. Gov’t’s Response Brief at
76. But the State Department’s report referred to that
hospital as “the only public healthcare provider for persons
with mental illness.” (Emphasis added.) Second, the
government attempts to bolster the BIA’s conclusion by
pointing to evidence that the Guatemalan government “is
actively trying to improve conditions for patients in mental
health facilities.” Id. at 77. But the BIA did not cite that
reason; it relied solely on the lack of an intent to harm. We
may review only the reasons given by the BIA. SuateOrellana v. Garland, 101 F.4th 624, 628 n.2 (9th Cir. 2024).
PETITIONS DISMISSED IN PART, DENIED IN
PART, AND GRANTED IN PART; REMANDED. The
parties shall bear their own costs on appeal.
ZOUHARY, District Judge, concurring in part and
dissenting in part:
I agree with the majority opinion on all points except the
decision to remand for the agency to examine Petitioner’s
competency. And, as to fear of future persecution, I join that
portion of the Opinion, writing further only to elaborate on
why the record supports the BIA’s ultimate conclusion.
1. The test for determining whether a petitioner “is
competent to participate in immigration proceedings is
whether he or she has a rational and factual understanding of
the nature and object of the proceedings, can consult with the
attorney or representative if there is one, and has a
reasonable opportunity to examine and present evidence and

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

49

cross-examine witnesses.” Matter of M-a-m-, 25 I. & N.
Dec. 474, 479 (2011).
During the proceedings below, the IJ questioned
Petitioner extensively about the discrepancies in his
testimony related to his criminal history. She found
Petitioner was attempting to “minimize the seriousness of his
criminal convictions” and that he had “lied to the court.” To
explain the discrepancies, Petitioner provided a “last
minute” letter from a doctor, which stated Petitioner suffered
from Wernicke-Korsakoff Syndrome. The IJ correctly noted
that she could not simply rely on the letter, as she had “no
background information or CV” and “didn’t even know if he
was [Petitioner’s] doctor during those time periods.” She
gave Petitioner additional time to provide a CV and further
medical testimony.
At the next hearing, Petitioner provided a new
neurologist report. But that report noted Petitioner was
readily able to communicate -- he was “[a]lert and oriented,”
“recall[ed] the names of his wife and children readily,” was
“[a]ble to speak about his line of work,” and had normal
“language function including spontaneous output,
comprehension and repetition intact.”
The IJ concluded that there was “some documentation to
show that [Petitioner] has memory lapses.” But the medical
documents did not show Petitioner lacked a rational
understanding of his surroundings.
Petitioner easily
answered questions about his family and his life. And he
had multiple opportunities to present sufficient medical
evidence, but failed to do so.
In any event, memory loss alone is not enough to show
incompetency. See Salgado v. Sessions, 889 F.3d 982, 987–
89 (9th Cir. 2018) (finding poor memory insufficient where

50

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

the petitioner answered questions, was alert, and asked for
clarification when confused). As the BIA noted, the medical
records did “not provide any details regarding the extent of
[Petitioner’s] memory loss,” and Petitioner “was able to
readily answer questions about this family, where he lives,
and his employment.” This was not a case in which
Petitioner did not rationally understand the proceedings.
Rather, Petitioner attempted to minimize certain aspects of
his past.
For these reasons, while I respect the majority’s
thorough analysis of the other claims, I cannot agree with the
decision to remand on competency grounds. Remanding
cases that lack a legitimate question of competency
undermines the finality of proceedings, encourages delay,
and further strains our already overburdened immigration
courts.
2. I reluctantly agree with the conclusion to remand on
the issue of fear of future harm. While the record does not
reflect that Petitioner is likely to be hospitalized or that he
likely belongs to a particular social group, the BIA did not
make that finding -- though such a finding necessarily flows
from the competency discussion above. Petitioner’s current
family support, relatives in Guatemala, and lack of medical
evidence of disability, do not point to him being
institutionalized for a mental illness. “However, this court
cannot affirm the BIA on a ground upon which it did not
rely.” Navas v. I.N.S., 217 F.3d 646, 658 n.16 (9th Cir.
2000).
Petitioner initially filed for asylum in 1992. In the
decades since, this case has included thousands of pages of
documents, dozens of hearings before different IJs, and

LEMUS-ESCOBAR V. BONDI

51

multiple appeals. Now, another unfortunate snag in our
congested and broken immigration system.

