FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
KIM RHODE; GARY BRENNAN;
CORY HENRY; EDWARD
JOHNSON; SCOTT LINDEMUTH;
RICHARD RICKS; DENISE
WELVANG; ABLE'S SPORTING,
INC., a Texas corporation; AMDEP
HOLDINGS, LLC, a Florida limited
liability company doing business as
Ammunition Depot; R&S
FIREARMS, INC., an Arizona
corporation doing business as Sam's
Shooters Emporium; CALIFORNIA
RIFLE & PISTOL ASSOCIATION,
a California corporation,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
ROB BONTA, in his official capacity
as Attorney General of the State of
California,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 24-542
D.C. No.
3:18-cv-00802BEN-JLB

OPINION

2

RHODE V. BONTA

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Southern District of California
Roger T. Benitez, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted December 4, 2024
Pasadena, California
Filed July 24, 2025
Before: Jay S. Bybee, Sandra S. Ikuta, and Bridget S. Bade,
Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Ikuta;
Dissent by Judge Bybee
SUMMARY *
Second Amendment
Affirming the district court’s grant of a permanent
injunction, the panel held that California’s ammunition
background check regime, which requires firearm owners to
complete background checks before each ammunition
purchase, facially violates the Second Amendment.
The panel applied the two-step framework set forth in
New York State Rifle and Pistol Association v. Bruen, 597

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

RHODE V. BONTA

3

U.S. 1 (2022), in assessing plaintiffs’ Second Amendment
challenge.
Applying the first step, the panel held that California’s
ammunition background check regime implicates the plain
text of the Second Amendment because the regime
meaningfully constrains the right to keep operable arms.
Applying the second step, the panel held that the
government failed to carry its burden of showing that
California’s ammunition background check regime “is
consistent with the Nation’s historical tradition of firearm
regulation.” The historical analogues proffered by
California were not within the relevant time frame, nor were
they relevantly similar to California’s ammunition
background check regime.
Accordingly, the panel held that California’s
ammunition background check regime did not survive
scrutiny under the two-step Bruen analysis.
The panel next considered Bruen’s footnote stating that
“nothing in [the Supreme Court’s] analysis should be
interpreted to suggest the unconstitutionality of the 43
States’ ‘shall-issue’ licensing regimes.” The panel
explained that the Supreme Court indicated that shall-issue
regimes may be constitutional, but did not hold that they
were
per
se
consistent
with
the
Second
Amendment. Moreover, Bruen shed no light on the
constitutionality of an ammunition background check
regime, which is meaningfully distinguishable from a shallissue licensing regime.
Finally, the panel considered the implications of the
nature of plaintiffs’ facial challenge to California’s
ammunition background check regime. The panel held that

4

RHODE V. BONTA

Bruen’s two-step framework applies regardless of whether a
plaintiff brings a facial or as-applied challenge to a law
alleged to violate the Second Amendment.
Because California’s ammunition background check
regime violates the Second Amendment, the panel held that
the district court did not abuse its discretion in granting a
permanent injunction.
Dissenting, Judge Bybee would reverse the judgment of
the district court and hold that California’s ammunition
background check scheme is facially constitutional. Under
the first step of the Bruen framework, California’s
imposition of a de minimis delay and small fee for
purchasing ammunition cannot possibly “meaningfully
constrain” the right to keep and bear arms, and therefore it is
unnecessary to proceed to Bruen’s second step. In addition,
the Supreme Court has repeatedly recognized that objective,
“shall-issue” licensing regimes—like California’s—are
presumptively lawful, and plaintiffs have failed to rebut that
presumption.
Judge Bybee also analyzed the Commerce Clause and
preemption arguments that the majority did not reach, and
would hold that (1) California's face-to-face requirement to
consummate ammunition transactions does not violate the
Commerce Clause; and (2) federal law does not preempt
California's prohibition on bringing out-of-state ammunition
into the state.

RHODE V. BONTA

5

COUNSEL
Matthew D. Rowen (argued), Erin E. Murphy, and Paul D.
Clement, Clement & Murphy PLLC, Alexandria, Virginia;
C.D. Michel and Sean A. Brady, Michel & Associates PC,
Long Beach, California; for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Mica L. Moore (argued), Deputy Solicitor General; Noreen
P. Skelly, Attorney; Anthony P. O’Brien, Deputy Attorney
General; Office of the California Attorney General,
Sacramento, California; Christina R.B. Lopez, Deputy
Attorney General; John D. Echeverria and R. Matthew Wise,
Supervising Deputy Attorneys General; Thomas S.
Patterson, Senior Assistant Attorney General; Helen H.
Hong, Principal Deputy Solicitor General; Michael J.
Mongan, Solicitor General; Rob Bonta, California Attorney
General; Office of the California Attorney General, Los
Angeles, California; Sebastian Brady; Meghan H. Strong,
Deputy Attorney General; California Department of Justice,
San Francisco, California; for Defendant-Appellant.
Michael K. Plimack and Nathan E. Shafroth, Covington &
Burling LLP, San Francisco, California; Hassan Ahmad and
Tori N. Keller, Covington & Burling LLP, Washington,
D.C.; Douglas N. Letter and Shira L. Feldman, Brady Center
to Prevent Gun Violence, Washington, D.C.; Esther
Sanchez-Gomez and William T. Clark, Giffords Law Center
to Prevent Gun Violence, San Francisco, California; for
Amici Curiae Brady Center to Prevent Gun Violence and
Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
Freya Jamison, Everytown Law, Washington, D.C.; Janet
Carter and William J. Taylor Jr., Everytown Law, New
York, New York; for Amicus Curiae Everytown for Gun
Safety.

6

RHODE V. BONTA

Barry K. Arrington, Arrington Law Firm, Wheat Ridge,
Colorado, for Amicus Curiae National Association for Gun
Rights.
David C. Tryon and Alex M. Certo, The Buckeye Institute,
Columbus, Ohio, for Amicus Curiae The Buckeye Institute.
Stephen R. Klein, Barr & Klein PLLC, Washington, D.C.,
for Amici Curiae American Firearms Association, et al..
Mathura Sridharan and Nicholas A. Cordova, Deputy
Solicitors General; T. Elliot Gaiser, Ohio Solicitor General;
Dave Yost, Ohio Attorney General; Office of the Ohio
Attorney General, Columbus, Ohio; Sean M. Corkery,
Assistant Attorney General; Alan M. Hurst, Idaho Solicitor
General; Raul R. Labrador, Idaho Attorney General; Idaho
Office of the Attorney General, Boise, Idaho; Steve
Marshall, Alabama Attorney General, Office of the Alabama
Attorney General, Montgomery, Alabama; Treg R. Taylor,
Alaska Attorney General, Office of the Alaska Attorney
General, Anchorage, Alaska; Tim Griffin, Arkansas
Attorney General Office of the Arkansas Attorney General,
Little Rock, Arkansas; Ashley Moody, Florida Attorney
General, Office of the Florida Attorney General,
Tallahassee, Florida;
Christopher M. Carr, Georgia
Attorney General, Office of the Georgia Attorney General,
Atlanta, Georgia; Theodore E. Rokita, Indiana Attorney
General, Office of the Indiana Attorney General,
Indianapolis, Indiana; Brenna Bird, Iowa Attorney General,
Office of the Iowa Attorney General, Des Moines, Iowa;
Kris Kobach, Kansas Attorney General, Office of the Kansas
Attorney General, Topeka, Kansas; Elizabeth B. Murrill,
Louisiana Attorney General, Office of the Louisiana
Attorney General, Baton Rouge, Louisiana; Lynn Fitch,
Mississippi Attorney General, Office of the Mississippi

RHODE V. BONTA

7

Attorney General, Jackson, Mississippi; Andrew Bailey,
Missouri Attorney General, Office of the Missouri Attorney
General, Kansas City, Missouri; Austin Knudsen, Montana
Attorney General, Office of the Montana Attorney General,
Helena, Montana; Michael T. Hilgers, Nebraska Attorney
General, Office of the Nebraska Attorney General, Lincoln,
Nebraska; John M. Formella, New Hampshire Attorney
General, Office of the New Hampshire Attorney General,
Concord, New Hampshire; Drew H. Wrigley, North Dakota
Attorney General, Office of the North Dakota Attorney
General, Bismarck, North Dakota; Alan Wilson, South
Carolina Attorney General, Office of the South Carolina
Attorney General, Columbia, South Carolina; Marty
Jackley, South Dakota Attorney General, Office of the South
Dakota Attorney General, Pierre, South Dakota; Jonathan
Skrmetti, Tennessee Attorney General and Reporter, Office
of the Tennessee Attorney General, Nashville, Tennessee;
Ken Paxton, Texas Attorney General, Office of the Texas
Attorney General, Austin, Texas; Sean D. Reyes, Utah
Attorney General, Office of the Utah Attorney General, Salt
Lake City, Utah; Patrick Morrisey, West Virginia Attorney
General, Office of the West Virginia Attorney General,
Charleston, West Virginia; Bridget Hill, Wyoming Attorney
General, Office of the Wyoming Attorney General,
Cheyenne, Wyoming; for Amici Curiae Ohio, Idaho,
Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Indiana,
Iowa, Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana,
Nebraska, New Hampshire, North Dakota, South Carolina,
South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, West Virginia, and
Wyoming.
Jeremiah L. Morgan, William J. Olsen, and Robert J. Olson,
William J. Olson PC, Vienna, Virginia; Joseph W. Miller,
Law Office of Joseph Miller LLC, Fairbanks, Alaska; John

8

RHODE V. BONTA

I. Harris III, Schulman Leroy & Bennett PC, Nashville,
Tennessee; for Amici Curiae Gun Owners of California, Gun
Owners of America, Inc., Gun Owners Foundation, Heller
Foundation, Tennessee Firearms Association, Tennessee
Firearms Foundation, America’s Future, U.S. Constitutional
Rights Legal Defense Fund, Conservative Legal Defense
and Education Fund, and Restoring Liberty Action
Committee.

OPINION
IKUTA, Circuit Judge:
This appeal raises the question whether California’s
first-of-its-kind ammunition background check regime,
which requires firearm owners to complete background
checks before each ammunition purchase, violates the
Second Amendment. We hold that California’s ammunition
background check regime is unconstitutional, and we affirm
the district court’s grant of a permanent injunction.
I
A
In 2016, California voters approved Proposition 63,
which created a background check regime for ammunition
sales. This regime went into effect July 1, 2019.
California requires residents to purchase ammunition
through licensed ammunition vendors in face-to-face

RHODE V. BONTA

9

transactions. See Cal. Penal Code § 30312(a)–(b). 1 The sale
of ammunition must be approved by the California
Department of Justice (referred to here as the “department”)
“at the time of purchase or transfer, prior to the purchaser or

1

Section 30312, reads, in pertinent part:
(a)(1) Commencing January 1, 2018, the sale of
ammunition by any party shall be conducted by or
processed through a licensed ammunition vendor.
(2) When neither party to an ammunition sale is a
licensed ammunition vendor, the seller shall deliver
the ammunition to a vendor to process the transaction.
The ammunition vendor shall promptly and properly
deliver the ammunition to the purchaser, if the sale is
not prohibited, as if the ammunition were the vendor’s
own merchandise. If the ammunition vendor cannot
legally deliver the ammunition to the purchaser, the
vendor shall forthwith return the ammunition to the
seller. The ammunition vendor may charge the
purchaser an administrative fee to process the
transaction, in an amount to be set by the Department
of Justice, in addition to any applicable fees that may
be charged pursuant to the provisions of this title.
(b) Commencing January 1, 2018, the sale, delivery,
or transfer of ownership of ammunition by any party
may only occur in a face-to-face transaction with the
seller, deliverer, or transferor, provided, however, that
ammunition may be purchased or acquired over the
Internet or through other means of remote ordering if
a licensed ammunition vendor initially receives the
ammunition and processes the transaction in
compliance with this section and Article 3
(commencing with Section 30342) of Chapter 1 of
Division 10 of Title 4 of this part.

Cal. Penal Code § 30312(a)–(b).

10

RHODE V. BONTA

transferee taking possession of the ammunition.”
§ 30370(a).

Id.

The statutes and regulations provide a detailed
description of the four ways that a person can obtain
authorization to purchase ammunition. First, a “Basic
Ammunition Eligibility Check” authorizes a single
transaction for any quantity of ammunition. See Cal. Code
Regs. tit. 11, § 4283; Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a)(3). 2 By
statute, the department “shall develop a procedure in which
a person who is not prohibited from purchasing or
2

Section 30370(a), in full, provides:
Commencing July 1, 2019, the department shall
electronically approve the purchase or transfer of
ammunition through a vendor, as defined in Section
16151, except as otherwise specified. This approval
shall occur at the time of purchase or transfer, prior to
the purchaser or transferee taking possession of the
ammunition. Pursuant to the authorization specified in
paragraph (1) of subdivision (c) of Section 30352, the
following persons are authorized to purchase
ammunition:
(1) A purchaser or transferee whose information
matches an entry in the Automated Firearms System
(AFS) and who is eligible to possess ammunition as
specified in subdivision (b).
(2) A purchaser or transferee who has a current
certificate of eligibility issued by the department
pursuant to Section 26710.
(3) A purchaser or transferee who is not prohibited
from purchasing or possessing ammunition in a single
ammunition transaction or purchase made pursuant to
the procedure developed pursuant to subdivision (c).

Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a).

RHODE V. BONTA

11

possessing ammunition may be approved for a single
ammunition transaction or purchase.” Cal. Penal Code
§ 30370(c). The department has imposed a fee of $19. Cal.
Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4283(b). To run such a basic check, a
vendor swipes the prospective purchaser’s driver’s license
or other government ID through a magnetic reader. Id.
§ 4283(c); Cal. Penal Code § 28180(a). The system then
automatically checks the purchaser’s identifying
information in four state databases (Automated Criminal
History Record System, Mental Health Firearms Prohibition
System, California Restraining and Protective Order
System, and Wanted Persons System). If the person’s name
is not listed in any of the four databases, the basic check is
completed automatically. If the person’s name is listed in
any of the four databases, a department analyst manually
reviews that database to confirm that the prospective
purchaser is correctly listed in the database. If the automatic
or manual check shows that the person is eligible to purchase
ammunition, the person is approved for a one-time purchase
or transfer of ammunition. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11,
§ 4283(d)(1). Otherwise, the person is not eligible to
purchase ammunition. Basic checks take an average of five
to six days to process. Approval for a basic check expires
30 days after it is issued. Id.
The second type of background check is known as a
Standard Ammunition Eligibility Check and costs $1. Id.
§ 4282(b); Cal. Penal Code § 30370(b), (e). A person whose
information matches an entry in the Automated Firearms
System (AFS) and is not listed in the Prohibited Armed
Persons File, see Cal. Penal Code § 30000(a), Cal. Code
Regs. tit. 11, § 4281(m), is authorized to purchase
ammunition pursuant to the standard check. Cal. Code Regs.
tit. 11, § 4282(a); Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a)(1). The AFS

12

RHODE V. BONTA

is a repository of firearm records maintained by the
department, Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4281(d); Cal. Penal
Code § 11106, which includes the Dealers’ Record of Sale
(DROS) of firearms, Cal. Penal Code § 11106(b)(2)(A). A
person is charged a DROS fee of $31.19 for each firearm
transaction. Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4001(a). Under the
department’s policy, Standard Ammunition Eligibility
Check approval is valid for 18 hours. 3 If a person is rejected
from a Standard Ammunition Eligibility Check due to the
lack of a current, matching AFS entry, the person may be
able to obtain ammunition by paying the $19 fee for a Basic
Ammunition Eligibility Check. See Cal. Penal Code
§ 30370(c).
Third, a person may obtain authorization to purchase
ammunition by having a current certificate of eligibility
issued by the department.
Cal. Penal Code
§§ 30370(a)(2), 26710. 4 To obtain a certificate of eligibility,

3
California has not identified any regulation that gives the department
the authority to limit the validity of a Standard Ammunition Eligibility
Check approval for 18 hours.
4

In full, section 26710 provides:
(a) A person may request a certificate of eligibility
from the Department of Justice.
(b) The Department of Justice shall examine its
records and records available to the department in the
National Instant Criminal Background Check System
in order to determine if the applicant is prohibited by
state or federal law from possessing, receiving,
owning, or purchasing a firearm.
(c) The department shall issue a certificate to an
applicant if the department's records indicate that the

RHODE V. BONTA

13

a person must pay a $22 application fee, Cal. Code Regs. tit.
11, § 4038(b)(1), and undergo an application process that
involves fingerprinting, id. § 4032.5, and a criminal
background check, Cal. Penal Code § 26710(b).
A
certificate of eligibility must be renewed annually. Cal.
Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4038(a). Each renewal costs $22. Id.
§ 4038(b)(2). Certificate of eligibility holders must pay a $1
verification fee at the time of each ammunition purchase.
Cal Penal Code § 30370(e); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11,
§ 4285(b). Under the department’s policy, following each
verification, a certificate of eligibility holder is approved to
buy ammunition for 18 hours. 5
Finally, a person who was approved by the department
to buy a firearm may purchase ammunition in the same
transaction as the firearm purchase if the ammunition vendor
is a licensed firearms dealer, and certain other requirements
are met. Cal. Penal Code § 30352(c)(2). The buyer must
pay the $31.19 fee for the firearms eligibility check. Cal.
Code Regs. tit. 11, §§ 4001(a), 4284(b). California subjects
firearms transactions to a 10-day waiting period. Cal. Penal

applicant is not a person who is prohibited by state or
federal law from possessing firearms.
(d) The department shall adopt regulations to
administer the certificate of eligibility program and
shall recover the full costs of administering the
program by imposing fees assessed to applicants who
apply for those certificates.
Cal. Penal Code § 26710.
California has not identified any regulation that authorizes it to limit
the ability of a Certificate of Eligibility holder to buy ammunition for 18
hours after each verification.
5

14

RHODE V. BONTA

Code § 26815(a). 6 Ammunition purchased as part of a
firearms transaction is subject to the 10-day waiting period
as well, unless the buyer undergoes another type of
background check and pays a separate fee. Cal. Code Regs.
tit. 11, § 4284(c).
California residents cannot bypass face-to-face
transactions with licensed vendors by purchasing
ammunition in another state and bringing it into California.
Therefore, while
See Cal. Penal Code § 30314(a). 7
California residents may buy ammunition remotely, such as
over the internet, id. § 30312(b), they may not access the
ammunition without a face-to-face transaction in California.
If residents purchase ammunition outside of California, they
must have the ammunition “delivered to a licensed
ammunition vendor for delivery . . . pursuant to the
procedures set forth in Section 30312.” Id. § 30314(a). 8

There are exceptions to this 10-day waiting period for sales, deliveries,
or transfers to law enforcement officers for use on duty, Cal. Penal Code
§ 26950, loans of unloaded firearms for use as a prop in an entertainment
production or event, id. § 27000, and sales, deliveries, and transfers
between or to licensed firearm importers and manufacturers, id. § 27100.

6

7

In full, section 30314(a) provides:
Commencing January 1, 2018, a resident of this state
shall not bring or transport into this state any
ammunition that he or she purchased or otherwise
obtained from outside of this state unless he or she first
has that ammunition delivered to a licensed
ammunition vendor for delivery to that resident
pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 30312.

Cal. Penal Code § 30314(a).
California has made certain exceptions to the requirement that residents
have ammunition purchased or obtained outside the state delivered to a

8

RHODE V. BONTA

15

If neither party to an ammunition sale is a licensed
vendor, the seller must deliver the ammunition to a licensed
vendor for processing.
Id. § 30312(a)(2).
When
ammunition has been delivered to a California licensed
vendor on behalf of a California purchaser, the vendor must
take several steps before delivering the ammunition to the
purchaser. First, the vendor who receives the ammunition
must verify with the department that the buyer is authorized
If the
to purchase ammunition.
Id. § 30352(d). 9
department’s records do not list the buyer as an authorized
ammunition purchaser, the vendor must deny the sale or
transfer of the ammunition. Id. In other words, a vendor
licensed vendor for processing. Cal. Penal Code § 30314(b). Persons
who do not have to comply with this requirement include: ammunition
vendors; sworn peace officers or federal law enforcement officers;
licensed importers or manufacturers of firearms or ammunition; persons
on a list of exempted federal firearms licensees; persons listed as
collectors of firearms; and persons who acquired the ammunition from a
spouse, registered domestic partner, or another immediate family
member. Id.
9

Section 30352(d) provides:
Commencing July 1, 2019, the ammunition vendor
shall verify with the department, in a manner
prescribed by the department, that the person is
authorized to purchase ammunition. If the person is
not listed as an authorized ammunition purchaser, the
vendor shall deny the sale or transfer.

Cal. Penal Code § 30352(d). This subdivision does not apply to sales or
transfers of ammunition to individuals listed in section 30352(e), which
includes certain ammunition vendors, exempted federal firearms
licensees, a person who works at a specified target facility, a gunsmith,
a wholesaler, and specified manufacturer or importer of firearms or
ammunition, a specified authorized law enforcement representative, or a
specified peace officer. See id. § 30352(e). None of these exceptions is
relevant here.

16

RHODE V. BONTA

may not deliver ammunition to a buyer unless the buyer is
“authorized to purchase ammunition.” Id. § 30352(c).10
If the buyer is so authorized, the licensed vendor can
charge the buyer a processing fee. Id. § 30312(a)(2). The
department has the authority to set the amount of these fees.
Id. If the purchaser is present for immediate delivery of the
ammunition, the processing fee cannot exceed $5. Cal. Code
Regs. tit. 11, § 4263(a)(1).11 But if the purchaser is not

10

Section 30352(c), in full, provides:
(c) Commencing on July 1, 2019, only those persons
listed in this subdivision, or those persons or entities
listed in subdivision (e) [described supra, in footnote
9], shall be authorized to purchase ammunition. Prior
to delivering any ammunition, an ammunition vendor
shall require bona fide evidence of identity to verify
that the person who is receiving delivery of the
ammunition is a person or entity listed in subdivision
(e) or one of the following:
(1) A person authorized to purchase ammunition
pursuant to Section 30370.
(2) A person who was approved by the department to
receive a firearm from the ammunition vendor,
pursuant to Section 28220, if that vendor is a licensed
firearms dealer, and the ammunition is delivered to the
person in the same transaction as the firearm.

Cal. Penal Code § 30352(c)(1)–(2).
11

In full, section 4263 provides:
(a) In addition to any applicable Department of Justice
fee, an ammunition vendor may charge the purchaser
a fee(s) for processing the sale of ammunition between
two private parties as follows:

RHODE V. BONTA

17

present for immediate delivery, the vendor can charge an
additional fee for storage of the ammunition.
Id.
§ 4263(a)(2). The purchaser must agree to the storage fee
before the vendor receives the ammunition, but the
department places no limit on the amount of money that
vendors can charge for storage. Id. Licensed California
vendors may also decline to process third parties’
ammunition transactions.
The department must approve a sale or transfer of
ammunition “at the time of purchase or transfer, prior to the
purchaser or transferee taking possession of the
ammunition.” Cal. Penal Code. § 30370(a). Contrary to the
dissent, obtaining such approval is not limited to a $1 fee,
and is not free from delay. Cf. Dissent at 55. A Standard
Ammunition Eligibility Check costs $1, but only if the
person previously paid a DROS fee of $31.19 per firearm.
Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a), (e); Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11,
§§ 4001(a), 4282. Similarly, a certificate of eligibility
holder must pay a $1 verification fee at the time of each
ammunition purchase, Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a), (e), but
the holder must pay $22 on an annual basis to be a certificate
holder, Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4038. Other than the 10day waiting period for purchasing ammunition as part of a
(1) If the purchaser will be present for immediate
delivery of the ammunition, the fee shall not exceed
five dollars ($5).
(2) If the purchaser will not be present for immediate
delivery of the ammunition, the vendor may charge an
additional storage fee as agreed upon with the
purchaser prior to the vendor receiving the
ammunition.
Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4263.

18

RHODE V. BONTA

firearms transaction, Cal. Penal Code § 26815(a), there is no
language in the applicable rules regarding the allowable
delay time in approving or denying a background check.
Section 30370(a) requires that approval occur before a
person can take possession of the ammunition, but it does
not require that approval be given within a certain time
period.
Because this appeal involves a facial challenge to
California’s ammunition background check regime, United
States v. Rahimi directs us to consider whether the law on its
face fits within the plain text of the Second Amendment and
this Nation’s historical tradition. 602 U.S. 680, 700
(2024).12
B
We now turn to the facts of this case. In 2018, lead
plaintiff Kim Rhode, who has won Olympic medals for trap
and skeet shooting, filed this pre-enforcement action along
with six other California residents, three out-of-state
ammunition vendors, and the California Rifle & Pistol
Association, Inc. The plaintiffs (referred to collectively as
“Rhode”) challenged California’s ammunition background
check regime on several grounds, three of which are relevant
to this appeal. Rhode argues that California’s ammunition
background check regime infringes upon California
residents’ Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms,
violates the dormant Commerce Clause by barring
unlicensed, out-of-state ammunition vendors from selling

California defends its ammunition background check regime as an
integrated whole, rather than rule by rule. Therefore, we consider the
ammunition background check regime as a whole.

12

RHODE V. BONTA

19

ammunition directly to Californians, and is expressly
preempted by 18 U.S.C. § 926A.13
The district court issued a preliminary injunction barring
California from “enforcing the ammunition sales
background check provisions found in California Penal
Code §§ 30370(a) through (d) and 30352, and the
ammunition anti-importation provisions found in
§§ 30312(a) and (b), 30314(a).” Rhode v. Becerra, 445 F.
Supp. 3d 902, 957 (S.D. Cal. 2020). After the Supreme
Court issued its decision in New York State Rifle and Pistol
Association v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1 (2022), we vacated the
preliminary injunction and remanded to the district court for
further proceedings consistent with Bruen. Rhode v. Bonta,
No. 20-55437, 2022 WL 17099119, at *1 (9th Cir. Nov. 17,
2022). On remand, the district court consolidated the
hearing on the motion for a preliminary injunction with a
13

18 U.S.C. § 926A provides:
Notwithstanding any other provision of any law or any
rule or regulation of a State or any political subdivision
thereof, any person who is not otherwise prohibited by
this chapter from transporting, shipping, or receiving a
firearm shall be entitled to transport a firearm for any
lawful purpose from any place where he may lawfully
possess and carry such firearm to any other place
where he may lawfully possess and carry such firearm
if, during such transportation the firearm is unloaded,
and neither the firearm nor any ammunition being
transported is readily accessible or is directly
accessible from the passenger compartment of such
transporting vehicle: Provided, That in the case of a
vehicle without a compartment separate from the
driver’s compartment the firearm or ammunition shall
be contained in a locked container other than the glove
compartment or console.

20

RHODE V. BONTA

trial on the merits, pursuant to Rule 65(a)(2) of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure, and each party submitted evidence.
See Fed. R. Civ. P. 65(a)(2).
Following the hearing, the district court permanently
enjoined California from enforcing the ammunition sales
background check provisions found in sections 30352 and
30370(a) through (e) and from enforcing the ammunition
anti-importation provisions found in sections 30312 (a) and
(b) and 30314(a). The district court also enjoined California
from criminally enforcing sections 30312(d), 30314(c), and
30365(a). It concluded that California’s ammunition
background check regime violated the Second Amendment
and that the anti-importation provisions violated the dormant
Commerce Clause. It also concluded that section 30314(a)
was preempted by § 926A to the extent that it criminalized a
California resident’s transportation of ammunition into
California from other states.
California appealed. It moved to stay the district court’s
permanent injunction and judgment. A motions panel of this
court granted that motion.
We have jurisdiction to review a final judgment under 28
U.S.C. § 1291. We review for abuse of discretion the district
court’s decision to grant or deny a permanent injunction.
Metlakatla Indian Cmty. v. Dunleavy, 58 F.4th 1034, 1042
(9th Cir. 2023). We review de novo the legal conclusions
underlying the district court’s decision. Id. Where, as here,
the district court has consolidated proceedings under Rule
65(a)(2), we review its factual findings for clear error.
Indep. Training & Apprenticeship Program v. Cal. Dep’t of
Indus. Rels., 730 F.3d 1024, 1031 (9th Cir. 2013). Because
Rhode brings a facial challenge, “we consider only the text
of the [challenged rules].” Nguyen v. Bonta, 149 F.4th 1237,

RHODE V. BONTA

21

1240 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting Calvary Chapel Bible
Fellowship v. County of Riverside, 948 F.3d 1172, 1176 (9th
Cir. 2020)).
II
The Second Amendment provides that “[a] well
regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free
State, the right of the people to keep and bear Arms, shall
not be infringed.” U.S. Const. amend. II.14
New York State Rifle and Pistol Association v. Bruen
guides our analysis. 597 U.S. 1 (2022). Bruen provides a
two-part framework for assessing Second Amendment
challenges. “[W]hen the Second Amendment’s plain text
covers an individual’s conduct, the Constitution
presumptively protects that conduct.” Id. at 17. The
government must then show that the challenged rule “is
consistent with this Nation’s historical tradition of firearm
regulation.” Id.
A
The Supreme Court has interpreted the text of the Second
Amendment to refer to “bearable arms.” See District of
Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570, 581–84 (2008); Bruen,
597 U.S. at 28. Bearable arms are “[w]eapons of offence”
or “any thing that a man wears for his defence, or takes into
his hands,” that is carried “for the purpose of offensive or
defensive action.” Heller, 554 U.S. at 581, 584 (internal
quotation marks and citations omitted). The term “arms”
encompasses commonplace weapons, as well as military
weapons. See id. at 581. The Second Amendment reaches
The Fourteenth Amendment incorporates the Second Amendment
right against the states. McDonald v. City of Chicago, 561 U.S. 742, 750
(2010).

14

22

RHODE V. BONTA

“instruments that constitute bearable arms,” regardless
whether those instruments existed at the founding. Rahimi,
602 U.S. at 691 (quoting Heller, 554 U.S. at 582).
The Supreme Court has indicated that the Second
Amendment protects “operable” arms. See Heller, 554 U.S.
at 630, 635 (holding that a requirement that firearms be “kept
inoperable” is unconstitutional).
Because arms are
inoperable without ammunition, the right to keep and bear
arms necessarily encompasses the right to have ammunition.
Cf. Bruen, 597 U.S. at 32–33 (explaining that “the central
component” of the Second Amendment right is the right to
use an arm for self-defense (quoting Heller, 554 U.S. at
599)). A firearm is not available “for the purpose of
offensive or defensive action,” Heller, 554 U.S. at 584
(internal quotation marks omitted), if it is unloaded. In other
words, the right to keep and bear arms incorporates the right
to operate them, which requires ammunition. See Jackson v.
City & County of San Francisco, 746 F.3d 953, 967 (9th Cir.
2014) (opining that “without bullets, the right to bear arms
would be meaningless”), abrogated on other grounds by
Bruen, 597 U.S. 1. Thus, we have recognized that laws
regulating ammunition fall under the ambit of the Second
Amendment. See id. (concluding that “the right to possess
firearms for protection implies a corresponding right to
obtain the bullets necessary to use them” (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted)); see also Fyock v. Sunnyvale,
779 F.3d 991, 998 (9th Cir. 2015) (concluding that the
Second Amendment right to keep and bear arms
encompasses a “corollary” right to possess the components
“necessary to render [one’s] firearms operable”), abrogated
on other grounds by Bruen, 597 U.S. 1; Duncan v. Bonta,
133 F.4th 852, 866 (9th Cir. 2025). Therefore, at the first
step of Bruen, the text of the Second Amendment applies to

RHODE V. BONTA

23

the right to keep and bear operable arms, which includes the
right to have ammunition.
We have also recognized that the right to keep and bear
arms “wouldn’t mean much without the ability to acquire
arms.” See Teixeira v. County of Alameda, 873 F.3d 670,
677 (9th Cir. 2017) (en banc) (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted). Therefore, “laws imposing conditions
and qualifications on the commercial sale of arms” implicate
the plain text of the Second Amendment if they
“‘meaningfully constrain[]’ the right to keep and bear arms.”
B&L Prods., Inc. v. Newsom, 104 F.4th 108, 118–19 (9th
Cir. 2024) (first quoting Heller, 554 U.S. 626–27, 627 n.26;
and then quoting Teixeira, 873 F.3d at 680). To be sure, “the
Second Amendment does not elevate convenience and
preference over all other considerations.” Teixeira, 873 F.3d
at 680. “[A] minor constraint on the precise locations within
a geographic area where one can acquire firearms does not”
meaningfully constrain the right to keep and bear arms. B&L
Prods., 104 F.4th at 119. By contrast, the “monthly metering
of firearm purchases meaningfully constrains the right to
purchase and possess firearms and is thus presumptively
unconstitutional.” Nguyen, 140 F.4th at 1243.
B
At the second step of the Bruen framework, a court must
consider whether the challenged rule is “consistent with this
Nation’s historical tradition.” 597 U.S. at 17. The
determination whether a law comports with historical
tradition “will often involve reasoning by analogy.” Id. at
28.
When reviewing historical analogues, courts should give
particular weight to laws in effect closer in time to the
adoption of the Second Amendment (1791) and the

24

RHODE V. BONTA

Fourteenth Amendment (1868). See id. at 34. Courts may
consider later laws, which can “liquidate and settle the
meaning of disputed or indeterminate terms & phrases in the
Constitution.” Id. at 35–36 (internal quotation marks and
citations omitted). However, courts should be careful not to
give too much weight to post-enactment laws. See id. at 36.
“[T]o the extent later history contradicts what the text says,
the text controls.” Id.
When determining whether a historical regulation is a
proper analogue for a modern regulation, courts must
consider whether the historical and modern regulations are
“relevantly similar.” Id. at 28–29 (citation omitted). This
analogical reasoning process is “neither a regulatory
straightjacket nor a regulatory blank check.” Id. at 30. The
law is not “trapped in amber,” and the Second Amendment
“permits more than just those regulations identical to ones
that could be found in 1791.” Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 691–92.
For the challenged rule to pass constitutional muster, it must
be a “well-established and representative historical
analogue, not a historical twin.” Bruen, 597 U.S. at 30
(emphasis in original).
Two factors are central to the determination whether a
rule is relevantly similar: “how and why the regulations
burden a law-abiding citizen’s right to armed self-defense.”
Id. at 29; see also Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 692. In assessing the
“why,” we look at why the historical analogue regulated
firearms and whether it was enacted to address a certain
problem. See Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 692. If a historical law
addressed a certain problem, modern laws that impose
similar restraints to address a similar problem are likely
constitutional. Id. In assessing the “how,” we consider the
nature of the challenged law’s restriction of the Second
Amendment right. See id. Even if a firearm regulation has

RHODE V. BONTA

25

a permissible purpose (the “why” of the regulation), it is
unconstitutional if it restricts the Second Amendment right
“to an extent beyond what was done” at the founding or at
Reconstruction (the “how” of the regulation). Id.
III
We now consider the constitutionality of California’s
ammunition background check regime, applying Bruen’s
two-step framework.
A
We begin with whether the plain text of the Second
Amendment applies to Rhode’s proposed course of conduct:
acquiring ammunition.15 California does not dispute that the
ammunition background check regime impacts “the people”
that the Second Amendment protects, as the rules apply to
all residents of California.
Furthermore, because
ammunition is necessary to the operation of a firearm,
California does not dispute that the right to keep ammunition
is entitled to protection under the Second Amendment.
For purposes of the first step of the Bruen analysis, the relevant
conduct is “the conduct the regulation prevents [the individual] from
engaging in.” United States v. Manney, 114 F.4th 1048, 1052 (9th Cir.
2024) (quoting Doe v. Bonta, 101 F.4th 633, 639 (9th Cir. 2024)), cert.
denied, No. 24-6197, 2025 WL 299574 (U.S. Jan. 27, 2025). California
attempts to characterize the proposed course of conduct as “purchas[ing]
ammunition without complying with any background check
requirements.” But defining the proposed course of conduct by reference
to the challenged regulatory requirements is inconsistent with Bruen, in
which the Supreme Court defined the proposed course of conduct as
“carrying handguns publicly for self-defense,” not as carrying handguns
publicly without meeting the requirements of the challenged regulation.
597 U.S. at 32; cf. B&L Prods., 104 F.4th at 117 n.17 (defining the
proposed course of conduct with reference to the “actual activity” that
the challenged statutes regulated).

15

26

RHODE V. BONTA

Laws that impose “conditions and qualifications on the
commercial
sale
of
arms”
are
presumptively
unconstitutional if they “meaningfully constrain” the right to
keep and bear arms. B&L Prods., 104 F.4th at 118–19.
Because Rhode asserts a facial challenge, in considering
whether California’s ammunition background check regime
meaningfully constrains the right to keep and bear arms, we
look only at the text of the challenged rules. Nguyen, 140
F.4th at 1240. As discussed above, a person who wants to
keep an operable firearm must necessarily acquire
ammunition. See Jackson, 746 F.3d at 967. Because the
right to keep and bear arms includes the right to keep
operable arms, rules on ammunition acquisition implicate
the plain text of the Second Amendment if they
meaningfully constrain the right to keep operable arms.
Nguyen, 140 F.4th at 1241.
We conclude that California’s ammunition background
check meaningfully constrains the right to keep operable
arms. California’s ammunition background check regime
regulates all ammunition acquisitions by California
residents; the regime applies not only to every transaction in
California but also to ammunition purchases by California
residents outside the state. Cal. Penal Code §§ 30312,
30314, 30370. It requires California residents to pay for and
complete an in-person background check before each
ammunition acquisition. Id. § 30312. Though not all the
rules comprising California’s ammunition background
check regime impose delays on their face,16 they do not
Cf. Cal. Penal Code § 26815(a) (subjecting firearms purchases to a 10day waiting period); Cal. Code Regs. Tit. 11, § 4284 (subjecting
ammunition purchased as part of a firearms transaction to the same
delay, unless the purchaser completes another form of background
check).

16

RHODE V. BONTA

27

require California to approve checks within a certain time
frame.17 Requirements prior to various types of background
checks, such as fingerprinting, see Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11,
§ 4032.5, inherently cause some amount of delay. After
approval, moreover, a California resident may be required to
purchase ammunition during a specified period of time—
e.g., 18 hours—after passing a background check. The
regime applies to all types of ammunition, see Cal. Penal
Code §§ 30312, 30314, and California residents cannot
avoid the background check requirements by taking
advantage of internet or out-of-state sales, id. § 30314.
Rather, out-of-state purchases are subject to additional
delays and fees. See id.18 Given the fees and delays
associated with California’s ammunition background check
regime, and the wide range of transactions to which it
applies, we conclude that, in all applications, the regime
Contrary to the dissent, Dissent at 66, section 30370(a) does not
require the department to approve an ammunition purchase within a
specified time frame. Rather, it provides that a purchaser cannot take
possession of ammunition until the department has approved the sale.
See Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a) (requiring a purchaser to obtain the
department’s approval of a sale of ammunition “at the time of purchase
or transfer, prior to the purchaser or transferee taking possession of the
ammunition.”). California has not interpreted the phrase “time of
purchase” as imposing any time constraints on the department.
17

Twenty-four states filed an amicus brief arguing that California’s
requirements are meaningful constraints, because they prohibit directdelivery internet sales, and impose “inconvenience and expense on
Californians who wish to access the unmatched selection that the multibillion dollar internet ammunition market offers.” Brief for Ohio, Idaho,
Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas,
Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Hampshire,
North Dakota, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah,
West Virginia, and Wyoming as Amici Curiae at 5, Rhode v. Bonta, No.
24-542 (July 31, 2024).
18

28

RHODE V. BONTA

meaningfully constrains California residents’ right to keep
and bear arms. Thus, it is not a “presumptively lawful
regulatory measure[].” See Heller, 554 U.S. at 626–27, 627
n.26; see also B&L Prods., 104 F.4th at 119.19
Three of our prior cases, B&L Productions, Teixeira, and
Nguyen, are helpful comparators.20 In Teixeira, we held that
The dissent’s argument that California’s ammunition background
check regime does not meaningfully constrain the right to obtain
firearms because it imposes a $1 fee and one-minute delay in 99% of
cases, Dissent at 66–67 & n.7, is wrong. First, we consider only the text
of the challenged rules in assessing a facial challenge, Nguyen, 140 F.4th
at 1240, and the text does not limit permissible delay times. Second, the
dissent’s factual allegations about California’s background check regime
are contrary to the district court’s finding that “Californians are denied
the Second Amendment right to buy ammunition for self-defense at least
11% of the time because of problems with the background check
system.” Given the posture of this appeal, we accept the district court’s
factual findings absent clear error.
See Indep. Training &
Apprenticeship Program v. Cal. Dep’t of Indus. Rels., 730 F.3d 1024,
1031 (9th Cir. 2013). Third, the minimum costs exceed $1. To complete
a $1 check as a certificate of eligibility holder, a purchaser must first pay
an annual fee of $22, Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4038(b). To complete a
$1 Standard Eligibility Check, a purchaser must have previously paid a
DROS fee of $31.19 per firearm.
Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11,
§§ 4001(a), 4282. A purchaser must have a valid AFS entry to complete
a Standard Eligibility Check, Cal. Penal Code § 30370(b), and the AFS
includes the DROS, absent exceptions not relevant here, id.
§ 11106(b)(2)(A). Therefore, a purchaser must pay at least one DROS
fee of $31.19 per firearm to be eligible for a Standard Eligibility Check.
Contra Dissent at 61 n.1.
19

Manney, a case relied on by the dissent, Dissent at 64–65, is not
applicable here. In connection with an as-applied challenge to 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(a)(6), which criminalizes making a false statement about “any fact
material to the lawfulness of the sale or other disposition of such firearm
or ammunition,” 18 U.S.C. § 922(a)(6), we concluded that the conduct
regulated by § 922(a)(6) is lying, and that lying is “unrelated to the
possession of a firearm.” Manney, 114 F.4th at 1053. By contrast, we

20

RHODE V. BONTA

29

a zoning ordinance that made it “virtually impossible” to
open a new firearms store in unincorporated Alameda
County did not violate the Second Amendment because
buyers could “freely purchase firearms within the County”
at ten existing stores, including one located 600 feet from the
plaintiff’s proposed retail location. 873 F.3d at 676, 679.21
We reasoned that “gun buyers have no right to have a gun
store in a particular location, at least as long as their access
is not meaningfully constrained.” Id. at 680 (emphasis
added). In B&L Productions, we likewise concluded that a
California law banning firearm sales on state property did
not implicate the plain text of the Second Amendment,
where the plaintiffs “essentially concede[d]” that the law did
not “‘meaningfully constrain’ the right to keep and bear
arms.” 104 F.4th at 119 (noting that the plaintiffs did not
allege “that a ban on sales on state property would impair a
single individual from keeping and bearing firearms”). We
explained that a restriction on firearms acquisition does not
meaningfully constrain the Second Amendment right where
plaintiffs can “acquire the same firearms down the street.”22
Id. We stated that while “a ban on all sales of a certain type
of gun or ammunition in a region generally implicates the
have recognized that the conduct of acquiring firearms is entitled to
Second Amendment protection, and that if it were not so entitled “the
right to keep and bear firearms would be meaningless.” B&L Prods.,
104 F.4th at 118.
In Teixeira, the plaintiffs brought both a facial and as-applied
challenge to a zoning ordinance, so we considered the zoning ordinance
as applied to the plaintiffs. 873 F.3d at 676. Rhode does not bring an
as-applied challenge here.
21

We considered facts regarding the ability to purchase firearms near a
particular fairground in assessing plaintiffs’ as-applied challenge to a ban
on firearm sales at that fairground. B&L Prods., 104 F.4th at 119.
22

30

RHODE V. BONTA

Second Amendment, as such a ban meaningfully constrains
the right to keep and bear that firearm or ammunition[,] . . .
a minor constraint on the precise locations within a
geographic area where one can acquire firearms does not.”
Id. By contrast, Nguyen involved a facial challenge to a
California law that prohibited most persons from buying
more than one firearm in a 30-day period. 140 F.4th at 1240.
We held that this law meaningfully constrained the right to
keep and bear arms. Id. at 1243. We explained that the plain
text of the Second Amendment protects the right to possess
multiple firearms. Id. at 1242. We concluded that the
government could not “temporally meter” this right by
barring citizens from purchasing more than one firearm per
month. Id. at 1243.
California’s ammunition background check regime is
not like the laws challenged in Teixeira and B&L
Productions. On their face, the rules challenged in Teixeira
and B&L Productions did not meaningfully constrain the
plaintiffs’ right to keep and bear arms. The challenged
zoning ordinance in Teixeira applied to one county. 873
F.3d at 674. Though the challenged laws in B&L
Productions applied statewide, they affected only the ability
to contract for firearm sales on state property, and did not
affect firearm sales on privately owned property. 104 F.4th
at 110. But California’s ammunition background check
regime applies on its face to all ammunition transactions
entered into by California residents, including transactions
that occur in another state. And similar to the “one gun a
month law” in Nguyen, California’s ammunition background
check regime, on its face, delays the ability of California
residents to bear operable arms by requiring the completion
of background checks prior to all ammunition acquisitions.
Considering together the costs, delays, and geographic scope

RHODE V. BONTA

31

of California’s ammunition background check regime, we
conclude that California’s ammunition background check
regime meaningfully constrains the right to keep and bear
arms.23
Under the first step of the Bruen analysis, California’s
ammunition background check regime implicates the plain
text of the Second Amendment. Therefore, the government
must carry its burden of showing that California’s
ammunition background check regime “is consistent with
the Nation’s historical tradition of firearm regulation.”
Bruen, 597 U.S. at 24. As such, we turn to the second step
of the Bruen analysis.
B
To determine whether the government has met its burden
at the second step of Bruen, we consider whether the
historical analogues proffered by California are relevantly
similar to California’s ammunition background check
regime. In doing so, we must compare the “how and why”
of the historical analogues proffered by California to the
“how and why” of California’s ammunition background
check regime. Id. at 29. California proposes four different
historical analogues: loyalty oath requirements and loyalist
disarmament provisions at the founding and during
The dissent’s reliance on out-of-circuit cases here, Dissent at 65, is
misplaced. Both Maryland Shall Issue, Inc. v. Moore, 116 F.4th 211,
225 (4th Cir. 2024) (en banc), and McRorey v. Garland, 99 F.4th 831,
839–40 (5th Cir. 2024), considered rules requiring one-time background
checks on firearm purchases, as opposed to rules imposing background
checks every time a citizen purchases ammunition. Moreover, unlike
our precedent, neither opinion considered whether the background check
requirements imposed a meaningful constraint on the right to keep and
bear arms.
23

32

RHODE V. BONTA

Reconstruction, 19th century concealed carry permitting
requirements, surety laws imposed at the founding on
persons who presented a danger to the community, and
licensing and recordkeeping requirements imposed on
vendors of gunpowder and firearms. We consider each in
turn.
1
California first points to founding and Reconstruction
era loyalty oaths and loyalist disarmament requirements.
We conclude that these historical regulations do not have the
same “why” and “how” as California’s ammunition
background check regime, and therefore are not relevantly
similar to California’s ammunition background check
regime.
a
California proffers four founding era documents (from
Connecticut, New Jersey, Massachusetts, and the
Continental Congress) that authorized the disarmament of
persons who were disloyal to the colonies or the new nation.
A Connecticut law enacted in 1775 prohibited individuals
who “shall libel or defame” the colonies from keeping arms
and from holding “any office civil or military.” Conn. Act
of Dec. 1775, The Public Records of the Colony of
Connecticut from May, 1775 to June, 1776 inclusive p. 193
(Charles J. Hoadly ed. 1890). Offenders could face
punishment by “fine, imprisonment, or disfranchisement.”
Id. In March 1776, the Continental Congress recommended
that the colonies “immediately [] cause all persons to be
disarmed” who “are notoriously disaffected to the cause of
America” or who refused to associate with the United
Colonies “against the hostile attempts of the British fleets
and armies.” 4 Js. of the Cont’l Cong. 1774-1789, at 205

RHODE V. BONTA

33

(W. Ford ed. 1906). Massachusetts passed an act adopting
this recommendation. Mass. Act of Mar. 14, 1776, ch. VII,
1775-1776 Mass. Acts 31. In 1777, New Jersey adopted an
act that authorized a council of safety to “apprehend and
imprison” persons “disaffected to this State,” as well as to
“deprive and take from such Persons as they shall judge
disaffected and dangerous to the present Government, all the
Arms, Accoutrements, and Ammunition which they own or
possess.” An Act for constituting a Council of Safety, ch.
XL, §§ 17, 20 (Sept. 20, 1777) (N.J. Act of Sept. 20, 1777,
Acts of the General Assembly of the State of New Jersey,
1777, at 89–90).
Neither the “how” nor “why” of these historical
regulations is relevantly similar to California’s ammunition
background check regime. The “why” of these historical
regulations is to address the problem of disaffected persons
having access to arms that could be used against the
colonies. The “how” of addressing this problem is
permanent disarmament. Such regulations are not analogous
to California’s ammunition background check regime,
where the problem is ensuring that individuals buying
ammunition are not legally prohibited from doing so, and
where California addresses the problem by requiring
ordinary citizens to undergo a background check every time
they purchase ammunition.
b
California also proffers founding era laws from Rhode
Island, Virginia, Pennsylvania, and North Carolina that
required individuals to take loyalty oaths to enjoy the
privileges of citizenship, including the right to keep arms. A
1776 Rhode Island regulation required “suspected persons in
the Colony, relative to the War with Great Britain” to declare

34

RHODE V. BONTA

allegiance to the colonies. R.I. Act of 1776, 7 Records of the
Colony of Rhode Island & Province Plantations in New
England p. 567 (Bartlett ed. 1862). Rhode Island allowed
officials to take “all arms, ammunition and warlike stores”
from persons who refused to subscribe to the oath. Id. A
1777 Virginia law required males above a certain age to
“give assurance of [a]llegiance” to Virginia. Va. Act of May
5, 1777, ch. III, 9 The Statutes at Large, at 281 (Hening ed.
1821). The Virginia law directed justices administering
these oaths to provide a list of persons who refused to take
the oath to the county lieutenant or the chief commanding
officer of the militia, who were in turn directed “to cause
such recusants to be disarmed.” Id. at 282. A 1777 North
Carolina law prohibited those who declined to take loyalty
oaths from voting or running for office, bringing lawsuits,
taking “Lands by Descent or Purchase,” and keeping “Guns
or other Arms” in their homes. N.C. Act of 1777, ch. VI,
§ IX, 24 The State Records of North Carolina, at 89 (Clark
ed. 1905). Pennsylvania enacted a similar law in 1778,
requiring all men to take a one-time “oath or affirmation” to
enjoy the privileges of citizenship, such as the right to serve
an office of trust or prosecute a lawsuit. Pa. Act of Apr. 1,
1778, ch. LXI, § 5, Acts of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (1782), at 123–28. The act
provided that those who declined to take an oath would be
disarmed by the lieutenant or sublieutenants of the city or
counties. Id. at 126.
Again, these laws are not relevantly similar to the “how”
and “why” of California’s ammunition background check
regime. In each historical case, the “why” was the problem
of persons who were not loyal to the state. The restriction
on their Second Amendment rights could be removed by the
one-time action of taking a loyalty oath. Neither the “why”

RHODE V. BONTA

35

nor “how” is analogous to requiring ordinary citizens to
undergo a background check every time they wish to
purchase ammunition, for the purpose of ensuring that the
citizens are not legally prohibited from doing so.
c
During Reconstruction, a number of states (primarily
former Confederate states) required individuals to take onetime loyalty oaths before enjoying certain privileges of
citizenship. But none of the historical regulations on which
California relies expressly conditioned firearm ownership on
taking an oath.24 For instance, both Virginia and West
Virginia required persons to take loyalty oaths before being
appointed to a government position. Va. Const. art. III, § 5;
W. Va. Act of Nov. 16, 1863, ch. 106, § 1. West Virginia
required persons to attest that they had “never voluntarily
borne arms against the United States” and had “voluntarily
given no aid or comfort to persons engaged in armed
hostility thereto.” W. Va. Act of Nov. 16, 1863, ch. 106, § 1.
And to vote in Mississippi and Arkansas, every registered
voter had to take and subscribe to a loyalty “oath which is
24
As a preliminary matter, California argues that during Reconstruction,
Tennessee “restrict[ed] . . . gun-access generally to those who took” a
prescribed form of loyalty oath. This statement is taken from the
declaration of Michael Vorenberg, an expert witness on the history of
the U.S. Civil War and Reconstruction (“Vorenberg Declaration”). The
declaration based its statement about loyalty oaths in Tennessee on a
single secondary source, Ben H. Severance, Tennessee’s Radical Army:
The State Guard and Its Role in Reconstruction, 1867-1869, 35–36
(2005). The cited pages in this secondary source discuss how loyalty
oaths were required as a condition of joining a militia, but do not assert
that loyalty oaths were generally used to determine who could keep and
bear arms. Id. Therefore, the Vorenberg Declaration’s assertion about
Tennessee’s loyalty oaths is not supported by a citation to any secondary
or primary source.

36

RHODE V. BONTA

printed at the top of each page of the precinct registration
books.” U.S. Congressional Serial Set, vol. 1308, at 142,
“Message of President communicating correspondence on
reconstruction, and opinions of Attorney General on
construction of reconstruction acts” (1867). California cites
no rule that required, or even endorsed, the use of
Reconstruction era loyalty oaths to determine who could
keep and bear arms.25 Because the problem of ensuring that
citizens are loyal to the United States by requiring a one-time
loyalty oath is not analogous to California’s recurring
ammunition background check rules, these historical laws
are not relevant.
d
In sum, California’s reliance on these founding era and
Reconstruction era regulations is misplaced because their
“how” and “why” are not relevantly analogous to the “how”
and “why” of California’s ammunition background check
regime.

The sole example provided in the Vorenberg Declaration did not
involve a regulation. The declaration states that in South Carolina,
Joseph Crews (a private citizen) used loyalty oath records to ensure that
weapons were not “purchased or seized by those known to be disloyal.”
The congressional records cited in the Vorenberg Declaration do not
support Vorenberg’s assertion that Crews used loyalty oath records for
this purpose. See U.S. Congressional Serial Set, vol. 1529, at 554–56
(1871-72), “Affairs in insurrectionary States, pt. 1: Report and minority
views.” Rather, these records indicate that Crews was involved with
administering elections in his role as chairman of the board of county
canvassers, and that he shipped arms into the county, and supplied these
arms to local militias. Id. at 554–55. In any event, the Vorenberg
Declaration concedes that the use of loyalty oaths as a means to maintain
the public safety was not codified by statute. Instead, it was a practice
that was “not spelled out in statutes.”

25

RHODE V. BONTA

37

2
Next, California proffers concealed carry restrictions
following the Reconstruction era as being relevantly similar
to its ammunition background check regime. Specifically,
California identifies several historical regulations, each of
which required persons to obtain permission from a
government official before they could carry concealed
weapons. For example, an ordinance for the Village of Hyde
Park, Illinois, enacted in 1876, provided that a person had to
obtain “written permission of the Captain of Police” to carry
a concealed weapon. Laws and Ordinances Governing the
Village of Hyde Park Together with Its Charter and General
Laws, at 64 (H. Willett ed. 1876). The City of St. Louis
required persons to obtain “written permission from the
mayor” to carry dangerous or deadly weapons pursuant to an
1871 ordinance. City of St. Louis Rev. Ord., art. II, ch.
XXV, § 8 (1871), in The Revised Ordinance of the City of
St. Louis, at 611–12 (M.J. Sullivan ed. 1881). A Salt Lake
City, Utah ordinance from 1888 likewise made it a
misdemeanor, punishable by fine, to carry a “concealed
deadly weapon, without the permission of the mayor.” Utah,
ch. XXVI, § 14 (1888), The Revised Ordinances of Salt
Lake City, at 283 (J. Lippman ed. 1892); see also The
Charter of Oregon City, Oregon, Together with the
Ordinances and Rules of Order, at 259 (1898) (providing that
the mayor could grant permission to “any person to carry a
pistol or revolver when upon proper representation it appears
to him necessary or prudent to grant such permission”);
Ordinances of the Mayor, Alderman and Commonalty of the
City of New York, in Force January 1, 1881, art. XXVII,
§ 265 (providing that persons could obtain permission to
carry pistols by showing the police that they were “proper
and law-abiding” persons).

38

RHODE V. BONTA

Many of these rules were enacted years after
Reconstruction, and so are entitled to less weight. See
Bruen, 597 U.S. at 34–35. Even giving them full weight,
however, the “how” of these historical regulations is not
analogous to California’s ammunition background check
regime. Like the “shall-issue” requirements mentioned in
Bruen, discussed infra at 46–49, these historical regulations
imposed one-time background checks to ensure “that those
bearing arms in the jurisdiction are, in fact, ‘law-abiding,
responsible citizens.’” 597 U.S. at 38 n.9 (quoting Heller,
554 U.S. at 635). This “how” is unlike the burden imposed
by the challenged restrictions on California residents, who
must undergo checks prior to each ammunition purchase.
Cal. Penal Code § 30312.
3
California next proffers surety laws as a relevantly
similar historical analogue. Our analysis, like California’s
argument, is informed by the Supreme Court’s review of the
history of surety laws in Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 695–96.
As explained in Rahimi, surety laws were a form of
“preventive justice” that derived from the ancient
frankpledge system. Id. at 695 (citation omitted). Under the
frankpledge system, adult men organized themselves into
“tithing[s]” of ten men, and the members of those tithings
“mutually pledge[d] for each other’s good behavior.” Id.
(quoting 4 W. Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of
England, 252 (10th ed. 1787)) (bracket in original).
Over time, the communal frankpledge system evolved
into an individualized surety regime. Id. Surety laws
allowed magistrates to require an individual suspected of
future misbehavior to post a bond. Id. (citing 4 Blackstone,
251). Failure to post a bond could lead to imprisonment. Id.

RHODE V. BONTA

39

(citing Mass. Rev. Stat., ch. 134, § 6 (1836)). And if a
person posted a bond and later broke the peace, that person
would suffer forfeiture. Id. (citing 4 Blackstone, 253).
Surety laws could be invoked to prevent all forms of
violence, and sureties “often took the form of a surety of the
peace,” in which an individual pledged to “keep the peace.”
Id. (quoting 4 Blackstone, 252–53).
Important here, surety laws targeted the misuse of
weapons. Id. at 696. For instance, a 1795 Massachusetts
law authorized justices of the peace to “arrest[]” and require
sureties of any “affrayers, rioters, disturbers, or breakers of
the peace . . . [who] go armed offensively.” 1795 Mass.
Acts ch. 2, in Massachusetts - Acts & Laws, 436. Later,
Massachusetts amended its surety law to require persons
who “go armed with a dirk, dagger, sword, pistol, or other
offensive and dangerous weapon, without reasonable cause
to fear an assault or other injury” to post sureties for
“keeping the peace.” Mass. Rev. Stat., ch. 134, § 16 (1836).
Such a bond could not be required for more than a six-month
period, and a person could obtain an exception to use arms
for a legitimate purpose, such as for self-defense. See id.
Surety laws required individuals to post bonds only “when
‘attended with circumstances giving just reason to fear that
he purposes to make an unlawful use of them.’” Bruen, 597
U.S. at 56 (quoting William Rawle, A View of the
Constitution of the United States of America 126 (2d ed.
1829)). The 1836 Massachusetts law was not an outlier; at
least nine other jurisdictions adopted similar laws between
1838 and 1871. Id. at 56 & n.23.26
Other jurisdictions’ laws similar to the Massachusetts surety law
include: 1838 Terr. of Wis. Stat. § 16, p. 381; Me. Rev. Stat., ch. 169,
§ 16 (1840); Mich. Rev. Stat., ch. 162, § 16 (1846); 1847 Va. Acts ch.
26

40

RHODE V. BONTA

In Rahimi, the Supreme Court concluded that surety laws
were relevantly similar to 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8). 602 U.S.
at 698–99. Under § 922(g)(8)(C)(i), after a court makes a
judicial determination that an individual represents “a
credible threat to the physical safety” of an intimate partner
or child, it may then issue a restraining order precluding that
individual from possessing a firearm for a certain period of
time. Id. at 699 (quoting § 922(g)(8)(C)(i)). Likewise,
surety laws required certain individuals to post a bond before
possessing a firearm following a judicial determination of
dangerousness. Id. at 698. Because both § 922(g)(8) and the
surety laws applied to individuals “found to threaten the
physical safety” of other persons, Rahimi concluded that the
surety laws were a relevantly similar analogue to
§ 922(g)(8). Id. Rahimi focused on the fact that § 922(g)(8),
like the surety laws, “involved judicial determinations of
whether a particular defendant likely would threaten” one or
more individuals with a weapon. Id. at 699. And similar to
surety laws’ six-month duration, § 922(g)(8) involved a
temporary restriction, as it prohibited firearm possession
only while a defendant was “subject to a restraining order.”
Id. (citing § 922(g)(8)).
Even assuming that the “why” of California’s
ammunition background check—to ensure that prohibited
persons cannot access operable firearms—is relevantly
similar to the “why” of these surety laws, its “how” is
unquestionably different. The “how” of the surety laws was
to impose a judicial process that required a person who was
14, § 16; Terr. of Minn. Rev. Stat., ch. 112, § 18 (1851); 1854 Ore. Stat.
ch. 16, § 17, p. 220; D. C. Rev. Code ch. 141, § (1857); 1860 Pa. Laws
p. 432, § 6; W. Va. Code, ch. 153, § 8 (1868). See Bruen, 597 U.S. at 56
n.23.

RHODE V. BONTA

41

likely to engage in future misbehavior to post a bond, i.e., a
type of insurance, for a time-limited period. By contrast,
California’s ammunition background check regime is
imposed on all residents of California, without any judicial
process establishing that any such resident is likely to disturb
the peace in the future. Nor is California’s ammunition
background check regime limited in time.
That the surety laws were “comparably justified” by the
problem of dangerous individuals possessing weapons
further demonstrates that the unprecedented burden imposed
by the “how” of California’s ammunition background check
regime is not “consistent with this Nation’s historical
tradition of firearm regulation.” Bruen, 597 U.S. at 29, 34;
see also id. at 26–27. California’s ammunition background
check regime imposes restrictions on all Californians who
wish to exercise their Second Amendment rights, whereas
surety laws restricted the right to keep and bear arms of
individuals who were judicially determined to be dangerous.
Therefore, the historical surety laws addressed a persistent
problem of dangerous individuals in a manner that is not
relevantly similar to California’s ammunition background
check regime. See id. at 26 (“[W]hen a challenged
regulation addresses a general societal problem that has
persisted since the 18th century, the lack of a distinctly
similar historical regulation addressing that problem is
relevant evidence that the challenged regulation is
inconsistent with the Second Amendment.”).
4
California next proffers historical regulations requiring
vendors of gunpowder and firearms to obtain licenses and
keep records as being relevantly similar to the challenged
regime.

42

RHODE V. BONTA

a
California points to two examples of colonial rules that
required vendors to obtain licenses for manufacturing or
selling gunpowder. During the colonial period, both
Massachusetts and Connecticut imposed licensing
requirements on persons manufacturing or transporting
gunpowder, which appear to be revenue-raising measures
punishable only by forfeiture or fee. The Massachusetts law,
adopted in 1651, required persons to obtain a license before
transporting gunpowder out of Massachusetts, subject to a
“penalty of forfeiting all such Powder as shall be
transporting or transported, or the value thereof.” The
Colonial Laws of Massachusetts: Reprinted From the
Edition of 1672, 126 (Whitmore ed. 1890). The Connecticut
law was enacted in 1775 “for encouraging the Manufactures
of Salt Petre and Gun Powder.” 1775 Conn. Acts, The
Public Records of the Colony of Connecticut, From May,
1775, to June 1776, inclusive, 190 (C. Hoadly ed. 1775).
This law established that “no salt petre, nitre, or gun-powder
made and manufactured, or that shall be made and
manufactured” in Connecticut, could be exported out of
Connecticut without “the license of the General Assembly or
his Honor the Governor and Committee of Safety.” Id. at
191. Connecticut could recover “twenty pounds for every
hundred weight of such salt petre, nitre or gun-powder”
exported without a license. Id. The laws are not relevantly
similar to the “why” or “how” of California’s ammunition
background check regime, which does not impose a payment
for export or transport on a manufacturer or seller, but rather
imposes fees and delays on a buyer.

RHODE V. BONTA

43

b
California also proffers some 19th century laws adopting
licensing requirements for gunpowder manufacturing and
sales that appear to be focused on public safety related to
storage. But these requirements are imposed on vendors, not
purchasers. For instance, a 1835 City of Cincinnati
ordinance established that “it shall not be lawful for any
person or persons to sell gun powder by retail within said
city, without having first obtained a license from the city
council for that purpose.” An Act Incorporating the City of
Cincinnati, and a Digest of the Ordinances of Said City, 57–
59 (1835), Gun Powder, § 2 (Jan. 3, 1835). It required the
city marshal and fire wardens to conduct examinations of
buildings “where gun powder is kept or suspected to be
[unlawfully] kept” and to seize gunpowder discovered. Id.
§ 4. Those licensed to sell gunpowder were required to
“keep the same in tin cannisters, well secured with good and
sufficient covers.” Id. § 3. A Portland, Oregon ordinance
from 1871 likewise required gunpowder vendors to obtain
licenses and required secure storage of the gunpowder to
prevent explosions. See Charter of the City of Portland,
Street and Fire Department Laws, Ordinances, Regulations,
&c. (1872), 225–26, No. 1108, §§ 1, 3–5 (Nov. 16, 1871).
Numerous jurisdictions across the country imposed similar
restrictions on the manufacturing and storage of gunpowder,
which were aimed at preventing accidents such as fires.27
See, e.g., 1869 Neb. Laws 53, An Act to Incorporate Cities of the First
Class in the State of Nebraska, § 47 (“The City Council shall have power
to license all . . . venders of gunpowder.”); Acts of the General Assembly
of the Commonwealth of Kentucky (1874), 332, ch. 306 § 6 (giving the
board of the City of Newport the power to “prohibit the manufacture of
gunpowder or other explosive, dangerous, or noxious compounds or
substances . . . and to regulate their sale and storage by license”).
27

44

RHODE V. BONTA

The “why” of these historical laws is not analogous to
California’s ammunition background check regime, because
they focus on a different problem (storing gunpowder
safely). The “how” also differs, as the historical laws
imposed a restraint on vendors, not purchasers, and required
only that gunpowder manufacturers and sellers discharged a
one-time duty to obtain a license. See, e.g., 1775 Conn. Acts,
at 191.
c
Long after Reconstruction, in the late 19th century, some
legislatures required firearm vendors to obtain certain
information from purchasers, and to keep such records
available for inspection. California relies on two such
examples. First, an 1881 Illinois statute required “[a]ll
persons dealing in deadly weapons” to maintain “a register
of all such weapons sold or given away by them.” Act of
July 1, 1881, 1881 Ill. Acts ch. 38, § 483(3). The register
had to contain information about the quantity, price, and
kind of weapons sold, the name and age of the purchaser,
and the reason for the purchase. Id. The statute required
dealers to keep the register “open for the inspection of the
public.” Id. Failure to keep an accurate register, or failure
to keep a register open for examination, was a misdemeanor
punishable by a fine of $25 to $200. Id. Similarly, in 1892,
Congress passed a law which required weapons dealers in
the District of Columbia to maintain a written register of the
“name and residence” of every purchaser. Act of July 13,
1892, ch. 159, § 5, 27 Stat. 116, 117 (1892).28
Some jurisdictions adopted similar laws in the early 20th century. See,
e.g., 1911 Colo. Sess. Laws ch. 136, § 3 (requiring firearms sellers to
“keep a record of each pistol or revolver sold, rented or exchanged at
retail” and to keep the records open for inspection by authorized police

28

RHODE V. BONTA

45

These rules were put in place many years after the
Reconstruction, and so are entitled to little weight in
deciding whether California’s ammunition background
check regime are analogous to historical regulations. See
Bruen, 597 U.S. at 35–37. And regardless, these rules are
not analogous to the “how” and “why” of California’s
ammunition background check regime. The “why” of these
laws is different in that they merely kept track of persons
who purchased the firearms. By contrast, California’s
ammunition background check regime focuses on
ammunition and requires lawful firearm owners to prove
they meet specified legal requirements each time they
purchase ammunition. The “how” of these late 19th century
laws is also different because they were imposed on vendors,
and did not require purchasers to undergo background
checks or pay fees. See Cal. Penal Code § 30312; cf. Act of
July 13, 1892, ch. 159, §§ 1–2 (applying to weapons such as
“daggers, air-guns, pistols, bowie-knives, dirk knives or
dirks, blackjacks, razors, razor blades, sword canes, slung
shot, brass or other metal knuckles” and not referring to
ammunition).
In sum, we conclude that the historical regulations
regarding gunpowder licensing and storage and firearm
vendor recordkeeping are not relevantly similar to
California’s ammunition background check regime.

officers); 1911 N.Y. Laws ch. 195, § 1914 (requiring firearm sellers to
keep registers containing “the time of sale, the date of sale, name, age,
occupation and residence of each purchaser” of a firearm, along with a
description of that firearm). Because these laws are even further in time
from the adoption of the Fourteenth Amendment, they shed little light on
our analysis. See Bruen, 597 U.S. at 35.

46

RHODE V. BONTA

Because none of the historical analogues proffered by
California is within the relevant time frame, or is relevantly
similar to California’s ammunition background check
regime, California’s ammunition background check regime
does not survive scrutiny under the two-step Bruen analysis.
C
We next consider Bruen’s footnote stating that “nothing
in [the Supreme Court’s] analysis should be interpreted to
suggest the unconstitutionality of the 43 States’ ‘shall-issue’
licensing regimes, under which ‘a general desire for selfdefense is sufficient to obtain a [permit].’” 597 U.S. at 38
n.9. In this footnote, the Court noted certain features of
shall-issue licensing regimes that differentiated them from
the may-issue regimes found to be unconstitutional in Bruen,
but added that “because any permitting scheme can be put
toward abusive ends, we do not rule out constitutional
challenges to shall-issue regimes where, for example,
lengthy wait times in processing license applications or
exorbitant fees deny ordinary citizens their right to public
carry.” Id. In other words, the Supreme Court indicated that
shall-issue regimes may be constitutional, but did not hold
that they were per se consistent with the Second
Amendment.29
Heller’s statement that longstanding conditions and qualifications on
the commercial sale of arms were “presumptively lawful,” 554 U.S. at
627 n.26, was clarified in Bruen, which was careful to eschew any
indication that background checks were entitled to a presumption of
constitutionality. 597 U.S. at 38 n.9. Specifically, Bruen opined that
“nothing in our analysis should be interpreted to suggest the
unconstitutionality of the 43 States’ ‘shall-issue’ licensing regimes” to
the extent they “are designed to ensure only that those bearing arms in
the jurisdiction are, in fact, ‘law-abiding, responsible citizens.’” Id.
Bruen made clear it was not endorsing a per se rule or a presumption of
29

RHODE V. BONTA

47

Nor did the Supreme Court address the constitutionality
of other state statutes that implicated Second Amendment
rights, including ammunition background check rules such
as those before us here. This is not surprising, given that
California was the first state to require in-person background
checks as a condition of each ammunition purchase, along
with a fee.30 See Office of Governor Gavin Newsom, Ahead
of Implementation Date of New Gun Safety Policies in
California, Governor Newsom and State Leaders Reaffirm
Commitment to Ending Epidemic of Gun Violence (June 25,
2019), https://bit.ly/3xK5QfM. Therefore, the Supreme
Court did not have occasion in Bruen to consider how an
ammunition background check regime such as that imposed
by California compares to a shall-issue licensing scheme.
The Supreme Court likewise has never approved an
analogous restriction on obtaining a component of a firearm
that is necessary to its operation.
And California’s ammunition background check regime
is not analogous to a shall-issue licensing regime. Among
other differences, the 43 states’ shall-issue licensing regimes
cited in Bruen generally provided individuals with a license
to engage in a course of conduct for a year or several years.31
constitutionality because it did not “rule out constitutional challenges to
such shall-issue regimes” under other fact patterns. Id.
After California imposed its background check regime, one other state,
New York, implemented an ammunition background check regime
similar to the one imposed by California. See N.Y. Penal Law §§ 400.02,
400.03.
30

31
See, e.g., Alaska Stat. § 18.65.700(d) (providing that a permit “expires
on the person’s birthday in the fifth year following issuance of the
permit”); Ariz. Rev. Stat. § 13-3112(I) (stating that concealed-carry
permits are valid for five years); Cal. Penal Code § 26220(a) (stating that
concealed-carry permits are valid for two years); Idaho Code § 18-

48

RHODE V. BONTA

By contrast, California’s ammunition background check
regime requires an ammunition purchaser to undergo a
background check prior to each ammunition transaction,
regardless of when the last background check occurred. Cal.
Penal Code § 30312. In short, the “how” of California’s
ammunition background check regime, which gives an
ammunition buyer permission to buy ammunition one time,
sometimes within an hours-long window, is not analogous to
the “how” of a shall-issue licensing regime wherein a person
receives a license that is valid for a period of years. Cf. Md.
Shall Issue, Inc., 116 F.4th at 217, 225 (addressing the
constitutionality of a shall-issue licensing regime in which
licenses are valid for a 10-year period). Accordingly, the
Supreme Court’s footnote in Bruen sheds little light on the
question whether a scheme requiring background checks
every time a person seeks to purchase ammunition infringes
on an ordinary citizen’s right to public carry.
We reject the dissent’s contention that an analysis of
Bruen’s footnote regarding shall-issue licensing regimes
must precede the application of Bruen’s two-step
framework. Dissent at 68–70. This approach gets the twostep Bruen inquiry backwards. Under Bruen, “[when] the
Second Amendment’s plain text covers an individual’s
conduct, the Constitution presumptively protects that
conduct.” 597 U.S. at 24. Only after making the
determination that the Constitution presumptively protects
the individual’s conduct do we consider whether the
government can “justify its regulation by demonstrating that
it is consistent with the Nation’s historical tradition of
firearm regulations.” Id. Thus, Bruen first concluded that
3302K (providing for a five-year concealed-carry license); Mont. Code
§ 45-8-321 (same); Wash. Rev. Code § 9.41.070 (same).

RHODE V. BONTA

49

the proposed course of conduct of “carrying handguns
publicly for self-defense” was protected by the plain text of
the Second Amendment. Id. at 32. Only then did Bruen turn
to the consideration of historical evidence and address, in a
footnote, the lawfulness of shall-issue licensing regimes and
its determination that a shall-issue licensing regime is not per
se unconstitutional. See id. at 38–39, 38 n.9. Our order of
analysis is therefore consistent with Bruen.
Bruen made clear that it did not rule out constitutional
challenges to shall-issue regimes “where, for example,
lengthy wait times in processing license applications or
exorbitant fees deny ordinary citizens their right to public
carry.” Id. at 38 n.9. Bruen’s examples of how shall-issue
licensing regimes could be abusive were not exclusive.
Moreover, Bruen shed no light on the constitutionality of an
ammunition background check regime, which is
meaningfully distinguishable from a shall-issue licensing
regime.
IV
Last, we consider the implications of the nature of
Rhode’s facial challenge to California’s ammunition
background check regime. Although Rhode brought a facial,
rather than as-applied challenge, the nature of Rhode’s
challenge is largely irrelevant under both Supreme Court and
Ninth Circuit precedent. Regardless whether a plaintiff
brings a facial or as-applied challenge to a law alleged to
violate the Second Amendment right, Bruen’s two-step
framework applies. See Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 693–700. Thus,
for Second Amendment challenges, our analysis is guided
by the question whether a challenged law fits within the plain
text of the Second Amendment and “this Nation’s historical
tradition.” Bruen, 597 U.S. at 17.

50

RHODE V. BONTA

A
The three leading Supreme Court cases interpreting the
Second Amendment, Heller, Bruen, and Rahimi, all involve
facial challenges to laws restricting Second Amendment
rights. Although only Rahimi lays out the test from United
States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987),32 the Supreme
Court’s analysis of the law at issue, in each of Heller, Bruen,
and Rahimi, evaluated the constitutionality of the law on its
face, not as applied to the appellant.
In Heller, the Supreme Court considered a facial
challenge to Washington, D.C.’s law banning handgun
possession in the home and determined that the law was
facially unconstitutional. 554 U.S. at 635. In evaluating the
constitutionality of Washington, D.C.’s handgun ban, Heller
did not assess whether the law might have a constitutional
application. Instead, Heller treated the law banning
handguns in the home as facially unconstitutional, regardless
whether Washington, D.C. permitted individuals to keep
other firearms in the home. Id. at 629.
Relying on Heller, Bruen held that New York’s mayissue licensing regime was unconstitutional on its face. 597
U.S. at 11, 20. Bruen set forth the two-step framework we
apply in assessing Second Amendment challenges. Id. at
17–20. Applying this framework, Bruen held that a
licensing regime that issues carry permits only to applicants
who show a special need for self-defense violates the Second
In Rahimi, the Supreme Court stated that a facial challenge “requires
a defendant to ‘establish that no set of circumstances exists under which
the [law at issue] would be valid.’” Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 693 (quoting
Salerno, 481 U.S. at 745). Rahimi also explained that in responding to a
facial challenge, “the Government need only demonstrate that [the law]
is constitutional in some of its applications.” Id.

32

RHODE V. BONTA

51

Amendment. Id. at 38–39. The Supreme Court did not focus
on the facts of the plaintiffs’ cases, nor did it discuss whether
New York could lawfully implement its may-issue licensing
regime in any hypothetical application. See id. at 38–70; cf.
Salerno, 481 U.S. at 745. Instead, Bruen concluded that the
New York may-issue licensing regime and the similar
regimes in five other states were unconstitutional. 597 U.S.
at 11.
In Rahimi, the Supreme Court assessed a facial challenge
to 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8), and cited the Salerno test. 602
U.S. at 693. In analyzing the facial challenge to § 922(g)(8),
Rahimi applied the two-step framework from Bruen
uncoupled from the facts of the challenger’s case. See id. at
693–700. Rahimi stated that § 922(g)(8)(C)(i) was lawful as
applied to the challenger himself. Id. at 700. However,
Rahimi made that clear that its analysis applied to all
applications of § 922(g)(8)(C)(i) against a person
determined by a court to “represent[] a credible threat to
physical safety” of another person. Id. at 699 (quoting
§ 922(g)(8)). Rahimi broadly recognized § 922(g)(8)(C)(i)
as constitutional and did not consider whether
§ 922(g)(8)(C)(i) could be unconstitutional in any other
applications. Id. at 702.
B
Our precedent is in accord with the Supreme Court. As
indicated in several recent cases, we have applied Bruen’s
two-step framework when evaluating both facial and asapplied challenges to laws alleged to violate the Second
Amendment.
In Duncan v. Bonta, we applied Bruen’s two-step
framework in assessing a facial challenge to California’s ban
on large-capacity magazines. 133 F.4th 852, 860 (9th Cir.

52

RHODE V. BONTA

2025) (en banc). Duncan did not cite the applicable standard
for assessing a facial challenge. Nor did it analyze whether
any specific application of the large-capacity magazine ban
violated the Second Amendment. We held broadly that
large-capacity magazine bans are constitutional. See id. at
872.
In B&L Productions, we assessed the constitutionality of
California’s ban on the sale of firearms on state property
without citing Salerno. 104 F.4th at 110. The plaintiffs
argued that California’s law barring the sale of firearms on
state property was unconstitutional on its face and as applied
to two specific state properties. Id. We did not separately
analyze the facial and as-applied challenges. Applying
Bruen, we concluded that the Second Amendment’s plain
text did not cover the plaintiff’s proposed course of conduct.
Id. at 117–18.
In Wolford v. Lopez, we considered the plaintiffs’ facial
challenges to California and Hawaii laws that barred
firearms in certain classes of geographical locations, such as
parks, playgrounds, bars and restaurants, parking areas, and
six other locations. 116 F.4th 959, 975–76, 982 (9th Cir.
2024). Although we cited Salerno, we applied Bruen’s
analytical framework in holding that the challenged state
laws did not facially apply to each geographic place listed.
Id. at 976, 984. Among other conclusions, we held that
regulations barring firearms in parks were not facially
unconstitutional, given the “national historical tradition of
banning firearms at a wide array of parks.” Id. at 984. We
rejected the plaintiffs’ facial challenge to a ban on firearms
in parking areas, explaining that a ban on concealed carry of
firearms in certain areas would be constitutional under
Bruen’s framework. Id. at 990. We did not assess whether
those laws could be applied constitutionally against the

RHODE V. BONTA

plaintiffs in such
circumstances.

areas

in

specific

53

hypothetical

In United States v. Duarte, we addressed a criminal
defendant’s argument that 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1), which
criminalizes the possession of firearms by felons, was
unconstitutional as applied to non-violent felons like him.
137 F.4th 743, 747 (9th Cir. 2025) (en banc). We held that
§ 922(g)(1) was not unconstitutional as applied to nonviolent felons like the defendant. Id. at 748. In reaching this
conclusion, we applied Bruen’s two-step framework. Id. at
750–62. Although the defendant brought an as-applied
challenge, our Bruen analysis did not reference case-specific
facts, such as the defendant’s criminal history. Id.
In sum, in our Second Amendment cases following
Bruen, we have not considered whether challenged laws
would be constitutional as applied to the facts of any
particular persons’ cases. We have instead considered
whether applying these rules would comport with Bruen’s
two-step framework without conducting a fact-specific
inquiry.
Here, consistent with our precedent and that of the
Supreme Court, we have applied Bruen’s two-step
framework in assessing Rhode’s facial challenge to
California’s ammunition background check regime. After
doing so, we conclude that California’s ammunition
background check regime lacks a “plainly legitimate
sweep.” Wash. State Grange v. Wash. St. Republican Party,
552 U.S. 442, 449 (2008) (citation omitted). Although
California’s ammunition background check regime does not
impose the same costs and delays as to all ammunition
buyers, the proposed conduct of purchasing ammunition
falls within the plain text of the Second Amendment in all

54

RHODE V. BONTA

applications, and none of the provisions at issue is consistent
with the Nation’s historical tradition of firearm regulation.
Nor has California shown any applications in which its
ammunition background check regime is constitutional. Cf.
Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 693.33
The dissent analyzes the costs and delays worked by
California’s ammunition background check regime on
certain ammunition buyers. Dissent at 66–67 & n.7. But
Bruen rejects this approach. See 597 U.S. at 17. Although
these facts may bear on whether a shall-issue licensing
regime is abusive, id. at 38 n.9, Bruen’s two-step framework
does not generally entail a consideration of the fees and wait
times placed on particular buyers.
***
By subjecting Californians to background checks for all
ammunition
purchases,
California’s
ammunition
background check regime infringes on the fundamental right
to keep and bear arms. Because California’s ammunition
background check regime violates the Second Amendment,
the district court did not abuse its discretion in granting a
permanent injunction.34

33
Perhaps recognizing that Bruen’s two-step framework applies to both
facial and as-applied challenges, the parties have not focused on the
facial versus as-applied distinction in litigating this case. California’s
51-page opening brief cites no authority about the burden of proving a
facial challenge and how that might differ from an as-applied challenge.
California mentions this issue in its reply brief, but issues raised for the
first time in a reply brief are generally deemed waived. United States v.
Anderson, 472 F.3d 662, 668 (9th Cir. 2006).

Because California’s ammunition background check regime violates
the Second Amendment, we need not consider the alternative grounds
34

RHODE V. BONTA

55

AFFIRMED.
BYBEE, Circuit Judge, dissenting:
Plaintiffs assert that California’s shall-issue ammunition
background check scheme facially violates the Second
Amendment. California, which has administered the scheme
since 2019, has shown that the vast majority of its checks
cost one dollar and impose less than one minute of delay.
Nevertheless, the majority concludes that the scheme
violates the Second Amendment because it lacks a historical
analogue. Maj. Op. at 46; see N.Y. State Rifle & Pistol Ass’n,
Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1 (2022). In reaching this
conclusion—by applying Bruen’s historical analysis at all—
the majority has broken with our precedent and flouted the
Supreme Court’s guidance.
The majority’s Second Amendment analysis is twiceflawed. First, as I explain in Part I, the majority contorts
beyond recognition our precedent applying Bruen’s first
step. As we explained in B&L Productions, Inc. v. Newsom,
Bruen first requires us to consider whether a plaintiff’s
proposed conduct falls within the Second Amendment’s
“plain text,” which only covers the right to “keep” and
“bear” arms. 104 F.4th 108, 117 (9th Cir. 2024), cert.
denied, 145 S. Ct. 1958 (2025). In cases such as this one,
where Plaintiffs assert an ancillary right, such as the right to
acquire firearms or ammunition, we only proceed to Bruen’s
second step—the historical analysis—if the challenged law

for concluding that the regime was unlawful (the dormant Commerce
Clause and preemption under § 926A).

56

RHODE V. BONTA

“meaningfully constrains” the right to keep and bear arms.
See B&L, 104 F.4th at 119.
Laws regulating firearm and ammunition acquisition
“meaningfully constrain” the right to keep and bear arms—
and thus trigger Bruen’s historical test—by “imped[ing]”
“access” to firearms. See Teixeira v. County of Alameda,
873 F.3d 670, 678, 680 (9th Cir. 2017). California’s onedollar fee and “time of purchase approval” for ammunition
purchases do not “impede” ammunition “access” any more
than the Teixeira and B&L regulations that we upheld. See
Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a); id.; 104 F.4th at 119. The
majority cannot, and does not, seriously dispute this.
Instead, the majority concludes that California’s law
“meaningfully constrains” the right to keep and bear arms
simply because it applies to every ammunition transaction in
California, and because it might possibly impose “delay.”
Maj. Op. at 27. Not only is this logic untethered from
Teixeira’s and B&L’s analytical framework, it is also
irreconcilable with our precedent holding that generally
applicable acquisition laws are not necessarily subject to
historical scrutiny. And the majority’s logic, which dwells
on hypothetical “delays,” contradicts the majority’s own
insistence that we only consider the law’s text in this facial
posture, and the Supreme Court’s warning in a Second
Amendment case that we avoid belaboring onerous
“hypothetical scenarios.” See United States v. Rahimi, 602
U.S. 680, 701 (2024).
Second, as I explain in Part II, the majority sharply
departs from Bruen. The majority invents a new rule to
exclude California’s law from the realm of “presumptively
lawful” licensing regimes endorsed by Bruen and District of
Columbia v. Heller, 554 U.S. 570 (2008). The majority
concludes—after it decides that California’s law is

RHODE V. BONTA

57

ahistorical, and thus unconstitutional—that California’s law
is not “presumptively lawful.” Maj. Op. at 46–49. In
reaching this conclusion, the majority cites no authority;
ignores the criteria that Bruen provided for evaluating a
law’s presumptive lawfulness; incompletely applies Bruen’s
analogical mode of reasoning; and, paradoxically, punishes
the government for making its “presumptively lawful”
background checks more efficient.
Finally, in Parts III and IV, I turn to the Dormant
Commerce Clause and preemption arguments the majority
does not reach. On this record, and in this procedural
posture, I would reverse the judgment of the district court. I
respectfully dissent.
I
The Second Amendment of the United States
Constitution protects “the right of the people to keep and
bear Arms.” U.S. Const. amend. II. Bruen ushered in a new
era for Second Amendment jurisprudence by imposing a
two-step test for Second Amendment challenges. See 597
U.S.at 17. We recently applied Bruen’s first step—which
considers whether a plaintiff’s conduct falls within the
Second Amendment’s “plain text”—in B&L Productions,
Inc. v. Newsom, in which plaintiffs analogously asserted a
right to acquire firearms. See 104 F.4th at 117. The
majority’s analysis here is irreconcilable with that approach.
A
Bruen imposes a two-step test: first, a “plain text”
analysis that considers whether plaintiffs’ asserted conduct
falls within the scope of the Second Amendment and,
second, the historical analysis. See, e.g., United States v.
Rush, 130 F.4th 633, 638 (7th Cir. 2025) (“Bruen set forth a

58

RHODE V. BONTA

two-step test for evaluating the constitutionality of a statute
under the Second Amendment.” (citation omitted)); Md.
Shall Issue, Inc. v. Moore, 116 F.4th 211, 218 (4th Cir. 2024)
(en banc) (“[T]he Court established a new, two-step
framework
for
evaluating
Second
Amendment
challenges.”), cert. denied, 145 S. Ct. 1049 (2025).
We proceed to Bruen’s second step—the historical
analysis—only if we conclude that plaintiffs have asserted
their “plain text” right to “keep and bear arms.” See Doe v.
Bonta, 101 F.4th 633, 639 (9th Cir. 2024); accord United
States v. Price, 111 F.4th 392, 400 (4th Cir. 2024) (“Bruen’s
first step requires us to evaluate whether ‘the Second
Amendment's plain text covers an individual’s conduct.’”
(quoting Bruen, 597 U.S. at 24)); Antonyuk v. James, 120
F.4th 941, 981 (2d Cir. 2024) (“Bruen instructs that history
is relevant only if ‘the Second Amendment’s plain text
covers an individual’s conduct[.]’” (quoting Bruen, 597 U.S.
at 17)); Rocky Mountain Gun Owners v. Polis, 121 F.4th 96,
113 (10th Cir. 2024) (“At step one, the plaintiff has the
burden of establishing that ‘the Second Amendment’s plain
text covers’ either the conduct they engaged or intended to
engage in.” (quoting Bruen, 597 U.S. at 17)).
We perform the first step because “the plain text of the
Second Amendment directly protects one thing—the right to
‘keep and bear’ firearms.” B&L, 104 F.4th at 117 (quoting
U.S. Const. amend. II). Accordingly, not all firearm-related
regulations implicate the right to keep and bear arms for selfdefense. Instead, “whether a regulation is covered by the
Second Amendment’s plain text must be tied to ‘the conduct
the regulation prevents [the individual] from engaging in.’”
United States v. Manney, 114 F.4th 1048, 1052 (9th Cir.
2024) (quoting Doe, 101 F.4th at 639).

RHODE V. BONTA

59

Sometimes, plaintiffs’ conduct indisputably falls within
the Second Amendment’s plain text, where, for example, the
government regulates the “keeping” or “bearing” of arms.
This type of regulation was at issue in a trilogy of Supreme
Court cases: Bruen, McDonald v. City of Chicago, 561 U.S.
742 (2010), and Heller. In Bruen, the plaintiffs’ “proposed
course of conduct [was] carrying handguns publicly for selfdefense.” 597 U.S. at 32 (emphasis added). In McDonald,
the plaintiffs sought to “keep their handguns in their homes
for protection.” 561 U.S. at 751 (emphasis added). In Heller,
the plaintiff “applied for a registration certificate for a
handgun that he wished to keep at home.” 554 U.S. at 575
(emphasis added). The plaintiffs in these cases indisputably
asserted their core right to keep and bear arms.
But when plaintiffs assert any conduct other than
keeping or bearing arms, their conduct necessarily falls
outside the Second Amendment’s plain text. As we
observed in B&L, the “Supreme Court has made clear that
the Second Amendment does not speak to all restrictions that
impact firearms in any way.” 104 F.4th at 118 (quoting
Bruen, 597 U.S. at 81 (Kavanaugh, J., concurring)). We
explained that “[a]ncillary rights,” like the “right to acquire
firearms,” are only “protected to the extent necessary to
serve [Second Amendment] purposes, [such as selfdefense]; otherwise, the Second Amendment is not
implicated by restraints on such rights.” Id. (footnote
omitted).
When regulations concern “implied corollary rights . . .
our analysis begins one step removed from the plain text.”
Oakland Tactical Supply, LLC v. Howell Twp., 103 F.4th
1186, 1196 (6th Cir. 2024). Accordingly, we subject these
regulations to historical scrutiny if—and only if—they
“meaningfully constrain” the “core right” to “keep and bear”

60

RHODE V. BONTA

arms. See B&L, 104 F.4th at 118–19; Teixeira, 873 F.3d at
677; see also Oakland Tactical Supply, 103 F.4th at 1196
(considering whether a zoning regulation “restrict[ed]
conduct necessary to effectuate” the core Second
Amendment right); Gazzola v. Hochul, 88 F.4th 186, 197 (2d
Cir. 2023) (applying Teixeira’s “meaningfully constrained”
standard where plaintiffs challenged a law that regulated the
purchase of firearms). “Under [this] approach . . . a ban on
all sales of a certain type of gun or ammunition” would
“meaningfully constrain[]” the right to keep and bear arms,
while “a minor constraint on the precise locations within a
geographic area where one can acquire firearms [would]
not.” B&L, 104 F.4th at 119.
“[A] facial challenge” to a gun regulation, such as this
one, “fails if the law is constitutional in at least some of its
applications.” Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 701 n.2 (citing United
States v. Salerno, 481 U.S. 739, 745 (1987)). We recently
held that, when “[p]laintiffs assert a facial challenge, ‘we
consider only the text of the [statute].’” Nguyen v. Bonta,
140 F.4th 1237, 1240 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting Calvary
Chapel Bible Fellowship v. County of Riverside, 948 F.3d
1172, 1176 (9th Cir. 2020)) (second alteration in original).
To sustain Plaintiffs’ facial challenge, the majority must
show that California’s law “meaningfully constrains” the
right to keep and bear arms, and that it does so in all of its
applications. That means that the majority must demonstrate
that the law’s one-dollar fee and “time of purchase”
background check categorically violate the Second
Amendment. See Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a). As I discuss
in greater detail in the next section, the majority does not
come close to satisfying that burden.

RHODE V. BONTA

61

B
Our en banc decision in Teixeira clarified that
regulations on firearm and ammunition acquisition do not
“meaningfully constrain” the right to keep and bear arms
unless they effectively constrain “access” to firearms or
ammunition. 873 F.3d at 680 (emphasis added); see also
B&L, 104 F.4th at 119 (“[T]he approach we took
in Teixeira—whether a challenged regulation meaningfully
impairs an individual’s ability to access firearms—remains
appropriate.”) (emphasis added); Gazzola, 88 F.4th 186,
192, 197–98 (concluding that “New York’s commercial
laws regulating the sale and transfer of firearms” did not
“meaningfully constrain[]” the right to keep and bear arms
because plaintiffs had “relatively easy access to sellers of
firearms”) (emphasis added).
At bottom, Teixeira
considered whether the challenged “ordinance impede[d]”
plaintiffs “from acquiring firearms.” 873 F.3d at 678.
California’s law—which, on its face, imposes no delay,
and a mere one-dollar fee 1—is not the kind of heavy-handed
regulation that meaningfully constrains the right to keep and
bear arms. The law does not categorically limit the amount
of ammunition that Californians may purchase, akin to the
law that we recently found unconstitutional in Nguyen. See
140 F.4th at 1239–40 (concerning a California law that
“prohibit[ed] most people from buying more than one
firearm in a 30-day period”). Nor is California’s law a “ban
on all sales of a certain type of gun or ammunition,” which
1
The majority, which recites Nguyen’s admonition that “we consider
only the text of the [challenged rules],” Maj. Op. at 20 (quoting 140 F.4th
at 1240), insists that the Standard Check imposes a $31.19 fee. That fee
applies to firearm registration, see Cal. Code Regs. tit. 11, § 4001, not
ammunition purchases, and is not challenged here by the Plaintiffs.

62

RHODE V. BONTA

is another type of restriction that we concluded would
“meaningfully impair[] an individual’s ability to access
firearms.” See B&L, 104 F.4th at 119. “This is not a case
where [California] seeks to achieve through its [one-dollar
fee] what it cannot do directly—ban all [ammunition].” See
Oakland Tactical Supply, 103 F.4th at 1198. California’s
law does not “shoehorn[] restrictions on purchase into [a]
functional prohibition[] on keeping.” See McRorey v.
Garland, 99 F.4th 831, 838 (5th Cir. 2024). Accordingly,
California’s law does not meaningfully constrain the right to
keep and bear arms.
Nor does California’s imposition of a one-dollar fee and
a background check for ammunition purchases “impede”
Californians from acquiring ammunition any more than the
Teixeira ordinance did. See 873 F.3d at 678. Teixeira held
that an Alameda County zoning ordinance that caused
individuals “to travel to other, more remote locations” to
purchase firearms and ammunition did not “meaningfully
constrain” the right to keep and bear arms because
individuals could still access firearms and ammunition at
those “more remote locations.” Id. at 679. Here,
California’s minimal fee and “time of purchase” background
check are less “meaningful” than the Teixeira ordinance’s
inducement of travel to “more remote” areas. See Cal. Penal
Code § 30370(a); id. Because it would be fatuous to suggest
that only a cheaper and shorter “constraint”—say, a twentyfive-cent fee and an instantaneous “time of purchase”
approval—could pass muster under Teixeira, the majority
has necessarily concluded that no regulation on firearm or
ammunition acquisition could pass muster.
The majority has failed to consider whether California’s
law impedes access to operable firearms, as B&L and
Teixeira instruct. Instead, the majority concludes that

RHODE V. BONTA

63

California’s law “meaningfully constrains” the right to keep
and bear arms simply because it “regulates all ammunition
acquisition by California residents.” Maj. Op. 26. As the
majority explains, California’s “regime . . . requires
California residents to pay for and complete an in-person
background check before each ammunition acquisition.”
Maj. Op. at 26 (citations omitted). The majority has not even
attempted to explain how these features necessarily
“impede[]” firearm access. Cf. Teixeira, 873 F.3d at 678.
Instead, the majority has described, in the broadest possible
terms, the essential features of any state or federal regulation
governing acquiring ammunition. Its conclusion is bereft of
analysis; it describes California’s scheme and announces its
conclusion, as though the Second Amendment violation
were self-evident.
The majority’s novel standard effectively abrogates
Bruen’s first step. It will require courts to conduct historical
scrutiny of any regulation on acquisition that regulates all
gun or ammunition purchases.
State and federal
governments will be compelled to produce historical
analogues for laws that require gun purchasers to show proof
of their age; 2 fill out a short form providing biographical
details; 3 or, as we cautioned in Manney, even “wait a short
time” at a gun store, 114 F.4th at 1052. Nor will states be
able to impose regulations designed to prevent gun

See, e.g., 18 U.S.C. § 922(b)(1) (prohibiting the sale of handguns and
ammunition to juveniles).

2

See, e.g., Manney, 114 F.4th at 1052 (rejecting the proposition that
requiring a purchaser to attest that they are the actual purchaser of a
firearm implicated the Second Amendment’s plain text).

3

64

RHODE V. BONTA

trafficking without producing a historical analogue. 4 All of
these provisions universally regulate some aspect of firearm
acquisition.
We have repeatedly rejected the majority’s boundless
interpretation of the Second Amendment. We did so most
recently in Manney, which held that a federal statute that
applied nationwide to every gun purchase did not implicate
the Second Amendment’s plain text. 5 We abjured the notion
that “any regulation related to the process of purchasing
firearms [is] covered by the Second Amendment’s plain text,
regardless of the conduct the statute regulates.” 114 F.4th at
1052. That conclusion is impossible to square with the
majority’s assertion that California’s law “meaningfully
constrains” the right to keep and bear arms—and thus
implicates the Second Amendment’s plain text—for simply
applying to all California ammunition purchases. 6 In fact, it
See, e.g., Cal. Penal Code § 27520(a) (“A person . . . shall not
acquire . . . a firearm for the purpose of selling, loaning, or transferring
the firearm . . . [with] intent to avoid . . . [t]he provisions of Section
27545.”); see also Cal. Penal Code § 27545 (“Where neither party to the
transaction holds a dealer’s license . . . the parties to the transaction shall
complete the sale, loan or transfer of that firearm through a licensed
firearms dealer[.]”).

4

See Manney, 114 F.4th at 1050 (concerning a challenge to 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(a)(6), which “makes it a crime ‘for any person in connection with
the acquisition or attempted acquisition of any firearm . . . [to]
knowingly to make any false or fictitious oral or written statement . . .
with respect to any fact material to the lawfulness of the sale . . . of such
firearm’”).

5

The majority asserts that Manney “is not applicable here” because it
concerned conduct—“lying”—that was “unrelated to the possession of a
firearm.” Maj. Op. at 28 n.20 (citing 114 F.4th at 1053). The majority
fails to recognize that the same principle animates both Manney and this
case: “The plain text of the Second Amendment directly protects [only]

6

RHODE V. BONTA

65

is difficult to imagine a regulation on the acquisition of
ammunition or firearms that would not “meaningfully
constrain” the right to keep and bear arms under the
majority’s new general applicability standard.
That
contradicts our admonition in B&L that “the right to acquire
firearms []only implicates the Second Amendment in limited
circumstances,” see 104 F.4th at 118, and our holding in
Teixeira that “the Second Amendment does not elevate
convenience and preference over all other considerations.”
873 F.3d at 680. We should have reaffirmed those cases
again here. See 114 F.4th at 119.
Unsurprisingly, the majority’s expansive holding also
breaks with our sister circuits, which have found that laws
imposing far more meaningful constraints on gun purchases
did not implicate the Second Amendment’s plain text. Cf.
Md. Shall Issue, 116 F.4th at 217, 227, 229 (holding that a
background check law that imposed a twenty-four hour
delay and initial $50 fee on firearm purchases did not
“infringe” the Second Amendment); McRorey, 99 F.4th at
838–40 (holding that a background check law that delayed
firearm purchases for ten business days was likely
permissible under the Second Amendment).
C
In an attempt to shore up its sweeping opinion, the
majority adopts an untenable reading of California’s law that
disregards the Supreme Court’s and our own guidance for
evaluating facial challenges. The majority stresses that “we
consider only the text of the challenged rules in assessing a
one thing—the right to ‘keep and bear’ firearms.” See B&L, 104 F.4th
at 117. Just as the Second Amendment says nothing about “lying,” it
“says nothing about commerce.” See id.

66

RHODE V. BONTA

facial challenge.” Maj. Op. at 28 n.19 (citing Nguyen, 140
F.4th at 1240). But the majority ignores its own admonition:
It asserts that “the text does not limit permissible delay
times” associated with background checks—even though the
text requires that approval occur at the “time of purchase.”
Maj. Op. at 28 n.19; Cal. Penal Code § 30370(a). The
majority’s reading of the statute is utterly implausible. Even
if the majority could persuasively read “time of purchase” as
contemplating some vague “delay,” any speculation about
that delay would be flatly inappropriate in this facial posture.
As the Supreme Court has instructed, we must “consider the
circumstances in which” gun regulations are “most likely to
be constitutional” rather than “hypothetical scenarios
where” they “might raise constitutional concerns.” Rahimi,
602 U.S. at 701.
As I have pointed out, in order to conclude in a facial
challenge that California’s law “meaningfully constrains”
the right to keep and bear arms on its face, the majority must
demonstrate that all of the law’s conceivable applications do
so. So if, for example, California could show—and it can 7—

California’s evidence reveals that the state approved tens of thousands
of ammunition purchases within just the first month of the scheme’s
operation. And, according to uncontested evidence from the California
Department of Justice’s Bureau of Firearms, California has approved
hundreds of thousands more since then:

7

From January 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, the
Department processed 538,359 AFS Checks, which is
roughly 99.2% of all ammunition eligibility checks
during this time. It approved 480,131 (89%), rejected
58,087 (11%) because the information submitted by
the purchaser did not match an AFS entry, and denied
141 (0.03%) because the Department’s information

RHODE V. BONTA

67

that its law overwhelmingly imposed a one-dollar fee and a
one-minute approval process, the majority must show that
this application meaningfully constrains the right to keep and
bear arms. The majority does not even attempt such
analysis. Instead, the majority makes repeated allusions to
hypothetical, nontextual “delays,” see, e.g., Maj. Op. 30, that
leave “the panel slaying a straw man,” see Rahimi, 602 U.S.
701.
In this facial posture, and on this record, I would hold
that California’s imposition of a de minimis delay and small
fee for purchasing ammunition cannot possibly
“meaningfully constrain” the right to keep and bear arms.
II
Even though Plaintiffs do not assert a right that falls
within the Second Amendment’s “plain text,” and even
though California’s ammunition background check scheme
does not “meaningfully constrain” the right to keep and bear
arms, the scheme is constitutional for an independent reason:
showed the purchaser to be on the Armed Prohibited
Persons System (APPS) list.
From January 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, AFS
Checks were completed within 170.7 seconds on
average.
From January 1, 2023, through June 30, 2023, taking
into account all types of ammunition eligibility
checks—AFS Checks, Basic Checks, and COE
Checks—more than 99% of all ammunition eligibility
checks were completed in less than one minute, and
more than 88% of all ammunition eligibility checks
were approved in less than one minute.
Plaintiffs’ facial challenge cannot surmount the burden of its own theory,
much less this evidence.

68

RHODE V. BONTA

The Supreme Court has repeatedly recognized that objective,
“shall-issue” licensing regimes—like California’s—are
presumptively lawful, and Plaintiffs have failed to rebut that
presumption. This analysis requires approaching the Second
Amendment from a slightly different angle, but the result is
the same.
A
The Court’s seminal decision in Heller characterized
“laws imposing conditions and qualifications on the
commercial sale of arms” as “presumptively lawful
regulatory measures.” 554 U.S. at 626–27 & n.26. Bruen,
despite introducing a rigorous historical analysis, affirmed
that these “‘shall issue’ regimes, which often require
applicants to undergo a background check,” are
constitutionally permissible. 597 U.S. at 38 n.9.
Accordingly, the government may impose certain minimum
requirements on the commercial sale of arms so long as they
are “narrow, objective, and definite.” Id.
But this presumption can be overcome. Plaintiffs may
“rebut[] th[e] presumption of constitutionality by showing
that a ‘shall-issue’ licensing law effectively ‘den[ies]’ the
right to keep and bear arms,” in which case “the burden shifts
to the government to demonstrate that the regulation is
‘consistent with this Nation’s historical tradition of firearm
regulation.’” Md. Shall Issue, 116 F.4th at 223 (quoting
Bruen, 597 U.S. at 17, 38 n.9). “[I]f the government does
not satisfy its burden in such cases, then the ‘shall-issue’
licensing law violates the Second Amendment.” Id.
The Supreme Court has not clarified where, exactly, the
“shall-issue” analysis falls within Bruen’s two-step inquiry.
In B&L, we held that “[t]he most reasonable interpretation
of [Bruen and Heller] is that commercial restrictions

RHODE V. BONTA

69

presumptively do not implicate the plain text of the Second
Amendment at the first step of the Bruen test.” 104 F.4th at
119. I did that analysis in Part I, which explained that
Bruen’s step one typically considers whether a plaintiff’s
putatively protected conduct falls within the Second
Amendment’s plain text. See Bruen, 597 U.S. at 24 (“When
the Second Amendment’s plain text covers an individual’s
conduct, the Constitution presumptively protects that
conduct.”). By contrast, Bruen’s and Heller’s “shall-issue”
analysis requires us to scrutinize the government’s conduct.
These are two discrete analyses that apply different
standards to different parties. Accordingly, they invite
separate consideration.
Regardless of where, exactly, the “shall-issue” analysis
lives within the Bruen scheme, there is no dispute that it
operates as a “presumption” of lawfulness. Yet the majority
begins with the claim that California cannot provide
“historical analogues,” Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 700, and that its
ammunition licensing scheme thus violates the Second
Amendment. Maj. Op. at 31–46. But this treats Heller’s
approval of “presumptively lawful regulatory measures,” as
an affirmative defense to a law’s unconstitutionality. 554
U.S. at 627 n.26. This is inconsistent with Heller and Bruen.
The majority has effectively reversed the presumption,
and the order of operations matters. 8 By the time the
Citing Bruen’s footnote 9, the majority observes that “the Supreme
Court indicated that shall issue regimes may be constitutional, but did
not hold that they were per se consistent with the Second Amendment.”
Maj. Op. at 46. I agree with the majority that these regimes are not per
se constitutional. But I lament that the majority has refused to recognize
that Bruen created a “presumption” of lawfulness, rather than a mere
indicium or suggestion of lawfulness. The majority’s miserly reading of
Bruen’s “presumptively lawful” measures is especially jarring given the

8

70

RHODE V. BONTA

majority gets to Part III.C of its opinion, it has already
concluded that “California’s ammunition background check
regime does not survive scrutiny under the two-step Bruen
analysis.” Maj. Op. at 46. So much for the “presumption”
of constitutionality. 9 Once the majority has found that
California’s scheme is ahistorical, it is a short step to
conclude that it must not be “presumptively lawful.” Maj.
Op. at 46 n.29. The majority’s analysis is backwards and
thus flawed from the outset.
B
The majority concludes that “the Supreme Court’s
footnote in Bruen sheds little light” on whether California’s
law is “presumptively lawful” because California imposes
“background checks every time a person seeks to purchase
ammunition,” Maj. Op. at 48, rather than every other “year
or several years,” id. at 47.
The majority has invented a new criterion for evaluating
the lawfulness of a background check regulation—the
majority’s admonition that “Bruen’s examples of how shall-issue
licensing regimes could be abusive were not exclusive.” Maj. Op. at 49.
Under the majority’s reading of Bruen, shall-issue regimes are now
presumptively unconstitutional until proven otherwise.
The majority distinguishes Bruen by observing that its footnote 9 did
not address “ammunition background check regime[s],” Maj. Op. at 49.
This is true, but should be irrelevant under the majority’s own logic. By
divorcing ammunition acquisition restrictions from firearm acquisition
restrictions, the majority has rejected a key premise of its own analysis:
that the Second Amendment extends the same protection to both
ammunition and firearms. Maj. Op. at 22–23. Nothing in the majority’s
analysis tells us why ammunition must be covered by the Second
Amendment—but must be treated differently from firearms—and why
Bruen’s footnote 9 is, consequently, “meaningfully distinguishable,”
Maj Op. at 49.

9

RHODE V. BONTA

71

frequency of the check—and has ignored the two criteria that
Bruen actually provided: cost and temporal delay. See
Bruen, 591 U.S. at 38 n.9. There is little wonder why. The
majority cannot say, with a straight face, that California’s
one-dollar fee is “exorbitant.” Nor can it assert, with any
credibility, that California’s one-minute wait time is
“lengthy.” See id. Instead, the majority’s sole rationale for
its new anti-frequency rule is that Bruen only alluded to
licensing regimes that permitted individuals to “engage in a
course of conduct for a year or several years” rather than for
a single transaction. Maj. Op. at 47. According to the
majority, Bruen could not possibly have contemplated a
licensing regime that operates with such frequency.
But this is a distinction without a difference. The
majority attempts to rationalize its novel anti-frequency rule
by invoking Bruen’s analogical mode of reasoning: It
concludes that California’s law is not “presumptively
lawful” because it “is not analogous to the ‘how’ of a shallissue licensing regime wherein a person receives a license
that is valid for a period of years.” Maj Op. at 48. Yet the
majority makes no effort to explain the importance of this
distinction. Instead, the majority effectively requires the
government to concoct “a historical twin” every time that it
implements a “presumptively lawful” background check
regulation, despite Bruen’s admonition to the contrary, and
despite Bruen’s acknowledgment that even a regulation
lacking a “dead ringer . . . may be analogous enough to pass
constitutional muster.” See Bruen, 597 U.S. at 30, 38 n.9.
And, more troublingly, the majority’s analogy is only
half complete. Bruen instructed courts to focus on both
“how and why . . . regulations burden a law-abiding citizen’s
right to armed self-defense.” Id. at 29 (emphasis added).
But the majority never gets past “how.” This is puzzling,

72

RHODE V. BONTA

since Bruen explained exactly “why” a licensing law should
be denied the presumption of lawfulness: for “deny[ing]
ordinary citizens their right to public carry.” Id. at 38 n.9
(citing Heller, 554 U.S. at 635). If the majority wishes to
apply Bruen’s analogical reasoning faithfully, it must not
only identify superficial differences, but, more importantly,
also consider whether a background check law is different
such that it effectively “prevent[s] ‘law-abiding, responsible
citizens’ from exercising their Second Amendment right to
public carry.” See id. (quoting Heller, 554 U.S. at 635). The
majority has not explained why conducting an inexpensive,
almost instantaneous background check necessarily denies
“law-abiding, responsible citizens” the right to public carry
any more than the licensing laws that it cited to
approvingly—some of which impose hundreds of dollars of
fees and months of delay.
For example, the majority cites California’s concealed
licensing scheme, Maj. Op. at 47 n.31, which is administered
by local governments. See Cal. Penal Code § 26220(b).
California localities typically charge hundreds of dollars for
concealed carry permits. See, e.g., Carry a Concealed
Weapon Licensing – CCW, Los Angeles Cnty. Sheriff’s
Dep’t, https://lasd.org/ccw/ [https://perma.cc/LNV2-B33C]
(last visited June 17, 2025) (“[T]he total initial [Carry
Concealed Weapon] license application fee will be $216.”);
Fee Schedule, San Diego Sheriff’s Off. License Div.,
https://www.sdsheriff.gov/home/showdocument?id=9157&
t=638803105385767072 [https://perma.cc/3UNX-RDS9]
(last visited June 17, 2025) (assessing a $176 fee for a
concealed carry permit). The majority also cites regulations
from other states that impose substantial delays. See, e.g.,
Alaska Stat. § 18.65.700(b) (permitting the state to hold a
concealed carry license application for up to 30 days); Ariz.

RHODE V. BONTA

73

Rev. Stat. § 13-3112(H) (75 days); Idaho Code § 18-3302K
(90 days); Mont. Code Ann. § 45-8-321(1) (60 days); Wash.
Rev. Code Ann. § 9.41.070(1) (30 days).
The majority’s strained logic punishes governments for
making their background check systems more effective and
efficient. Under the majority’s anti-frequency rule, the more
effectively that a background check or licensing law
“prohibit[s] . . . the possession of firearms by felons and the
mentally ill,” the less likely that that law will pass
constitutional muster. See Heller, 554 U.S. at 626. The
majority, which complains that “California residents cannot
avoid the background check requirements by taking
advantage of internet or out-of-state sales,” apparently
believes that background check laws are unconstitutional
unless they are flecked with obvious loopholes. Maj. Op. at
27.
The majority’s new rule can only be justified by
accepting the premise that undergoing a background check
per se—even one that costs one dollar and takes one
minute—imposes some kind of ineffable injury that must be
minimized at all costs. Yet Heller, far from construing
background checks as inherently injurious, or even
presumptively suspect, instead christened them as
“presumptively lawful.”
Heller, 554 U.S. at 627 n.26
(emphasis added).
By the majority’s reasoning, any regulation of sales of
ammunition is presumptively unlawful, unless the state can
produce an identical historical twin. I doubt that any state
will be able to do so, any more than a state will be able to
show a strong tradition of state regulation of arms sales when
the Second Amendment was adopted. The implications of
the majority’s analysis flatly contradict Heller and Bruen.

74

RHODE V. BONTA

III
Plaintiffs also assert that California’s ammunition
background check scheme violates the Commerce Clause by
requiring vendors, including out-of-state vendors, to
consummate ammunition transactions face-to-face in
California. I would reverse the district court’s judgment on
this claim as well.
The United States Constitution grants Congress the
power to “regulate Commerce . . . among the several
states[.]” U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 3. The Supreme Court
has held that the Commerce Clause implicitly preempts state
regulations that disrupt interstate commerce. See Or. Waste
Sys., Inc. v. Dep’t of Env’t Quality, 511 U.S. 93, 98 (1994).
“Two levels of scrutiny exist for analyzing state statutes
challenged under the dormant Commerce Clause.” Black
Star Farms LLC v. Oliver, 600 F.3d 1225, 1230 (9th Cir.
2010) (citation omitted). First, statutes that “affirmatively
discriminate against . . . [interstate] transactions” are subject
to “more demanding scrutiny.” Maine v. Taylor, 477 U.S.
131, 138 (1986). In these cases, “the burden falls on the
State to demonstrate both that the statute ‘serves a legitimate
local purpose,’ and that this purpose could not be served as
well by available nondiscriminatory means.” Id. (quoting
Hughes v. Oklahoma, 441 U.S. 322, 336 (1979)).
Alternatively, “statutes that burden interstate transactions
only incidentally” are permissible unless the “burdens they
impose on interstate trade are ‘clearly excessive in relation
to the putative local benefits.’” Id. (quoting Pike v. Bruce
Church, Inc., 397 U.S. 137, 142 (1970)). In either case, it is
an “antidiscrimination principle [that] lies at the very core of
the [Court’s] dormant Commerce Clause jurisprudence.”
Nat’l Pork Producers Council v. Ross, 598 U.S. 356, 369

RHODE V. BONTA

75

(2023) (quotation marks and citation omitted); see Flynt v.
Bonta, 131 F.4th 918, 923–24 (9th Cir. 2025).
California’s scheme requires that all ammunition sales
be consummated with state-licensed vendors in face-to-face
transactions. Cal. Penal Code § 30312(a)–(b). Vendors who
lack a physical location may rely, for a fee, on vendors with
a physical location for assistance consummating sales faceto-face. Plaintiffs assert that this face-to-face requirement
discriminatorily “favor[s] in-state, in-person transactions
over in-person transactions with a vendor in another state.”
They also assert that “[w]hile a California vendor may sell
to a Californian face-to-face, an out-of-state vendor may
not[.]”
But Plaintiffs “read too much into too little.” Nat’l Pork
Producers, 598 U.S. at 373. California’s face-to-face
requirement does not “affirmatively discriminate” against
out-of-state transactions: A California ammunition retailer
faces the same burden as a Nevada or North Carolina
ammunition retailer—Either operate a physical location in
California or contract with a business that does. See Taylor,
477 U.S. at 138. This means that California’s face-to-face
requirement applies “even-handedly” to both in-state and
out-of-state vendors. See Day v. Henry, 129 F.4th 1197,
1205–06 (9th Cir. 2025) (upholding Arizona’s direct
shipping restrictions on wine retailers because “[t]here is no
clear-cut ‘in-state’ and ‘out-of-state’ divide”); cf. Granholm
v. Heald, 544 U.S. 460, 473–76 (2005) (disapproving of
Michigan and New York statutes that discriminated between
in-state and out-of-state wineries in direct shipment).
Plaintiffs’ argument for discrimination requires
conflating “California vendors” with California brick-andmortar vendors. As California observes, in-state vendors

76

RHODE V. BONTA

who lack a physical location in California cannot directly
sell ammunition to Californians, either. This means that
neither a Los Angeles-based vendor nor a New York Citybased vendor may conduct a purely online (or telephonic, or
mail-order) transaction with a San Francisco-based
purchaser.
And Plaintiffs’ assertion that “California’s resident
businesses are the only businesses that may sell directly to
California consumers,” belies reality: Out-of-state
businesses sell ammunition directly to Californians at brickand-mortar stores in California. 10 Nor do Plaintiffs identify
any law or regulation that erects a discriminatory barrier that
prevents those out-of-state retailers from obtaining licenses
to do so. Accordingly, vendors principally located in other
states may sell ammunition to Californians “face-to-face”
under the same rules that apply to vendors principally
located in California. And “setting up a physical storefront
in [California] is not a per se burden on out-of-state
companies and per se benefit to in-state companies.” Day,
129 F.4th at 1206–07 (quotation marks omitted). There is no
discrimination here.
Because California’s face-to-face requirement “regulates
even-handedly to effectuate a legitimate local public interest,
Consider, for example, Bass Pro Shops, a Missouri-based sporting
goods retailer, see Where is Bass Pro Shops Corporate Headquarters
Located?, Bass Pro Shops,
https://help.basspro.com/companyinformation-e8cd63ea/where-is-bass-pro-shops-corporate-headquarterslocated-d15e9de5 [https://perma.cc/DS9A-AGZH] (last visited June 17,
2025), whose various California stores sell ammunition, see, e.g., FN 5.7
x 28mm Polymer Tip Handgun Ammo, Bass Pro Shops,
https://www.basspro.com/p/fn-57-x-28mm-polymer-tip-handgunammo [https://perma.cc/sw8p-x5m4] (last visited June 17, 2025) (“In
stock at Irvine, CA.”).
10

RHODE V. BONTA

77

and its effects on interstate commerce are only incidental, it
will be upheld unless the burden imposed on such commerce
is clearly excessive in relation to the putative local benefits.”
See Pike, 397 U.S. at 142 (citation omitted). Plaintiffs fare
no better with this alternative balancing theory under Pike,
which does not “depart from the antidiscrimination rule that
lies at the very core of [the Court’s] dormant Commerce
Clause jurisprudence.” Nat’l Pork Producers, 598 U.S. at
377 (quotation marks and citation omitted).
Plaintiffs concede that “no one denies that keeping arms
out of the hands of dangerous felons is a legitimate
government interest.” I agree. Still, Plaintiffs argue that the
face-to-face requirement imposes a burden that is “clearly
excessive in relation” to these benefits by requiring out-ofstate businesses to rely on “the unfettered discretion” of “instate competitors . . . to condition their access to the
California market on paying a King’s ransom.” Plaintiffs
ignore the fact that out-of-state vendors may nonetheless sell
directly to California customers if they operate a physical
location, and that any burden flowing from their choosing to
do so, or from their choice to contract with a business that
does so, falls equally on in-state and out-of-state businesses.
I would hold that California’s face-to-face requirement
does not violate the Commerce Clause.
IV
Finally, Plaintiffs contend that California Penal Code
§ 30314, which prohibits Californians from bringing out-ofstate ammunition into California, is preempted by 18 U.S.C.

78

RHODE V. BONTA

§ 926A. I would also reverse the district court’s judgment
on this claim. Section 926A provides in relevant part:
Notwithstanding any other provision of any
law or any rule or regulation of a State or any
political subdivision thereof, any person who
is not otherwise prohibited by this chapter
from transporting, shipping, or receiving a
firearm shall be entitled to transport a firearm
for any lawful purpose from any place where
he may lawfully possess and carry such
firearm to any other place where he may
lawfully possess and carry such firearm if,
during such transportation the firearm is
unloaded, and neither the firearm nor any
ammunition being transported is readily
accessible . . . .
18 U.S.C. § 926A. Congress has made clear that this
preemption provision does not “occupy the field”; it applies
only if “there is a direct and positive conflict between such
provision and the law of the State so that the two cannot be
reconciled or consistently stand together.” 18 U.S.C. § 927.
Section 926A protects the interstate transportation of
firearms and ammunition. However, it only protects the
transportation of ammunition between states where the
transporter “may lawfully possess and carry” that
ammunition. See 18 U.S.C. § 926A. Here, California’s
§ 30314(a) provides that:
[A] resident of this state shall not bring or
transport into this state any ammunition that
he or she purchased or otherwise obtained

RHODE V. BONTA

79

from outside of this state unless he or she first
has that ammunition delivered to a licensed
ammunition vendor for delivery to that
resident pursuant to the procedures set forth
in Section 30312.
Cal. Penal Code § 30314(a). Because Californians may not
“lawfully possess and carry” ammunition unless that
ammunition first passes through a licensed vendor who can
perform a face-to-face background check, § 926A does not
apply here. Plaintiffs contend that California has taken
advantage of § 926A’s safe harbor to “regulat[e] the
interstate transport of ammunition generally, which is
unequivocally protected by § 926A.” But this is largely a
retread of Plaintiffs’ Commerce Clause argument.
I would hold that § 30314 is not preempted by § 926A.
* * *
For the forgoing reasons, I would reverse the judgment
of the district court. I respectfully dissent.

