FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JERRY LEE KING,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 23-1713
D.C. No.
1:17-cv-00676JLT-EPG

R. VILLEGAS; P. CRUZ; J.
CURRY,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of California
Jennifer L. Thurston, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 7, 2024
Submission Vacated November 13, 2024
Resubmitted October 20, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed October 20, 2025
Before: William A. Fletcher, Consuelo M. Callahan, and
Ana de Alba, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge W. Fletcher;
Dissent by Judge Callahan

2

KING V. VILLEGAS

SUMMARY *
Prisoner Civil Rights
The panel reversed the district court’s dismissal of a state
prisoner’s 42 U.S.C. § 1983 suit as barred by Heck v.
Humphrey, 512 U.S. 477 (1994), and remanded for further
proceedings.
Plaintiff, a prisoner in Kern Valley State Prison, was
involved in a physical altercation with two correctional
officers. He subsequently filed a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 lawsuit
against the officers, alleging they used excessive force in
violation of the Eighth Amendment. The state brought
criminal charges arising out of the incident, and plaintiff
entered a plea of nolo contendere.
The panel held in a § 1983 case, where the Heck bar is at
issue, a plaintiff’s nolo plea is inadmissible under Fed. R.
Evid. 410(a) to show that he committed the charged
crime. Treatment of nolo pleas under Rule 410 reflects the
long-standing recognition that the nolo plea constitutes a
special creature under the law. Under Rule 410(a), neither
the plea nor the statements made during the plea proceedings
should have been admitted against plaintiff in this civil
case. The panel rejected defendants’ arguments in favor of
their interpretation of Rule 410(a). Finally, the panel held
that its decision was consistent with the purposes underlying
both the Heck bar and Rule 410(a).

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

KING V. VILLEGAS

3

Judge Callahan dissented because the majority
undervalued the Heck bar and, by giving Rule 410(a) an
incorrect and unprecedented interpretation, eviscerated the
Heck bar. She rejected the majority’s assertion that Rule
410(a) effectively created an exception to the Heck bar for
collateral challenges to criminal convictions resulting from
nolo contendere pleas.

COUNSEL
Kristin O'Bryan (argued) and Rachel Trauner (argued),
Certified Law Students, Ninth Circuit Appellate Advocacy
Clinic, Pepperdine, Caruso School of Law, Malibu,
California; Curt Cutting and Rebecca G. Powell,
Supervising Attorneys, Horvitz & Levy LLP, Burbank,
California; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Sarah M. Brattin (argued) and Martha P. Ehlenbach, Deputy
Attorneys General; Neah Huynh, Supervising Deputy
Attorney General; Monica N. Anderson, Senior Assistant
Attorney General; Rob Bonta, California Attorney General;
Office of the California Attorney General, Sacramento,
California; for Defendants-Appellees.

4

KING V. VILLEGAS

OPINION
W. FLETCHER, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiff-Appellant Jerry Lee King, a prisoner in Kern
Valley State Prison (“KVSP”), was involved in a physical
altercation with two correctional officers. He subsequently
filed a lawsuit under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 against the officers,
alleging that they used excessive force against him in
violation of the Eighth Amendment. A year later, the state
brought criminal charges against King arising out of the
same incident. After a two-year delay, King entered a plea
of nolo contendere to one count of resisting an executive
officer under California Penal Code § 69. Based on the plea,
the district court dismissed King’s complaint as barred by
Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S. 477 (1994). We reverse.
I. Background
On August 17, 2016, there was a physical altercation
between King and two KVSP correctional officers,
Defendants-Appellees R. Villegas and P. Cruz (collectively,
“Defendants”). Because the facts of this incident are
disputed, we present two versions of the events as alleged by
the respective parties.
We begin with King’s version of events. King alleges in
his complaint that Villegas and an unidentified officer came
to King’s housing unit to escort him and about nine other
inmates to a different part of the prison. King and the other
inmates were “‘immediately’ placed . . . in restraints
(handcuffs) based upon [their] orientation status.” As
exhibits to his complaint, King attached declarations from
newly arrived inmates in KVSP, who had come to the prison
at about the same time as King. All of them stated that newly

KING V. VILLEGAS

5

arrived inmates could not leave their cells without first being
handcuffed.
King alleges that Villegas and the other officer escorted
King and the others to the mental health department
building. An inmate directly behind King asked King a
question, and he responded. Villegas then approached King
and said, “What don’t you understand about shut your
fucking mouth?” King responded that “he didn’t have to get
directly in his [] face and talk to him that way.” Then,
“without any provocation,” Villegas grabbed King by the
shirt and “with great force,” “rammed [King]’s head into the
wall” with his forearm. This caused King’s “head to bust
open as blood began to p[our] down [his] face.”
King responded, “what the fuck,” and Villegas used his
foot to “sweep [King] off his feet[] causing [him] to fall
forcefully to the ground[,] . . . simultaneously yelling out
code #1 assault on staff.” Defendant P. Cruz responded to
the scene, and “while [King] was l[y]ing on the ground,”
“struck [him] with great force and a close[d] fist in his right
eye causing blood to p[our] from the . . . eye.” Cruz also
“gr[ound] [King]’s ankles into the [asphalt].” King alleges
that a sergeant on the scene told medical staff to document
that King had “refused treatment to sadistically cover-up the
extent of [his] injuries.” King was eventually examined by
medical staff.
Defendants presented a different version of events in
their incident reports. According to these reports, King was
not handcuffed or restrained while being escorted with the
other inmates. They allege that King was “facing the wall
outside the Mental Health building” when he “became
disruptive by talking loudly while other inmates were trying
to check in.” Villegas told King to be quiet. Then “without

6

KING V. VILLEGAS

warning or provocation,” King “swung his right hand
backwards striking [Villegas’s] right shoulder area.”
Villegas yelled at him to stop, but King continued to “twist
his body back and forth in attempt to elbow [him].” Villegas
pushed King to incapacitate him, causing King’s head to
strike the wall. Cruz then grabbed King by the shoulder and
“forced him to the ground.” King landed on the ground in
“prone position,” and Villegas landed on top of him.
King continued to struggle. Villegas used his hands to
keep King on the ground, then announced a “Code 1” staff
battery through his radio. Cruz grabbed King’s legs to
further restrain him. King then stopped moving and
complied with orders to put his hands behind his back.
Villegas placed King in handcuffs, and Villegas and Cruz
continued to restrain King on the ground until other KVSP
staff arrived to relieve them.
Afterwards, Villegas, Cruz, and King were examined by
medical staff.
Another officer took photographs to
document the injuries. (No photographs are in the record on
appeal.) King was interviewed regarding the incident and
placed in administrative segregation. The incident was
referred to the Kern County prosecutor.
The remaining facts are not in dispute. After a prison
disciplinary hearing, King was found guilty of battery on a
peace officer. After exhausting his administrative remedies,
King filed a pro se § 1983 suit in the district court on May
17, 2017. He alleged that Villegas and Cruz used excessive
force against him in violation of the Eighth Amendment. He
sought damages as well as declaratory and injunctive relief.
Just over a year after the incident and several months
after King filed his § 1983 suit, the Kern County prosecutor
charged King with a felony count of battery by a state

KING V. VILLEGAS

7

prisoner on a non-confined person under California Penal
Code § 4501.5 and one count of obstructing or resisting an
executive officer under California Penal Code § 69. These
charges arose out of the above-described incident. On July
12, 2019, Defendants successfully moved to stay King’s
§ 1983 action pending resolution of the criminal case against
King.
King’s criminal case was not brought to trial or
otherwise resolved for two years after the criminal charges
were brought. He finally entered a nolo contendere plea. At
the plea hearing, King expressed concern about the impact
his plea would have on his long-pending § 1983 suit. He
first asked the judge if he could retract his plea if the plea
ended up affecting his civil case. The judge told him that
“[i]t shouldn’t” affect his civil case, but that he did not “have
any control over the civil case.” King made clear his
concern, saying, “I don’t want [my plea] to affect my civil
case in any way.” The judge responded, “I don’t do federal
law. . . . I have almost no civil experience. I don’t know
what might or might not affect [your civil case]. I really just
can’t tell you.” Marquez, King’s counsel, then interjected:
“If I can pipe in. I just indicated to Mr. King, to the best of
my knowledge, [that] the People vs. West plea is intended so
that it won’t impact the civil suit. But, again, I can’t make a
promise that it wouldn’t.”
Before King entered his plea, the judge, King’s counsel,
and the prosecutor had the following exchange:
THE COURT:
MARQUEZ:

Mr. Marquez, do you
feel like you had enough
time to talk to Mr. King?
Yes.

8

KING V. VILLEGAS

COURT:

And do you believe he
understands
his
constitutional rights?
MARQUEZ:
Yes.
THE COURT:
Join in his waiver of
those rights?
MARQUEZ:
Join.
THE COURT:
And stipulate to a
factual basis based on
the probable cause
statement
and
the
reports in discovery
with the understanding
this is a People vs. West
and a no contest plea?
MARQUEZ:
With that understanding
it’s a People vs. West
plea.
[PROSECUTOR]: So stipulated on that
understanding.
The “reports in discovery” referenced by the court were
reports by various prison staff members who witnessed or
were otherwise involved with the incident in question, as
well as medical reports for King, Villegas, and Cruz.
King then entered a nolo plea to one count of obstructing
or resisting an executive officer under § 69, and the
prosecutor agreed to dismiss the charge for battery under
§ 4510.5. Soon thereafter, Defendants notified the district
court of the resolution of the criminal case and
simultaneously moved to dismiss King’s suit on the ground
that it was now barred under Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S.
477 (1994). Defendants argued that King’s claim that they

KING V. VILLEGAS

9

“attacked him without any provocation, struggle, or
resistance” was irreconcilable with his now outstanding
conviction for resisting an executive officer under California
Penal Code § 69.
After entry of the nolo plea in King’s criminal case, a
magistrate judge in his § 1983 suit recommended denying
Defendants’ motion for judgment on the pleadings. King v.
Villegas, No. 1:17-CV-00676, 2022 WL 17039156 (E.D.
Cal. Nov. 17, 2022). The judge recommended that the
district court find that in entering a nolo plea, King did not
admit to the facts that were referenced as part of the factual
basis found by the criminal court. Id. at *8. The magistrate
judge relied in part on Federal Rule of Evidence 410(a),
which provides that evidence of a nolo contendere plea “is
not admissible against the defendant who made the plea.”
Fed. R. Evid. 410(a); see King, 2022 WL 17039156, at *7–
9.
District Judge Ishii adopted the magistrate court’s
recommendation in full and denied Defendants’ motion for
judgment on the pleadings. King v. Villegas, No. 1:17-CV00676, 2023 WL 3095288 (E.D. Cal. Apr. 26, 2023). Judge
Ishii then retired, and King’s case was reassigned to Judge
Thurston. Defendants asked for reconsideration of Judge
Ishii’s ruling, contending that he had erred in holding that
Rule 410 prevented the admission of King’s nolo plea in his
§ 1983 suit. In support of their argument, Defendants
pointed to our unpublished disposition in Briseno v. City of
West Covina, No. 22-55100, 2023 WL 2400833 (9th Cir.
Mar. 8, 2023), in which we held that Heck barred a suit by a
plaintiff who had pleaded no contest to resisting a peace
officer under California Penal Code § 148(a)(1).

10

KING V. VILLEGAS

Judge Thurston concluded that reconsideration was
warranted and granted Defendants’ motion for judgment on
the pleadings. King v. Villegas, No. 1:17-CV-00676, 2023
WL 4627687 (E.D. Cal. July 19, 2023). Judge Thurston held
that the court could consider evidence of King’s nolo plea
because Defendants did not rely on the plea “‘against the
defendant’ within the meaning of Rule 410.” Id. at *7. She
compared the statement of facts in King’s complaint to a
summary of the incident written by a supervising
correctional officer. Id. at *9–10. She found that “there
[wa]s no possible way these two sets of facts could
simultaneously be true” and thus held that Heck barred
King’s excessive force claim. Id. at *11.
This appeal followed. After oral argument, we ordered
supplemental briefing on the question of whether Federal
Rule of Evidence 410(a) precludes admission of a prior nolo
plea into evidence in a Heck suit. We now reverse.
II. Discussion
We review de novo a district court’s judgment on the
pleadings. Parker v. Cnty. of Riverside, 78 F.4th 1109, 1112
(9th Cir. 2023). At the pleading stage, we consider the facts
in the light most favorable to the plaintiff. Belanus v. Clark,
796 F.3d 1021, 1024 (9th Cir. 2015).
In Heck v. Humphrey, 512 U.S. 477, 487 (1994), the
Supreme Court held that a state prisoner’s § 1983 suit for
damages cannot proceed if “judgment in favor of the
plaintiff would necessarily imply the invalidity of his
conviction or sentence.” Heck’s “favorable termination”
rule is based on the “hoary principle that civil tort actions are
not appropriate vehicles for challenging the validity of
outstanding criminal judgments.” Id. at 486 & n.5.
Defendants argue that King’s suit is barred under Heck

KING V. VILLEGAS

11

because its success would necessarily imply the invalidity of
his conviction for resisting an executive officer under
California Penal Code § 69.
There are two issues in this appeal: first, in a § 1983 case
where the Heck bar is at issue, whether a plaintiff’s nolo plea
is inadmissible under Federal Rule of Evidence 410(a) in
order to show that the plaintiff committed the underlying
crimes charged; second, if the plea is admissible for that
purpose, whether King’s suit is nevertheless barred by Heck.
For the reasons that follow, we hold that King’s nolo plea is
inadmissible under Rule 410(a) to show that he committed
the charged crime. We do not reach the second issue.
A
Rule 410(a) provides that “[i]n a civil or criminal case,”
evidence of a “nolo contendere plea” “is not admissible
against the defendant who made the plea.” Fed. R. Evid.
410(a). This rule “prohibits the admission of nolo
contendere pleas and the convictions resulting from them as
proof that the pleader actually committed the underlying
crimes charged.” United States v. Nguyen, 465 F.3d 1128,
1131 (9th Cir. 2006).
We have never squarely answered the question of
whether the evidentiary bar of Rule 410(a) applies when a
defendant in a § 1983 suit seeks to introduce evidence of the
plaintiff’s nolo contendere plea in support of a Heck bar.
Defendants correctly note that our court has previously
applied the Heck bar in cases where the relevant criminal
conviction was obtained through a plea of nolo contendere.
See, e.g., Sanders v. City of Pittsburg, 14 F.4th 968, 970–73
(9th Cir. 2021); Szajer v. City of Los Angeles, 632 F.3d 607,
609–12 (9th Cir. 2011). But crucially, none of these
previous decisions considered whether Rule 410 barred the

12

KING V. VILLEGAS

admission of the nolo plea in the first place. “[C]ases are not
precedential for propositions not considered, or for matters
that are simply assumed.” United States v. Kirilyuk, 29 F.4th
1128, 1134 (9th Cir. 2022) (internal quotations and citations
omitted). Because “we have never squarely addressed” the
application of Rule 410(a) to the admission of nolo pleas in
Heck cases, “we are free to address the issue on the merits.”
Brecht v. Abrahamson, 507 U.S. 619, 631 (1993).
We now hold that Rule 410(a) bars admission of a nolo
contendere plea to show that a § 1983 plaintiff committed
the crimes to which he pleaded nolo contendere. Our
holding follows from a straightforward application of the
text of the Rule.
Rule 410(a) states, in full:
(a) Prohibited Uses. In a civil or criminal
case, evidence of the following is not
admissible against the defendant who made
the plea or participated in the plea
discussions:
(1) a guilty plea that was later withdrawn;
(2) a nolo contendere plea;
(3) a statement made during a
proceeding on either of those pleas
under Federal
Rule
of
Criminal
Procedure 11 or a comparable state
procedure; or
(4) a statement made during plea
discussions with an attorney for the
prosecuting authority if the discussions

KING V. VILLEGAS

13

did not result in a guilty plea or they
resulted in a later-withdrawn guilty plea.
Fed. R. Evid. 410(a) (emphasis added). Rule 410(b) sets out
two exceptions, neither of which is applicable here:
(b) Exceptions. The court may admit a
statement described in Rule 410(a)(3) or (4):
(1) in any proceeding in which another
statement made during the same plea or
plea discussions has been introduced, if in
fairness the statements ought to be
considered together; or
(2) in a criminal proceeding for perjury or
false statement, if the defendant made the
statement under oath, on the record, and
with counsel present.
Fed. R. Evid. 410(b).
As described above, King filed a civil action under
§ 1983 against Defendants alleging unlawful force under the
Eighth Amendment. He then entered a nolo contendere plea
to one count of violating Penal Code § 69. Defendants
presented evidence in King’s civil case of his nolo plea,
seeking to preclude his § 1983 claim under Heck. In holding
King’s claim to be Heck-barred, the district court compared
the facts contained in King’s complaint to those contained in
one of Defendants’ incident reports, reasoning that at his
plea hearing King stipulated to a factual basis for his nolo
plea based on the reports contained in discovery. See King,
2023 WL 4627687, at *6–7, 10–11. That is, the district court
considered both evidence of “a nolo contendere plea” and
“statement[s] made during a proceeding on” that plea “[i]n a

14

KING V. VILLEGAS

civil case” against “the defendant who made the plea.” Such
evidence falls squarely within the evidentiary bar of Rule
401(a). We hold that the district court erred in considering
such evidence.
This result is consistent with the established
understanding of nolo pleas. Treatment of nolo pleas under
Rule 410 reflects the long-standing recognition that the nolo
plea constitutes “a special creature under the law. It is, first
and foremost, not an admission of factual guilt.” Nguyen,
465 F.3d at 1130; see also North Carolina v. Alford, 400
U.S. 25, 36 (1970); Fed. R. Evid. 410 advisory committee’s
note to proposed rules (“The present rule gives effect to the
principal traditional characteristic of the nolo plea, i.e.,
avoiding the admission of guilt which is inherent in pleas of
guilty.”). This is especially true where, as here, a defendant
in California state court couples a nolo plea with a plea
pursuant to People v. West, 3 Cal.3d 595 (Cal. 1970). See
Almanza-Arenas v. Lynch, 815 F.3d 469, 473 n.3 (9th Cir.
2016) (“A West plea is a plea of [guilty or] nolo contendere,
not admitting a factual basis for the plea. Such a
plea . . . allows a defendant to . . . take advantage of a plea
bargain while still asserting his or her innocence.” (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted)); In re Alvernaz, 830
P.2d 747, 752 (Cal. 1992) (explaining that the defendant
does not admit a factual basis for the neplea when entering a
West plea). The district court thus mistakenly treated King’s
nolo plea and statements as an admission as to the truth of
the contents of Defendants’ reports. See also Carty v.
Nelson, 426 F.3d 1064, 1068 (9th Cir. 2005) (describing a
nolo plea as “not admit[ting] the specific details about [the]
conduct” underlying the plea). Neither King’s plea nor
statements during the hearing culminating in his nolo plea
constituted admissions of the factual basis for the plea.

KING V. VILLEGAS

15

Under Rule 410(a), neither the plea nor the statements
should have been admitted against him in his civil case.
B
Defendants make several arguments in favor of their
interpretation of Rule 410(a), none of which we find
persuasive. They first rely on the Sixth Circuit’s reading of
Rule 410(a) in Walker v. Schaeffer, 854 F.2d 138 (6th Cir.
1988). In Walker, two individuals pleaded nolo contendere
to disorderly conduct and reckless driving. They then
brought a civil suit against their arresting officers, alleging
false arrest and imprisonment. Id. at 140–41. The officers
argued that the plaintiffs’ pleas and corresponding
admissions estopped them from claiming that the officers
lacked probable cause during the arrest. Id. at 141–42.
The Sixth Circuit ruled in favor of the officers, holding
that Rule 410(a) did not bar the admission of the nolo pleas.
The court reasoned that Rule 410(a) prevented “the use of a
nolo contendere plea against the pleader in a subsequent civil
or criminal action in which he is the defendant.” Id. at 143
(emphasis in original). According to the court, because the
pleaders in the civil suit were plaintiffs, their nolo pleas were
not being used “‘against the defendant’ within the meaning
of [Rule] 410.” Id.
Walker’s interpretation is inconsistent with the text of
Rule 410(a). The Rule reads, “In a civil or criminal case,
evidence of the following is not admissible against the
defendant who made the plea or participated in the plea
discussions . . . .” Fed. R. Evid. 410(a) (emphasis added).
The word “defendant” refers to the person protected by Rule
410—the person who entered the nolo plea as a criminal
defendant. Of course, a criminal defendant who pleads no
contest can later become a plaintiff in a future civil case. But

16

KING V. VILLEGAS

Rule 410 protects the person—the “defendant”—who
entered the nolo plea. The fact that this person is now acting
as a civil plaintiff does not remove that protection. We agree
with the magistrate judge below that “[t]here is no indication
in the text suggesting that Rule 410 does not apply when ‘the
defendant who made the plea’ subsequently files a civil
case.” King, 2022 WL 17039156, at *9; see also Norton v.
Stille, No. 1:11-CV-1083, 2014 WL 12279521, at *2 (W.D.
Mich. Apr. 14, 2014).
Our interpretation of Rule 410(a) is confirmed by its
history. As first codified in Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 11, Rule 410(a) was phrased: “[E]vidence of . . .
a plea of nolo contendere . . . is not admissible in any civil
or criminal proceeding against the person who made the
plea or offer.” Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(e)(6) (1975) (emphasis
added). Congress then amended the Federal Rules in 1979,
moving the phrase “in any civil or criminal proceeding” to
the beginning of the sentence. As explained by the advisory
committee: “An ambiguity presently exists because the
word ‘against’ may be read as referring either to the kind of
proceeding in which the evidence is offered or the purpose
for which it is offered. The change makes it clear that the
latter construction is correct.” Fed. R. Crim. P. 11 advisory
committee’s note to 1979 Amendment. That is, after the
amendment to the Rule, “the person who made the plea or
offer” is protected in “any civil or criminal proceeding.”
The advisory committee’s note makes clear that Rule
410(a) was amended to avoid precisely the Sixth Circuit’s
interpretation in Walker. Here, King, a plaintiff in a civil
case, is “the defendant who made the plea” of nolo
contendere. Defendants in the civil case sought to introduce
evidence of that plea against him. It is clear, particularly
after the amendment in 1979, that Rule 410 forbids the

KING V. VILLEGAS

17

admission of a nolo plea “against the defendant who made
the plea[.]” That defendant may become a plaintiff in a later
civil suit, but he or she remains the person who was the
“defendant who made the plea.”
C
Defendants next argue that even if Rule 410(a) bars
admission of King’s nolo plea, it does not bar admission of
the resulting conviction under Penal Code § 69. In Brewer
v. City of Napa, 210 F.3d 1093 (9th Cir. 2000), we held that
evidence of a prior conviction could be admitted for
impeachment purposes even when that conviction was
derived from a plea of nolo contendere. We explained,
“Rule 410 by its terms prohibits only evidence of [no contest
pleas], insofar as pleas constitute statements or admissions.
Rule 609, by contrast, permits admission for impeachment
purposes of evidence of convictions.” Id. at 1096 (emphasis
in original). We did not specify in Brewer the manner in
which the conviction had been used for impeachment.
We clarified in Nguyen the uses of a nolo plea that are,
or are not, permitted by Rule 410. As in Brewer, we
recognized that Rule 410 does not, by its terms, categorically
forbid the admission into evidence of a conviction based on
a nolo plea. Consistent with Brewer, a conviction based on
a nolo plea can be introduced to impeach a statement by the
defendant that he or she has never been convicted of a crime.
But we made clear in Nguyen that Rule 410(a) forbids the
admission of a conviction when that conviction is “offered
for the purpose of demonstrating that the pleader is guilty of

18

KING V. VILLEGAS

the crime pled to.” 465 F.3d at 1131 (quoting Olsen v.
Correiro, 189 F.3d 52, 60 (1st Cir. 1999)). We wrote:
Reading the rule to preclude admission of a
nolo contendere plea but to permit admission
of conviction based on that plea produces an
illogical result. Rule 410’s exclusion of a
nolo contendere plea would be meaningless
if all it took to prove that the defendant
committed the crime charged was a certified
copy of the inevitable judgment . . . .
Id.
In applying the Heck bar in the case before us, the district
court relied on facts about King’s actions alleged in
Defendants’ incident reports. It reasoned that King admitted
to those facts in pleading nolo contendere to his conviction
under § 69. In other words, the court considered King’s
conviction as evidence that he was guilty of the acts to which
he pleaded no contest. Under our precedent, that is an
impermissible use of a conviction arising from a nolo plea.
D
Finally, our decision is consistent with the purposes
underlying both the Heck bar and Rule 410(a). The Supreme
Court’s principal concern in Heck was that “civil tort actions
are not appropriate vehicles for challenging the validity of
outstanding criminal judgments.” 512 U.S. at 486. King’s
§ 1983 suit was plainly not an attempt to engage in any such
collateral attack. Indeed, at the time of filing, King had no
conviction to challenge. The record also reflects that once
he was criminally charged under Penal Code § 69, King took

KING V. VILLEGAS

19

careful steps to resolve his criminal case in a way that would
not interfere with the pending civil action.
Barring admission of nolo pleas in Heck cases promotes
the efficient administration of criminal law and the
“disposition of criminal cases by compromise,” one of the
underlying purposes of Rule 410. Fed. R. Evid. 410 advisory
committee’s note to proposed rules; see also Olsen, 189 F.3d
at 60 (“A second reason behind Rule 410’s exclusion of nolo
pleas is a desire to encourage compromise resolution of
criminal cases.”). The case before us is a prime example:
King was willing to accept a plea offer only after
reassurances that a plea of nolo contendere, pursuant to
People v. West, would not preclude his civil suit. As
Defendants themselves note, “Rule 410 is meant to
encourage compromise in criminal cases, which, in turn,
lessens the burden on courts, defendants and prosecutors,
producing a more efficient criminal justice system.” That is
precisely what happened here.
Conclusion
King pleaded no contest to obstructing or resisting an
executive officer under Penal Code § 69. The district court
below improperly considered his plea in finding his § 1983
suit barred by Heck. We reverse the judgment of the district
court and remand for further proceedings consistent with our
opinion.
REVERSED and REMANDED.

20

KING V. VILLEGAS

CALLAHAN, Circuit Juge, dissenting:
Jerry Lee King (“King”) seeks damages from prison
officials for an incident in which King was convicted for
resisting arrest. In Heck v. Humphrey¸512 U.S. 477, 487
(1994), the Supreme Court held “when a state prisoner seeks
damages in a § 1983 suit, the district court must consider
whether a judgment in favor of the plaintiff would
necessarily imply the invalidity of his conviction or
sentence; if it would, the complaint must be dismissed unless
the plaintiff can demonstrate that the conviction or sentence
has already been invalidated.” Remarkably, the majority
does not dispute that if King prevails on his claim for
damages, it would necessarily imply the invalidity of his
conviction. Instead, because King’s conviction is the result
of a nolo contendere plea, the majority contrives to interpret
Federal Rule of Evidence 410(a) as precluding the court
from even considering the state court conviction and the
state court records that establish the factual basis for the
conviction. 1 In doing so, the majority undervalues the Heck
bar and, by giving Rule 410(a) an incorrect and
unprecedented interpretation, eviscerates the Heck bar.
Accordingly, I dissent.
I
The Supreme Court in setting forth the Heck bar traced
its origins to the “common law cause of action for malicious
prosecution.” Heck, 512 U.S. at 484. It noted that one
“element that must be alleged and proved in a malicious
prosecution action is termination of the prior criminal
Although the majority couches its holding as precluding consideration
of King’s nolo contendere plea, it includes the state court records that
define the conviction in its definition of plea. See Op. at 18.

1

KING V. VILLEGAS

21

proceeding in favor of the accused.” Id. (cleaned up) “This
requirement ‘avoids parallel litigation over the issues of
probable cause and guilt . . . and it precludes the possibility
of the claimant [sic] succeeding in the tort action after having
been convicted in the underlying criminal prosecution, in
contravention of a strong judicial policy against the creation
of two conflicting resolutions arising out of the same or
identical transaction.’” Id. (quoting 8 S. Speiser, C. Krause,
& A. Gans, American Law of Torts § 28:5, p. 24 (1991)).
The Supreme Court further quoted from that treatise that
“to permit a convicted criminal defendant to proceed with a
malicious prosecution claim would permit a collateral attack
on the conviction through the vehicle of a civil suit.” Id. The
Court noted that it had “long expressed similar concerns for
finality and consistency and ha[d] generally declined to
expand opportunities for collateral attack,” and held that “the
hoary principle that civil tort actions are not appropriate
vehicles for challenging the validity of outstanding criminal
judgments applies to § 1983 damages actions that
necessarily require the plaintiff to prove the unlawfulness of
his conviction or confinement.” Id. at 485-86.
The Supreme Court then set forth Heck bar, which has
remained the law for the last 30 years:
We hold that, in order to recover damages for
allegedly unconstitutional conviction or
imprisonment, or for other harm caused by
actions whose unlawfulness would render a
conviction or sentence invalid, a § 1983
plaintiff must prove that the conviction or
sentence has been reversed on direct appeal,
expunged by executive order, declared
invalid by a state tribunal authorized to make

22

KING V. VILLEGAS

such determination, or called into question by
a federal court's issuance of a writ of habeas
corpus, 28 U.S.C. § 2254.
Id. at 486-87. Thus, “when a state prisoner seeks damages
in a § 1983 suit, the district court must consider whether a
judgment in favor of the plaintiff would necessarily imply
the invalidity of his conviction or sentence; if it would, the
complaint must be dismissed unless the plaintiff can
demonstrate that the conviction or sentence has already been
invalidated.” Id. at 487.
II
Heck applies equally to all collateral attacks on criminal
convictions, regardless of whether a given conviction is the
result of a jury verdict or a plea by the defendant. As is
relevant here we have consistently applied the Heck bar to
collateral attacks on criminal convictions following no
contest pleas. 2 For example, in Sanders v. City of Pittsburg,
14 F.4th 968, 972-73 (9th Cir. 2021), we held that the
plaintiff’s § 1983 claim for excessive force based on a police
dog bite was barred because he had pled no contest and been
convicted of resisting arrest for the same incident. In Szajer
v. City of Los Angeles, 632 F.3d 607 (9th Cir. 2011), we held
that the Szajers’s pleas of no contest to criminal charges
barred their civil rights action. Similarly, in Smithart v.
Towery, 79 F.3d 951, 952 (9th Cir. 1996), we held that
following Smithart’s Alford plea there was “no question that
Heck bars Smithart's claims that defendants lacked probable

For the purposes of this opinion, the terms “nolo contendere,” “no
contest,” “West plea,” and “Alford plea” are used interchangeably to
reference a plea that is not an admission to any particular facts.
2

KING V. VILLEGAS

23

cause to arrest him and brought unfounded criminal charges
against him.”
We have also specifically rejected, albeit in unpublished
decisions, the majority’s assertion that Rule 410(a)
effectively creates an exception to the Heck bar for collateral
challenges to criminal convictions resulting from nolo
contendere pleas. In Arrington v. City of Los Angeles, No.
16-6755, 2021 WL 4168156 (9th Cir. Sept. 14, 2021), we
held Arrington’s claim for false arrest and imprisonment was
Heck barred based on his conviction of resisting arrest,
delaying, or obstructing an officer following his nolo
contendere plea. We explained that the nolo contendere plea
did not change:
the Heck analysis with regard to the false
arrest and false imprisonment claim. See
Smithart, 79 F.3d at 952. Arrington’s
conviction was not admitted “against” him as
an evidentiary admission. Fed. R. Evid. 410.
The Heck issue was decided as a matter of
law by the district court—properly so, as the
legal consequences of the conviction
preclude him from having a cognizable
section 1983 claim for false arrest and false
imprisonment under Heck.
Id. at *1. Similarly, in Briseno v. City of West Covina, No.
22-55100, 2023 WL 2400833 (9th Cir. Mar. 8, 2023), we
held that because Briseno had pled no contest to resisting a
peace officer, “Heck precludes Briseno from bringing an
excessive force claim ‘predicated on allegedly unlawful
actions by the officer at the same time as the plaintiff's
conduct that resulted in his § 148(a)(1) conviction.’” Id. at

24

KING V. VILLEGAS

*1 (quoting Sanders, 14 F.4th at 971). See also Radwan v.
County of Orange, 519 F. App’x 490, 491 (9th Cir. 2013)
(reiterating that Heck bars “§ 1983 claims, even where the
plaintiff’s prior convictions were the result of guilty or no
contest pleas”); Velarde v. Duarte, 937 F. Supp. 2d 1204,
1218-20 (S.D. Cal. 2013) (plaintiff’s West plea barred his
excessive force claim because the claim would “imply the
invalidity of his criminal battery conviction”); Wetter v. City
of Napa, No. 07-04583, 2008 WL 62274 at *2-3, (N.D. Cal.
Jan. 4, 2008) (stating that under California law “a plea of
nolo contendere equates to a conviction” and that the
purpose of the Heck doctrine is “to ensure that valid state
criminal convictions and sentences are not, in effect,
retroactively contradicted by subsequent federal civil actions
. . . applies to any conviction whether by guilty plea or nolo
contendere plea”). 3
III
The majority does not dispute that King’s success in his
civil action would necessarily imply the invalidity of his
conviction—nor could it.
The underlying incident occurred on August 17, 2016, at
the Kern Valley State Prison in California. King alleged that
Officer Villegas engaged in an unjustified use of force—
grabbing a handcuffed King without provocation and
ramming his head into the wall. Officer Villegas, on the
other hand, alleged a non-handcuffed King, after being told
to not be disruptive, without warning or provocation, “swung
both arms upwards” and struck Officer Villegas’s right
Although we are not bound by unpublished Ninth Circuit decisions or
district court decisions, this chorus of cases shows how far afield the
majority has strayed.

3

KING V. VILLEGAS

25

shoulder. Officer Villegas claimed that he only used the
force necessary to subdue King, who was resisting arrest.
King, Officer Villegas, and another officer all sustained
injuries. 4
After being charged and found guilty of a disciplinary
violation of battery on a peace officer, King was also
charged with criminal offenses, including interfering with an
executive officer under California Penal Code § 69(a). 5 In
the interim, King had filed his § 1983 action, but that action
was stayed pending resolution of the criminal case. The
criminal case was resolved when King pleaded nolo
contendere to violating California Penal Code § 69, and the
state court convicted him.
In turn, the federal district court concluded that King’s
§ 1983 action was Heck barred because “there is no possible
way these two sets of facts could simultaneously be true.”
The district court determined:
the key events appear to encompass the same
time and factual context, beginning when the
King “received a medical evaluation noting injuries to his face and
abrasions to his left elbow and knees.” Villegas “received injuries to his
head, neck, right knee and left foot as a result of inmate King’s action,”
and the second officer “received injuries to his left hand and right knee
as a result of inmate King’s actions.”

4

California Penal Code 69(a) reads: “Every person who attempts, by
means of any threat or violence, to deter or prevent an executive officer
from performing any duty imposed upon the officer by law, or who
knowingly resists, by the use of force or violence, the officer, in the
performance of his or her duty, is punishable by a fine not exceeding ten
thousand dollars ($10,000), or by imprisonment pursuant to subdivision
(h) of Section 1170, or in a county jail not exceeding one year, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.”

5

26

KING V. VILLEGAS

prisoners arrived at the outside of the mental
health facility, extending through Officer
Villegas’ use of force on Plaintiff, and ending
at some point after Officer Cruz arrived and
used force on Plaintiff. Plaintiff maintains
that he was handcuffed and not resisting the
entire time.
This is fundamentally
inconsistent with the no contest plea. If
Plaintiff were to succeed on his civil rights
claims, it would necessarily undermine the
validity of the factual material considered by
the criminal court in accepting his no contest
plea to violating Cal. Penal Code § 69.
This case concerns a single incident—either King interfered
with an executive officer, or the officer used excessive force
against King. Under Heck, King’s acceptance of a
conviction bars him from showing the latter.
IV
Because there is no dispute that King’s success in his
§ 1983 action would necessarily imply the invalidity of his
conviction, the majority instead interprets Rule 410(a) as
precluding any consideration of the state court record. It
reasons that the district court “considered King’s conviction
as evidence that he was guilty of the acts to which he pleaded
no contest,” and that “[u]nder our precedent, that is an
impermissible use of a conviction arising from a nolo plea.”
Op. at 18. This is wrong for several reasons.
First, whether an action is Heck-barred is a question of
law that courts resolve by reference to records from the
criminal proceeding to “determine which acts formed the
basis for the conviction.” Lemos v. County of Sonoma, 40

KING V. VILLEGAS

27

F.4th 1002,1006 (9th Cir. 2022) (en banc). In performing
this analysis, courts properly review the records from the
state criminal proceedings, which are judicially noticeable.
See Bennett v. Medtronic, Inc., 285 F.3d 801, 803, n.2 (9th
Cir. 2002) (“We may take notice of proceedings in other
courts, both within and without the federal judicial system,
if those proceedings have a direct relation to matters at
issue.”) (citation omitted). Thus, here, we may—indeed,
must—look to the state court record, which includes the
probable cause report and the incident reports by prison
officials that the parties submitted in support of King’s plea.
Second, our case law holds that even when the scope of
the prior conviction is unclear and thus raises a factual
question (which is not the situation here), it is the court that
first considers and reviews the impact of the conviction. In
Mayfield v. City of Mesa, 131 F.4th 1100 (9th Cir. 2025), we
reversed the district court’s application of the Heck bar, not
because the court erred in considering the state court’s
criminal record, but because it incorrectly found that
Mayfield’s civil action would necessarily imply the
invalidity of her conviction. Similarly, in Lemos, we held
that “a court must look at the record of the criminal case—
including the jury instructions—to determine which facts the
jury necessarily found,” but reversed because the district
court erred in its evaluation of the scope of the underlying
conviction. 40 F.4th at 1006. The majority’s approach seeks
to prohibit a district court from considering the state court
record whenever a conviction is based on a nolo contendere
plea.
Third, by its terms, Rule 410(a) is inapplicable to our
inquiry whether “a judgment in favor of the plaintiff would
necessarily imply the invalidity of his conviction.” Lemos,
40 F.4th at 1005. The rule only prevents the admission of

28

KING V. VILLEGAS

“evidence” “against the defendant” of “a nolo contendere
plea” or of “statement[s] made” by the defendant during a
proceeding on a nolo contendere plea. But here, we look to
King’s conviction and to the records before the state court
that the state court found established a factual basis of his
conviction; See People v. Palmer, 58 Cal. 4th 110, 118 (Cal.
2013) (describing California state courts’ statutory
obligation to make such findings). While it is true that King
stipulated at his plea hearing and on his waiver form that
these records provided a factual basis for his conviction, that
fact is irrelevant to the Heck analysis. When a criminal
defendant enters a nolo contendere plea, that plea—which
does not admit to any particular facts—is not the factual
basis for the conviction. Rather, the nolo plea requires the
judge to determine, before formally accepting the plea, that
the records before the court provide a factual basis that the
defendant violated the law. While a conviction may be the
result of a nolo plea, such a plea never forms the factual basis
for the conviction. Thus, for purposes of the Heck analysis,
there is simply no need to rely on King’s stipulation—let
alone to “admit” it into “evidence” “against [King].” In sum,
the majority’s reasoning—that federal courts may not
consider judicially noticeable records central to the Heck
analysis if the defendant has previously stipulated in
connection with a nolo contendere plea that those records
provide a factual basis for his conviction—is not only
contrary to the text of Rule 410(a), but also leads to the
absurd result that federal courts will be unable to perform
any Heck analysis in nolo contendere cases, which are
commonplace.
Indeed, under California law, King’s conviction was not
dependent on King’s nolo contendere plea. As asserted,
California law requires that before a court can accept a plea,

KING V. VILLEGAS

29

it must satisfy itself that there is a factual basis for the plea.
See Cal. Penal Code § 1192.5. In Palmer, the California
Supreme Court held “[w]hen a trial court takes a conditional
plea of guilty or nolo contendere (hereafter no contest) to an
accusatory pleading charging a felony, under Penal Code
section 1192.51 it must ‘cause an inquiry to be made of the
defendant to satisfy itself that the plea is freely and
voluntarily made, and that there is a factual basis for the
plea.’” 58 Cal.4th at 112 (internal citation omitted).
In addition, under California law “the lawfulness of the
officer’s conduct is an essential element of the offense of
resisting, delaying, or obstructing a peace officer.” Smith v.
City of Hemet, 394 F.3d 689, 695 (9th Cir. 2005) (en banc);
see also Lemos, 40 F.4th at 1006. We have noted that in
California a conviction for resisting a peace officer has three
elements: “(1) the defendant willfully resisted, delayed, or
obstructed a peace officer, (2) when the officer was engaged
in the performance of his or her duties, and (3) the defendant
knew or reasonably should have known that the other person
was a peace officer engaged in the performance of his or her
duties.” Lemos, 40 F.4th at 1006 (quoting Yount v. City of
Sacramento, 43 Cal.4th 885, 894 (2008). We explained that
“[t]he second element is particularly significant because
California courts have held that an officer who uses
excessive force is acting unlawfully and therefore is not
engaged in the performance of his or her duties.” Id. See In
re Manuel G., 16 Cal.4th 805, (1997) (“The longstanding
rule in California and other jurisdictions is that a defendant
cannot be convicted of an offense against a peace officer
engaged in the performance of [his or her] duties unless the
officer was acting lawfully at the time the offense against the
officer was committed.”) (cleaned up).

30

KING V. VILLEGAS

Thus, as this case concerns a single incident, under
California law, King’s conviction—regardless of the nature
of his plea—determined that there was a factual basis for his
conviction. That basis included that the officer was engaged
in the performance of his duty and thus was not using
excessive force. Accordingly, any judgment in favor of
King in the civil action “would necessarily imply the
invalidity of his conviction.” Heck, 512 U.S. at 487.
Fourth, the majority’s reliance on United States v.
Nguyen, 465 F.3d 1128 (9th Cir. 2006) is misplaced. The
opinion does appear to interpret Rule 410(a) broadly to apply
not only to nolo contendere pleas but to judgments of
convictions based on nolo contendere pleas. But its
reasoning is specific to the purpose for which the judgments
of conviction were introduced in that criminal case. In
Nguyen, the prosecution sought to prove that the criminal
defendant had violated the terms of his supervised release by
committing new crimes while released. The only evidence
the prosecution offered in support of its charge was
“certified copies of the two state court judgments of
conviction resulting from the pleas of nolo contendere.” Id.
at 1130. A jury convicted the defendant, but we reversed.
First, we held that there was insufficient evidence to sustain
the conviction because the prosecution was required to prove
that the defendant actually committed new crimes, not
merely that he had been convicted of new crimes. Id. at
1130-31. Second, we held that under Rule 410(a) the state
court judgments were inadmissible for the purpose of
showing that the defendant “actually committed the
underlying crimes charged,” reasoning that “Rule 410’s
exclusion of a nolo contendere plea would be meaningless if
all it took to prove that the defendant committed the crime
charged was a certified copy of the inevitable judgment of

KING V. VILLEGAS

31

conviction resulting from the plea.” Id. at 1131 (citation
omitted).
In Nguyen, unlike here, it was not relevant that the
defendant had been convicted of the crimes to which he pled
nolo contendere; the only relevant question was whether he
had actually committed the crimes. Id. at 1130-31. This case
is the inverse of Nguyen. It is not critical whether King
actually interfered with an executive officer; the key
questions are whether he has been convicted of the crime,
and, if so, on what factual basis. Accordingly, the state court
records of King’s conviction are not being used to prove that
he actually interfered with an executive officer, but instead
to determine his conviction and its factual basis.
The majority fundamentally misunderstands the Heck
inquiry when it asserts that the state court records are being
used to show that King “committed the charged crime.” Op.
at 11. That is wrong. The state records are used to show that
King was convicted, not the propriety of the conviction.
Defendants have no need to prove that King actually
committed the crime. King had ample opportunity in his
state criminal proceeding to challenge the sufficiency of the
factual evidence against him but by entering a nolo plea he
chose not to do so.6 Now that his state conviction is final,
Heck precludes him from seeking civil damages that would
imply the invalidity of his state court conviction, furthering

The majority’s distinction between showing that King was convicted
and showing that he “committed the charged crime” obscures the
opinion’s negation of the Heck bar. If the record of the state criminal
proceedings is inadmissible, no state defendant will be able to raise the
Heck bar even when, as here, the civil action will “necessarily imply the
invalidity of his conviction.” Heck, 512 U.S. at 487.

6

32

KING V. VILLEGAS

the important comity and finality interests that the Heck bar
is intended to serve. 7
V
Finally, the scope and impact of the majority opinion
should not be underestimated. Very few criminal cases
actually go to trial, most are resolved at the pleading stage,
and many of those are the result of nolo contendere pleas.
Thus, the majority’s strained reading of Rule 410(a) would
subject state officials to a broad swath of civil cases that as
a matter of fact imply the invalidity of the plaintiffs’
underlying convictions and thus should be barred under
Heck, as is the case here. Indeed, the majority’s approach
paves the way for criminal defendants to plead nolo
contendere to criminal charges and then sue the officers for
their actions in apprehending them. Imagine a situation
similar to that in Beets v. County of Los Angeles, 669 F.3d
1038 (9th Cir. 2012), where a person, while resisting arrest,
aims a car at a police officer and is shot (but not killed as
was the situation in Beets). The majority countenances the

The majority suggests that its approach is consistent with the purposes
of Heck and Rule 410(a) because King was not “attempt[ing]” to
collaterally attack his conviction (even though that is what he is doing),
and because King purportedly saved judicial resources by resolving a
criminal case with a nolo contendere plea. The majority simply ignores
that the Heck bar prohibits civil cases that necessarily imply the
invalidity of a state convictions and in doing so it saves judicial resources
by precluding duplicative and potentially inconsistent federal actions,
like the present. While one of the purposes of Rule 410(a) is to
encourage nolo contendere pleas, it obviously does not bar all evidence
of convictions based on nolo contendere pleas, see e.g., Brewer v. City
of Napa, 210 F.3d 1093 (9th Cir. 2000). There is no evidence whatsoever
that the drafters of Rule 410(a) intended it to permit subsequent civil
actions that are otherwise Heck-barred.

7

KING V. VILLEGAS

33

person pleading nolo to resisting arrest and assaulting an
officer and then suing the officer for using excessive force.
The majority’s opinion is wrong and should be
overturned, if not by our court sitting en banc then by the
Supreme Court. I respectfully dissent.

