FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ISLAND INDUSTRIES, INC.,
Relator,
and

Plaintiff-Appellee,

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ex
rel. Island Industries, Inc.,
Plaintiff,
v.
SIGMA CORPORATION,
Defendant-Appellant,
and
VANDEWATER INTERNATIONAL,
INC.; NEIL REUBENS; ANVIL
INTERNATIONAL, LLC; SMITH
COOPER INTERNATIONAL;
ALLIED RUBBER AND GASKET
COMPANY; JOHN DOES, 1-10,
Defendants.

No. 22-55063
D.C. No.
2:17-cv-04393RGK-KS
ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

2

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
R. Gary Klausner, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted January 10, 2023
Submission Withdrawn March 27, 2023
Resubmitted June 23, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed June 23, 2025
Amended August 21, 2025
Before: Michelle T. Friedland and Mark J. Bennett, Circuit
Judges. *
Order;
Opinion by Judge Friedland
SUMMARY **
False Claims Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment in a case
in which a jury found Sigma Corp. liable under the False
Claims Act for knowingly making false statements on
Judge Paul J. Watford, who was a member of the panel at the time the
case was argued, left the court on May 31, 2023. In accordance with
General Order 3.2(h), this opinion is issued by the remaining panel
members as a quorum pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 46(d).

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

3

customs forms to avoid paying tariffs on some of its imports
from China.
Island Industries, Inc., filed suit under the False Claims
Act, alleging that Sigma made two types of false statements
on customs forms to evade antidumping duties that applied
to welded outlets. Island alleged that Sigma (1) declared that
the products it was importing were not subject to
antidumping duties and (2) described the products as steel
couplings even though it marketed them to customers as
welded outlets. The jury returned a verdict in favor of Island.
Meanwhile, upon Sigma’s and two of its codefendants’
requests for a scope ruling, the Department of Commerce
ruled that Sigma’s and the other companies’ welded outlets
fell within the scope of the “China Order,” an antidumping
duty order covering certain carbon steel butt-weld pipe
fittings imported from China. After a remand, the Court of
International Trade and eventually the Federal Circuit
affirmed. Sigma filed this appeal, which was stayed pending
the Federal Circuit’s decision. The panel lifted the stay after
that decision issued and proceeded to address Sigma’s
appeal.
The panel held that it had jurisdiction, and the action did
not need to be initiated in the Court of International Trade
and then appealed, if at all, to the Federal Circuit. The panel
held that 28 U.S.C. § 1582, which vests in the Court of
International Trade exclusive jurisdiction over “any civil
action which arises out of an import transaction and which is
commenced by the United States . . . to recover customs
duties,” poses no jurisdictional obstacle to a relator’s False
Claims Act suit in federal district court to recover customs
duties.

4

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

Affirming the district court’s denial of Sigma’s motion
for judgment as a matter of law or a new trial, the panel held
that 19 U.S.C. § 1592, which provides a specific mechanism
for the United States to recover fraudulently avoided
customs duties, does not displace the False Claims Act as to
claims like Island’s. Rather, § 1592 overlaps with the False
Claims Act, which reaches antidumping duties that an
importer has fraudulently evaded paying.
The panel rejected Sigma’s argument that it lacked an
“obligation to pay” antidumping duties, as defined by the
False Claims Act.
The panel concluded that Island’s theory that Sigma
violated the False Claims Act by knowingly falsely declaring
that no antidumping duties were owed on its products was
both legally valid and supported by sufficient evidence.
Sigma argued that it lacked the required scienter because, at
the time of its imports, it would have been objectively
reasonable to believe that its products were not covered by
the China Order. The panel held that such an objectivereasonableness defense was foreclosed by United States ex
rel. Schutte v. SuperValu, Inc., 598 U.S. 739 (2023).
The panel further held that the evidence at trial was
plainly sufficient to support the jury’s verdict in Island’s
favor under either of Island’s theories of liability.
COUNSEL
Nicole A. Saharsky (argued) and Kelly B. Kramer, Mayer
Brown LLP, Washington, D.C.; C. Mitchell Hendy and
Matthew H. Marmolejo, Mayer Brown LLP, Los Angeles,
California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

5

Joseph H. Lang Jr. (argued), Carlton Fields PA, Tampa,
Florida; Michael L. Yaeger, Carlton Fields PA, New York,
New York; for Defendant-Appellant.
Sarah W. Carroll (argued), Anna O. Mohan, Charles W.
Scarborough, and Michael S. Raab, Attorneys, Appellate
Staff; Brian M. Boynton, Principal Deputy Assistant
Attorney General; Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae
United States of America.
Douglas W. Baruch, Jennifer M. Wollenberg, and James D.
Nelson, Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP, Washington, D.C.;
Tara S. Morrissey and Andrew R. Varcoe, United States
Chamber Litigation Center, Washington, D.C.; Erica
Klenicki, NAM Legal Center, Washington, D.C.; for Amici
Curiae National Association of Manufacturers and Chamber
of Commerce of the United States of America.
Jonathan K. Tycko and Jaclyn S. Tayabji, Tycko & Zavareei
LLP, Washington, D.C.; Jacklyn DeMar, The Anti-Fraud
Coalition, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae the AntiFraud Coalition.
ORDER
The opinion filed on June 23, 2025, is amended and the
amended opinion is filed concurrently with this order. With
this amendment, the panel unanimously votes to deny the
petition for panel rehearing and petition for rehearing en
banc. The full court has been advised of the petition for
rehearing en banc, and no judge has requested a vote on
whether to rehear the matter en banc. Fed. R. App. P. 40.
The petitions for rehearing and rehearing en banc are
DENIED. No further petitions may be filed.

6

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

OPINION
FRIEDLAND, Circuit Judge:
The False Claims Act imposes liability for certain acts of
fraud against the federal government. The jury in this case
found Sigma Corporation liable under the False Claims Act
for knowingly making false statements on customs forms to
avoid paying tariffs on some of its imports from China.
Sigma appeals, arguing that it is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law or, in the alternative, a new trial. We disagree
and therefore affirm the judgment.
I.
A.
The United States tries to protect domestic businesses by
preventing companies from importing foreign goods at
prices below the market prices in the exporting country. In
the parlance of international trade, flooding another
country’s market with such underpriced goods is called
“dumping.”
To prevent dumping, Congress has authorized the
Department of Commerce (“Commerce”) to impose
“antidumping duties” on products exported to the United
States at less than their fair value. 19 U.S.C. § 1673.
Commerce issues antidumping duty orders that both identify
covered products and set the rates for calculating applicable
duties. See id.; 19 C.F.R. § 351.211. Those rates generally
reflect the difference between a given product’s market price
in the exporting country and its import price. 19 U.S.C.
§§ 1673, 1677a, 1677b.

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

7

The importer is responsible for filing an “entry” with
Customs and Border Protection (“Customs”) that declares
the “value, classification and rate of duty applicable to the
merchandise” being imported. Id. § 1484(a)(1)(B). The
entry must also include “such other information as is
necessary” for Customs to properly assess duties. Id.
“Duties and the liability for their payment accrue upon
imported merchandise on arrival” in the United States.
19 C.F.R. § 141.1(a). The importer usually must deposit
estimated duties at the time of entry. 19 U.S.C. § 1505(a).
Importers initially pay only estimated antidumping
duties because “the United States uses a ‘retrospective’
assessment system under which final liability for
antidumping . . . duties is determined after merchandise is
imported.” 19 C.F.R. § 351.212(a). The antidumping duty
rate is reviewed and re-determined at least annually to
account for changing prices in both the exporting country
and the United States. 19 U.S.C. § 1675(a). An importer
may therefore ultimately owe more or less than the estimated
antidumping duties it initially deposited.
The final computation and ascertainment of antidumping
duties for an entry is called “liquidation.” 19 C.F.R. § 159.1.
Entries that are not liquidated within one year will generally
be “deemed liquidated” by operation of law at the estimated
duty rate deposited upon arrival. 19 U.S.C. § 1504(a). But
liquidation of an entry can be “suspended” by statute or court
order, preventing liquidation until the suspension is lifted.
Id. Although completed liquidations are generally “final and
conclusive,” id. § 1514(a), if Customs later learns that an
importer has avoided duties by means of a false statement or
omission, it “shall require” that those duties be paid and may
pursue penalties through litigation before the United States
Court of International Trade (“CIT”), id. § 1592.

8

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

B.
Questions sometimes “arise as to whether a particular
product is included within the scope of an antidumping . . .
duty order.” 19 C.F.R. § 351.225(a) (2018). An importer,
Customs, or another interested party can seek clarification
from Commerce through a process called a scope inquiry.
Id. § 351.225(b), (c). 1
When Commerce conducts a scope inquiry, it may
decide that the antidumping duty order covers the product
based on the order’s plain language alone. Meridian Prods.,
LLC v. United States, 851 F.3d 1375, 1381 (Fed. Cir. 2017).
Or it may need to take the additional step of considering the
factors found at 19 C.F.R. § 351.225(k)(1) (2018). These
(k)(1) factors include any prior scope determinations by
Commerce and any determinations by the International
Trade Commission as to the continued necessity of a given
antidumping duty order. Id.; 19 C.F.R. § 351.218(a);
19 U.S.C. § 1677(2). 2 If both the plain language of the
The scope-inquiry regulations were updated in 2021, 2023, and 2024.
Regulations to Improve Administration and Enforcement of Antidumping
and Countervailing Duty Laws, 86 Fed. Reg. 52300, 52374 (Sept. 20,
2021); Administrative Protective Order, Service, and Other Procedures
in Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Proceedings, 88 Fed. Reg.
67069, 67077 (Sept. 29, 2023); Regulations Improving and
Strengthening the Enforcement of Trade Remedies Through the
Administration of the Antidumping and Countervailing Duty Laws, 89
Fed. Reg. 20766, 20833 (Mar. 25, 2024). We refer in this opinion to the
2018 version of 19 C.F.R. § 351.225 because that was the version in
effect throughout the period relevant to this case.
1

The International Trade Commission is not part of Commerce; it is an
“independent, nonpartisan, quasi-judicial federal agency that fulfills a
range of trade-related mandates.” U.S. Int’l Trade Comm’n, About the

2

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

9

antidumping duty order and the (k)(1) factors are
inconclusive, Commerce then considers the factors in the
next subsection, (k)(2). 19 C.F.R. § 351.225(k)(2) (2018).
The (k)(2) factors include the product’s physical
characteristics, its ultimate use, and the way it is marketed.
Id. Commerce’s scope rulings are reviewable in the CIT,
28 U.S.C. § 1581, and the CIT’s decisions are in turn
appealable to the United States Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit, id. § 1295(a)(5).
C.
In 1992, Commerce issued an antidumping duty order
covering certain “carbon steel butt-weld pipe fittings”
imported from China (the “China Order”). Antidumping
Duty Order and Amendment; Certain Carbon Steel ButtWeld Pipe Fittings from China, 57 Fed. Reg. 29702, 29703
(July 6, 1992). The China Order identifies the butt-weld
pipe fittings covered as those “used to join sections in piping
systems where conditions require permanent, welded
connections, as distinguished from fittings based on other
fastening methods (e.g., threaded, grooved, or bolted
fittings).” Id. These fittings have beveled ends to facilitate
welding onto pipes during installation and come in various
shapes. Carbon Steel Butt-Weld Pipe Fittings from Brazil,
China, Japan, Taiwan, and Thailand, Inv. No. 731-TA-308310, 520-521, USITC Pub. No. 4628, at I-4, I-5 fig. I-1
(Aug. 1, 2016) (Fourth Review) (“ITC Report”) (showing
representative products).
USITC, https://perma.cc/NDS3-RB7W. By statute, it is responsible for
conducting periodic reviews of “whether revocation of . . . [an]
antidumping duty order” would lead to “continuation or recurrence of
dumping . . . and of material injury” to domestic businesses. 19 U.S.C.
§ 1675(c)(1).

10

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

The China Order is part of a family of antidumping duty
orders issued between 1986 and 1992 covering the same type
of products from Brazil, Japan, Taiwan (the “Taiwan
Order”), and Thailand. 3 Although their exact wording
varies, all five orders cover “carbon steel butt-weld pipe
fittings,” and the “definition of the subject merchandise [is]
essentially the same for all five countries.” ITC Report at 6
n.26.
In 1992, Commerce clarified the scope of one of the buttweld pipe fitting orders in response to an inquiry from
Sprink, Inc., an importer of Taiwanese pipe fittings (the
“Sprink Ruling”). Sprink asked Commerce to rule that its
“Sprink-let” welded outlet, which is a pipe fitting that
connects fire sprinklers to pipes, was not a “butt-weld pipe
fitting” within the meaning of the Taiwan Order. Sprink
argued, among other things, that the product was not covered
because not all of its connections would be welded upon
installation. Commerce rejected that argument, explaining
that “the order does not require that all . . . connections be
welded” and that a “pipe fitting with beveled edges that is
permanently joined through welding falls within the scope
of the order.” Commerce held that this conclusion was clear
from the Taiwan Order “itself” and the “documents
supporting” it.

3

Antidumping Duty Order; Certain Carbon Steel Butt-Weld Pipe
Fittings from Brazil, 51 Fed. Reg. 45152 (Dec. 17, 1986); Antidumping
Duty Order; Certain Carbon Steel Butt-Weld Pipe Fittings from Taiwan,
51 Fed. Reg. 45152 (Dec. 17, 1986); Antidumping Duty Order; Certain
Carbon Steel Butt-Weld Pipe Fittings from Japan, 52 Fed. Reg. 4167
(Feb. 10, 1987); Antidumping Duty Order; Certain Carbon Steel ButtWeld Pipe Fittings from Thailand, 57 Fed. Reg. 29702 (July 6, 1992).

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

11

D.
Defendant-Appellant Sigma Corporation (“Sigma”)
imported welded outlets from China between 2010 and
2018. Sigma’s outlets are nearly identical to those addressed
by the Sprink Ruling. One end of each outlet has a beveled
edge designed to be welded to a pipe during installation. The
other end has a threaded connection for a sprinkler head or
other attachment. The present case concerns whether Sigma
is liable under the False Claims Act (“FCA”) for knowingly
making false statements on customs forms to avoid paying
antidumping duties on those welded outlets.
The FCA prohibits certain acts of fraud against the
federal government and imposes treble damages and
penalties. 31 U.S.C. § 3729. The FCA allows private
parties, called “relators,” to sue on behalf of the United
States to recover money owed. Id. § 3730(b); United States
ex rel. Eisenstein v. City of New York, 556 U.S. 928, 932
(2009). Such suits are sometimes known as “qui tam”
actions. Eisenstein, 556 U.S. at 932. The FCA incentivizes
private parties to identify and pursue fraud by awarding them
up to thirty percent of the damages if their suit is successful.
31 U.S.C. § 3730(d).
One of Sigma’s competitors, Island Industries, sued
Sigma and five other importers under the FCA. 4 Island sued
as a relator under the FCA provision that makes liable
anyone who “knowingly makes, uses, or causes to be made
or used, a false record or statement material to an obligation
to pay or transmit money or property to the Government” or
Three of those other importers eventually settled, and proceedings
against the remaining two others—including Vandewater International,
Inc.—were stayed when those importers filed for bankruptcy. As a
result, Sigma is the only defendant involved in the present appeal.

4

12

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

“knowingly conceals or knowingly and improperly avoids or
decreases an obligation to pay or transmit money or property
to the Government.” Id. § 3729(a)(1)(G). The FCA defines
“knowingly” to mean that a person (i) has “actual
knowledge” of the falsity of information in the statement;
(ii) “acts in deliberate ignorance of the truth or falsity of”
such information; or (iii) “acts in reckless disregard of the
truth or falsity of” such information. Id. § 3729(b)(1)(A). It
“require[s] no proof of specific intent to defraud.” Id.
§ 3729(b)(1)(B).
Island alleged that Sigma violated the FCA by making
two types of false statements on customs forms to evade the
antidumping duties that apply to welded outlets. Island
alleged that Sigma (1) declared that the products it was
importing were not subject to antidumping duties and
(2) described the products as steel couplings even though it
marketed them to customers as welded outlets.
According to Sigma, it only became aware of the Sprink
Ruling around the time the FCA suit was filed. Recognizing
that its welded outlets were essentially identical to Sprink’s,
Sigma took the position that the Sprink Ruling was incorrect.
Sigma requested a scope ruling from Commerce, as did two
of its codefendants in the FCA suit, urging Commerce to
take a fresh look at the scope of this family of antidumping
orders. Sigma contended that its outlets were not covered
because the only beveled end was curved and would be
welded onto another pipe that would not itself be beveled.
Commerce undertook a (k)(1) analysis—which, as
explained above, includes evaluating relevant prior scope
determinations—and ruled that Sigma’s and the other
companies’ welded outlets fell within the scope of the China
Order. Commerce stated that it was “not bound” by the

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

13

Sprink Ruling because the text of the Taiwan Order differs
somewhat from that of the China Order, but it nevertheless
concluded that “here, as in [the Sprink] case, . . . the
merchandise is covered by the scope of an antidumping
order on ‘butt-weld pipe fittings’ because the merchandise
has a beveled end that is permanently joined by welding.”
Sigma and the two codefendants challenged Commerce’s
ruling before the CIT. See Vandewater Int’l, Inc. v. United
States, No. 18-00199 (Ct. Int’l Trade); Sigma Corp. v.
United States, No. 19-00003 (Ct. Int’l Trade). 5
The CIT was puzzled that Commerce had said the Sprink
Ruling was not binding given that the Sprink Ruling
addressed “virtually identical” products and given that the
Taiwan Order it interpreted is a “companion” to the China
Order. Vandewater Int’l, Inc. v. United States, 476 F. Supp.
3d 1357, 1360 (Ct. Int’l Trade 2020). The CIT observed that
“[f]or over 25 years, . . . Commerce has treated [such]
outlets as butt-weld fittings” covered by this family of
orders, which “would seem to be dispositive.” Id. at 1361.
But because the CIT was reviewing the reasons that
Commerce gave for its decision, and because it was
unsatisfied with the other sources on which Commerce had
based its decision, the CIT remanded for Commerce to
conduct a more thorough analysis that also included the
(k)(2) factors. Id. at 1362.
On remand, Commerce again held that the welded
outlets were “butt-weld pipe fittings” within the meaning of
Vandewater concerned products that were imported by one of the
codefendants, which the parties treated throughout these proceedings as
materially identical to Sigma’s products at issue here, and which we also
therefore assume are identical for purposes of our analysis. Sigma
intervened in Vandewater, which was the lead case before the CIT.

5

14

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

the China Order. Commerce clarified that it had said the
Sprink Ruling was not binding because that ruling involved
an order with “slightly different language” than the China
Order, but that it nevertheless viewed the Sprink Ruling as
“informative” because it concerned essentially identical
products. Commerce rejected the argument that products
with a curved edge cannot be covered butt-weld pipe fittings.
It also reiterated the reasoning of the Sprink Ruling that a
product can be a covered butt-weld pipe fitting even if “not
all ends . . . have a beveled edge to facilitate a permanent
connection.”
The CIT affirmed that scope ruling on appeal.
Vandewater Int’l Inc. v. United States, 589 F. Supp. 3d 1324,
1328 n.1, 1343 (Ct. Int’l Trade 2022). Sigma appealed that
decision to the Federal Circuit. See Vandewater Int’l Inc. v.
United States, No. 23-1093 (Fed. Cir. Dec. 14, 2022), ECF
No. 10 (consolidating appeals). The Federal Circuit likewise
affirmed. Vandewater Int’l Inc. v. United States, 130 F.4th
981, 995 (Fed. Cir. 2025).
While the scope ruling litigation played out, Island
continued to pursue its FCA lawsuit. The United States did
not intervene in the FCA suit. At a jury trial, Island
presented evidence and arguments supporting both of its
theories of fraud: first, that Sigma falsely declared that no
antidumping duties were owed, and second, that Sigma
misidentified its products as steel couplings instead of
welded outlets. Island presented scienter evidence that
Sigma would have been on notice of the likelihood that its
imports were subject to antidumping duties, that it did not
take basic steps to figure out whether they were, and that it
would have been easy to find the China Order and the Sprink
Ruling. Island also presented scienter evidence that
although Sigma called its products “welded outlets” on its

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

15

website and in its product catalog, it referred to them as
“steel couplings” on its customs forms (which did not trigger
an antidumping duty). Because of Commerce’s scope
ruling, the district court instructed the jury that Sigma’s
statements that it owed no antidumping duties were false.
The jury returned a general verdict for Island, finding
that Sigma was liable for violating the FCA and that it owed
over $8 million (before trebling). Sigma filed a post-trial
motion for judgment as a matter of law, or in the alternative
for a new trial, which the district court denied. Sigma then
appealed. We stayed this appeal pending the Federal
Circuit’s decision in Vandewater International Inc. v. United
States. That decision has now issued, and the Federal Circuit
has denied Sigma’s petition for panel rehearing and
rehearing en banc, Vandewater Int’l Inc. v. United States,
No. 23-1093 (Fed. Cir. May 23, 2025), ECF No. 87, so we
lift our stay and proceed to address this appeal.
II.
We review de novo jurisdictional questions and rulings
on motions for judgment as a matter of law. See United
States ex rel. Alexander Volkhoff, LLC v. Janssen
Pharmaceutica N.V., 945 F.3d 1237, 1241 (9th Cir. 2020);
EEOC v. GoDaddy Software, Inc., 581 F.3d 951, 961 (9th
Cir. 2009). We review a denial of a motion for a new trial
for abuse of discretion. Jorgensen v. Cassiday, 320 F.3d
906, 918 (9th Cir. 2003). We decide legal questions de novo,
and “a district court abuses its discretion when it makes an
error of law.” United States v. Hinkson, 585 F.3d 1247, 1261
(9th Cir. 2009) (en banc).

16

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

III.
We must first decide whether we have jurisdiction over
this action, or whether it needed to be initiated in the CIT
and then appealed (if at all) to the Federal Circuit. See
28 U.S.C. §§ 1582(3), 1295(a)(5).
Congress vested in the CIT exclusive jurisdiction over
“any civil action which arises out of an import transaction
and which is commenced by the United States . . . to recover
customs duties.” Id. § 1582(3). Over two decades ago, we
held that an FCA suit filed by the United States against a
defendant alleged to have evaded paying customs duties
must be brought in the CIT under that jurisdictional
provision. United States v. Universal Fruits & Vegetables
Corp., 370 F.3d 829, 836-37 (9th Cir. 2004). 6 We
specifically declined to rule on whether a relator can bring
an “FCA action involving customs duties in the district
courts.” Id. at 837 n.14.
We now hold that § 1582 poses no jurisdictional obstacle
to a relator’s FCA action in federal district court to recover
customs duties. “A civil action is commenced by filing a
complaint with the court.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 3. A “civil
action . . . commenced by the United States . . . to recover
customs duties” that must be brought in the CIT, 28 U.S.C.

Upon transfer of the case to the CIT following our decision, the CIT
disagreed and held that it did not in fact have jurisdiction because the
FCA provides for damages and civil penalties, not the recovery of
customs duties. United States v. Universal Fruits & Vegetables Corp.,
433 F. Supp. 2d 1351, 1355-56 (Ct. Int’l Trade 2006). No matter how
persuasive the CIT’s reasoning, we have no authority here to overrule an
earlier decision of our court. See Miller v. Gammie, 335 F.3d 889, 899
(9th Cir. 2003) (en banc).
6

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

17

§ 1582(3), is therefore a lawsuit in which “the United States”
filed the complaint.
The Supreme Court has concluded that the term “the
United States” in another jurisdictional statute does not
include FCA relators. United States ex rel. Eisenstein v. City
of New York, 556 U.S. 928, 933 (2009). In Eisenstein, the
Supreme Court interpreted the statute governing appeal
deadlines, which provides more time to appeal in civil
actions in which one of the parties is “the United States.”
28 U.S.C. § 2107(b). The Supreme Court held that “[t]he
United States . . . is a party to a privately filed FCA action
only if it intervenes.” Eisenstein, 556 U.S. at 933 (quotation
marks omitted). This holding necessarily means that a
relator is not “the United States” for purposes of interpreting
the appeal deadline statute. Similarly, a relator is not “the
United States” for purposes of interpreting § 1582’s grant of
exclusive jurisdiction to the CIT.
To be sure, in the standing context we have said that
relators “effectively stand[] in the shoes” of the United
States when they pursue FCA suits. United States ex rel.
Kelly v. Boeing Co., 9 F.3d 743, 748 (9th Cir. 1993). But
that metaphor does not mean that a statute’s reference to “the
United States” can be read to include FCA relators. In Kelly,
we held that relators have Article III standing to bring FCA
suits because the government would have standing and
because “the FCA effectively assigns the government’s
claims” to relators. Id. That assignment theory of standing
itself suggests that the term “the United States” does not
include relators because assignment necessarily involves
two distinct parties: an assignor and an assignee. See
Assignable, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2021)
(defining “assignable” as “transferable from one person to

18

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

another, so that the transferee has the same rights as the
transferor had”).
We accordingly have jurisdiction over this appeal.
IV.
We now consider Sigma’s contentions that it is entitled
either to judgment as a matter of law or to a new trial. We
reject Sigma’s arguments.
A.
Sigma contends that 19 U.S.C. § 1592, which provides a
specific mechanism for the United States to recover
fraudulently avoided customs duties, displaces the FCA as
to claims like Island’s. We disagree and hold that the FCA
reaches antidumping duties that an importer has fraudulently
evaded paying. 7
The FCA was intended to “reach all types of fraud,
without qualification, that might result in financial loss to the
Government.” United States v. Neifert-White Co., 390 U.S.
228, 232 (1968). Since it was amended in 1986, the FCA
has covered evasion of obligations to pay the government in
addition to fraudulent requests for payment from the
government. False Claims Amendments Act of 1986, Pub.
L. No. 99-562, 100 Stat. 3153, 3153 (codified as amended at
We ordered supplemental briefing on this issue after oral argument.
Island argues in its supplemental brief that Sigma forfeited the argument
that § 1592 displaces the FCA by failing to raise it before the district
court or in its opening brief on appeal. We resolve the issue
notwithstanding Sigma’s possible forfeiture because it is purely legal and
“does not depend on the factual record developed below.” Organic
Cannabis Found., LLC v. Commissioner, 962 F.3d 1082, 1092 n.6 (9th
Cir. 2020) (quoting Cold Mountain v. Garber, 375 F.3d 884, 891 (9th
Cir. 2004)).
7

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

19

31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(G)).
Although Congress has
explicitly excluded claims under the Internal Revenue Code
from the FCA’s otherwise sweeping scope, 31 U.S.C.
§ 3729(d), there is no carveout for customs duties.
Separately, § 1592 prohibits the importation of
merchandise by means of a material false statement or
omission.
19 U.S.C. § 1592(a)(1)(A).
Section 1592
provides maximum penalty amounts, procedures for the
United States to seek such penalties in the CIT, and partial
protection from penalties for importers who voluntarily
disclose violations. Id. § 1592(c), (e). Section 1592
provides that Customs “shall require” any avoided duties to
be paid even if the entry has been liquidated. Id. § 1592(d).
In other words, when duties are avoided by fraud or
negligence, § 1592 provides an exception to the general rule
that liquidation is “final and conclusive.” Id. § 1514(a).
Only the government may initiate an action under § 1592,
but a whistleblower may be awarded up to a quarter of any
recovery that the government obtains, not to exceed
$250,000 for any case. Id. § 1619.
Section 1592 undoubtedly overlaps with the FCA. But
under the canon against implied repeal, “when two statutes
are capable of co-existence, it is the duty of the courts, absent
a clearly expressed congressional intention to the contrary,
to regard each as effective.” Swinomish Indian Tribal
Cmty. v. BNSF Ry. Co., 951 F.3d 1142, 1156 (9th Cir. 2020)
(quoting Morton v. Mancari, 417 U.S. 535, 551 (1974)).
One statute should be read to impliedly repeal another only
if there is an irreconcilable conflict between the two. Id.
There is no irreconcilable conflict here. Section 1592
does not state that it is an exclusive remedy. And the FCA
expressly contemplates that FCA cases can proceed in

20

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

parallel with the government’s pursuit of “any alternate
remedy available to the Government, including any
administrative proceeding to determine a civil money
penalty.” 31 U.S.C. § 3730(c)(5). The FCA also has many
mechanisms that prevent a relator from undermining the
interests of the United States. It provides that a relator may
not “bring an action . . . based upon allegations or
transactions which are the subject of a civil suit or an
administrative civil money penalty proceeding in which the
Government is already a party.” Id. § 3730(e)(3). Even
when a relator can bring suit, the government has the right
to assume primary responsibility for the FCA case, to
dismiss or settle it, or to request that the court limit the
relator’s participation in various ways. Id. § 3730(c).
Alternatively, the government can decline to get involved
and allow the relator’s action to proceed, as it did with
respect to Island’s FCA suit. Id. § 3730(b)(4), (c)(3).
The statutory and legislative history of the FCA and
§ 1592 confirms that Congress specifically intended the two
statutes to coexist. Section 1592 has been in substantially its
current form since 1978. Customs Procedural Reform and
Simplification Act of 1978, Pub. L. No. 95-410, § 110(a), 92
Stat. 888, 893. In 1986, Congress amended the FCA to reach
fraud to avoid payment obligations to the government. False
Claims Amendments Act of 1986, Pub. L. No. 99-562, 100
Stat. 3153, 3153. In 2009, Congress further amended the
FCA, changing the definition of an “obligation” to make
clear that, contrary to what one court of appeals had held, the
FCA reaches customs duties even though the precise amount
due may not be fixed at the time of entry. See S. Rep.
No. 111-10, at 14 n.10 (2009). The fact that Congress
enacted that amendment to the FCA when § 1592 already
provided a pathway for recovering fraudulently avoided

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

21

customs duties demonstrates that Congress did not intend
§ 1592 to be the sole avenue for recovering such duties.
Sigma separately argues that § 1592 is the exclusive
pathway for recovering antidumping duties under the
reasoning of Middlesex County Sewerage Authority v.
National Sea Clammers Association, 453 U.S. 1 (1981). In
Sea Clammers, the Supreme Court held that “[w]hen the
remedial devices provided in a particular Act are sufficiently
comprehensive, they may suffice to demonstrate
congressional intent to preclude the remedy of suits under
[42 U.S.C.] § 1983.” Id. at 20. The Supreme Court has
explained that this doctrine applies when a specific statute
creates a remedial framework against the backdrop of a
general statute that “creates no rights but merely provides a
civil cause of action to remedy some otherwise defined
federal right,” and that the doctrine does not contravene the
canon against implied repeal. City of Rancho Palos Verdes
v. Abrams, 544 U.S. 113, 120 n.2 (2005) (quotation marks
omitted) (quoting Great Am. Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass’n v.
Novotny, 442 U.S. 366, 376 (1979)). The Supreme Court
has only ever said that the Sea Clammers doctrine applies to
§ 1983 and to 42 U.S.C. § 1985(3), both of which the
Supreme Court has recognized are purely remedial general
statutes. Id. (citing Great Am. Fed. Sav. & Loan Ass’n, 442
U.S. at 376).
Even assuming that the Sea Clammers doctrine is not
limited to §§ 1983 and 1985(3) and that there are other
purely remedial general statutes to which it might apply, the
FCA is not a purely remedial general statute. The FCA does
not merely provide a cause of action for violations of rights
defined elsewhere—it prohibits certain types of fraud
against the government. To be sure, the type of FCA liability
at issue here requires an “obligation” to the government

22

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

created by another statute or regulation. But the FCA
affirmatively prohibits fraudulent conduct that avoids
satisfying such an obligation. A person violates the relevant
provision of the FCA if she “knowingly makes, uses, or
causes to be made or used, a false record or statement
material to [that] obligation.” 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(G).
Sea Clammers and other precedents concerning purely
remedial general statutes like § 1983 are therefore not
applicable here. 8
B.
Sigma contends that even if § 1592 does not displace the
FCA as to customs duties, Sigma still cannot be liable
because it had no “obligation” to pay antidumping duties, as
defined by the FCA. We disagree.
An “obligation to pay” is indeed an essential element of
an FCA action for fraudulently avoiding paying money to
the government. See 31 U.S.C. § 3729(a)(1)(G). A plaintiff
bringing such a claim must show that the United States “was
owed a specific, legal obligation at the time that the alleged
false record or statement was made.” United States v.
Bourseau, 531 F.3d 1159, 1169 (9th Cir. 2008). Under the
FCA, an “obligation” means “an established duty [to pay],
whether or not fixed,” arising from a statute or regulation
(among other sources). 31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(3).
The Sea Clammers doctrine may be inapplicable for the independent
reason that the enactment of the modern version of § 1592 pre-dates the
creation of the type of FCA claim at issue here, as discussed above. An
FCA claim to recover customs duties does not attempt to assert “rights
created by a later statute . . . within the remedial framework of [an]
earlier one.” Rancho Palos Verdes, 544 U.S. at 120 n.2 (emphasis
modified) (quotation marks omitted) (quoting Great Am. Fed. Sav. &
Loan Ass’n, 442 U.S. at 377).
8

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

23

“An importer becomes liable for any antidumping duty
as soon as the foreign merchandise arrives in the United
States.” Thyssenkrupp Steel N. Am., Inc. v. United States,
886 F.3d 1215, 1218 (Fed. Cir. 2018) (citing 19 C.F.R.
§ 141.1(a)).
Sigma’s welded outlets are subject to
antidumping duties under the China Order. Vandewater Int’l
Inc. v. United States, 130 F.4th 981, 995 (Fed. Cir. 2025). 9
Sigma therefore became liable for antidumping duties when
it imported its welded outlets from China between 2010 and
2018. That liability was an “obligation” under the FCA at
the time of the welded outlets’ arrival even though the
amount due was not yet fixed through liquidation. See
31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(3). Of course, an importer that wrongly
believes that no duties are owed might not be liable under
the FCA. But any lack of liability in such a case would turn
on a lack of scienter, not on the lack of an obligation.
Sigma contends that it never had an obligation to pay
duties in light of a portion of the scope ruling concerning the
final assessment of duties for affected products.
Specifically, Sigma points to the fact that Commerce plans
to collect additional duties only for entries from recent years,
not for older ones like Sigma’s. But Commerce’s decision
about the years of entries on which duties can be collected
turns on its interpretation of the complicated restrictions in
the liquidation and suspension regulations. See 19 C.F.R.
Sigma argued for the first time in its petition for rehearing that
Commerce might reach a different result in Sigma’s (k)(2) proceedings
than was reached in Vandewater. Because Sigma previously represented
that the results of the Vandewater proceedings would apply to Sigma as
well, we deem its new argument to have been waived. See Hamer v.
Neighborhood Hous. Servs. of Chi., 583 U.S. 17, 20 n.1 (2017)
(“[W]aiver is the ‘intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known
right.’” (quoting United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725, 733 (1993))).
9

24

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

§ 351.225(l) (2018).
Neither the regulations nor
Commerce’s implementation of them suggests that duties
were never owed on entries that can no longer be reached
through the liquidation process. Indeed, under § 1592, even
if further duties cannot be collected through the liquidation
process, the duties can still be recovered if there was fraud
or negligence. Section 1592 therefore shows that the
existence of an obligation to pay is independent of the details
of the liquidation process.
Sigma further argues that it cannot be liable under the
FCA because the government sustained no damages as
shown by the fact that Commerce does not plan to collect
additional duties on older entries. That contention merely
repackages Sigma’s other arguments, and we reject it.
Damages in an FCA suit can be measured by “the difference
between what the defendant should have paid the
government and what the defendant actually paid the
government.” Bourseau, 531 F.3d at 1172. As we have
explained, Sigma should have paid antidumping duties when
it imported its welded outlets. Sigma did not do so,
depriving the government of money.
In sum, an importer cannot evade duties, wait until its
entries are liquidated, and then assert based on that
liquidation that its actions did not deprive the government of
money.
C.
Sigma finally argues that it is entitled to judgment as a
matter of law, or at least a new trial, because of purported
flaws in the two theories of liability that Island put to the
jury. Island’s first theory at trial was that Sigma violated the
FCA by knowingly falsely declaring that no antidumping
duties were owed on its products. Island’s second theory at

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

25

trial was that Sigma violated the FCA by knowingly
misrepresenting its products as steel couplings. Sigma
contends that it is entitled to judgment as a matter of law on
the first theory under an objective-reasonableness defense to
scienter because a reasonable person could have believed
that no duties were owed. Once Island’s first theory is out
of the picture, Sigma argues, it is entitled to judgment in its
favor because there is insufficient evidence supporting the
second theory. In the alternative, Sigma asserts that it is
entitled to a new trial because the jury might have
improperly based its general verdict on the first theory. We
reject Sigma’s arguments.
Sigma contends that it lacked the scienter required by the
first theory because, at the time of its imports, it would have
been objectively reasonable to believe that its products were
not covered by the China Order. Scienter under the FCA
encompasses actual knowledge, deliberate ignorance, and
reckless disregard. 31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(1)(A). Under the
objective-reasonableness defense that Sigma seeks to
invoke, an FCA defendant would always prevail if a
hypothetical reasonable person could have believed the
defendant’s statements were true, regardless of any evidence
that the real-life defendant had actual knowledge of, was
deliberately ignorant of, or recklessly disregarded the falsity
of its statements.
Such a defense is foreclosed by the Supreme Court’s
decision in United States ex rel. Schutte v. SuperValu Inc.,
598 U.S. 739 (2023). The Supreme Court in SuperValu
concluded that “[t]he FCA’s scienter element refers to [a
defendant’s] knowledge and subjective beliefs—not to what
an objectively reasonable person may have known or
believed.” Id. at 749. Under SuperValu, a defendant cannot
(as Sigma seeks to do here) escape liability by arguing that

26

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

an objectively reasonable person could have believed that
the statements it submitted to the government were true.
That is so even if the terms of the defendant’s legal
obligation were ambiguous. The Supreme Court explained
that “ambiguity does not preclude” an FCA defendant “from
having learned [the] correct meaning” of its obligation. Id.
at 753. An “honest mistake” may preclude liability, but it
must be the defendant’s honest mistake, not a hypothetical
honest mistake made by someone else. Id. Even if the China
Order were ambiguous enough that some hypothetical
reasonable person could have believed that it did not cover
Sigma’s welded outlets, under SuperValu that would not
make Sigma entitled to judgment in its favor on Island’s first
theory of liability. 10
We therefore reject Sigma’s challenge to the legal
validity of Island’s first theory of liability. And Sigma does
not challenge the legal validity of the second theory. Where
a general verdict encompasses multiple legally valid
Sigma contends that a footnote in SuperValu left open the possibility
that the FCA’s scienter definition “still incorporates an objective
element.” That footnote states: “In some civil contexts, a defendant may
be called ‘reckless’ for acting in the face of an unjustifiably high risk of
illegality that was so obvious that it should have been known, even if the
defendant was not actually conscious of that risk. We need not consider
how (or whether) that objective form of ‘recklessness’ relates to the
FCA.” SuperValu, 598 U.S. at 751 n.5 (citation omitted).
Sigma does not explain how this footnote helps it or what it thinks
went wrong at trial concerning this issue. Sigma has not argued that the
jury instructions captured too many forms of mens rea or that it was
precluded from introducing evidence rebutting a theory of objective
recklessness. For that reason, any argument based on the SuperValu
footnote is forfeited. United States v. Graf, 610 F.3d 1148, 1166 (9th
Cir. 2010) (“Arguments made in passing and not supported by citations
to the record or to case authority are generally deemed [forfeited].”).

10

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

27

theories, “we will uphold the verdict if the evidence is
sufficient with respect to any of the [theories].” McCord v.
Maguire, 873 F.2d 1271, 1273-74 (9th Cir.), amended by
885 F.2d 650 (9th Cir. 1989). Sigma does not challenge the
sufficiency of the evidence supporting the first theory, so the
verdict can be sustained without further analysis of the
evidence.
In any event, the evidence at trial was plainly sufficient
to support the jury’s verdict in Island’s favor under either
theory. On the first theory, the jury heard evidence that
Sigma declared on customs forms that no antidumping duties
were owed on its welded outlets, and the jury was correctly
instructed that this was a false statement. The jury also heard
expert testimony that such statements are material because
they tend to dissuade Customs from assessing antidumping
duties. See 31 U.S.C. § 3729(b)(4) (“[T]he term ‘material’
means having a natural tendency to influence, or be capable
of influencing, the payment or receipt of money or
property.”).
As for scienter, there was sufficient evidence for the jury
to conclude that Sigma acted with either deliberate ignorance
or reckless disregard for the truth when it declared on
customs forms that it did not owe antidumping duties on its
welded outlets. See Bourseau, 531 F.3d at 1168 (holding
that FCA scienter encompasses “the ‘ostrich’ type situation
where an individual has buried his head in the sand and failed
to make simple inquiries which would alert him that false
claims are being submitted” (quotation marks omitted)).
The jury heard evidence that products from China, and steel
products in particular, are frequently subject to antidumping
duty orders. Yet Sigma made no inquiry into whether it
owed duties on its welded outlets before stating that it did
not. Sigma’s vice president overseeing import operations

28

ISLAND INDUS. V. SIGMA CORP.

testified that Sigma had never seen the China Order or the
Sprink Ruling—both of which were issued in 1992—until
2017 or 2018. That same executive testified that he did not
recall anyone at Sigma looking at the International Trade
Commission’s periodic antidumping reviews or inquiring
with Commerce or Customs as to whether its imports were
subject to antidumping duties.
Other testimony made clear how easy it would have been
for Sigma to learn about the China Order and the Sprink
Ruling. Island’s sales manager testified that he began
looking into import regulations because Island’s prices kept
being undercut by products from China. Lacking any
specialized experience in trade law or antidumping duty
orders, he used Google and contacted an analyst at
Commerce. Within 24 hours, he found the China Order and
the Sprink Ruling. He immediately determined that welded
outlets like Sigma’s were likely subject to antidumping
duties.
On the second theory, the jury heard evidence that Sigma
called its products welded outlets in its product catalog and
on its website but referred to them as steel couplings on
customs forms. The jury also heard evidence that Customs
does not assess antidumping duties on steel couplings. From
that evidence, a reasonable jury could conclude that Sigma
knowingly misrepresented its products as steel couplings to
avoid antidumping duties.
V.
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the judgment
against Sigma for violating the FCA.

