FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 24-2861
D.C. No.
4:23-cr-00193BLW-1

RYAN R. VANDYKE,
OPINION
Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Idaho
B. Lynn Winmill, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted July 9, 2025
Seattle, Washington
Filed October 27, 2025
Before: M. Margaret McKeown, Richard A. Paez, and
Gabriel P. Sanchez, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge McKeown

2

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

SUMMARY*
Criminal Law
On the government’s appeal, the panel reversed the
district court’s order dismissing an indictment charging
Ryan VanDyke with illegal firearm possession in violation
of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8)(C)(ii), and remanded for further
proceedings.
Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii) prohibits firearm possession by
an individual subject to a court order that “by its terms
explicitly prohibits the use, attempted use, or threatened use
of physical force against [an] intimate partner or child that
would reasonably be expected to cause bodily injury.”
VanDyke did not dispute that he was subject to a nocontact order that not only reiterated that he could not
contact his victim but also mandated that he not use, attempt
to use, or threaten physical force against her. By the time that
order was issued, he had been dogging his victim for months,
flouting both the conditions of his probation for a separate
telephone-harassment offense and the terms of the earlier
court-ordered protections obtained by his victim for herself
and her minor child. Nor did VanDyke contest that by
carrying his gun at the courthouse he violated
Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii).
Instead, VanDyke argued that the application of that
federal statute to him violated the Second Amendment. The
district court agreed that Section (C)(ii), as applied to
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

3

VanDyke, does not fall within a historical tradition of
firearm regulation.
The panel reversed in light of intervening precedent in
United States v. Rahimi, 602 U.S. 680 (2024). As the Court
wrote in Rahimi, “[s]ince the founding, our Nation’s firearm
laws have included provisions preventing individuals who
threaten physical harm to others from misusing firearms.”
The Court emphasized that a historical analogue suffices; a
“historical twin” is not required. There is also a long
historical tradition concerning “categories of persons
thought by a legislature to present a special danger of
misuse.” Such categories include criminals facing serious
pending charges on pretrial release. VanDyke fits this
description. Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii) is therefore
constitutional as applied to VanDyke.

4

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

COUNSEL
Scott A.C. Meisler (argued) and Mahogane D. Reed, Trial
Attorneys, Appellate Section; Antoinette T. Bacon,
Supervisory Official; Criminal Division; Lisa H. Miller,
Deputy Assistant Attorney General; Nicole M. Argentieri,
Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General; United States
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Katherine L.
Horwitz, Assistant United States Attorney, Office of the
United States Attorney, United States Department of Justice,
Boise, Idaho; Jack Haycock, Assistant United States
Attorney, Frank Zebari, Appellate Coordinator; Justin D.
Whatcott, Acting United States Attorney; Joshua D. Hurwit,
United States Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney,
United States Department of Justice, Pocatello, Idaho; for
Plaintiff-Appellant.
Samuel Macomber (argued), Assistant Federal Defender,
Federal Defender Services of Idaho, Boise, Idaho, for
Defendant-Appellee.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

5

OPINION
McKEOWN, Circuit Judge:
In May 2023, Ryan VanDyke walked into an Idaho state
courthouse carrying a fully loaded Smith & Wesson .38
revolver. At the time, he was subject to a civil protection
order and a no-contact order and faced a felony stalking
charge—all because he had persistently ignored court orders
to stay away from a woman who wanted to escape his
prolonged harassment. He was subsequently indicted for
illegal firearm possession in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(g)(8)(C)(ii), which prohibits firearm possession by an
individual subject to a court order that “by its terms
explicitly prohibits the use, attempted use, or threatened use
of physical force against [an] intimate partner or child that
would reasonably be expected to cause bodily injury.”
VanDyke does not dispute that he was subject to a nocontact order that not only reiterated that he could not
contact his victim but also mandated that he not use, attempt
to use, or threaten physical force against her. By the time that
order was issued, he had been dogging his victim for months,
flouting both the conditions of his probation for a separate
telephone-harassment offense and the terms of the earlier
court-ordered protections obtained by his victim for herself
and her minor child. Nor does VanDyke contest that by
carrying his gun at the courthouse in March 2023 he violated
Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii), which prohibits firearm possession
by individuals subject to no-contact orders like that against
VanDyke.
Instead, VanDyke argues that the application of that
federal statute to him violated the Second Amendment. The
district court agreed that Section (C)(ii), as applied to

6

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

VanDyke, does not fall within a historical tradition of
firearm regulation. In light of intervening precedent in
United States v. Rahimi, 602 U.S. 680 (2024), we reverse.
As the Court wrote in Rahimi, “[s]ince the founding, our
Nation’s firearm laws have included provisions preventing
individuals who threaten physical harm to others from
misusing firearms.” Id. at 690. The Court emphasized that a
historical analogue suffices; a “historical twin” is not
required. Id. at 692 (quoting New York State Rifle & Pistol
Ass’n, Inc. v. Bruen, 597 U.S. 1, 30 (2022)). We also have a
long historical tradition concerning “categories of persons
thought by a legislature to present a special danger of
misuse.” Id. at 698; see also United States v. Duarte, 137
F.4th 743, 756–61 (9th Cir. 2025) (en banc). Such categories
include criminals facing serious pending charges on pretrial
release. See United States v. Perez-Garcia, 96 F.4th 1166,
1182–84 (9th Cir. 2024), cert. denied, 145 S. Ct. 2707
(2025). VanDyke fits this description to a tee. We conclude
that Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii) is constitutional as applied to
VanDyke.
Background
VanDyke was placed under a civil protection order in
April 2022, forbidding him from contacting, stalking, or
using physical force against his victim or her minor children.
The order specifically applied to “Stalking and/or Threats,”
with a citation to an Idaho statute enabling victims of
stalking and harassment to petition for protection orders and
criminalizing violations of those orders. Two months later,
VanDyke was convicted of using a telephone to annoy,
harass, intimidate or threaten someone, and he was placed
on two years of probation. See Idaho Code §§ 18-6710–11.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

7

In October 2022, VanDyke was charged with stalking—
that is, engaging in “a course of conduct that seriously
alarms, annoys or harasses the victim.” Idaho Code § 187906. Specifically, the state alleged that VanDyke had texted
and left packages for his victim. He had allegedly followed
her and “put an app on her phone.” He had also emailed her
family and sent items to them, asking them to relay the
messages and “gifts” to his victim. VanDyke was charged
with stalking in the first degree, a felony, indicating the
presence of aggravating circumstances. Idaho Code § 187905. The prosecutors alleged that VanDyke’s stalking
conduct violated the April civil protection order. His conduct
also violated the conditions of his probation for the
telephone-harassment charge.1
After an initial hearing regarding the felony stalking
charge, VanDyke was placed under a new no-contact order.
That no-contact order was issued under Idaho Code Section
18-920, which permits a state court to forbid contact with
another person where the defendant is charged with or
convicted of various crimes against the person, including,
among others, assault and battery (Idaho Code §§ 18-901,
903, 905, 907, 909, 911, 915); domestic violence (§ 18-918);
use of telecommunication to annoy, terrify, threaten,
intimate, harass, or offend (§§ 18-6710–11); and stalking
(§§ 18-7905–06).

1

We consider the background facts related to VanDyke’s criminal
charges in this as-applied challenge for the limited purpose of evaluating
whether his no-contact order under Idaho state law and resulting firearm
restriction is “relevantly similar” to historical traditions of regulation of
Second Amendment rights. Bruen, 597 U.S. at 28–29. We do not engage
in collateral review of the validity of any state court orders. See United
States v. Young, 458 F.3d 998, 1005 (9th Cir. 2006).

8

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

The October 2022 order prohibited VanDyke from,
among other things, “us[ing], attempt[ing] to use or
threaten[ing] use of physical force, [or] engag[ing] in any
other conduct that would place the protected person(s) in
reasonable fear of bodily injury.” The no-contact order also
stated: “As a result of this Order, it may be unlawful for you
to purchase or possess a firearm, including a rifle, pistol, or
revolver, or ammunition pursuant to federal law under
18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8).” At his hearing, the state magistrate
judge advised VanDyke that he was “to have no firearms in
his possession including his residence, vehicles, sheds, or
storage units.” The order was to remain in place for two
years or until dismissal of the case against VanDyke.
In March 2023, the court renewed the April 2022 civil
protection order, forbidding VanDyke from contacting his
victim, her minor child, or other family members of the
victim for another year.
In sum, by May 2023, VanDyke was subject to a
renewed civil protection order issued pursuant to a domestic
violence crime prevention statute, facing felony stalking
charges, and under a no-contact order specifically forbidding
the use or threat of force—all related to the same victim.
That month, VanDyke entered a state courthouse for a
pretrial conference regarding his felony stalking case. He
was carrying a loaded revolver in his backpack.
VanDyke was then indicted for possession of a firearm
while subject to the October no-contact order, in violation of
18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8)(C)(ii) (“Section (C)(ii)”). It is
undisputed that the October no-contact order against
VanDyke satisfied the notice-and-hearing requirements of
Section 922(g)(8)(A), the restraint-from-stalking language
in Section 922(g)(8)(B), and the prohibition on the “use,

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

9

attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against
[an] intimate partner or child that would reasonably be
expected to cause bodily injury” in Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii).
VanDyke successfully moved to dismiss the indictment,
arguing that Section (C)(ii) is unconstitutional as applied to
him. At the time of its decision, the district court did not have
the benefit of Rahimi. On appeal by the government, we
reverse the district court’s order dismissing the indictment
and remand for further proceedings.
Analysis
Following the Supreme Court’s decision in Bruen in
2022, our analysis in Second Amendment cases has changed
dramatically. 597 U.S. 1. The first step in analyzing a Second
Amendment challenge is to “consider whether the Second
Amendment’s plain text covers an individual’s proposed
course of conduct.” Perez-Garcia, 96 F.4th at 1178. If the
plain text covers that conduct, then it is presumptively
protected by the Second Amendment. Bruen, 597 U.S. at 24.
Neither party disputes that the Second Amendment applies
here.
The crux of this case is at the second step. A few months
after the district court’s decision in April 2024, the Supreme
Court decided Rahimi, which clarified the appropriate scope
of the required inquiry. 602 U.S. 680. The key question is
whether the modern firearm regulation is “consistent with
the principles that underpin our regulatory tradition” and
“underl[ie] the Second Amendment.” Id. at 692. In that
determination, why a regulation burdens Second
Amendment rights and how it does so are “central”
considerations. Id. For a regulation to pass constitutional
muster, its “why” and “how” must have “a well-established
and representative historical analogue.” Bruen, 597 U.S. at

10

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

30 (emphasis omitted). The Court in Rahimi reiterated that a
challenged regulation need not “precisely match its
historical precursors” or be a “historical twin,” and elements
of multiple historical laws may be considered together to
define a tradition of regulation. 602 U.S. at 692, 698 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The Court in Rahimi held that its analysis “starts and
stops with Section 922(g)(8)(C)(i) because the Government
offers ample evidence that the Second Amendment permits
the disarmament of individuals who pose a credible threat to
the physical safety of others.” Id. at 693. Because of this
posture, the Court did not need to decide whether regulation
under Section (C)(ii), Section (C)(i)’s closest neighboring
provision, is also permissible. However, much of the Court’s
discussion is framed with respect to Section 922(g)(8) as a
whole and, like our sister circuits, we are convinced that the
decision provides the analytical framework applicable to
Section (C)(ii) as well as Section (C)(i). See, e.g., United
States v. Perez-Gallan, 125 F.4th 204, 214–16 (5th Cir.
2024) (relying on Rahimi to reject a challenge to Section
(C)(ii)); United States v. Gordon, 137 F.4th 1153, 1156–57
(10th Cir. 2025) (same). We see no reason to deviate from
this framework in addressing an as-applied challenge.
Section (C)(ii)’s “why” and “how” are analogous to two
historical traditions of firearm regulation. The first tradition
is individual disarmament based on a judicial determination
of dangerousness, as embodied by the surety and goingarmed laws relied upon in Rahimi. 602 U.S. at 695–700. The
second tradition is categorical disarmament, as manifested
in laws forbidding firearm possession by whole groups of
people whom “the legislature deemed dangerous.” Duarte,
137 F.4th at 759 (emphasis added).

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

11

I. Individual Disarmament
The Supreme Court’s decision in Rahimi focused on the
tradition of individual disarmament that involved judicial
determinations of dangerousness, exemplified in the surety
and going-armed laws of the eighteenth and nineteenth
centuries. 602 U.S. at 694–98. In the historical-analogy
analysis, the Court focused on the burden imposed, as well
as the procedures of and reasons for imposition.
To begin, the burden imposed by all subsections of 18
U.S.C. § 922(g) is “temporary disarmament.” Rahimi, 602
U.S. at 699; see also Gordon, 137 F.4th at 1156 (noting the
identical burdens imposed by Sections (C)(i) and (C)(ii)).
The firearm prohibitions of Sections (C)(i) and (C)(ii) cover
only the period during which the defendant is subject to a
restraining order. Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 699. The Supreme
Court has already concluded that such a restriction is well
within the national tradition of firearms regulation. Id.
The terms of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(8) ensure that
temporary disarmament pursuant to Section (C)(ii), as with
Section (C)(i), is imposed only after notice and an
opportunity to be heard. § 922(g)(8)(A). VanDyke does not
contest that he was given notice and a hearing, at which he
was represented by counsel, regarding the October 2022 nocontact order. These procedures find historical analogy in
the surety laws, which involved judicial evidence-taking,
summons, and an opportunity to respond. See Rahimi, 602
U.S. at 696–97.
We are thus left to decide whether there exists a
historical analogy to the justifications for VanDyke’s
temporary disarmament. Facially and in context, Section
(C)(ii) and Section (C)(i) share a common aim: the
protection of victims of intimate partner violence from the

12

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

harassers and abusers who pose a threat to their physical
safety. Cf. United States v. Chapman, 666 F.3d 220, 228 (4th
Cir. 2012). Sections (C)(i) and (C)(ii) were, after all, passed
together in the Violent Crime Control and Law Enforcement
Act of 1994, 108 Stat. 1796, 2014 (1994), and appeared
together within a subtitle on domestic violence. The Ninth
Circuit has noted a similar “historical justification[]” for
disarmament like VanDyke’s: “protecting the public from
future criminal acts of the accused defendant.” PerezGarcia, 96 F.4th at 1184. That basic motivation is analogous
to the motivation of the surety laws (prevention of violence,
including spousal abuse) and of the going-armed laws
(prevention of terror and “disrupt[ion of] the public order”).
Rahimi, 602 U.S. at 695, 697 (internal quotation marks
omitted). The comparability between (C)(i) and (C)(ii)’s
justifications has informed other circuits’ application of
Rahimi in upholding of Section (C)(ii) against facial
challenges. See Gordon, 137 F.4th at 1156; Perez-Gallan,
125 F.4th at 213–15.
The further question in this as-applied challenge is
whether the statute’s application to VanDyke was supported
by similar justifications. All evidence suggests that it was.
Under Idaho law, a no-contact order “must be made to
protect the current or future victims” of crimes enumerated
in Section 18-920 of the Idaho Criminal Code, which include
felony stalking, telephone harassment, as well as assault,
battery, and other crimes against persons. State v. Lodge, 461
P.3d 819, 822 (Idaho 2020). VanDyke does not argue that
the state court failed to comply with this requirement. As
other circuits have done, we conclude that state-law
prerequisites like Idaho’s enable the inference of a judicial
determination of dangerousness. See United States v. Boyd,
999 F.3d 171, 187 (3d Cir. 2021), cert. denied, 142 S. Ct.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

13

511; Perez-Gallan, 125 F.4th at 215; Gordon, 137 F.4th at
1157–58. It is common sense that “the primary purpose of a
no-contact order is to protect the victims of domestic abuse
by the offender.” Sunuwar v. Att’y Gen., 989 F.3d 239, 248
(3d Cir. 2021) (internal quotation marks omitted).
By the time the October 2022 no-contact order was
issued, VanDyke had already been under a civil protection
order prohibiting any contact, harassment, or stalking of the
victim. In contravention of that earlier court order and the
conditions of his probation, VanDyke was charged with
stalking in the first degree for “knowingly and maliciously
engag[ing] in a course of conduct that seriously alarmed,
annoyed or harassed” the same woman. The state alleged
that VanDyke texted her, followed her, put an app on her
phone, sent “gifts” to her family members, and left packages
on her car. Given the terms of the October 2022 order, the
state court found it “appropriate” to enjoin VanDyke from
“us[ing], attempt[ing] to use or threaten[ing] use of physical
force” against his victim or “engag[ing] in any other conduct
that would place [her] in reasonable fear of bodily injury.”
Considering similar terms, the Third Circuit reasoned:
If the state court believed that [the defendant]
posed only a risk of harassment untethered
from dangerousness, it could have issued no
order at all, it could have issued only a ‘no
contact’ order, or it could . . . strike out the
physical injury component and leave in only
the directive with respect to harassment. It
instead issued the type of order we would

14

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

expect when faced with a person who posed
a credible danger to his [victims].

Boyd, 999 F.3d at 187. The same is true here. We agree that
it is reasonable to infer from the terms of this order a
prospective concern for the protected persons’ physical
safety.2 This was not a simple order prohibiting contact;
instead, the order specifically enjoined the use or threat of
physical force after VanDyke had violated previous court
orders.
Under these circumstances—a state statutory scheme
authorizing courts to issue no-contact orders to protect
victims of domestic abuse from harm; an order prohibiting
the use of force against that victim, satisfying a federal
statute designed to prevent domestic violence; and a
defendant who, in contravention of court orders, allegedly
harassed and stalked his victim for months—the obvious
justification for restricting VanDyke’s firearm possession
was to mitigate the risk he posed to his victim’s physical
safety.
We conclude that the justification for the entry of the nocontact order against VanDyke—and thus this application of
Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii)—was the state court’s implicit
2

Contrary to VanDyke’s arguments, Ninth Circuit precedent permits
reliance on the terms of an order satisfying Section (C)(ii) to infer a threat
determination. See United States v. Sanchez, 639 F.3d 1201, 1206 (9th
Cir. 2011) (holding that absent the language required by Section
922(g)(8), “there is no presumption that the person subject to the order
represents a threat of violence,” and distinguishing orders that “contain
explicit terms substantially similar in meaning to the language of
(8)(C)(ii)”).

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

15

determination that he posed a threat to the physical safety of
his victim and other protected persons. This is not just
analogous, but virtually identical, to the justification that the
Court upheld in Rahimi. Like our sister circuits, given such
a strongly implied dangerousness finding by the state court,
we see no need to require further documentation. See Boyd,
999 F.3d at 187; Gordon, 137 F.4th at 1157. VanDyke’s
argument ignores the terms of Section (C)(ii) and the
structure of Idaho law. Cf. United States v. Reese, 627 F.3d
792, 802–04 (10th Cir. 2010), abrogated on other grounds
by Bruen, 597 U.S. 1 (concluding, for similar reasons, that
“no [explicit credible-threat] findings were necessary” to
establish that Section (C)(ii) was intended to keep firearms
out of the hands of those who pose a heightened danger of
misuse towards an intimate partner or child).
II.

Categorical Disarmament

In addition to the tradition of individualized
disarmament, America’s history of firearm regulation also
includes “longstanding prohibitions” on firearm possession
by certain categories of people. District of Columbia v.
Heller, 554 U.S. 570, 626 (2008). Categorical disarmament
is based on legislatively presumed danger, rather than an
individualized assessment of risk. Duarte, 137 F.4th at 759
(“The historical record reveals a host of regulations that
disarmed those whom the legislature deemed dangerous on
a categorical basis.”).
VanDyke falls within at least one category of people who
were historically disarmed on a categorical basis: criminal
defendants facing serious charges pending trial, including
those eligible for pretrial release. See Perez-Garcia, 96 F.4th
at 1184. VanDyke’s criminal charge was undoubtedly

16

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

serious: felony stalking in the first degree, aggravated by his
repeated disobedience of court orders.
There exists a tradition of restrictions on firearm
possessions for groups that were deemed dangerous by
legislatures, in the absence of criminal charges. These
groups included intoxicated persons and “certain vagrants”
whom the legislature thought, “as a class, presented a danger
to the community if armed.” Duarte, 137 F.4th at 760. The
right to bear arms was limited for many groups deemed, for
various reasons, to be outside the bounds of “peaceable or
virtuous citizens.” United States v. Bena, 664 F.3d 1180,
1184 (8th Cir. 2011). Detention and disarmament were
within the power of the legislature even when the group in
question was not defined by past violence. Perez-Garcia, 96
F.4th at 1183–84 (noting that such penalties were imposed
for non-violent offenses including forgery, horse theft, and
“running away with a ship or vessel”) (citation omitted).
The reality of the dangerous intersection of firearms and
domestic abuse is well-documented. As the Supreme Court
has recognized, “[f]irearms and domestic strife are a
potentially deadly combination nationwide.” United States
v. Hayes, 555 U.S. 415, 427 (2009). “The dangerous
propensities of persons with a history of domestic abuse are
no secret, and the possibility of tragic encounters has been
too often realized.” United States v. Kafka, 222 F.3d 1129,
1132 (9th Cir. 2000) (quoting United States v. Meade, 175
F.3d 215, 226 (1st Cir. 1999)). Congress enacted the gunpossession restrictions of Section 922(g)(8)(C)(i) and (C)(ii)
“in light of evidence that domestic violence presents a
pervasive problem in American society.” Bena, 664 F.3d at
1184. Further illustrative of this categorical concern is the
fact that dozens of state legislatures restrict, or permit state
courts to restrict, gun possession by people subject to

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA V. VANDYKE

17

protective orders. Brief for the United States 34–35 nn.22–
23, United States v. Rahimi, 602 U.S. 680 (2024) (collecting
statutes). At least one circuit has already concluded that
individuals “subject to domestic violence protective orders
covered by § 922(g)(8) fall within the historical bar of
presumptively dangerous persons.” See Boyd, 999 F.3d at
186. Because VanDyke’s disarmament falls squarely within
the first categorical-disarmament tradition, related to facing
serious charges pending trial, we need not answer whether it
also falls into the bar against presumptively dangerous
persons not facing such charges.
Section 922(g)(8)(C)(ii) is constitutional as applied to
VanDyke under the historical traditions of individual
disarmament and categorical disarmament. We reverse the
district court’s dismissal of the indictment.
REVERSED and REMANDED.

