FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
SUSAN SOTO PALMER; ALBERTO
MACIAS; FABIOLA LOPEZ; CATY
PADILLA; HELIDORA MORFIN,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,

Nos. 23-35595
24-1602
D.C. No.
3:22-cv-05035RSL

v.
STEVEN HOBBS, in his official
capacity as Secretary of State of
Washington; STATE OF
WASHINGTON,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees,
JOSE A. TREVINO; ISMAEL G.
CAMPOS; ALEX YBARRA,
Intervenor-Defendants Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
Robert S. Lasnik, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 27, 2025
Seattle, Washington

2

PALMER V. TREVINO

Filed August 27, 2025
Before: M. Margaret McKeown, Ronald M. Gould, and
John B. Owens, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge McKeown
SUMMARY *
Voting Rights
In appeals brought by three Yakima voters who
intervened before the district court to challenge the district
court’s decisions (1) enjoining the Washington State
redistricting commission’s legislative district map for the
state’s Yakima Valley Region (Enacted Map) and
(2) imposing a new legislative map in its place (Remedial
Map), the panel affirmed in part the district court’s remedial
order and judgment and dismissed in part the appeals for lack
of jurisdiction.
Plaintiffs sued the State of Washington and its Secretary
of State, arguing that the commission’s Enacted Map
violated Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. Their lawsuit
was successful, such that the district court enjoined the
Enacted Map. After the redistricting commission declined to
craft a new map, the court did so itself by fashioning the
Remedial Map. None of the original parties sought to
disturb the district court’s decision. Instead, Intervenors
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

PALMER V. TREVINO

3

appealed, challenging the district court’s Section 2 liability
determination pertaining to the Enacted Map, and also
alleging that the Remedial Map violated the Equal Protection
Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment and Section 2.
The panel first held that the district court properly
exercised jurisdiction over the Voting Rights Act challenge
to the Remedial Map. The panel rejected the Intervenors’
assertion that 28 U.S.C. § 2284 requires a three-judge district
court for a statutory challenge to redistricting, holding that
Section 2284’s plain language, the relevant interpretive
canon, and the statutory history confirm that in the absence
of congressional guidance, a three-judge district court needs
to be convened only for constitutional challenges, not
statutory challenges, to legislative apportionment.
Addressing standing, the panel first held that Intervenors
lacked standing to appeal the district court’s liability finding
pertaining to the Enacted Map because they failed to show
that their alleged gerrymandering injuries were traceable or
redressable; Interventors failed to provide evidence that the
district court classified them on the basis of race and also
failed to allege a real and immediate threat of repeated
injury. Next, Intervenors lacked standing to appeal the
Remedial Map as violating Section 2 because they failed to
adequately allege vote dilution. One intervenor, however,
had standing to bring an equal protection challenge against
the Remedial Map because his asserted racial-classification
injury of being moved between legislative districts was a
cognizable harm in the context of a racial gerrymandering
claim, and the vacatur of the Remedial Map could redress
his ongoing representation harm.
Exercising its discretion to address the merits despite
Interventors’ likely forfeiture, the panel held that the district

4

PALMER V. TREVINO

court’s Remedial Map did not discriminate on the basis of
race in violation of the Equal Protection Clause. Intervenors
failed to demonstrate that race was the predominant factor
motivating the district court’s decisions. Rather, the district
court’s thoughtful attention to the details of the maps,
population and voter numbers, and viable alternatives
confirmed that race was not the predominant factor in
shaping the map.
The panel dismissed the appeal of the liability order
pertaining to the Enacted Map for lack of jurisdiction. The
panel further dismissed the appeal of the remedial order and
judgment pertaining to the Remedial Map for lack of
jurisdiction, except for the district court’s dismissal of
Intervenors’ equal protection claims, which the panel
affirmed.

COUNSEL
Annabelle E. Harless (argued), Campaign Legal Center,
Chicago, Illinois; Mark P. Gaber, Simone T. Leeper, Aseem
Mulji, and Benjamin Phillips, Campaign Legal Center,
Washington, D.C.; Ernest I. Herrera and Thomas A. Saenz,
Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund,
Los Angeles, California; Chad W. Dunn and Sonni Waknin,
UCLA Voting Rights Project, Los Angeles, California;
Edwardo Morfin, Morfin Law Firm PPLC, Tacoma,
Washington; for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Andrew R.W. Hughes (argued), Assistant Attorney General;
Cristina Sepe, Deputy Solicitor General; Office of the
Washington Attorney General, Seattle, Washington; Kate S.
Worthington Assistant Attorney General; Karl D. Smith,

PALMER V. TREVINO

5

Deputy Solicitor General; Robert W. Ferguson, Attorney
General; Office of the Washington Attorney General,
Olympia, Washington; for Defendants-Appellees.
Dallin B. Holt (argued) and Drew C. Ensign, Holtzman
Vogel Baran Torchinsky & Josefiak PLLC, Phoenix,
Arizona; Phillip M. Gordon and Caleb Acker, Holtzman
Vogel Baran Torchinsky & Josefiak PLLC, Haymarket,
Virginia; Jason B. Torchinsky, Holtzman Vogel Baran
Torchinsky & Josefiak PLLC, Washington, D.C.; Andrew
R. Stokesbary, Chalmers Adams Backer & Kaufman LLC,
Seattle, Washington; for Intervenor-Defendants-Appellants.
Sam Spiegelman and Jackson Maynard, Citizen Action
Defense Fund, Olympia, Washington, for Amicus Curiae
Citizen Action Defense Fund.
Paul Graves, Auburn, Washington, for Amici Curiae Sarah
Augustine, Joe Fain, and Paul Graves.
Ruth M. Greenwood and Samuel Davis, Election Law
Clinic, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts, for
Amicus Curiae Latino Community Fund of Washington
State.

6

PALMER V. TREVINO

OPINION
McKEOWN, Circuit Judge:
In the last four years, there have been two consecutive
attempts to ensure that all voters in Washington State’s
Yakima Valley could cast votes of equal weight. The state’s
redistricting commission tried first in 2021, as part of the
statewide reapportionment process that occurs every ten
years. This appeal centers on the second effort: After
enjoining the part of the commission’s map corresponding
to the Yakima Valley region, a federal district court imposed
a new map in place of the original. On appeal, we address
certain challenges to the district court’s remedial map.
The case comes to our court in an unusual posture. Susan
Soto Palmer and a group of Latino voters in the Yakima
Valley sued the State of Washington and its Secretary of
State, Steven Hobbs, arguing that the commission’s map
violated Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. Their lawsuit
was successful, such that the district court enjoined the
enacted map. After the redistricting commission declined to
craft a new map, the court did so itself. The State chose to
accept the new map rather than appeal. Consequently, none
of the original parties sought to disturb the district court’s
decision.
Instead, three Yakima Valley voters, after permissively
intervening before the district court, now challenge both the
liability determination and the new remedial map. They
argue that the liability determination against the
commission’s enacted map, as well as the remedial map,
violated the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment and Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act. They
also challenge the district court’s jurisdiction.

PALMER V. TREVINO

7

After determining that the district court had jurisdiction,
we conclude that the Intervenors lack standing to challenge
the district court’s liability determination. They also lack
standing to challenge the remedial map under Section 2.
However, at least one Intervenor has standing to challenge
the remedial map under the Fourteenth Amendment. Despite
Intervenors’ likely forfeiture of the equal protection
argument, we exercise our discretion to consider the issue.
In sum, the district court’s remedial map did not discriminate
on the basis of race in violation of the Equal Protection
Clause, and we affirm the district court.
Background
As required by the Constitution, the U.S. Census is
conducted every ten years. The updated numbers of residents
are used to ensure that each federal and state district within
the states have approximately the same number of people, in
accordance
with
constitutional
equal-population
requirements. Thus, the Census regularly catalyzes
redistricting efforts, and the latest Census—conducted in
2020—was no different.
Washington State requires that its federal and state
legislative districts be drawn by a five-member, bipartisan,
independent redistricting commission (“Commission”).
After the 2020 Census, new members were appointed to the
Commission according to the procedures laid out in the state
constitution: The majority and minority leaders in both
legislative houses each appointed one of the four voting
Commissioners, and the four voting Commissioners then
voted to appoint the nonvoting chair. The Commission was
tasked with agreeing by majority vote on a new legislative
map for the state by November 15, 2021.

8

PALMER V. TREVINO

The 2020 Census data for Washington State showed
significant population growth in the Yakima Valley, a region
in central Washington known for its agriculture, particularly
fruit production. During the Commission’s map
negotiations, a debate arose among the Commissioners over
whether and how the districts in the Yakima Valley needed
to be altered to comply with the Voting Rights Act. At the
center of this debate was the area including and to the east of
the Yakama Nation Reservation, which would become
Legislative District 15 (“LD 15”).
On November 16, 2021, the Commission unanimously
approved a new legislative district map (“the Enacted
Map”). The Legislature adopted the map, with minor
adjustments, in February 2022.
Susan Soto Palmer and other voters in Washington
State’s Yakima Valley (“collectively Soto Pamer”) filed suit
against Washington State and its Secretary of State (“the
State”), alleging that the Enacted Map, especially the
configuration of LD 15, diluted their votes and deprived
them of an equal opportunity to elect the candidates of their
choice, in violation of Section 2 of the Voting Rights Act.
Jose Trevino, Alex Ybarra, and Ismael Campos
(“Intervenors”) were granted permissive intervention by the
district court. Trevino is a Latino voter who was re-sorted
from LD 15 under the Enacted Map to the new LD 14 under
the district court’s remedial map. Ybarra is a Washington
state legislator representing LD 13 and also a voter in that
district. Campos is a registered Latino voter in LD 8.
After conducting a four-day bench trial, the district court
determined that Latinos in the Yakima Valley formed a
geographically compact community of interest. According
to the district court, the boundaries of LD 15 illegally

PALMER V. TREVINO

9

“cracked” 1 that community, thereby depriving them of an
equal opportunity to elect candidates of their choice in
violation of Section 2.
The district court then requested that the Commission
draw a remedial district. When the Commission “declined,”
the court drew its own map, relying in part on briefs and
remedial proposals from Soto Palmer. Intervenors and the
State elected not to submit any proposed maps by the court’s
deadline. Later, Intervenors offered a map that failed to
remedy the Section 2 violation. The court considered this
proffered map despite its untimeliness. Intervenors offered
feedback on the proposed maps, which Soto Palmer revised
in response. Upon learning that Soto Palmer’s Map 3A was
the court’s likely preferred alternative, Intervenors requested
an evidentiary hearing. Following a hearing, the court
imposed an adjusted version of Map 3A, known as Plaintiffs’
Map 3B (the “Remedial Map”). Intervenors timely appealed,
seeking to vacate the Remedial Map. That appeal was
consolidated with Intervenors’ earlier timely appeal on
liability. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
Analysis
I. District Court’s Jurisdiction
We begin with Intervenors’ challenge to the district
court’s jurisdiction. Although Intervenors conceded below
that a single-judge court could hear Soto Palmer’s statutory
claims, Intervenors now argue that the single-judge district
court lacked jurisdiction. They claim that 28 U.S.C. § 2284
requires a three-judge panel for statutory as well as
“Cracking means dividing a party’s supporters among multiple districts
so that they fall short of a majority in each one.” Gill v. Whitford, 585
U.S. 48, 55 (2018) (quoting allegations in the complaint).

1

10

PALMER V. TREVINO

constitutional challenges to state legislative districts. Section
2284(a) provides: “A district court of three judges shall be
convened when otherwise required by Act of Congress, or
when an action is filed challenging the constitutionality of
the apportionment of congressional districts or the
apportionment of any statewide legislative body.”
Intervenors read the phrase “the constitutionality of” to
modify only “the apportionment of congressional districts,”
and not “the apportionment of any statewide legislative
body.” Thus, in their view, Section 2284 requires that
statutory as well as constitutional challenges to the
apportionment of state legislative districts be heard by three
judges, not one.
We do not share Intervenors’ strained interpretation of
Section 2284’s plain language. The most natural reading is
that a three-judge district court must be convened to hear a
statutory challenge when such a court is “required by Act of
Congress.” And, in the absence of such congressional
guidance, a three-judge district court must be convened only
for a constitutional challenge to legislative apportionment,
whether state or federal.
Although the text is unambiguous, the relevant
interpretive canon corroborates our reading of the statute.
The series-qualifier canon instructs that “[w]hen several
words are followed by a clause which is applicable as much
to the first and other words as to the last, the natural
construction of the language demands that the clause be read
as applicable to all.” Porto Rico Ry., Light & Power Co. v.
Mor, 253 U.S. 345, 348 (1920). Under this principle, “the
constitutionality of” should be read to apply to “the
apportionment of any statewide legislative body” as well as
to “the apportionment of congressional districts.” See

PALMER V. TREVINO

11

Thomas v. Reeves, 961 F.3d 800, 803 (5th Cir. 2020) (en
banc) (Costa, J., concurring).
The statutory history further buttresses our interpretation
of the text. Historically, general provisions for three-judge
district courts concerned only constitutional questions. See
Act of March 3, 1911, ch. 321, 36 Stat. 1162 (requiring that
any interlocutory injunction against a state statute issued
“upon the ground of the unconstitutionality of such statute”
be “heard and determined by three judges”); Act of February
13, 1925, ch. 229, 43 Stat. 938 (extending the three-judge
requirement to “the final hearing in such suit in the district
court”); Act of August 24, 1937, ch. 754, 50 Stat. 752
(creating a three-judge procedure for “interlocutory or
permanent injunction[s]” against “any Act of Congress upon
the ground that such Act or any part thereof is repugnant to
the Constitution of the United States”).
In 1948, Congress consolidated general references to the
three-judge procedure into a single short chapter—Chapter
155—of the U.S. Code. See Act of June 25, 1948, ch. 646,
62 Stat. 968. Section 2281, mirroring the Act of 1911, barred
single district court judges from issuing injunctions for
constitutional reasons against state statutes. 28 U.S.C.
§ 2281 (injunction “upon the ground of the
unconstitutionality of such statute”) (repealed 1976). Section
2282, mirroring the Act of 1937, did the same for federal
statutes. 28 U.S.C. § 2282 (“for repugnance to the
Constitution of the United States”) (repealed 1976). Sections
2281 and 2282 required that applications for such
constitutional injunctions be “heard and determined by a
district court of three judges under section 2284 of this title.”
Id. Section 2284 incorporated external statutory directives
by noting that “any action or proceeding required by Act of

12

PALMER V. TREVINO

Congress to be heard and determined by a district court of
three judges” would follow its procedures. 2 Id.
In 1976, Sections 2281 and 2282—related to
constitutional injunction of federal and state statutes—were
repealed. Concurrently, Section 2284 was amended to the
current text now in dispute: “A district court of three judges
shall be convened when otherwise required by Act
of Congress, or when an action is filed challenging the
constitutionality of the apportionment of congressional
districts or the apportionment of any statewide legislative
body.” The first clause in the statute continued the function
of Section 2284 as it had been since 1948—to ensure that
three-judge courts required by an act of Congress would
uniformly follow the congressionally-mandated procedures.
The second clause of the statute, though narrowing the
general requirement for three-judge courts to only
apportionment challenges, is best read to otherwise reflect
the historic constitutional focus of Sections 2281 and 2282
and their predecessors.
Thus, since the inception of the three-judge court, its
convocation has been generally required only for
constitutional challenges, or as otherwise specifically
required by explicit directive in a separate statute. More than
a century of statutory evolution underscores the consistency
Such independent directives appeared, for instance, in a statute
designed to expedite antitrust suits, Act of February 11, 1903, ch. 544,
32 Stat. 823; a statute providing for judicial review of orders of the
Interstate Commerce Commission, Act of June 29, 1906, ch. 3591, 34
Stat. 584, 592; and (of special interest here) Sections 4, 5, and 10—but
not Section 2—of the Voting Rights Act. Pub. L. 89-110, 79 Stat. 437
§§ 4(a), 5, 10(c) (directing actions pursuant to those subsections to be
“heard and determined by a court of three judges in accordance with the
provisions of section 2284 of title 28 of the United States Code”).

2

PALMER V. TREVINO

13

of this approach, including in the modern Section 2284. The
action in the district court was undisputedly a statutory one.
The district court’s decision “deal[t] only with the Section 2
claim.” (Even though Intervenors now raise constitutional
issues on appeal, that does not transform what was before the
district court below.) Intervenors cannot, of course, point to
any “Act of Congress” that requires actions under Section 2
of the Voting Rights Act to be undertaken by a three-judge
court under the procedures of Section 2284. In the absence
of such a congressional mandate, “a district court of three
judges” under Section 2284 is not required for a statutory
challenge to the apportionment of state legislative bodies.
No court has adopted Intervenors’ reading. On the
contrary, the Supreme Court has affirmed the judgment of a
single-judge district court in a Section 2 challenge to a state
legislative apportionment scheme. See Allen v. Milligan, 599
U.S. 1, 16 (2023) (noting that the actions involving
constitutional challenges “were consolidated before [a]
three-judge Court . . . while [a statutory challenge]
proceeded before Judge Manasco on a parallel track”).
There, as here, the single-judge district court had jurisdiction
over the action.
II. Standing
We now assess whether Intervenors have standing to
bring this appeal. Intervenors allege racial gerrymandering
under the Equal Protection Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment, as well as vote dilution under Section 2 of the
Voting Rights Act, and they challenge both the liability
determination and the Remedial Map. “We consider [each
Intervenor’s] standing on a claim-by-claim basis.” Valley
Outdoor, Inc. v. City of Riverside, 446 F.3d 948, 952 (9th
Cir. 2006).

14

PALMER V. TREVINO

A. Standing as to the Liability Determination
Given the absence of traceability and redressability, none
of the Intervenors has standing to challenge the liability
determination.
Trevino, the voter who was re-sorted from LD 15 under
the Enacted Map to the new LD 14 under the Remedial Map,
alleges an injury of racial classification. In the context of a
racial-gerrymandering claim, “racial classification itself is
the relevant harm.” Alexander v. S.C. State Conf. of the
NAACP, 602 U.S. 1, 38 (2024). Trevino also alleges that he
is suffering ongoing injury from “special representational
harms” inflicted because of that classification. United States
v. Hays, 515 U.S. 737, 745 (1995).
To sustain standing, Trevino’s alleged injuries must be
“fairly traceable to the judgment below”—that is, each
judgment he challenges here: the liability determination and
the injunction. West Virginia v. EPA, 597 U.S. 697, 718
(2022) (emphasis omitted) (quoting Food Mktg. Inst. v.
Argus Leader Media, 588 U.S. 427, 433 (2019)). An injury
is fairly traceable if “the links in the proffered chain of
causation are not hypothetical or tenuous and remain
plausible.” Idaho Conservation League v. Bonneville Power
Admin., 83 F.4th 1182, 1188 (9th Cir. 2023) (quoting Ass’n
of Irritated Residents v. EPA, 10 F.4th 937, 943 (9th Cir.
2021)).
Curiously, Intervenors have not provided any evidence
that, in reaching its liability determination, the district court
classified them based on their race. They barely argue that
the determination classified anyone. After all, in racial
classification cases, plaintiffs typically allege that “race
predominated in the drawing of a district.” Alexander, 602
U.S. at 38 (emphasis added). Trevino did not plausibly allege

PALMER V. TREVINO

15

that the district court, in determining that the Enacted Map
violated Section 2, used race, classified Trevino by race, or
treated him unequally based on his race. Nor has Trevino
alleged that the liability determination “required [him] to do
anything or to refrain from doing anything” because of his
race or otherwise. Food & Drug Admin. v. All. for
Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. 367, 385 (2024).
In the absence of evidence, Intervenors resort to the
rhetoric that Trevino’s injury is traceable to the liability
determination, because racial classification is “inherent to
Section 2 remedies” and so “inexorably” results from
Section 2 liability determinations. We disagree.
While in many cases redistricting implicates racial
considerations, those challenges rest on “unequal
treatment,” Adarand Constructors, Inc. v. Pena, 515 U.S.
200, 228 (1995), or a constitutionally prohibited “use of
race,” Miller v. Johnson, 515 U.S. 900, 914 (1995); see also
Stephen Menendian, What Constitutes A “Racial
Classification”?: Equal Protection Doctrine Scrutinized, 24
Temp. Pol. & Civ. Rts. L. Rev. 81, 85 (2014) (“[I]t is the
further use of [racial] classification . . . that generally raises
constitutional concerns.”). This general principle holds in
the racial-gerrymandering context, where standing is
accorded citizens who are “able to allege injury as a direct
result of having personally been denied equal treatment.”
Hays, 515 U.S. at 746 (cleaned up). Even if it is possible to
trace a racial-classification injury to a liability
determination, Trevino has not done so, because he has not
plausibly alleged that the specific method or substance of
that determination somehow made race-based treatment in
the remedial phase more likely. Because Trevino’s alleged
harm arose only from the alleged use of race in crafting the

16

PALMER V. TREVINO

Remedial Map and bears no connection to the liability
judgment, he lacks standing to challenge the latter. 3
Ybarra, the Washington state legislator, alleges two
harms: increased campaign expenditures and reduced
chances of reelection. At the time of this appeal, the 2024
election for the Washington state legislature had not yet
occurred.
Ybarra’s past harms do not support his standing. Because
the Intervenors seek only prospective relief, harms Ybarra
suffered in the 2024 election are past and cannot support his
standing. Ybarra is not “seek[ing] a remedy that redresses
[his] injury.” Uzuegbunam v. Preczewski, 592 U.S. 279, 282
(2021).
As for his alleged future harms, Ybarra has not
demonstrated “a sufficient likelihood that he will again”
potentially suffer increased campaign expenditures. City of
Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95, 111 (1983). He has not
declared any intention of running again for state legislative
office, and even if we could divine such an intent, Ybarra
There are additional reasons to view Intervenors’ traceability argument
with skepticism. At the close of the liability phase, Trevino’s assertions
of future racial classification were purely speculative. As the State put it,
“there were lots of ways the district court could have enacted a remedy
that didn’t affect Mr. Trevino in the slightest.” Importantly, the district
court’s challenged resolution in the remedial process—the conduct
giving rise to Intervenors’ alleged harms—was not foreseeable or on the
table at the time of the liability determination. Upon making its liability
determination, the district court requested that the state redistricting
commission take up the task of drawing a remedial map. The anticipated
remedy flowing from the liability determination was a baton-pass to an
independent decisionmaker. The liability finding was just that—striking
down a portion of the map but with no resolution as to how the map
would end up.
3

PALMER V. TREVINO

17

has provided no reason to believe that increased
expenditures associated with meeting new constituents on an
expedited timeline will persist. Constituents who were
unfamiliar to him leading up to the 2024 election have since
become familiar to him, and they will remain familiar in
2026 and beyond.
An unfounded concern regarding an unspecified future
election, in which Ybarra may not even participate, does not
allege a “real and immediate threat of repeated injury.” Bates
v. United Parcel Serv., Inc., 511 F.3d 974, 985 (9th Cir.
2007) (en banc) (quoting O’Shea v. Littleton, 414 U.S. 488,
496 (1974)).
The claim that Ybarra’s chances of reelection may be
reduced does not support standing as to the liability
determination, because it is not traceable to that judgment.
Intervenors proffered hardly any chain of causation leading
back to the liability order, let alone a “plausible” one. Idaho
Conservation League, 83 F.4th at 1188. Ybarra’s alleged
electoral disadvantage—a 0.64% decrease in the Republican
lean of his district, from 63.85% to 63.21%—flows from
which constituents were subsequently sorted into and out of
LD 13. The liability order had no assured impact whatsoever
on LD 13. Nor did the order determine which of LD 13’s
constituents might be removed or which constituents from
other districts might be added. Any chain of causation from
the liability determination to Ybarra’s injury is too tenuous
to support standing.
Intervenors declined to defend the standing of Campos,
the voter in LD 8. Unlike Trevino, Campos does not allege
that he was resorted into a different district under the
Remedial Map. Having provided no clue as to what harm he
might have suffered, Campos does not have standing.

18

PALMER V. TREVINO

B. Standing as to the Remedial Map
Standing as to the Remedial Map also poses a roadblock
for Intervenors. No Intervenor has standing to challenge the
Remedial Map under Section 2. However, at least one
Intervenor, Trevino, does have standing to challenge the
Remedial Map under the Fourteenth Amendment.
1. No Intervenor has standing to bring a challenge
against the Remedial Map under Section 2
Intervenors seek to challenge the Remedial Map as an
illegal remedy under Section 2. We note at the outset that
Intervenors have not brought their own Section 2 claim. In
fact, Intervenors’ Section 2 arguments contradict the heart of
their position. Throughout this litigation, they have
strenuously denied that Section 2 applies at all to the Yakima
Valley—contesting every one of the district court’s findings
regarding the Gingles preconditions. 4 To now seek to utilize
Section 2 is strange indeed. Even if their attempt is made in
good faith, it fails.
Intervenors do not have a freestanding right to attack the
district court’s remedial decision. See Diamond v. Charles,
476 U.S. 54, 68 (1986). Because no other party joins them in
The Court in Thornburg v. Gingles, 478 U.S. 30 (1986), developed a
framework for evaluating claims brought under Section 2 of the Voting
Rights Act. Plaintiffs alleging a Section 2 violation must first satisfy
three “preconditions,” id. at 50: first, whether the minority group is
sufficiently compact and numerous to have “the potential to elect a
representative of its own choice in some single-member district,” Growe
v. Emison, 507 U.S. 25, 40 (1993); second, whether the minority
population has “expressed clear political preferences that are distinct
from those of the majority,” Old Person v. Cooney, 230 F.3d 1113, 1121
(9th Cir. 2000) (citation omitted); and third, whether the majority votes
sufficiently as a bloc “usually to defeat the minority’s preferred
candidate,” id. at 1122 (quoting Gingles, 478 U.S. at 51).

4

PALMER V. TREVINO

19

this appeal, Intervenors must demonstrate that they
individually satisfy the requirements of Article III. Id.; see
also Arizonans for Off. Eng. v. Arizona, 520 U.S. 43, 64
(1997) (standing on appeal “in the place of an original
defendant, no less than standing to sue, demands that the
litigant possess a direct stake in the outcome” (internal
marks and citations omitted)). As usual, Intervenors must
make this showing claim-by-claim. Valley Outdoor, Inc.,
446 F.3d at 952.
Intervenors do not endeavor to justify their standing with
respect to the Remedial Map. They have failed to adequately
allege the only injury that supports a Section 2 claim. “Under
[Section] 2, by contrast [to the equal protection context], the
injury is vote dilution.” League of United Latin Am. Citizens
v. Perry, 548 U.S. 399, 433 (2006). At most, Intervenors
merely imply an injury of vote dilution. The only evidence
proffered tending to show vote dilution is that the Hispanic
Citizen Voting-Age Population (“HCVAP”) declined
slightly, from 52.6% in the Enacted LD 15 to 50.2% in the
Remedial LD 14. But a vote dilution claim in the
redistricting context involves a holistic analysis of the
relative opportunities for political participation of various
groups, considering the specific political dynamics of a
given region. Taken alone, the bare assertion of a marginally
diminished group is not enough to show, let alone permit
reasonable inference of any change in the effectiveness of
any Intervenor’s vote or other individualized disadvantage
to any Intervenor’s political participation. The Supreme
Court has repeatedly reiterated that voters of a particular race
cannot be assumed to “think alike, share the same political
interests, [or] prefer the same candidates at the polls.” Shaw
v. Reno (“Shaw I”), 509 U.S. 630, 647 (1993). We decline to
infer from Intervenors’ allegations that the vote of Jose

20

PALMER V. TREVINO

Trevino, the only Intervenor who lives in the new LD 14, has
been diluted merely because he is Hispanic and will now
vote alongside fewer Hispanics.
2. At least one Intervenor has standing to bring an
equal protection challenge against the
Remedial Map.
Trevino’s asserted racial-classification injury is a
cognizable harm in the context of racial gerrymandering, as
is any representational harm that may flow from such
classification. Alexander, 602 U.S. at 38; Hays, 515 U.S. at
745. The alleged classification occurred when Trevino was
“specifically moved from Enacted LD 15 to Remedial LD
14” under the district court’s Remedial Map. Contrary to
Soto Palmer’s arguments, the standing analysis does not
require us to decide whether the Remedial Map actually
classified voters by race; that is a question left to analysis on
the merits.
Trevino’s grievance is sufficiently individualized under
Hays, which requires only that the party reside in an
allegedly racially gerrymandered district. 515 U.S. at 744–
45. No one disputes that Trevino’s change from one district
to the other is traceable to the Remedial Map. And the
remedy Trevino seeks—vacatur of the Remedial Map—
could redress his ongoing representational harms as a
registered voter in LD 14. See Shaw v. Hunt (“Shaw II”), 517
U.S. 899, 904 (1996) (concluding that registered voters and
residents of a district subject to a racial-gerrymandering
claim had standing to seek prospective relief). Trevino
therefore has standing to bring an equal protection claim
against the Remedial Map. Because Trevino has standing on
this claim, we need not assess standing for either Ybarra or
Campos. Rumsfeld v. Forum for Acad. & Institutional Rts.,

PALMER V. TREVINO

21

Inc., 547 U.S. 47, 52 n.2 (2006) (“[T]he presence of one
party with standing is sufficient to satisfy Article III’s caseor-controversy requirement.”).
III. Forfeiture
Although Trevino has standing to bring an equal
protection challenge against the Remedial Map, he may have
forfeited that challenge by failing to make it in the district
court. It is well established that “we generally will not
consider arguments raised for the first time on appeal,
although we have discretion to do so.” In re Am. W. Airlines,
Inc., 217 F.3d 1161, 1165 (9th Cir. 2000).
Intervenors argue that they preserved their equal
protection challenge by asserting their Fourteenth
Amendment rights in their statement of interest seeking
intervention. Notably, that argument was not directed at the
Remedial Map—not could it have been—because the map
had not yet been drawn. Intervenors also claim that they
made an equal protection argument at the evidentiary
hearing on Map 3A, which the district court granted at
Intervenors’ request. But the hearing transcript reflects only
one question about whether Soto Palmer’s map-drawing
expert “kn[e]w if [P]laintiffs’ counsel consulted any racial
or political data.” Taken alone, this single inquiry is
insufficient to preserve the equal protection argument.
At oral argument, Intervenors complained that they had
little time to raise an equal protection argument during the
remedial phase. In fact, they had plenty of opportunities.
They could have raised the issue at the hearing on Map 3A,
among their multiple written objections to Soto Palmer’s
map proposals, or as part of the presentation of their own
alternative map. Even after the district court selected Map

22

PALMER V. TREVINO

3B as the Remedial Map, they could have moved to amend
or set aside the judgment. But they did not.
That said, “[t]he matter of what questions may be taken
up and resolved for the first time on appeal is one left
primarily to the discretion of the courts of appeals, to be
exercised on the facts of individual cases.” Singleton v.
Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 121 (1976). There is “no general rule,”
but “a federal appellate court is justified in resolving an issue
not passed on below . . . where injustice might otherwise
result.” Id. (internal marks and citation omitted). Despite the
deficiencies in Intervenors’ equal protection challenge, we
recognize that this case is suffused with concerns about
equal treatment under the law. In our view, given the nature
of the challenge, an injustice might result from dismissal of
this case without a substantive analysis of the equal
protection claim as it pertains to the Remedial Map. We
therefore turn to the merits.
IV. Remedial Map
Intervenors challenge the Remedial Map on several
grounds, including their characterization that the map
represents an unconstitutional racial gerrymander, an abuse
of the district court’s discretion, and a further dilution of
Latino voting strength. These claims are ambiguously styled
and could be construed as arguments under the Equal
Protection Clause or Section 2. However, because
Intervenors lack standing to bring a Section 2 challenge, we
consider their arguments only under an equal protection
framework.
To demonstrate that a map is an unconstitutional racial
gerrymander, Intervenors must prove that “race was the
predominant factor motivating the [map drawer’s] decision
to place a significant number of voters within or without a

PALMER V. TREVINO

23

particular district.” Cooper v. Harris, 581 U.S. 285, 291
(2017) (quoting Miller, 515 U.S. at 916). Importantly, not all
mentions of race trigger strict scrutiny, and the mere fact that
the district court was “aware of racial considerations” does
not indicate that the court was “motivated by them.” North
Carolina v. Covington, 585 U.S. 969, 978 (2018) (quoting
Miller, 515 U.S. at 916).
If race predominated in the redistricting process, then
“the design of the district must withstand strict scrutiny.”
Cooper, 581 U.S. at 292. Nothing in the record, however,
supports a claim that race predominated in the redistricting
process. To the contrary, the district court accomplished
three distinct, non-racial objectives when it adopted a map
that: (1) “starts with, and avoids gratuitous changes to, the
enacted map while remedying the Voting Rights Act
violation at issue”; (2) “keeps the vast majority of the lands
that are of interest to the Yakama Nation together”; and
(3) “is consistent with the other state law and traditional
redistricting criteria.” In particular, the map minimizes
population deviations, maintains district compactness, and
creates districts of contiguous, traversable territory that do
not unnecessarily split counties, cities, or precincts. The
Remedial Map stands.
A. LD 14’s Shape
The shape of LD 14 itself does not reflect that race
predominated in the district court’s construction of the
Remedial Map. In Intervenors’ view, the shape of LD 14 is
so exceptional that it is “unexplainable-except-by-racialgrounds,” and therefore presumptively unconstitutional.
Indeed, we recognize that when a district is “so extremely
irregular on its face that it rationally can be viewed only as
an effort to segregate the races for purposes of voting,” strict

24

PALMER V. TREVINO

scrutiny applies. Bush v. Vera, 517 U.S. 952, 958 (1996)
(quoting Shaw I, 509 U.S. at 642). No such irregularity
triggers strict scrutiny here. Despite Intervenors’ rhetoric
denigrating LD 14 as an “octopus slithering along the ocean
floor” akin to the “sacred Mayan bird” and “bizarrely shaped
tentacles” in Bush v. Vera, LD 14’s shape is neither unusual
nor “extremely irregular on its face” as Intervenors
suggest—and nowhere near as inexplicable as the districts in
Shaw and Bush v. Vera. Vera, 517 U.S. at 958, 965, 974.
A visual review of LD 14 (Figure 1) reveals a district
that, like many of the other districts in Washington, is
essentially a large contiguous tract with only a small portion
surrounding another district. In contrast, District 12 in Shaw
I (Figure 2) was a noncompact squiggle that ran, like a river,
directly through the middle of multiple other districts.
Districts 18, 29 and 30 in Bush v. Vera (Figure 3) were
similarly irregular, with complex, interlocking borders;
narrow corridors; and strange protrusions. The districts’
bizarre, noncompact shapes were evidence that Texas had
“substantially neglected traditional districting criteria such
as compactness, that it was committed from the outset to
creating majority-minority districts, and that it manipulated
district lines to exploit unprecedentedly detailed racial data.”
Vera, 517 U.S. at 962. The shapes of the three districts
reflected an “utter disregard for traditional redistricting
criteria” and were “ultimately unexplainable on grounds
other than” race. Id. at 976 (addressing Districts 18 and 29);
see also id. at 971 (discussing how District 30’s shape
similarly “reveal[s] that political considerations were
subordinated to racial classification in the drawing of many
of the most extreme and bizarre district lines”). The Texas
districts look more like inkblots of a Rorschach test than
legislative districts.

PALMER V. TREVINO

Figure 1: Remedial Map 3A.

Figure 2: The electoral map in Shaw I. 509 U.S. at 659 (App'x)
(District 12 colored in green).

25

26

PALMER V. TREVINO

Figure 3: Districts 18, 29, and 30 in Bush v. Vera. 517 U.S. at 986
(App'x A-C).

Here, unlike in Shaw I or Vera, rational, non-racial
explanations readily support the shape of LD 14. Soto
Palmer notes that the challenged protrusions were added to
“include the Yakama Nation’s off-reservation trust lands and
fishing villages in the same district as its reservation” to
address Intervenors’ objection that the proposed map did not
include off-Reservation trust land. To the extent LD 14’s
shape is in any way unusual, it is directly attributable to
Intervenors’ own requests during the remedial process–not
to any improper racial considerations. In short, LD 14’s
shape alone does not subject it to strict scrutiny.
B. Alternative Maps
In equal protection challenges to redistricting plans,
alternative plans can “serve as key evidence” of racial
predominance. Cooper, 581 U.S. at 317. But the alternative
maps here do not supply such proof.
Intervenors point to Plaintiffs’ Maps 4 and 5 and their
own map, offered by Dr. Trende, as evidence that the district
court could have adopted a less disruptive map. Based on our
review of the record, the district court carefully considered
all proposed remedial maps and ultimately selected Map 3A

PALMER V. TREVINO

27

because it was most “consistent with traditional redistricting
criteria. It seems to remedy the Voting Rights Act violation,
even with a relatively low LCVAP. It keeps tribal lands
together . . . and it avoids another cross-Cascade [mountains]
district.”
The district court’s rejection of Maps 4 and 5 on the
grounds of traditional redistricting principles does not
suggest that the district court improperly considered race by
adopting a variant of Map 3A. Significantly, the district
court considered and rejected Intervenors’ proposed map for
failure to remedy the Section 2 violation.
For each of Intervenors’ proffered alternatives, the
district court rejected the alternative maps on race-neutral
grounds. The district court’s thoughtful attention to the
details of the maps, population and voter numbers, and
viable alternatives does not furnish evidence of racial
predominance. Instead, it confirms that race was not the
predominant factor in shaping the map.
C. Intent to Remedy Section 2 Violation
Finally, the record does not otherwise support a claim
that “race was the predominant factor motivating the [map
drawer’s] decision to place a significant number of voters
within or without a particular district.” Cooper, 581 U.S. at
291 (quoting Miller, 515 U.S. at 916). We acknowledge that
“[a]pplying traditional equal protection principles in the
voting-rights context is ‘a most delicate task.’” Shaw II, 517
U.S. 899, 905 (1996) (quoting Miller, 515 U.S. at 905). And
we are especially cognizant of our obligation to “exercise
extraordinary caution in adjudicating claims that a State has
drawn district lines on the basis of race.” Miller, 515 U.S. at
916. The “[Supreme] Court has long recognized,” however,
“[t]he distinction between being aware of racial

28

PALMER V. TREVINO

considerations and being motivated by them,’” Covington,
585 U.S. at 978 (quoting Miller, 515 U.S. at 916). The mere
mention of race is not enough to trigger strict scrutiny. Race
must be more than “a motivation” to trigger strict scrutiny;
it must be “the predominant factor,” “subordinating
traditional race-neutral districting principles to racial
considerations.” Easley v. Cromartie, 532 U.S. 234, 241
(2001) (cleaned up). Although this map was configured by
the district court and not the state legislature, we afford the
same “presumption of good faith” to the district court.
Miller, 515 U.S. at 916.
Intervenors identify two points in the district court
proceedings that supposedly demonstrate race’s
predominance in the decision-making: first, the district
court’s recognition that a “fundamental goal of the remedial
process” is to “unite the Latino community of interest in the
region,” and second, the district court’s rejection of
Intervenors’ proof-of-concept map because it failed to unite
the Latino community in the Yakima Valley.
These references are far from sufficient to show that race
predominated. The Supreme Court has distinguished
between racial classification and the unification of “tangible
communities of interest.” Miller, 515 U.S. at 919 (internal
marks and citation omitted). As the Court counseled: “A
State is free to recognize communities that have a particular
racial makeup, provided its action is directed toward some
common thread of relevant interests.” Id. at 920. That is
precisely what the district court did here. Experts testified
that communities in the larger Yakima Valley were
dependent on the agriculture and dairy industries, had large
Spanish-speaking and first-generation populations, shared
housing access issues due to substandard and overcrowded
farmworker housing, and shared common migration patterns

PALMER V. TREVINO

29

and historical experiences of racism in the region. Unlike in
Miller, where “[a] comprehensive report demonstrated the
fractured political, social, and economic interests” of the
minority population, here, the Latino community in the
Yakima Valley evinces the “common thread of relevant
interests” rendering it a “tangible communit[y] of interest.”
Id. at 919–20 (internal marks and citation omitted). An intent
to unify that political community is not tantamount to a
predominantly racial motivation.
Even if race—as distinct from belonging in a political
community—were “a motivation” in the district court’s
actions, which it was not, that motivation alone would not
trigger strict scrutiny. The touchstone is whether race
predominates in shaping the configuration. In Cromartie, the
Court held that a map drawer’s direct admission that a
challenged redistricting plan sought “racial balance” in a
congressional delegation, even if it “shows that the
legislature considered race, along with other partisan and
geographic considerations . . . “sa[id] little or nothing about
whether race played a predominant role comparatively
speaking.” 532 U.S. at 253 (emphasis in original).
To bring that point home, in Miller, the record supported
a finding of racial predominance where the state admitted
that certain counties would not have been excluded or
included “but for the need to include additional black
population in that district,” and that the need to create
majority-black districts required the state to “violate all
reasonable standards of compactness and contiguity.” 515
U.S. at 918–19 (emphasis added) (cleaned up). Here, in
contrast, the district court considered traditional, raceneutral districting principles throughout the remedial
process, including minimizing total population deviation;
ensuring the reasonable shape, compactness, and contiguity

30

PALMER V. TREVINO

of affected districts; keeping together the lands of interest to
the Yakama Nation; and maintaining partisan
competitiveness of the impacted districts. The district court
did not subordinate these race-neutral redistricting principles
to race when it drew the Remedial Map.
D. Intervenors’ Other Arguments
Intervenors’ remaining objections to the Remedial Map
do not support a claim that race predominated. Intervenors
now contend that too many Washingtonians were moved
into new districts, that the Remedial Map’s partisan
composition now favors Democrats, and that incumbents
were harmed.
We begin by noting that the factual record furnishes only
limited support for Intervenors’ objections, which are, in any
case, not germane to the issue of racial predominance. For
instance, Intervenors claim that 500,000 of Washington’s
approximately 7.7 million residents were moved into new
districts, whereas Plaintiffs suggest that the number is nearly
100,000 fewer. Intervenors also assert that the Remedial
Map was drawn to benefit Democrats, whereas both
Plaintiffs and the district court note that the Remedial Map
“confer[red] no gain or loss to any party beyond LDs 14 and
15, and the overall partisan tilt of the legislative map remains
slightly Republican, just as in the enacted plan.”
But even accepting Intervenors’ view of the facts, these
arguments, which center on the political lean of the new LD
14, are not obviously relevant to Intervenors’ claim that the
Remedial Map was an illegal racial gerrymander. They are
objections based on partisanship, not race. The equal
protection challenge is grounded in race, not partisanship.

PALMER V. TREVINO

31

Intervenors’ remaining arguments—that the Remedial
Map improperly lowered the HCVAP of LD 15 from 51.1%
to 50.2% (based on the 2021 census), that LD 14 is an
improper coalition or crossover district, and that the
Remedial Map altered too many districts to remedy the
Section 2 violation—also do not bear on the question of
whether race predominated in the district court’s
redistricting process.
Conclusion
The district court properly exercised jurisdiction over the
challenge to the Remedial Map. Section 2284 does not
require a three-judge court for a statutory challenge to
redistricting under the Voting Rights Act. Although
Intervenors lack standing to appeal the liability finding and
lack standing as to the Section 2 claims under the Voting
Rights Act, they have standing to challenge the Remedial
Map on equal protection grounds. The appeal of the liability
order is dismissed for lack of jurisdiction. The appeal of the
remedial order and judgment is also dismissed for lack of
jurisdiction, except for Intervenors’ equal protection claims,
as to which we affirm the district court. Intervenors shall
bear the costs of appeal.
AFFIRMED IN PART and DISMISSED IN PART
FOR LACK OF JURISDICTION.

