FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
BRIAN CALDRONE, an individual;
JOSEPH CELUSTA, an individual;
KATHLEEN STAATS, an
individual,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.

No. 24-1432
D.C. No.
5:21-cv-00749GW-kk
OPINION

CIRCLE K STORES INC., a Texas
Corporation,
Defendant - Appellee,
and
CROSS AMERICA PARTNERS,
LP, a Delaware Limited Partnership,
Defendant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
George H. Wu, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 6, 2025
Pasadena, California

2

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

Filed October 3, 2025
Before: Andrew D. Hurwitz, Eric D. Miller, and Jennifer
Sung, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Miller
SUMMARY *
Employment Discrimination
The panel reversed the district court’s grant of summary
judgment in favor of Circle K Stores, Inc., and remanded, in
an employment discrimination action brought under the Age
Discrimination in Employment Act and the California Fair
Employment and Housing Act.
Three plaintiffs alleged that Circle K illegally denied
them the opportunity to apply for, and ultimately secure, a
promotion to West Coast regional director because of their
age. Applying the McDonnell Douglas three-step burdenshifting framework, the district court concluded that
plaintiffs failed to establish a prima facie case giving rise to
an inference of discrimination because they did not apply for
the regional director position. The district court concluded,
alternatively, that at step two of the McDonnell Douglas
analysis, Circle K offered a legitimate, nondiscriminatory
justification for its decision, and at step three, plaintiffs did

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

3

not establish a triable issue whether the proffered reason was
a pretext for discrimination.
To establish a prima facie case of age discrimination,
plaintiffs must demonstrate that (1) they were at least 40
years old, (2) they were qualified for the position they
sought, (3) they were denied the position, and (4) the
promotion was given to a substantially younger person. The
panel held that to establish the second component, plaintiffs
are not required to demonstrate that they submitted an
application when, as here, their employer declines to solicit
applications and does not announce that a position is
available. The panel also held that, although ten years is the
presumptive threshold for a substantial age difference, a
plaintiff can overcome that presumption by producing
additional evidence to show that the employer considered his
or her age to be significant.
Because all three plaintiffs therefore established a prima
facie case, the panel proceeded to steps two and three of the
McDonnell Douglas analysis. At step two, Circle K
articulated a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for
selecting another candidate to be West Coast regional
director by asserting that he was the only person to express
interest in the position, and his prior experience as the
Southeast regional director made him uniquely suited for the
role. At step three, however, plaintiffs presented enough
evidence to create a triable issue on pretext, making
summary judgment inappropriate.

4

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

COUNSEL
Joseph S. Klapach (argued), Klapach & Klapach PC,
Sherman Oaks, California; Shelly D. McMillan, McMillan
& Herrell, Los Angeles, California; for PlaintiffsAppellants.
Maria C. Rodriguez (argued), Amanda D. Murray,
Christopher A. Braham, and Elvira R. Kras, McDermott Will
and Emery LLP, Los Angeles, California; for DefendantAppellee.

OPINION
MILLER, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiffs Brian Caldrone, Joseph Celusta, and Kathleen
Staats are former employees of Circle K Stores, a chain of
convenience stores and fuel stations with nearly 10,000
North American locations. Plaintiffs sued Circle K for
employment discrimination, alleging that Circle K denied
them a promotion because of their age. The district court
granted summary judgment to Circle K. We reverse and
remand.
I
Before 2020, plaintiffs were employed at Circle K as
Dealer Business Managers (DBMs). Among other
responsibilities, DBMs assist fuel station operators by
providing advice on pricing, customer service, and station
appearance. DBMs report to regional directors who oversee
particular geographic areas.

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

5

Plaintiffs were, by all accounts, exemplary DBMs. They
each received strong performance reviews and earned
company awards for their work. Their performance put them
in line for promotion to the regional-director level, an
opportunity in which they all expressed interest.
Around January 2020, the position of West Coast
regional director became available. Despite their impressive
track records and indications of interest in promotion,
plaintiffs were not given a chance to apply for the position.
Instead, without soliciting applications, Circle K chose Miko
Angeles for the role. Angeles had previously served as the
Southeast regional director and, before that, as a DBM. At
the time, Caldrone, Celusta, and Staats were 54.4, 55.8, and
56.9 years old, respectively. Angeles was 45.2 years old.
Plaintiffs sued Circle K in California state court. Circle
K removed the case to federal district court and moved to
dismiss. Two claims survived Circle K’s motion to
dismiss—one under the federal Age Discrimination in
Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA), Pub. L. No. 90-202, 81
Stat. 602 (29 U.S.C. §§ 621 et seq.), and one for age
discrimination under the California Fair Employment and
Housing Act (FEHA), Cal. Gov’t Code §§ 12900 et seq.
Both claims were premised on the theory that Circle K
illegally denied plaintiffs the opportunity to apply for, and
ultimately secure, the promotion to West Coast regional
director because of their age. (As plaintiffs acknowledge,
there is only one position at issue here, so all three plaintiffs
could not have been promoted to it. That fact may affect the
jury’s determination of liability and any award of damages,
but it is not relevant to the issues before us.)
Circle K moved for summary judgment, and the district
court applied the three-step burden-shifting framework

6

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

established in McDonnell Douglas Corp. v. Green, 411 U.S.
792 (1973). Under that framework, the plaintiff has the
initial burden of establishing a prima facie case giving rise
to an inference of discrimination. Id. at 802. If the plaintiff
carries that burden, the burden shifts to the employer to
proffer a legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for its
decision. Id. If the employer does so, the burden shifts back
to the plaintiff to prove that the proffered reason is a pretext
for discrimination. Id. at 804.
The district court held that establishing a prima facie
case required plaintiffs to show that they applied for the
West Coast regional-director position. Because plaintiffs
conceded that they did not apply for the position, the district
court determined that their claims failed at step one. In doing
so, the district court rejected plaintiffs’ asserted justification
for their failure to apply: that Circle K did not call for
applications, as it had in the past. It concluded that plaintiffs’
evidence demonstrating that Circle K had a policy of
soliciting applications internally was inadmissible hearsay
and that, even if such a policy existed, there was no evidence
that Circle K’s deviation from that policy in this instance was
motivated by ageist animus. In addition, the district court
concluded that Caldrone could not establish a prima facie
case because he is only 9.3 years older than Angeles, an age
gap too small to give rise to a presumption of discrimination.
See France v. Johnson, 795 F.3d 1170, 1174 (9th Cir. 2015).
Although the district court’s step-one determinations
resolved plaintiffs’ claims, the district court also presented
an alternative analysis under the remaining steps of the
McDonnell Douglas framework. At step two, the district
court held that Circle K had offered a legitimate,
nondiscriminatory justification for its decision: that Angeles
was the only one to express interest in the position and that

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

7

his prior experience as the Southeast regional director made
him uniquely qualified.
The district court thus proceeded to the final step of the
McDonnell Douglas framework. To show pretext, plaintiffs
first pointed to evidence that George Wilkins, the Circle K
executive who they claim selected Angeles to be a regional
director, exhibited animus by disparaging older employees
because of their age and pushing them to retire. But the
district court dismissed that evidence as irrelevant because it
concluded that the evidence showing that Wilkins selected
Angeles was inadmissible hearsay.
Plaintiffs also attempted to show pretext by offering
declarations explaining that Angeles performed poorly as the
Southeast regional director and, before that, as a DBM,
which—if credited—would undermine Circle K’s
explanation that Angeles was uniquely qualified for the role.
The district court dismissed that evidence too, concluding
that it merely reflected the declarants’ “opinion” about
Angeles’s performance and was too speculative to create a
triable issue on pretext.
The district court entered judgment for Circle K, and
plaintiffs appealed. “We review a district court’s grant of
summary judgment de novo and, viewing the evidence in the
light most favorable to the non-movant, determine whether
there are any genuine issues of material fact and whether the
district court correctly applied the relevant substantive law.”
Teradata Corp. v. SAP SE, 124 F.4th 555, 572 (9th Cir.
2024) (quoting Honey Bum, LLC v. Fashion Nova, Inc., 63
F.4th 813, 819 (9th Cir. 2023)).

8

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

II
The ADEA makes it unlawful for an employer to
“discriminate against any individual with respect to his
compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of
employment, because of such individual’s age.” 29 U.S.C.
§ 623(a)(1). To show that an employer took an adverse
action “because of” age, “a plaintiff must prove that age was
the ‘but-for’ cause of the employer’s adverse decision.”
Gross v. FBL Fin. Servs., Inc., 557 U.S. 167, 176 (2009). A
plaintiff can make such a showing using the three-part
burden-shifting framework established in McDonnell
Douglas. See O’Connor v. Consolidated Coin Caterers
Corp., 517 U.S. 308, 311 (1996); France, 795 F.3d at 1173.
A similar analysis applies to the FEHA claim. See Guz v.
Bechtel Nat’l, Inc., 8 P.3d 1089, 1113 (Cal. 2000)
(explaining that “[b]ecause of the similarity between state
and federal employment discrimination laws, California
courts look to pertinent federal precedent,” including
McDonnell Douglas, in FEHA age-discrimination cases).
Like the district court, we begin by assessing whether
plaintiffs established a prima facie case of age
discrimination. See McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802. In
failure-to-promote cases, we have held that establishing a
prima facie case requires plaintiffs to demonstrate that
(1) they were at least 40 years old at the time, (2) they were
qualified for the position they sought, (3) they were denied
the position, and (4) the promotion was given to a
substantially younger person. See France, 795 F.3d at 1174;
Shelley v. Geren, 666 F.3d 599, 608 (9th Cir. 2012); see also
29 U.S.C. § 631(a) (limiting the protections of the ADEA “to
individuals who are at least 40 years of age”). There is no
dispute that the plaintiffs established the first and third
components.

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

9

The district court concluded that plaintiffs could not
establish the second component because they did not apply
for the West Coast regional-director position. We
acknowledge that the language of some of our cases suggests
that the plaintiff must apply for the position in question. For
instance, in Shelley, we articulated the second component as
requiring the plaintiff to show that he was “qualified for the
position for which an application was submitted.” 666 F.3d
at 608 (emphasis added). And in Steckl v. Motorola, Inc., we
held that a plaintiff established a prima facie case because
“[h]e was clearly within the protected class, had applied for
an available position for which he was qualified, and was
denied a promotion which was given to a younger person.”
703 F.2d 392, 393 (9th Cir. 1983) (emphasis added).
That requirement makes sense in many cases. If an
employer selects a candidate for promotion from a pool of
applicants, it is reasonable to infer that a plaintiff who fails
to put himself in the running has that failure—and not any
protected characteristic—to blame for not being promoted.
But the Supreme Court has explained that “the specification
. . . of the prima facie proof required from [a plaintiff] is not
necessarily applicable in every respect to differing factual
situations.” McDonnell Douglas, 411 U.S. at 802 n.13; see
also Furnco Constr. Corp. v. Waters, 438 U.S. 567, 575
(1978) (explaining, in a racial-discrimination case, that the
four-part prima facie case “was not intended to be an
inflexible rule”). And it makes little sense to require
plaintiffs to demonstrate that they submitted an application
when an employer declines to solicit applications and does
not announce that a position is available.
That is the lesson of Reed v. Lockheed Aircraft Corp.,
613 F.2d 757 (9th Cir. 1980). There, we reviewed the district
court’s grant of summary judgment to an employer in a sex-

10

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

discrimination case under Title VII of the Civil Rights Act
of 1964. See id. at 758–59. Reed brought a failure-topromote claim, alleging that Lockheed favored men when
evaluating candidates for promotion and selection for
training programs. See id. at 761. Lockheed argued that Reed
could not state a claim under Title VII because she “never
was personally denied admission to a training program or
denied promotion.” Id. at 761. But we described that as
“immaterial” because Reed alleged that employees at
Lockheed “did not apply for training or for promotion but
instead had to be sought out.” Id. We declined to penalize
Reed for failing to submit an application because
Lockheed’s system of promotion denied her “notice of an
opening.” Id.
So too here. Plaintiffs’ theory of the case is that Circle K
declined to accept applications for the West Coast regionaldirector position because it wanted to handpick a younger
candidate. Circle K concedes that it did not seek
applications, asserting that it “decided there was no need to
open the [role] for applications, internally or externally,
because Angeles laterally moving into the West Coast
Regional Director position was a decision that made
business sense for Circle K.” As in Reed, Circle K’s decision
not to accept applications obviated plaintiffs’ obligation to
submit them.
Contrary to the district court’s understanding, it does not
matter why Circle K did not open the West Coast regionaldirector position to applications. Plaintiffs need not show
that Circle K somehow acted improperly in not soliciting
applications. The ADEA does not require an employer to
solicit applications, or, indeed, to use any specific process in
deciding which employees to promote. At the first step of the
McDonnell Douglas inquiry, the question is simply whether

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

11

the plaintiff has established that the employer took actions
that, if inadequately explained, give rise to an inference of
age discrimination. See EEOC v. Metal Serv. Co., 892 F.2d
341, 348 (3d Cir. 1990); White v. City of San Diego, 605 F.2d
455, 458 (9th Cir. 1979). And if plaintiffs had no way to
submit an application—whatever the reason—their failure to
do so does nothing to weaken any inference of age
discrimination that the other elements of the prima facie case
create. Because there is no dispute that Circle K did not give
plaintiffs the opportunity to apply for the West Coast
regional-director position, plaintiffs have established the
second component of a prima facie case.
Although the parties agree that Celusta and Staats
established the fourth component of a prima facie case, the
district court held that Caldrone could not do so because
Angeles is only 9.3 years younger than Caldrone and
therefore is not “substantially younger” than him. O’Connor,
517 U.S. at 313; France, 795 F.3d at 1174. In France, we
held that “an average age difference of ten years or more
between the plaintiff and the replacements will be
presumptively substantial, whereas an age difference of less
than ten years will be presumptively insubstantial.” 795 F.3d
at 1174.
Although 10 years is the presumptive threshold for a
substantial age difference, a plaintiff can overcome that
presumption by “producing additional evidence to show that
the employer considered his or her age to be significant.”
France, 795 F.3d at 1174; accord Hartley v. Wisconsin Bell,
Inc., 124 F.3d 887, 893 (7th Cir. 1997) (“Ten years is a
reasonable threshold . . . . Yet the line we draw is not so
bright as to exclude cases where the gap is smaller but
evidence nevertheless reveals the employer’s decision to be
motivated by the plaintiff’s age.”). In France, the plaintiff

12

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

successfully rebutted the presumption with evidence that the
hiring manager “explicitly expressed a preference for
promoting younger [employees]” and “had repeated
retirement discussions with [the plaintiff] soon before the
posting of the [vacancy], in spite of [the plaintiff’s] personal
inclination not to retire.” 795 F.3d at 1174. That evidence,
we concluded, sufficed to show that the employer
“considered age in general to be significant in making its
promotion decisions, and that [the hiring manager]
considered [the plaintiff’s] age specifically to be pertinent in
considering [the plaintiff’s] promotion.” Id.
Caldrone produced similar evidence. Celusta declared
that George Wilkins—the Circle K executive who plaintiffs
assert chose Angeles—told him that he was “out of touch”
and “too old for this business” after he told Wilkins that he
was 56. Wilkins also encouraged Celusta to “start thinking
about retiring.” Thomas Maloney, who previously served as
the Midwest regional director, declared that Gerardo
Valencia—Wilkins’s boss—“press[ed] [him] to remove
older employees for no business reasons.” And Staats
declared that Maloney told her that Valencia and Wilkins
“wanted only younger people with MBAs.” That evidence
may or may not convince a jury that the ultimate promotion
decision was based on age, but for purposes of establishing
a prima facie case, it creates an issue of fact about whether
Circle K “considered age in general to be significant in
making its promotion decisions.” France, 795 F.3d at 1174.
We recognize that, unlike the plaintiff in France,
Caldrone has not offered evidence that Circle K “considered
[his] age specifically to be pertinent in considering [his]
promotion.” France, 795 F.3d at 1174. In France, however,
we did not consider whether such plaintiff-specific evidence
is required to overcome the presumption, much less hold that

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

13

it is. Id. Rather, we explained that “[t]he plaintiff can
produce either direct or circumstantial evidence to show that
the employer considered age to be a significant factor,” and
we described the nature of the evidence that the plaintiff
presented to explain our conclusion that his evidence was
sufficient. Id. In any event, Circle K has not argued that
France requires evidence at that level of particularity.
Instead, its position appears to be that Caldrone has not
provided any admissible evidence to overcome the
presumption that his 9.3-year age gap is insignificant. As
demonstrated above, that is incorrect. We therefore conclude
that Caldrone has established a prima facie case of age
discrimination.
Because all three plaintiffs established a prima facie
case, we proceed to step two of the McDonnell Douglas
framework, which requires Circle K to articulate a
legitimate, nondiscriminatory reason for selecting Angeles
to be the West Coast regional director. See 411 U.S. at 802–
03. As noted, Circle K asserts that it selected Angeles
because he was the only person to express interest in the
position and because his prior experience as the Southeast
regional director made him uniquely suited for the role.
Those are legitimate, nondiscriminatory rationales.
We therefore move to the final step of the McDonnell
Douglas framework, which requires plaintiffs to raise a
triable issue of fact whether a facially legitimate rationale
was pretextual. See 411 U.S. at 804. Plaintiffs may do so
“either directly by persuading the court that a discriminatory
reason likely motivated [the employer] or indirectly by
showing that [the employer’s] proffered explanation is
unworthy of credence.” Diaz v. Eagle Produce Ltd. P’ship,
521 F.3d 1201, 1212 (9th Cir. 2008) (quoting Snead v.

14

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

Metropolitan Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co., 237 F.3d 1080, 1093–
94 (9th Cir. 2001)).
Plaintiffs have presented enough evidence to create a
triable issue on pretext. First, there is the evidence, recounted
above, that Wilkins made ageist comments to older
employees, expressed a desire to promote younger
candidates, and encouraged older employees to retire. The
district court deemed that evidence irrelevant because it
believed that plaintiffs had not produced any admissible
evidence showing that Wilkins was involved in the selection
of Angeles.
That was error. Maloney declared that it was Circle K’s
policy for the vice president to whom the regional director
would report to select that regional director. When Angeles
was selected to be the West Coast regional director, Wilkins
was the vice president to whom the new West Coast regional
director was to report. A jury crediting that evidence could
reasonably infer that Circle K followed its internal policy in
this instance, which would mean that Wilkins selected
Angeles. And if the jury also credited the evidence about
Wilkins’s ageist animus, it could reasonably infer that he
denied plaintiffs the opportunity to seek the West Coast
regional-director position because of their age.
Second, plaintiffs offered evidence that casts doubt on
the quality of Angeles’s experience at Circle K. Maloney
declared that Angeles’s performance as the Southeast
regional director was woefully subpar. According to
Maloney’s declaration, Angeles was responsible for 231
dealers as the Southeast regional director but managed to
meet with only 10. And although regional directors are
expected to visit each State in their region at least quarterly,
Angeles traveled to Florida and North Carolina only once in

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

15

more than a year. The situation, in Maloney’s telling,
became so bad that he was “forced to assist [Angeles] with
management of his region by managing some of his DBMs.”
Nor does it appear to be undisputed that Angeles
produced a record as a DBM that was worthy of promotion.
Maloney declared that as his direct report, Angeles was
“timid and lacking confidence, . . . interpersonal skills,
industry knowledge, . . . entrepreneurial vision, [and] general
leadership skills.” Angeles’s productivity scores put him in
the 30th percentile of his DBM peer group. So extreme was
Angeles’s underperformance that Maloney declared that he
ought to have been disqualified from promotion under Circle
K’s policies. The district court dismissed this evidence in a
footnote, characterizing it as nothing more than Maloney’s
“opinion.” Even so, that opinion was based on objective
performance metrics—metrics that a jury could infer that
Circle K management likely knew about.
Third, plaintiffs have produced evidence suggesting that
Circle K’s decision not to advertise the West Coast regionaldirector position to its employees was a deviation from its
standard policy. Plaintiffs presented four declarations stating
that when a position became available, Circle K would
inform its employees of the vacancy either through email or
its intranet. Because it is undisputed that Circle K knew
about plaintiffs’ interest in a promotion, a jury could infer
that this deviation was an attempt to prevent plaintiffs from
applying for the role. That would undercut Circle K’s
explanation that it chose Angeles because he was the only
person to express interest in the position.
The district court concluded that the declarations were
inadmissible hearsay. Under Federal Rule of Evidence 801,
hearsay is an out-of-court statement offered “to prove the

16

CALDRONE V. CIRCLE K STORES INC.

truth of the matter asserted in the statement.” Plaintiffs’
declarations were not offered to establish the truth of any
out-of-court statements but merely to establish Circle K’s
pattern of conduct—namely, its prior practice of announcing
vacancies. Although the declarations arguably refer to outof-court statements—the job listings themselves—plaintiffs
are not offering those statements for their truth because they
are not attempting to show that the positions at issue in the
prior announcements actually were available. All that
matters is that the statements were made and that they
provide evidence of a policy of posting job openings
internally. The declarations are not hearsay.
The district court also determined that, even if Circle K
had a policy of posting jobs internally at some point before
2020, there was no evidence that its deviation from that
policy in this instance was motivated by ageist animus. But
that is what a jury could infer if plaintiffs succeed in proving
that Circle K’s decision not to post the vacancy was a
deviation from its normal policy, made with knowledge of
plaintiffs’ interest in a promotion. Plaintiffs have thus raised
a material dispute of fact as to whether Circle K’s proffered
explanation for selecting Angeles was pretext for illegal
discrimination, making summary judgment inappropriate.
REVERSED and REMANDED.

