FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 23-2282
D.C. No.
3:20-cr-00228-SI-1

v.
ROBERT J. JESENIK,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 23-2308
D.C. No.
3:20-cr-00228-SI-3

v.
ANDREW N. MACRITCHIE, AKA
Andrew MacRitchie,
Defendant - Appellant.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 23-2316
D.C. No.
3:20-cr-00228-SI-4

2

USA V. JESENIK

v.
BRIAN K. RICE,
Defendant - Appellant.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 24-5402
D.C. No.
3:20-cr-00228-SI-3

v.
ANDREW N. MACRITCHIE, AKA
Andrew MacRitchie,
Defendant - Appellant.

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 24-5404
D.C. No.
3:20-cr-00228-SI-1

v.
ROBERT J. JESENIK,
Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Michael H. Simon, District Judge, Presiding

USA V. JESENIK

3

Argued and Submitted April 2, 2025
San Francisco, California
September 5, 2025
Before: Andrew D. Hurwitz, Lucy H. Koh, and Anthony D.
Johnstone, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Hurwitz
SUMMARY*
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed three defendants’ convictions arising
out of the failure of Aequitas Management LLC, an
investment management company.
Former Aequitas executives Robert Jesenik, Andrew
MacRitchie, and Brian Rice were convicted of wire fraud
and conspiracy to commit wire fraud. Jesenik was also
convicted of making a false statement on a loan application.
The defendants contended that although they were
charged in the operative indictment only with engaging in
material misrepresentations and misleading half-truths, they
may have been improperly convicted on an omissions theory
of fraud without instructions requiring proof of a trusting
relationship. Rejecting this contention, the panel wrote
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

4

USA V. JESENIK

(1) evidence of what the defendants did not disclose is
probative of the materiality of a half-truth or
misrepresentation, (2) the government did not argue that
omissions alone were sufficient to prove fraud or present that
theory to the jury, (3) the government sufficiently tethered
non-disclosures to affirmative statements, and (4) the jury
instructions fairly stated the law. Whether statements about
Aequitas’s financial health were misleading half-truths,
rather than general claims of financial success or subjective
enthusiasm and puffing, was properly a question for the jury.
The panel rejected Rice’s challenge to the sufficiency of
the evidence to support his conviction.
The panel rejected the defendants’ contentions that they
were precluded from presenting a complete defense—
arguments centered on disclosures in Private Placement
Memoranda
(PPMs)
and
audited
financial
statements. Consistent with other circuits that have
addressed the issue, the panel held that contractual
disclaimers do not render immaterial other representations in
criminal wire fraud prosecutions. For the same reason, the
panel rejected the argument that the defendants’
representations in sales pitches and marketing materials
were immaterial to “accredited” investors. Nor did the
district court err in admitting evidence of investors’ reliance
on those representations.
Finding no abuse of discretion in the district court’s
denial of a proposed jury instruction on “objective”
materiality, the panel held that the instructions given to the
jury fairly and adequately covered whether representations
in sales pitches and marketing materials were material.
The panel rejected the defendants’ claims that the jury
was prevented from considering defense theories about

USA V. JESENIK

5

elements other than materiality. To the extent the defendants
challenged the district court’s preclusion of evidence about
investor negligence or non-reliance, their argument is
foreclosed. The district court’s evidentiary rulings did not
prevent the defendants from urging legitimate disclosurebased defenses, and the jury instructions adequately covered
the defendant’s good-faith defense theory. The panel
rejected the defendants’ assertion that they were prejudiced
by the government’s statement in closing that “you can’t
disclose your way out of fraud.”
The panel addressed other issues in a concurrently filed
memorandum disposition.

6

USA V. JESENIK

COUNSEL
Hannah Horsley (argued) and Ryan W. Bounds, Assistant
United States Attorneys; Suzanne Miles, Criminal Appellate
Chief; Natalie K. Wight, United States Attorney; Office of
the United States Attorney, United States Department of
Justice, Portland, Oregon; Christopher Cardani, Assistant
United States Attorney, Office of the United States Attorney,
United States Department of Justice, Eugene, Oregon; for
Plaintiff-Appellee.
Jessica G. Snyder (argued) and Conor Huseby, Assistant
Federal Public Defenders; Elizabeth G. Daily, Appellate
Chief; Office of the Federal Public Defender, Portland,
Oregon; Anna M. Estevao (argued), Claire B. Buck, and
Michael Tremonte, Sher Tremonte LLP, New York, New
York; Angelo J. Calfo (argued), Angeli & Calfo LLC,
Seattle, Washington; Henry C. Phillips, Morgan Lewis &
Bockius LLP, Seattle, Washington; Brendan J. Anderson,
Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP, Washington, D.C.; for
Defendants-Appellants.

USA V. JESENIK

7

OPINION
HURWITZ, Circuit Judge:
This case arises out of the failure of an investment
management company. After the company was placed in
receivership, Robert Jesenik, Andrew MacRitchie, and Brian
Rice, former executives of the company, were indicted and
eventually convicted of wire fraud and conspiracy to commit
wire or mail fraud. Jesenik was also convicted of making a
false statement on a loan application.
Each defendant has timely appealed.
We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 and affirm the
convictions for the reasons in this opinion and in a
concurrently filed memorandum disposition.
I.
Facts and Procedural Background
A. Facts1
Aequitas Management LLC, an investment management
company, was founded in the 1990s by Robert Jesenik, its
Chief Executive Officer. Andrew MacRitchie, its Chief
Compliance Officer, joined the company in 2007, and Brian
Rice, an Executive Vice President, joined in 2014.
In the mid-2000s, Aequitas began purchasing discounted
receivables from hospitals, later expanding to other
businesses, and collected the debt through its affiliates.
Sellers of the receivables executed recourse contracts,
1

We recite the facts in the light most favorable to the government, the
prevailing party below. See, e.g., United States v. Halbert, 640 F.2d
1000, 1008 (9th Cir. 1981) (per curiam).

8

USA V. JESENIK

agreeing to repurchase defaulted debt. Aequitas solicited the
funds to purchase receivables through its Private Note
Program (“Private Note”), managed by its affiliate Aequitas
Commercial Finance (“ACF”), which issued secured
subordinated promissory notes to investors. Starting in late
2014, Aequitas also solicited private investments through
the Income Opportunity Fund II (“IOF II”) and Luxembourg
Bond (“Lux Bond”). 2 Between June 2014 and February
2016, the period covered by the indictment, Aequitas raised
approximately $346 million from private investors,
including $167 million through Private Note, $68 million
through IOF II, and $15 million through the Lux Bond.
Aequitas’s investors were required to be “accredited”
under wealth and sophistication standards set by the
Securities and Exchange Commission (“SEC”) for
participation in the Regulation D private securities market.
A majority were represented by Registered Investment
Advisors (“RIAs”), some of whom also invested their own
funds.
Investors were typically solicited through in-person sales
pitches by Aequitas executives, sometimes using marketing
materials such as a “tear sheet,” a one- or two- page
summary of the investment, or a longer “pitch deck.” Before
investors’ funds were released to Aequitas, they signed a
subscription agreement and acknowledged reading a Private

2

IOF II was a standalone fund, offering senior promissory notes,
marketed to Registered Investment Advisors (“RIAs”). The Lux Bond
was a debt instrument offered to European investors through a limited
partnership in the Cayman Islands.

USA V. JESENIK

9

Placement Memorandum (“PPM”), a lengthy document
describing the terms and potential risks of the investment.3
By 2014, one of Aequitas’s largest receivables assets
was student loan debt from Corinthian College. Because of
defaults, Aequitas was receiving cash payments of about $4
million per month from Corinthian under a recourse
agreement. But Corinthian stopped paying in June 2014 and
later filed for bankruptcy.
Aequitas accordingly faced dire short-term cash
shortfalls. In response, it offered investors “blue-light
specials,” promissory notes with short redemption periods
and high interest rates. It also persuaded some investors to
delay redemptions. These measures, however, provided
only short-term relief. The shortfalls were exacerbated by
Aequitas’s spending on new offices, private jets, and
corporate retreats.
The SEC began an investigation into Aequitas in the
spring of 2015. In November 2015, Aequitas stopped paying
Private Note redemptions, and in January 2016, it defaulted
on its obligations to the Private Note investors. The
company collapsed in March 2016 and was placed in
receivership.
B. The Indictment
After Aequitas collapsed, Jesenik, MacRitchie, and Rice
were indicted on one count of conspiracy to commit mail and
wire fraud, 18 U.S.C. § 1349; 28 counts of substantive wire
fraud, 18 U.S.C. § 1343; and one count of conspiracy to
commit money laundering, 18 U.S.C. § 1956(h). Jesenik
3

Consistent with the trial witnesses and the parties, we refer to
subscription agreements, PPMs, and financial statements as “written
disclosures” to distinguish them from written marketing materials.

10

USA V. JESENIK

was also charged with one count of making a false statement
on a loan application, 18 U.S.C. § 1014. Three other
Aequitas executives—Brian Oliver, an Executive Vice
President; Olaf Janke, Chief Financial Officer through early
2015; and Scott Gillis, Chief Financial Officer thereafter—
entered guilty pleas to various charges. Oliver and Janke
testified for the government at the joint trial of Jesenik,
MacRitchie, and Rice.
The operative indictment alleged that the three
defendants solicited investments through “material
misrepresentations and misleading half-truths” about “the
uses of investor money, the financial health and strength of
Aequitas, Aequitas’s investments and investment strategies,
and the inherent risks of those investments and investment
strategies.” In particular, it alleged that the defendants
represented to investors that their funds would be used to
purchase receivables, but that Aequitas actually “used the
majority of new investor money to repay prior investors and
to pay operating expenses,” because it “was consistently in
liquidity and cash-flow crises.” It also alleged that Aequitas
“concealed [the] material facts” that it had “insufficient
collateral to secure the notes it sold to investors,” and that
the most valuable of its purported assets was an
intercompany loan used as an artifice to conceal
“accumulating operating losses.”
C. Trial
1. The Government’s Case
The government’s case focused on false or misleading
statements to investors in sales pitches, discussions of
existing investments, and marketing materials.
The
government presented evidence that the defendants misled

USA V. JESENIK

11

investors about “how their money was going to be used” and
“how secure their investments were.”
Investors testified extensively about the importance of
marketing materials, especially the tear sheets. One RIA
testified that the tear sheet “is pretty much the bible in our
industry” to explain investments to clients, and that most of
her investors base their investment decisions on the tear
sheets, rather than the “fairly generic” PPM. Other RIAs
explained that the tear sheets were more valuable than the
PPMs for their clients’ investment decisions because a “tear
sheet is concise and tells you exactly what you need to know
about every product you invest in,” while the PPM is so
“voluminous,” “it has things in it that anybody would just
not find.” 4 Tear sheets, updated quarterly, were also the
primary communication from Aequitas to RIAs on “how the
funds are doing.”
Several investors testified at trial about the importance
of verbal communications with Aequitas executives to their
investment decisions. One RIA testified that he would “not
deal with a company” unless he met with top executives,
“the ones who really know what’s going on” and provide
4

When asked to explain the relationship between marketing materials
and the PPM, Aequitas’s general counsel explained:
The PPM was really a lawyer-driven document that
was sort of the CYA to catch all the risk factors and all
the things that could go wrong. The marketing
materials were very much, “Here is how we are going
to invest your money. Here is why investing with us
is a good idea and how you’ll make money if you trust
us to invest your money.”
Aequitas’s head of marketing explained that the PPM was not a sales
tool: “I don’t think [the PPM] was even placed in the shared marketing
folder.”

12

USA V. JESENIK

“the information I need to service my clients.” The RIA
testified that the “verbal communication that I received from
the executives of Aequitas is paramount and far more
significant than the PPM.” Investors testified that based on
their direct communications with the defendants, they
decided to invest in Aequitas, recommend Aequitas to
clients, and keep their money in Aequitas.
One RIA testified that neither Jesenik, Rice, nor
MacRitchie ever talked about the PPM when pitching him,
and another testified that none of the defendants stated that
their oral statements or the tear sheets should be modified by
the PPM. Oliver, Jesenik’s former “No. 2” and head of
fundraising, stated that he only got the sense a “handful” of
times that the disclosures in the PPM changed someone’s
decision to invest after an in-person meeting.
a. False Statements
i. Uses of Investor Funds
Oliver testified that he and Jesenik pitched investors
hundreds of times on “win-win-win-win” investments in
healthcare receivables that purportedly offered a built-in
safety net, high rates of return, and social benefits to
hospitals and patients. Investors found the pitch appealing:
one testified that she was interested in healthcare receivables
because they were “very secure,” “[d]ue to the fact that
insurance companies make their payments for the most part,
and the majority of individuals are honest people and pay
their medical bills.”
For blue-light specials, Oliver explained that he and
Jesenik developed additional talking points to “combat the
potential concerns with investors that the funds are needed
to solve a problem/crisis (cash losses, lawsuit, Corinthian, et
cetera).”
Specially designed marketing materials

USA V. JESENIK

13

highlighted that Aequitas was “seeking short-term liquidity”
to pursue “new financing initiatives.”
Aequitas investors testified that they relied on
representations by each of the defendants that their money
would be used to purchase secure receivables. Consistent
with those representations, Private Note tear sheets stated
throughout the indictment period that investor funds would
be used to buy receivables:
ACF uses proceeds from Private Note
primarily to fund or finance the purchase of
student loan receivables from educational
providers, patient-pay receivables from
healthcare providers, other private credit
strategy receivables and loan portfolios, or
direct collateralized loan and lease
obligations, equities, and secured liquidity
lines to affiliates for general corporate
purposes.
The tear sheet for IOF II stated:
The Aequitas Income Opportunity Fund II
(“IOF II” or the “Fund”) follows a value
investing approach by acquiring or investing
in receivables or loans. IOF II accomplishes
this by investing in receivables, loans and
leases, often at discounted prices, through
Aequitas Capital. Aequitas Capital has
established itself within large and inefficient
credit markets, such as education, healthcare
and private credit, where it provides unique

14

USA V. JESENIK

financing solutions to companies and their
consumers.
The Lux Bond marketing materials indicated that
investments would be backed by “pools of consumer loan
receivables originated through Aequitas Capital’s platform,”
“accessed through structures that provide investors
significant credit enhancement.”
The reality was far different. Charles Foster, a CPA who
performed a forensic accounting of Aequitas during its
receivership, testified that he could not identify “meaningful
amounts” of private investor funds used to buy receivables
during the indictment period.
Aequitas continued to acquire receivables, but largely
through bank financing. Because those receivables were
collateral for the loans, they did not secure the great bulk of
new private investments.
Meanwhile, new private
investments were overwhelmingly used to pay prior
investors and fund operating expenses, because Aequitas’s
remaining cash-generating investments were not profitable
enough to fund its cash needs in the wake of Corinthian’s
default.
In the fall of 2015, the Private Note tear sheet was
revised to state that “ACF uses proceeds from Private Note
primarily to repay prior investors.” Aequitas investors
shown the document at trial testified they would never have
invested had they known this. As one RIA put it, he would
not have invested “a penny” of his clients’ money “[b]ecause
that’s the definition of a Ponzi scheme.”

USA V. JESENIK

15

ii. Security of Investments and Aequitas’s Financial
Health
Oliver testified that a “strong selling point” was that
clients’ investments were secure because, in addition to the
“recourse element,” they were backed by Aequitas’s other
assets. One RIA described Jesenik and Oliver “[t]elling me
about their Private Notes; how successful they have been
over the years; the fact that in 2008 during the credit crisis
their company did not miss any payments to any of their
investors and how prudent they were with the investments
that they made over the years and how they grew their
company over the years.”
Aequitas executives also stressed the company’s assets,
growth, and financial health to reassure concerned investors.
One investor testified that he was convinced Corinthian’s
collapse would have no impact on his investments based on
a letter from Jesenik, MacRitchie, and Janke assuring
investors that their investment was “strongly protected” by
the collateral and cash flow of ACF and its growing portfolio
of investments.
Marketing materials were consistent with these
representations. For example, Private Note tear sheets
indicated that promissory notes were supported by a lien on
all assets of ACF and included a “collateral summary”
showing the total value of ACF’s assets compared to the
Private Note debt. Until revised in the fall of 2015, the
summary indicated that ACF had twice as much collateral as
was owed to them as a group, which was, as one investor

16

USA V. JESENIK

testified, “a very good profile,” and that approximately onethird of this collateral was receivables.5
In fact, only about half the total claimed value of
assets—and only a fraction of ACF’s claimed receivables—
was available as collateral for Private Note holders after
deducting the senior interests of others, such as banks.
Moreover, one of ACF’s largest purported assets,
categorized on tear sheets as “corporate debt,” was a loan to
its parent company, Aequitas Holdings (the “Holdings
Note”), which used the money to pay operating expenses of
other Aequitas affiliates.
This loan, which grew
dramatically during the indictment period, was severely
undercollateralized. According to Foster, by the end of the
indictment period, the debt on the Holdings Note was $180
million, but at least $110 million, and perhaps as much as
$170 million, could not be repaid in the event of liquidation.
On top of this, the value of Aequitas’s third major asset
category—equity investments—was based largely on
unrealized gains in the estimated value of a company that
serviced healthcare receivables. 6 Investors testified that
they would not have invested had they known the true nature
of “corporate debt” or the actual amount of available
collateral.
5

For example, the Q1 2015 tear sheet stated that ACF had assets with a
“collateral value” of $772,259,000 to support $364,822,000 of
“subordinated debt” and $136,721,000 of “senior debt and credit
facilities.” The asset allocation chart listed $113,595,000 in education
credit, $41,832,000 in healthcare credit, $26,505,000 in transportation
credit, and $28,816,000 in consumer and small business credit.
6

The revised Q3 2015 tear sheet removed the “corporate debt” category,
replacing it with “loans to affiliates.” Taken together, equity investments
and loans to affiliates comprised 84% of the assets purportedly backing
Private Note investments.

USA V. JESENIK

17

b. The Defendants’ Roles in the Conspiracy
Jesenik directed solicitation of new investments, efforts
to persuade existing investors to delay redemptions, and use
of new investor funds to manage ongoing cash shortfalls.
Janke testified that “nothing” about Aequitas’s financial
situation “went without his approval.” Jesenik also solicited
investments directly.
MacRitchie oversaw and approved Aequitas’s marketing
materials. He also directly solicited investments, especially
in the Lux Bond, which he established.
Rice managed Aequitas’s sales to RIAs, for whom he
became the primary contact in 2015, and personally solicited
RIA investments in IOF II and Private Note. Rice also
coordinated efforts to fundraise and delay redemptions.
Oliver and Janke testified that the defendants knew they
were misleading investors about the uses of their funds and
security of their investments. Top Aequitas executives,
including the three defendants, were regularly apprised at
executive committee meetings of the company’s financial
situation, including its increasing operating losses and the
value of the Holdings Note. Jesenik and Rice also received
frequent “cash dash” emails, which documented Aequitas’s
urgent cash shortfalls needed to repay prior investors and
fund operating expenses.
Emails documented the
defendants’ coordination of fundraising efforts and
allocation of new investor money to meet these shortfalls.
Two former Aequitas employees, Vanessa Dehaan and
Jessica Cataudella, testified that during compliance testing
in the spring of 2015, they became concerned that Aequitas
was engaging in a Ponzi scheme. They raised their concerns
to MacRitchie, who rebuffed them.

18

USA V. JESENIK

Dehaan and Cataudella then shared their concerns with
Robert Holmen, who became general counsel in June 2015,
shortly after the SEC investigation began. Over the summer
and fall of 2015, Cataudella and Holmen sought to revise
marketing materials and PPMs to accurately reflect
Aequitas’s uses of investor funds and the value of its assets.
In describing those efforts, Cataudella explained that:
So it all has to connect. It all has to match.
One cannot be saying one thing and then
another document say, “Well, we are really
not doing that,” right. So, for instance, if
you’re soliciting investor assets, and you
know that those assets may not be used for its
intended purposes, you can’t have a
backstop, in my view, of a PPM.
....
It means you can’t say to someone, “Well, we
are not going to use your money for what we
say we are going to use” and have that be
okay; have no repercussions made.
In this testimony, Cataudella used a “tongue-in-cheek”
phrase that she said was common in the compliance industry:
“you can’t disclose away fraud.” Investors did not receive
the revised materials until late 2015 and early 2016.
At a meeting attended by MacRitchie and Rice on
September 1, 2015, Holmen raised concerns that Aequitas
was at risk of being unable to pay its investors because ACF
had net negative revenue and net negative equity, and over
$90 million of the then-$150 million Holdings Note was
unsupported by collateral. Holmen also observed that during
July and August, several million dollars raised from IOF II

USA V. JESENIK

19

investors had been transferred to ACF to pay Private Note
investors and operating expenses, and “point[ed] out that
using one set of investors’ money to redeem investors at
100% out of a different fund that is in the red may be deemed
a Ponzi scheme.” Holmen had raised his concerns with
Jesenik the week before.
On September 1, Oliver sent Rice an email expressing
concern that despite Holmen’s warnings of “compliance and
disclosure risks around ACF being viewed as insolvent and
having insufficient asset/collateral value to support the
Private Note holders,” Aequitas would “fall into a false sense
of security that we are in some accounting manner ‘making
money’ when we are in fact burning it at an alarming pace.”
Oliver sent a similar email to MacRitchie, who replied:
To be honest, though, we have been heading
towards this point for a couple of years spending money we don’t have, addicted to
the Private Note investments. . . . We are
heading for a big train wreck, and I don’t
know how we avoid it.
Nonetheless, the defendants continued to solicit investments
through Private Note, IOF II, and the Lux Bond to meet
ongoing shortfalls without disclosing the facts underlying
Holmen’s concerns.
On September 23, 2015, Oliver sent Rice an email about
pitching RIAs on a “short term . . . bridge financing
opportunity” to help Aequitas raise $7-10 million to buy
healthcare receivables, “[s]o we are singing from the same
song sheet.” The “song sheet” email followed an internal
email in which Oliver indicated that because of upcoming
redemptions due to investors, Aequitas would have a $6.5

20

USA V. JESENIK

million shortfall by the end of the month—assuming it could
use $6.4 million of new Lux Bond funds. Chris Bean, an
RIA, testified that Rice told him on September 24 that
Aequitas was “urgently looking for cash” to capitalize on a
“time-sensitive investment opportunity” to “exercise options
on two businesses that were performing well,” and would
offer up to $10 million in Private Note with a 90-day
redemption period and a high interest rate. Based on Rice’s
representations, Bean’s clients committed $4 million during
the following week.
In multiple conversations with Bean during the fall of
2015, Rice did not disclose Aequitas’s liquidity crisis,
difficulty meeting payroll and late redemptions, the SEC
investigation, or Holmen’s concerns. Bean testified that he
would not have invested his clients’ money had he known
these facts or that their money would not be used for a timesensitive receivables investment opportunity.
On September 30, 2015, a European company invested
$5 million in the Lux Bond. MacRitchie then told Gillis that
he “could loan up to $3 M[illion] [to ACF] short term.”
Although Holmen advised that the loan was risky,
MacRitchie authorized it. Nicholas Mavroleon, who helped
solicit Lux Bond investments and witnessed MacRitchie
pitch the Lux Bond to European investors several times,
testified that he had never heard MacRitchie mention the use
of investments for affiliate loans. Mavroleon also testified
that MacRitchie presented the Lux Bond as a “bankruptcy
remote vehicle,” as did the pitch deck. In February 2016,
Aequitas informed the European company it could not repay
the loan.
By early November 2015, Aequitas had stopped paying
Private Note redemptions, and on December 1, Oliver

USA V. JESENIK

21

internally circulated a draft letter explaining this to investors.
Although Holmen had recommended ending Private Note
fundraising on October 30, it continued thereafter, as the
defendants attempted to reassure increasingly concerned
investors. Brett Trowbridge, an investor who was told that
his money would be used to buy receivables, signed a
subscription agreement in November 2015, but delayed
wiring investment funds to Aequitas because he was
concerned about the SEC investigation. Contrary to
Holmen’s advice, Trowbridge was not sent an updated tear
sheet.
Trowbridge met with Oliver and Jesenik in December to
discuss whether the company was healthy and his $1.5
million investment was safe. At the meeting, Jesenik “talked
about the big picture of the business; how well it was going”;
about the company’s expansion to New York and Europe;
and said that the receivables business was “healthy and
good.”
Jesenik assured Trowbridge that the SEC
investigation would be resolved soon, and Oliver said the
company’s cash flow was positive. Neither mentioned
liquidity problems or that Aequitas had stopped paying
redemptions. Trowbridge testified that he would not have
invested had he received the updated tear sheet or Oliver’s
draft letter, and that he felt Jesenik lied to him.
2. The Defense
Jesenik and MacRitchie focused heavily on the PPMs
and other written disclosures, particularly ACF’s audited
financial statements. Jesenik’s counsel argued that:
[I]nformation conveyed to investors by Bob
Jesenik was not a misleading half-truth. . . .
The government wants to make this about

22

USA V. JESENIK

oral pitches and marketing materials, and it is
about that. . . It is about everything investors
were told. Simply put: If there is full
disclosure, there is no fraud, right. There is
no intent to deceive or cheat.
MacRitchie’s counsel similarly argued:
There is no half-truth when the whole truth
was provided. And there is no requirement
that every piece of information be provided
on a one-page marketing piece obviously.
These defendants stressed that documents other than the
tear sheets disclosed critical facts about the use of investor
funds and Aequitas’s finances that were allegedly left out of
verbal discussions and marketing materials. For example,
the Private Note PPM’s “Uses of Proceeds” section
disclosed that some investor funds might be used to pay prior
investors:
The Company generally pays the principal
and interest of Secured Notes from the
proceeds from repayments of loans, leases,
subordinated debt investments and similar
assets of the Company and sales of Company
assets. From time to time, the Company may
use proceeds of the sale of Secured Notes to
repay the principal and interest of previously
issued Secured Notes due principally to the
illiquid nature of many of the Company’s
investments and to the Company’s ongoing
efforts to reduce its weighted average cost of
capital by, in part, replacing Secured Notes

USA V. JESENIK

23

bearing higher interest rates with Secured
Notes bearing lower interest rates.
It also disclosed that “[t]he Company uses proceeds to
provide lines of credit for the benefit of its affiliates,”
including to “[p]rovide working capital and operating
liquidity.” A lengthy appendix of risk factors discussing the
security of investments elaborated that: “from time to time a
significant portion of the collateral securing the Secured
Notes may be in the form of loans or other obligations owed
to the Company by its affiliates.” An October 2014
supplement disclosed Corinthian’s default and the resulting
possibility of a “material adverse effect” on Aequitas’s
“operations and financial performance and its ability to
repay the Secured Notes.”
Both tear sheets and PPMs directed potential investors to
ACF’s financial statements. Serena Morones, a defense
forensic accounting expert, testified that ACF’s audited
financial statements disclosed Aequitas’s loans to affiliates,
including the Holdings Note, and their growth over time.
Morones also testified that the financial statements made
plain that Aequitas had “very negative cash flow,” that most
of its income was from unrealized, non-cash gains, and that
the company depended on borrowing from banks and private
investors to finance its operating losses. She further testified
that, based on other information in the statements, a reader
could “connect the dots” that investor funds were being used
for operating expenses and redemptions.
Jesenik and MacRitchie argued that their written
disclosures showed a lack of intent to defraud. They
believed their investors read the PPMs, “the main document
for explaining how the investment works,” and asserted that

24

USA V. JESENIK

they relied on lawyers and accountants who reviewed the
PPMs and financial statements.
Jesenik and MacRitchie also attacked the credibility of
investors who testified to basing investment decisions on
verbal communications and marketing materials,
emphasizing that RIAs in particular had due diligence
obligations to their clients to read the PPMs and financial
statements. Using the PPMs and financial statements
extensively at trial, defense counsel cross-examined
investors and RIAs, some of whom admitted that these
documents conveyed information allegedly not disclosed by
the defendants or in marketing materials.
For example, Bean, an RIA who invested in September
2015, acknowledged that the Private Note PPM disclosed
that some funds could be used for operating expenses, and
accurately disclosed risks related to cash-flow issues and
insufficient or unavailable collateral, although he considered
these to be worst-case, hypothetical scenarios rather than “a
forecast or an expectation.” Bean also conceded that the
PPM disclosed ACF’s loans to affiliates and that the audited
financial statements disclosed that one of these loans was the
then-$120 million Holdings Note. And he further agreed
that he told his clients that Aequitas’s “balance sheet and
audit report looks great,” even though the financial
statements showed a net income loss of $15 million in 2014;
operating losses; and that a significant amount of ACF’s
income was from unrealized gains in equity investments.
Defense counsel also elicited testimony that Bean and
another RIA had been sued by their clients for due diligence
failures.
Addressing the latter end of the indictment period,
Jesenik argued that he was an honest businessman who

USA V. JESENIK

25

believed in the company and kept fundraising so Aequitas
could survive the “bank run” brought on by the SEC
investigation and exacerbated by the illiquid nature of its
collateral. MacRitchie argued that he was outside the inner
circle and only became aware of Aequitas’s financial
problems in the summer of 2015. Both emphasized that they
supported changes to marketing materials once professionals
told them they were needed.
Rice’s defense was different. He was not alleged to have
become a co-conspirator until February 2015, when he
began receiving “cash dash” emails. Rice argued that any
misrepresentations he made to investors were the result of
misrepresentations the other defendants made to him.
Rice conceded that he was aware of the cash shortfalls
and, later, the Ponzi scheme concern, but thought these were
short-term accounting issues that could be fixed. He argued
that the PPMs and tear sheets existed before he arrived, and,
like his co-defendants, that he supported updating PPMs and
marketing materials in late 2015. Rice also argued that he
did not mislead the RIAs into investing in receivables,
because they had all already been pitched by Jesenik and
Oliver and had done their own due diligence.
D. Verdicts and Sentences
After a six-week trial, a jury returned verdicts finding all
defendants guilty of one count of conspiracy to commit mail
and wire fraud and 28 counts of wire fraud. Jesenik was also
found guilty of making a false statement on a loan
application. 7 Jesenik was sentenced to 168 months of

7

All defendants were acquitted of conspiracy to commit money
laundering.

26

USA V. JESENIK

imprisonment; MacRitchie to 70 months; and Rice to 37
months. All timely appealed.
II.
We first address all defendants’ contention that they may
have been convicted on an invalid legal theory of fraud and
Rice’s challenge to the sufficiency of evidence.
A.
The elements of wire fraud in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1343 are “(1) the existence of a scheme to defraud; (2) the
use of wire, radio, or television to further the scheme; and
(3) a specific intent to defraud.” United States v. Lindsey,
850 F.3d 1009, 1013 (9th Cir. 2017) (quoting United States
v. Jinian, 725 F.3d 954, 960 (9th Cir. 2013)).8 A “scheme to
defraud” requires the use of “material falsehoods.” Id.
(quoting Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1, 20 (1999). “[A]
false statement is material if it has a natural tendency to
influence, or is capable of influencing, the decisionmaker to
whom the statement was addressed.” United States v.
Galecki, 89 F.4th 713, 737 (9th Cir. 2023) (cleaned up).
False statements can include “misleading half-truths,”
see, e.g., United States v. Lloyd, 807 F.3d 1128, 1153 (9th
8

The statute provides that a person commits wire fraud if:
having devised or intending to devise any scheme or
artifice to defraud, or for obtaining money or property
by means of false or fraudulent pretenses,
representations, or promises, [he] transmits or causes
to be transmitted by means of wire, radio, or television
communication in interstate or foreign commerce, any
writings, signs, signals, pictures, or sounds for the
purpose of executing such scheme or artifice [. . .].

18 U.S.C. § 1343.

USA V. JESENIK

27

Cir. 2015); Lustiger v. United States, 386 F.2d 132, 138 (9th
Cir. 1967), representations that are partly true but misleading
“because of [the defendant’s] failure to state additional or
qualifying matter,” Universal Health Servs., Inc. v. United
States ex rel. Escobar, 579 U.S. 176, 188 (2016) (cleaned
up). Even in the absence of a false statement, a conviction
can be based on a failure to disclose material facts. See
United States v. Shields, 844 F.3d 819, 822 (9th Cir. 2016).
But wire fraud can be premised on such an omissions theory
only if the defendant had a special “trusting relationship”
with the victim. Id. at 823. That relationship is not required
in fraud cases premised on misrepresentations, including
half-truths. See Lloyd, 807 F.3d at 1153; United States v.
Benny, 786 F.2d 1410, 1418 (9th Cir. 1986).
The defendants contend that although they were charged
in the operative indictment only with engaging in “material
misrepresentations and misleading half-truths,” the
government really presented an omissions theory at trial. 9
They argue that the district court therefore erred in denying
proposed instructions requiring proof of a trusting
relationship.
“We review de novo whether the Government’s theory
of fraud at trial was legally valid.” United States v.
Milheiser, 98 F.4th 935, 941 (9th Cir. 2024). “[A] general
verdict that may rest on a legally invalid theory” cannot
stand unless we are convinced beyond a reasonable doubt
that presentation of the invalid theory “did not contribute to
the jury’s verdict.” United States v. Yates, 16 F.4th 256,
269–70 (9th Cir. 2021) (cleaned up). Such an error is not
9

The original indictment also alleged the defendants engaged in
“omissions of material facts.” This allegation was dropped in a
superseding indictment.

28

USA V. JESENIK

harmless even “where the verdict is supportable on [another]
ground.” Yates v. United States, 354 U.S. 298, 312 (1957).
B.
The defendants assert that the government improperly
“focused [its case] on non-disclosure alone, rather than
whether omitted information made any affirmative
statement materially misleading.”
They cite the
government’s questioning of investors about whether they
would have invested had they known certain undisclosed
facts and the government’s discussion of that testimony in
closing argument.
They object particularly to the government’s statement
in closing argument that an RIA was “defrauded” because:
Brian Rice failed to disclose liquidity
problems at Aequitas. He failed to disclose
the SEC investigation, the payroll funding, or
that the general counsel of Aequitas had
raised concerns in early September that the
firm was running a Ponzi scheme.
To the extent the defendants argue that it was error for
the district court to allow the government to ask investors
“would you have invested had you known” questions, or to
discuss what the defendants did not disclose, we disagree. It
is well-established that such evidence is probative of the
materiality of a half-truth or misrepresentation. See United
States v. Laurienti, 611 F.3d 530, 549 (9th Cir. 2010)
(approving “[i]f you had known” questions).
And the government did not argue that omissions alone
were sufficient to prove fraud or present that theory to the
jury. Rather, the government elicited extensive testimony

USA V. JESENIK

29

about the relevant affirmative statements when questioning
witnesses about non-disclosures, and stressed these
affirmative statements in closing argument. For example,
RIA Jeff Sica, whose 70 clients had invested a total of $32
million in Private Note, testified that he became concerned
about the security of those investments after Aequitas
refused to redeem a client’s $10 million note when it was
due in April 2015, and only did so two months later.
Sica had previously been assured by Rice that Aequitas
“was very secure; that they had plenty of assets; that business
was great.” Later, when Sica asked why the redemption was
late, Rice told him: “Well, we don’t do a good job managing
our liquidity. So it is not a matter that there are not assets;
it’s [that] the leadership needs to change.” Around the time
of a due diligence visit in October 2015, after Sica had
requested redemption of all his clients’ notes, he told Rice
he suspected Aequitas was a Ponzi scheme, and Rice denied
it. He also testified that Rice continued to pitch him on
Aequitas products and tried to persuade him to delay
redemptions into November 2015. At trial, the government
asked Sica about the facts Rice failed to disclose in the
context of this testimony, and in closing argument, the
government’s comments about what Rice “failed to
disclose” followed discussion of Sica’s interactions with
Rice in the fall of 2015. Thus, the government sufficiently
tethered Rice’s non-disclosures to his affirmative
statements.
C.
The defendants also claim that the district court erred in
denying three proposed instructions: (1) “[a] nondisclosure [
] can support a [wire] fraud charge only when there exists an
independent duty that has been breached by the person so

30

USA V. JESENIK

charged”; (2) “omissions alone are not sufficient to support
a charge of mail or wire fraud”; and (3) “[a]n omission alone
– absent a connection to a half-truth – does not constitute a
misrepresentation.”
“In reviewing jury instructions, the relevant inquiry is
whether the instructions as a whole are misleading or
inadequate to guide the jury’s deliberation.” Lloyd, 807 F.3d
at 1164 (quoting United States v. Dixon, 201 F.3d 1223,
1230 (9th Cir. 2000)). We determine whether an instruction
misstates the law de novo but review its “language and
formulation” for abuse of discretion. United States v.
Rodriguez, 971 F.3d 1005, 1012 (9th Cir. 2020).
Instructions are evaluated “as a whole, and in context,” id.,
and we afford the trial judge “substantial latitude so long as
the instructions fairly and adequately covered the issues
presented,” United States v. Moe, 781 F.3d 1120, 1127 (9th
Cir. 2015) (quoting United States v. Bauer, 84 F.3d 1549,
1560 (9th Cir. 1996)).
At the defendants’ request, the district court defined
“half-truth” in an instruction drawn directly from Universal
Health Servs., Inc., 579 U.S. at 188, and Ninth Circuit Model
Criminal Jury Instruction 15.35. The instruction required the
government to prove that a defendant “knowingly
participated in a scheme or plan to defraud, or a scheme or
plan for obtaining money by means of a false or fraudulent
representations,” and then stated:
Deceitful statements of half-truths may
constitute false or fraudulent representations.
A half-truth is a representation that states the

USA V. JESENIK

31

truth only so far as it goes, while omitting
critical qualifying information.
This instruction fairly stated the law. Had the defendants
been charged under an omissions theory, the government
would have been required to show a relationship giving rise
to a duty to disclose. See Shields, 844 F.3d at 822–23;
United States v. Spanier, 744 Fed. App’x 351, 353–54 (9th
Cir. 2018). But these defendants were not so charged, and
the district court therefore did not err in denying the
defendants’ proposed “independent duty” instruction. See
United States v. Farrace, 805 Fed. App’x 470, 473 (9th Cir.
2020). For the same reason, the district court did not abuse
its discretion in denying the proposed instruction that
“omissions alone are not sufficient to support a charge of
mail or wire fraud” and that “[a]n omission alone – absent a
connection to a half-truth – does not constitute a
misrepresentation.”
Moreover, the district court instructed the jury shortly
after the relevant portion of the government’s closing
argument that because the indictment only alleged
misrepresentations and half-truths, the argument about what
the defendants failed to disclose was only relevant to
whether the defendants made any “deceitful half-truths.”
Using language nearly identical to the defendants’ proposed
instruction, the court then told the jury that “[i]f all we have
is an omission or a failure to disclose, that’s not actionable
here.” That instruction fairly covered the substance of the
defendants’ proposed instruction.
D.
“Puffing concerns expressions of opinion, as opposed to
the knowingly false statements of fact which the law

32

USA V. JESENIK

proscribes.” United States v. Tarallo, 380 F.3d 1174, 1191
(9th Cir. 2004), amended, 413 F.3d 928 (9th Cir. 2005)
(cleaned up). The defendants contend that their statements
about Aequitas’s financial health were merely “generic
claims of financial success” or “subjective enthusiasm and
puffing.” We are not persuaded.
The defendants highlight the government’s emphasis in
closing argument on investors’ testimony that they were
misled by the defendants’ statements that Aequitas was “just
doing outstanding” and “growing very rapidly,” focusing on
a portion of the argument that followed the court’s
supplemental instructions about half-truths and omissions:
All of those things that they were
complaining about in that testimony that I
summarized for you, those were omissions in
service of the half-truths that, “Hey,
everything at Aequitas is going great.”
But given the severe financial straits that Aequitas was in
when these statements were made and the defendants’
knowledge of the company’s finances, a jury could well find
them to be “knowingly false statements of fact.” Tarallo,
380 F.3d at 1191; see United States v. Autuori, 212 F.3d 105,
118–19 (2d Cir. 2000) (finding that a jury could infer that
the defendant’s representations that PPM forecasts were
“good” and “credible”; that a partnership project was “safe”;
and that his prestigious accounting firm “stood behind the
numbers” were not puffing, but rather “representations that
contradicted his honest view”).
The defendants also claim that non-disclosures about
liquidity problems, difficulty paying operating expenses,
and an SEC investigation did not render general statements

USA V. JESENIK

33

about Aequitas’s financial health “half-truths” because they
were insufficiently “tethered” to those claims or did not
“pertain[] to the same topic.” They cite the Supreme Court’s
“classic example of an actionable half-truth”: “the seller who
reveals that there may be two new roads near a property he
is selling, but fails to disclose that a third potential road
might bisect the property.” Universal Health Servs., 579
U.S. at 188–89. In the context of this case, however, the
defendants’ affirmative representations that Aequitas was in
good financial health, made while soliciting purportedly
secure investments in income-generating assets, have a plain
nexus to non-disclosures about liquidity problems, difficulty
paying operating expenses, and an SEC investigation
concerning potential misuse of investor funds. Whether
those representations were misleading half-truths was
therefore properly a question for the jury.
E.
Rice challenges the sufficiency of evidence supporting
his conviction. We must decide whether the evidence,
viewed in the light most favorable to the government, is
sufficient for a “rational trier of fact” to have “found the
essential elements of the crime beyond a reasonable
doubt.” Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 (1979). The
evidence in this case satisfies that forgiving standard.
For example, four RIAs testified that Rice personally
solicited them to invest in receivables during 2015 through
IOF II and Private Note. Starting in February 2015,
however, Rice had received “cash dash” emails indicating
unequivocally that these funds would in fact be used for
payroll and to repay prior investors. And, although
Aequitas’s general counsel told Rice in September 2015 that
Aequitas could be engaging in a Ponzi scheme, Rice

34

USA V. JESENIK

continued to facilitate investor due diligence visits and
solicit investments to meet ongoing urgent cash shortfalls
without disclosing the actual uses of investors’ funds, the
SEC investigation, or that the investments were not secure.
III.
We next address the defendants’ contentions that they
were precluded from presenting a complete defense. These
arguments again center on disclosures in the PPMs and
audited financial statements.
A.
1.
The defendants first assert that the district court erred in
admitting any evidence of representations in sales pitches
and marketing materials, and evidence that investors relied
on these representations. They argue that disclaimers of
reliance in the subscription agreements and PPMs rendered
any representations outside those documents immaterial.10
They also argue that verbal representations and marketing
materials could not be “objectively” material to Aequitas’s
“accredited” investors given the written disclosures,
especially to RIAs with fiduciary duties to their clients.
We disagree. “[T]he focus of the mail fraud statute, like
any criminal statute, is on the violator.” United States v.
10

The Private Note and IOF II PPMs both stated:
No person has been authorized in connection with this
Offering to give any information or make any
representations other than those contained in this
Memorandum or the Transaction documents and, if
given or made, such information or representations
must not be relied upon as having been authorized by
the Company.

USA V. JESENIK

35

Weaver, 860 F.3d 90, 95 (2d Cir. 2017) (per curiam)
(cleaned up). Proof of a scheme to defraud does not require
showing that a victim relied on the defendant’s falsehoods;
it is sufficient that falsehoods were material. Lindsey, 850
F.3d at 1014. Materiality, as opposed to reliance, is an
objective measure of a representation’s “tendency to
influence” “the decisionmaker to whom [it] was addressed.”
Galecki, 89 F.4th at 737 (cleaned up); see also Lindsey, 850
F.3d at 1013–14.
Whether a representation has a tendency to influence a
decisionmaker is not the same question as whether the
decisionmaker would be justified in relying on it. Justifiable
reliance is relevant to civil liability for fraud, but not to
criminal liability. See Neder, 527 U.S. at 24–25; see also
Weaver, 860 F.3d at 95. Thus, consistent with other circuits
that have addressed the issue, see, e.g., Weaver, 860 F.3d at
95–96; United States v. Lucas, 516 F.3d 316, 339–40 (5th
Cir. 2008); United States v. Ghilarducci, 480 F.3d 542, 547
(7th Cir. 2007), we hold that contractual disclaimers do not
render immaterial other representations in criminal wire
fraud prosecutions.
For the same reason, we reject the argument that the
defendants’ representations in sales pitches and marketing
materials were immaterial to “accredited” investors. To be
sure, “materiality is judged in relation to the persons to
whom the statement is addressed.” Galecki, 89 F.4th at 737
(cleaned up). But “the wire fraud statute protects the naive
as well as the worldly-wise.” United States v. Ciccone, 219
F.3d 1078, 1083 (9th Cir. 2000) (cleaned up). Materiality is
a question of fact for the jury, see United States v. Gaudin,
28 F.3d 943, 944 (9th Cir. 1994) (en banc), aff'd, 515 U.S.
506 (1995), and the district court properly left the materiality
issue to the jury.

36

USA V. JESENIK

Nor did the district court err in admitting evidence of
investors’ reliance on these representations. Although not
dispositive, a victim’s reliance on the defendant’s falsehoods
is probative of materiality. See Phillips v. United States, 356
F.2d 297, 308 (9th Cir. 1965) (“Evidence that appellants’
sales materials did in fact deceive persons to whom it was
directed, causing them to rely upon it, tends to show that
such materials were of the nature charged.”).
2.
The defendants also argue that they were entitled to this
proposed jury instruction on “objective” materiality:
Whether or not a statement is capable of
influencing the decision-making body to
which it was addressed is evaluated
objectively.
In considering whether a
statement is material, you should consider the
context in which the communications
occurred, including any evidence about
industry practice, agreements between the
parties, the parties’ professional status or
accreditations, and other information known
to the parties at the time the allegedly false
statements were made. The government does
not need to prove that the statement actually
influenced any decisionmaker.
We find no abuse of discretion in the district court’s
denial of this instruction. The court accurately instructed the
jury that:
An oral or written statement is material if it
has a natural tendency to influence, or was

USA V. JESENIK

37

capable of influencing, a person to part with
money. Neither proof of reliance on a false
statement nor actual harm is needed to show
materiality.
The jury was also instructed that “[i]n determining whether
a scheme to defraud exists, you may consider not only a
defendant’s words and statements, but also the
circumstances in which those words and statements are used,
considered as a whole.” See Ninth Circuit Model Criminal
Jury Instruction 15.35. These instructions fairly and
adequately covered whether representations in sales pitches
and marketing materials were material.
B.
The defendants next assert that the jury was prevented
from considering defense theories about elements other than
materiality. We reject those claims.
1.
The district court granted a government pretrial motion
to preclude evidence or argument that investors should have
“exercised more due diligence or skepticism in their dealings
with Aequitas” and that investors did not actually rely on the
co-conspirators’ allegedly false statements. The defendants
argue that the court then improperly limited their crossexamination of investors about the contents of the relevant
disclosures and their “failure to read, understand, or
appreciate” them.
To the extent that the defendants challenge the district
court’s preclusion of evidence about investor negligence or
non-reliance, their argument is foreclosed by Lindsey, a case
involving mortgage fraud. We held there that “a bright-line

38

USA V. JESENIK

rule against evidence of individual lender behavior to
disprove materiality is both a reasonable and necessary
protection” because “evidence of individual lender behavior
can easily touch on lender negligence, intentional disregard,
or lack of reliance—none of which is a defense to mortgage
fraud.” 850 F.3d at 1017.11 We find no reason to adopt a
different rule in this case, simply because the loans gave rise
to promissory notes instead of mortgages.
The defendants also argue that evidence of investor
negligence or non-reliance is admissible to impeach the
investor “by confronting the investor with contradictory
information provided to him by the defendants in the PPM,”
and to show whether the defendants had an intent to defraud.
The defendants cite the cross-examination of Bob
Zamarripa, who invested $12 million with Aequitas.
Zamarripa testified that he was misled by Jesenik’s
assurances that “a hundred percent” of his money would go
to secure health care receivables and not to pay other
investors. During cross-examination, Zamarripa testified
that he had not read the subscription agreements and PPMs.
The court admitted these documents, and allowed defense
counsel to show Zamarripa one of the subscription
agreements and ask whether it instructed him to read the
PPM. However, the court sustained a series of relevancy
objections when defense counsel attempted to ask more
questions about the contents of the documents, given
Zamarripa’s admission that he had not read them.

11

Instead, defendants may seek to disprove materiality through generally
accepted standards, id. at 1016, because “[t]he way the entire market has
historically treated a statement or requirement says a lot about that
statement or requirement’s natural capacity to influence a decision by
market participants,” id. at 1017.

USA V. JESENIK

39

These evidentiary rulings did not prevent the defendants
from urging legitimate disclosure-based defense theories.
The court admitted PPMs, subscription agreements, and
audited financials, and several investors admitted that those
documents were material to their decisions. The court also
admitted defense expert testimony about these documents,
and allowed extensive questioning of investors who had read
them about their contents.
Evidence of Aequitas investors’ lengthy experience in
the financial industry—and RIAs’ due diligence
obligations—was also admitted, as was testimony that some
RIAs’ former clients blamed them for their financial losses,
and that two had been sued for negligence. The defendants
were allowed to cross-examine investors about their claims
that they had not read the PPMs and that they were unaware
of Aequitas’s financial difficulties. Over government
objections, the district court allowed defense counsel to ask
investors questions relevant to credibility “even if it may
have the secondary effect of implying that there was
inadequate due diligence.” The court also admitted
testimony about the defendants’ reliance on lawyers,
accountants, and compliance professionals, and their support
for revisions to the PPMs and tear sheets in response to those
professionals’ concerns.
2.
The district court’s materiality instruction stated, in
relevant part:
It is not a defense to a charge of mail or wire
fraud or a charge of conspiracy to commit
mail or wire fraud that an investor or
registered investment advisor may have been

40

USA V. JESENIK

gullible, careless, naive, or negligent or even
that an investor or registered investment
advisor
intentionally
disregarded
information.
The defendants argue that the instruction “suggested that
disclosures could not be considered as to any issue” and that
in the absence of “an accompanying admonition that truthful
disclosures could be considered in connection with good
faith or lack of a scheme to defraud, the instruction
fundamentally misled the jury.”
We disagree. The instruction is drawn from Lindsey, in
which we held that “negligence is not a defense to wire
fraud” and “intentional disregard of relevant information is
not a defense to wire fraud.” 850 F.3d at 1019. The
defendants attempt to distinguish Lindsey because it focused
on whether lenders’ disregard of relevant information was
admissible to disprove the materiality of the defendant’s
false statements, see id. at 1015–16, while they wished to use
such evidence to argue other defenses.
To the extent the defendants argue that “if an investor
felt misled, it was because the investor . . . chose to disregard
part of the complete representation,” they effectively seek to
urge that Aequitas’s investors were negligent. As Lindsey
emphasizes, “negligence is not a defense to wire fraud.” Id.
at 1015, 1019.
More importantly, the challenged instruction did not
indicate that the written disclosures were irrelevant. Indeed,
the defendants were permitted to argue that the written
disclosures were accurate, material to investors, and
indicative of the defendants’ good faith. In closing, Jesenik
and MacRitchie both argued extensively that any alleged

USA V. JESENIK

41

misrepresentations did not qualify as half-truths in light of
the disclosures. All defendants robustly argued that their
provision of written disclosures to investors was evidence of
good faith. And the defendants were allowed to attack the
investors’ credibility.
The jury was instructed that “[i]n determining whether a
scheme to defraud exists, you may consider not only a
defendant’s words and statements, but also the
circumstances in which those words and statements are used,
considered as a whole.” See Ninth Circuit Model Criminal
Jury Instruction 15.35. Taken together with the court’s
instructions on half-truths, materiality, good faith, fraudulent
intent, and witness credibility, the “instructions, in their
entirety, adequately cover[ed] th[e] defense theory.” Moe,
781 F.3d at 1127 (cleaned up).
3.
In its rebuttal, the government stated:
A few things about the jury instructions. You
see here “negligence by the investors and the
RIAs is not a defense to fraud.” So
allegations that they should have done this
and that they should have done that are not
allegations [sic] to fraud if you find that the
defendants acted with the intent to defraud.
You have other jury instructions. But the oral
statements—in considering what evidence
has been promoting the fraud, the oral
statements by Mr. Jesenik, by Mr. Oliver, by
Mr. Rice. The investor/RIA testimony about
the tear sheets, the pitch decks that contain

42

USA V. JESENIK

false information. The cooperator testimony
we provided and the written documentation.
The PPM—a lot of evidence about the PPM
and whether they are in support of a reliance
defense or good faith on the part of the
defendants. Members of the jury, I suggest
that’s not a proper defense. If you find that
these defendants—who individually have to
be assessed—but if you find that they
approached or promoted—in approaching
investors to give them money under false
pretenses, “We are doing great; your money
is going for receivables,” knowing that it is
not, that’s fraud. The crime has been
completed. And as Jessica Cataudella said,
“You can’t disclose your way out of fraud,”
meaning you can’t use the PPM, which has
50 pages of legalese, footnotes, warnings,
buzzers, and bells that lawyers write and the
SEC monitors, it’s important, no doubt, but
it’s not important to this fraud because—
After MacRitchie’s counsel objected that the prosecutor
misstated the burden of proof, the court instructed the jury
that intent to defraud and good faith were defined in the jury
instructions.
The defendants assert that they were prejudiced by the
government’s statement in closing that “you can’t disclose
your way out of fraud.” They claim that, like the court’s
materiality instruction, this argument improperly indicated
that jurors could not consider whether their purportedly
truthful written disclosures cured other alleged
misrepresentations or demonstrated good faith. Relatedly,

USA V. JESENIK

43

the defendants also contend that the district court erred in
denying a proposed addition to the court’s instruction on the
definition of a half-truth: “If the speaker does provide that
critical qualifying information, the duty to speak is satisfied
and the statement does not amount to a misrepresentation.”
We reject the argument.
The government’s argument accurately recounted the
testimony of Cataudella, the former Aequitas compliance
officer, in which she said that “you can’t disclose away
fraud” was a common phrase in the compliance industry.12
In context, the argument was not improper, because whether
the defendants’ written disclosures sufficed to make alleged
misrepresentations not misleading was a question for the
jury, and the jury was properly instructed on how to consider
evidence of those disclosures. Moreover, the court gave a
prompt curative instruction after the challenged statements,
and “[j]urors are presumed to follow the court’s
instructions.” United States v. Reyes, 660 F.3d 454, 468 (9th
Cir. 2011).
IV.
For the reasons above, and those in the concurrently filed
memorandum disposition, we affirm the judgments of
conviction.
AFFIRMED.

12

At trial, MacRitchie unsuccessfully objected to this statement as a lay
opinion. MacRitchie does not pursue this argument on appeal.

