FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
INTERNATIONAL PARTNERS
FOR ETHICAL CARE INC;
ADVOCATES PROTECTING
CHILDREN; PARENT 1A;
PARENT 1B; PARENT 2A;
PARENT 2B; PARENT 3A;
PARENT 3B; PARENT 4A;
PARENT 4B; PARENT 5A;
PARENT 5B,

No. 24-3661
D.C. No.
3:23-cv-05736DGE
ORDER

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
ROBERT FERGUSON, Governor;
NICK BROWN, Attorney General of
Washington; TANA SENN,
Secretary of the Washington
Department of Children, Youth, and
Families,
Defendants - Appellees.
Filed December 5, 2025
Before: Sidney R. Thomas, Milan D. Smith, Jr., and Daniel
A. Bress, Circuit Judges.

2 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

Order;
Dissent by Judge VanDyke;
Dissent by Judge Tung
SUMMARY *
Article III Standing
The panel denied a petition for panel rehearing and a
petition for rehearing en banc in a case in which the panel
affirmed the district court’s dismissal, for lack of Article III
standing, of a challenge to three Washington laws regulating
the rights and privileges of Washington minors seeking
access to mental health care and shelter services, particularly
minors who are transgender.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
VanDyke, joined by Judge Bumatay, stated that
Washington’s legal regime governing the treatment of
gender dysphoria infringes on the plaintiff parents’ right to
direct the care and upbringing of their children. Plaintiffs
plausibly allege an unconstitutional interference with their
fundamental right to parent, and the panel’s decision to the
contrary narrows the parental right unjustly—creating a
clean split with the Fifth Circuit in the process.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Tung, joined by Judges Bumatay and VanDyke, stated that
the facts, as alleged in the complaint, should have been more
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 3

than enough to establish standing. The parents alleged that
Washington law poses a substantial risk of harm to their
ability to direct the upbringing of their children and that the
law violates their constitutional rights. In concluding that
the parents’ allegations were insufficient to state an injuryin-fact, the panel runs afoul of Supreme Court and Ninth
Circuit jurisprudence governing standing, improperly
construes the parents’ complaint in the light most
disfavorable to them, and is inconsistent with the holdings of
other circuits.

ORDER
The panel voted to deny the petition for panel rehearing.
Judge M. Smith and Judge Bress voted to deny the petition
for rehearing en banc, and Judge S.R. Thomas so
recommended.
The full court was advised of the petition for rehearing
en banc. A judge requested a vote on whether to rehear the
matter en banc. The matter failed to receive a majority of
the votes of the nonrecused active judges in favor of en banc
consideration. Fed. R. App. P. 40. The petition for panel
rehearing and the petition for rehearing en banc are
DENIED.

4 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

VANDYKE, Circuit Judge, joined by BUMATAY, Circuit
Judge, dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc:
Time and again, the Supreme Court has reminded lower
courts that “the interest of parents in the care, custody, and
control of their children” sits among “the oldest of the
fundamental liberty interests” recognized in our Nation.
Troxel v. Granville, 530 U.S. 57, 65 (2000) (plurality op.).
Wherever the outer bounds of that right may lie, the Supreme
Court has not been shy in insisting that “the state can neither
supply nor hinder” the “cardinal” role of fit parents in “the
custody, care and nurture of the child.” Prince v.
Massachusetts, 321 U.S. 158, 166 (1944). This case teaches
that apparently the state can, so long as it keeps parents in
the dark about what it’s doing.
Washington’s legal regime governing gender-confused
children now empowers its state-run shelters to hide minors
from parents and to encourage them to travel further down
the path of gender ideology—all while hiding from fit
parents what the state or other actors do in those shelters.
That odious framework inverts the age-old, common-sense
principle that parents—not the state and certainly not the
child—hold primacy over the parent–child relationship.
The panel opinion doesn’t dispute this basic point and—
one hopes—would not attempt to uphold Washington’s legal
regime if it squarely addressed it. But its holding that parents
aren’t even harmed by this state of affairs presents a no less
extreme position and one that departs from both our sister
circuit and Supreme Court guidance. Under its rationale,
Washington doesn’t harm any parent until the moment that
it gets caught secretly subjecting a child to so-called gender
transition services—something that parents might never
know until it’s too late. Such a reductionist view of parental

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 5

rights mistakes parental authority for a mere property
interest in the physical possession of a child—a view long
rejected by our court and others.
The parents in this case have plausibly alleged that they
cannot counsel their gender-confused children in the way
they see fit, lest those children, prompted by Washington’s
novel law, leave home for a state-run shelter that will help
them undergo transition procedures in secret. Washington’s
legal regime therefore chills the rights of these parents to
direct the care and upbringing of their children, strikes at the
heart of what the parental right protects, and constitutes a
current and ongoing invasion of the parents’ constitutional
rights.
By denying rehearing en banc, our court missed an
opportunity to correct the panel’s erroneous view that
parents only have an interest in the physical custody of their
children. Our failure to do so is particularly troubling here
where our court had a unique and well-presented opportunity
to weigh in on a clear collision between gender ideology and
parental rights. Without rehearing, our court now joins a
growing crowd of lower courts that appear to have made
every effort to avoid addressing a constitutional
confrontation occurring all across our Nation. See Lee v.
Poudre Sch. Dist. R-1, No. 25-89, 2025 WL 2906469, at *1
(U.S. Oct. 14, 2025) (Alito, J., concurring in the denial of
certiorari) (“But I remain concerned that some federal courts
are ‘tempt[ed]’ to avoid confronting a ‘particularly
contentious constitutional questio[n.]’”) (alterations in
original). The plaintiffs plausibly allege an unconstitutional
interference with their fundamental right to parent, and our
court should have reheard this case and recognized that they
have alleged sufficient injury to confer standing. I
respectfully dissent from our failure to do so.

6 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

I.
This case arises from Washington’s regulatory regime,
which—through a series of amendments and a patchwork of
interacting statutes—now systematically facilitates the
covert transitioning of children without parental knowledge
or consent. In 1985, Washington enacted a series of laws to
“ensure that minors in need of mental health care and
treatment receive appropriate care and treatment.”
1985 Wash. Sess. Laws, ch. 354, § 1. Those laws ensured
that minors 13 years and older could receive outpatient
health treatment without the consent of their parents. Wash.
Rev. Code § 71.34.530.
But Washington, for decades, did not allow that
treatment to happen in secret. Instead, whenever a shelter
learned that a “child [wa]s away from a lawfully prescribed
residence or home without parental permission,” that shelter
was required by law to contact the child’s parents within 72
hours. Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i). The only
exception to this general rule was “[i]f there [were]
compelling reasons not to notify the parent” of the child’s
presence at the shelter. Id. And those “compelling reasons”
were, predictably, only those circumstances where
“notifying the parent or legal guardian [would] subject the
minor to abuse or neglect.” Id. § 13.32A.082(2)(c). That
changed in 2023 when Washington amended its parental
notification statute. 2023 Wash. Legis. Serv., ch. 408, § 2.
While the parental notification statute still generally requires
parental notification “within 72 hours” of the minor leaving
home for health treatment, the “compelling reasons”
exception was expanded to include any scenario where “a
minor is seeking or receiving protected health care services,”
which includes so-called “gender-affirming treatment.”
Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(2)(c)(ii). That amendment

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 7

now treats the parents of children suffering from gender
dysphoria as per se neglectful or abusive and does not
require the shelter to contact them. 1
What’s worse, even if the shelter does contact a minor’s
parents to inform them that a child has run away from home,
Washington law still requires it “to make referrals on behalf
of the minor for appropriate behavioral health services”—
meaning services intended to transition that child to a
different gender. Id. § 13.32A.082(3).
A group of plaintiffs—Washington parents with children
suffering from gender dysphoria—and two aligned
organizational plaintiffs sued to enjoin this regulatory
regime. Relevant here, two sets of parents—1A and 1B,
alongside 2A and 2B—alleged that Washington’s legal
regime has interfered with their ability to parent their
children as they see fit. Both sets of parents have children
who have expressed confusion about their gender, including
a desire to transition to a different gender. Both sets of
parents also believe that it is in the best interest of their
children to raise them in conformity with their biological
sex. But unlike most parents, these parents have to navigate
this disagreement with the full knowledge that, at any
moment, their children can veto their decisions about gender
and leave home for a state-run shelter to begin transitioning
in secret. That possibility understandably has changed the
behavior of these parents who, as a result, have declined to
discuss issues of gender with their children, inculcate their
views about gender identity, or address their children’s
The Complaint and Petition for Rehearing En Banc both refer to these
children as experiencing “gender confusion” or “gender dysphoria.”
Consistent with the plaintiffs’ pleadings and the motion-to-dismiss stage
of this case, this dissent adopts that terminology.
1

8 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

gender dysphoria consistent with the parents’ beliefs.
These parents alleged that their First and Fourteenth
Amendment rights had been violated by Washington and
sued to enjoin the relevant statutes.
But the district court dismissed the plaintiffs’ claims as
too speculative, holding that the parents failed to allege that
Washington’s legal regime had actually harmed them.
Instead, the district court concluded that the allegations
rested on “speculation and conjecture” and dismissed the
case for lack of standing. A panel of our court agreed,
holding that the parents complained of “[d]amages ‘inflicted
by [their] own hand.’” Such a decision enervates the wellestablished right of parents to direct the care and upbringing
of their children, and perversely encourages states to be
clandestine when intentionally interfering with such rights.
II.
It is well established that parents have the right and duty
to direct the care and upbringing of their minor children.
This right extends beyond just a mere liberty interest in the
custody of their children but also protects the parent–child
relationship from infringement by state actors.
Washington’s legal regime intentionally infringes on
that relationship by granting minor children a veto over their
parents’ decisions on gender and gender identity. Parents
cannot be free—and as alleged by plaintiffs, are not free—
to inculcate their children with traditional views of gender so
long as Washington creates a system facilitating the
transition of those children without their parents’
involvement and against their parents’ wishes.
Our court erred in concluding otherwise. In doing so,
our cursory holding splits with the Fifth Circuit’s far more

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 9

rigorous analysis on the scope of parental rights. The panel’s
decision goes too far in cabining parental rights, and the full
court should have corrected that error. Washington’s legal
regime not only infringes on parental rights but, as the Fifth
Circuit explained, effectively debilitates them.
This case presented an ideal opportunity to confront the
ongoing and intensifying conflict between longstanding
conceptions of parental rights and the ever-growing
encroachment of state actors with a particular view of gender
ideology.
And because it is relatively free of the
complicating factual issues that often accompany school
gender ideology cases, this case would have allowed for both
an authoritative ruling on a contentious constitutional issue
and much-needed guidance to lower courts.
A.
The Supreme Court has long held “that the custody, care
and nurture of the child reside first in the parents, whose
primary function and freedom include preparation for
obligations the state can neither supply nor hinder.” Prince,
321 U.S. at 166. This parental right to direct the care and
upbringing of children preexists our own constitutional order
and flows from the “natural bonds of affection” that “lead
parents to act in the best interests of their children.” Parham
v. J.R., 442 U.S. 584, 602 (1979); see also 1 William
Blackstone, Commentaries on the Laws of England *447
(1753) (“Providence has … implant[ed] in the breast of
every parent that natural … affection, which not even the
deformity of person or mind … can totally suppress.”).
It is also well settled that the parental right over children
includes “a ‘high duty’ to recognize symptoms of illness and
to seek and follow medical advice.” Parham, 442 U.S. at
602. It would be plainly illegal for Washington to subject a

10 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

minor child to medical procedures without parental consent
under our precedent. See Mann v. County of San Diego, 907
F.3d 1154, 1160–61 (9th Cir. 2018) (holding that the state
may not perform medical examinations on children without
parental notification and consent or judicial authorization).
But because Washington has not yet used its state-run
shelters to start transitioning a plaintiff’s child—or at least
we don’t know that it has—the panel held that no parent
could allege a harm sufficient to confer standing.
That decision misunderstands the nature and contours of
parental rights. Centuries of American and English tradition
recognize that fit parents hold a near-absolute right to make
decisions about the care and upbringing of their children,
free from state interference. See Troxel, 530 U.S. at 65
(plurality opinion) (“[T]he interest of parents in the care,
custody, and control of their children—is perhaps the oldest
of the fundamental liberty interests recognized by this
Court.”). Parental rights encompass more than a bar against
the state removing a child from the home. See Hardwick v.
Cnty. of Orange, 980 F.3d 733, 741 (9th Cir. 2020) (noting
the parental right encompasses both the right to
companionship of children and the right in raising those
children). Rather “the relationship between parent and child
is constitutionally protected,” which “the state can … no[t]
hinder.” Quilloin v. Walcott, 434 U.S. 246, 255 (1978)
(emphasis added). This relationship extends beyond mere
custody of a child, but also encompasses choices broadly
implicated in a parental duty to direct the upbringing and
preparation of the child for life’s future obligations. See
Troxel, 530 U.S. at 65–66 (collecting cases); see also Smith
v. City of Fontana, 818 F.2d 1411, 1418 (9th Cir. 1987)
(holding that the “constitutional interest in familial
companionship and society logically extends to protect

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 11

children from unwarranted state interference with their
relationships with their parents”), overruled on other
grounds by Hodgers-Durgin v. de la Vina, 199 F.3d 1037
(1999); Michael H. v. Gerald D., 491 U.S. 110, 142 (1989)
(Brennan, J., dissenting) (“Where the interest under
consideration is a parent-child relationship, we need not ask,
over and over again, whether that interest is one that society
traditionally protects.”).
B.
Washington’s new statutory scheme strikes at the heart
of this parental right and, as alleged by plaintiffs, chills the
fundamental right of Washington parents to direct the care
and upbringing of their children. Parents 1A and 1B, for
example, are parents to a gender-confused daughter, who
began expressing gender dysphoria at a Washington public
school. The public school encouraged the daughter to
“socially transition” and present as a boy without notifying
the parents. Although the parents removed their daughter
from the school after discovering what happened,
Washington’s statutory framework governing runaway
children still instills reasonable fear in 1A and 1B. And that
fear—that their daughter could run away for a state-run
gender transition facility—has understandably chilled their
approach to parenting. As alleged by 1A and 1B, the parents
have hesitated to discipline their daughter from a reasonable
concern that doing so would incentivize her to run away and
transition without parental consent.
Parents 2A and 2B also altered their parenting in reaction
to Washington’s regulatory scheme. Those parents have two
gender confused daughters, one eighteen years old and one
who is thirteen. Both daughters have accused the parents of
being “transphobic” for refusing to affirm the daughters’

12 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

transgender beliefs, and the older sister has explicitly
threatened to take her younger sister to a “safe place” where
her transgender identity will be affirmed. In the face of this
threat, and with the knowledge that Washington law
facilitates carrying out the threat, the parents now decline to
refer to their daughter by her given name, don’t use any
pronouns when describing her, and refuse to inculcate the
parents’ values and beliefs about gender at all when around
her.
It is difficult to see how these parents, who allege that
they cannot raise their children as they see fit because of
Washington’s regulatory scheme, have not been harmed in a
manner sufficient to confer standing. See Food & Drug
Admin. v. All. for Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. 367, 381
(2024) (“An injury in fact can be a physical injury, a
monetary injury, … or an injury to one’s constitutional
rights, to take just a few common examples.”). The very
existence of a state regulatory regime that encourages and
facilitates the transition of children without the consent of
their parents presently interferes with the protected parent–
child relationship by subverting a parent’s authority to direct
the upbringing of her child. The plaintiffs have alleged
exactly that and have been injured by Washington’s statutes.
C.
The panel nonetheless concluded that these constraints
on parenting do not arise to the level of concrete and
particularized harm.
In doing so, it fundamentally
misunderstood the nature of parental rights by concluding
that the plaintiff parents have only alleged “self-inflicted
injuries” in describing how Washington’s legal regime has
chilled and interfered with their parenting. In the panel’s
view, the parents cannot show standing until the moment that

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 13

“their children’s behavior has … brought them within the
reach of the Statutes.” “[W]ithin the reach of the Statutes”
presumably means that Washington must first hide a genderconfused child from their parents before a parent may sue.
But the real harm to parents from Washington’s legal
regime happens long before a child runs away. Such an
intentional interference with the parent–child relationship,
be it direct or indirect, creates an injury to the fundamental
right to parent. See, e.g., Troxel, 530 U.S. at 75 (“[T]he
burden of litigating a domestic relations proceeding can
itself be so disruptive of the parent-child relationship that the
constitutional right of a custodial parent to make certain
basic determinations for the child’s welfare becomes
implicated.”) (internal quotations omitted); see also City of
Huntington Beach v. Newsom, 2025 WL 1720210, at *6
(C.D. Cal. June 16, 2025) (finding injury where “parents and
children are at odds with each other regarding how to
address … gender identity issues, resulting in difficulties
parenting the children in the manner the parents want to raise
them”); City of Fontana, 818 F.2d at 1418 (identifying “the
many times the Supreme Court has interpreted the due
process clause to protect the interests of parents in
maintaining a relationship with their children” (simplified)
and describing Kelson v. City of Springfield, 767 F.2d 651
(9th Cir. 1985), overruled on other grounds by Daniels v.
Williams, 474 U.S. 327 (1986), as holding that “a parent has
a constitutionally protected liberty interest in the
companionship and society of his or her child”).
The Fifth Circuit carefully explained this point just a few
years ago in Deanda v. Becerra, 96 F. 4th 750 (5th Cir.
2024). There a parent (Deanda) sued the Secretary of Health
and Human Services over the implementation of Title X,
which funded programs that offered contraceptives to

14 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

minors without parental consent. Id. at 754–55. Deanda
sought to raise his children under a traditional Christian
worldview, which includes a belief in abstaining from premartial sexual relations. Id. at 754. He argued that the
Secretary’s funding of any program that offered
contraceptives to children without parental consent violated
“his constitutional right to direct his children’s upbringing.”
Id. at 755.
Deanda never alleged that any child of his had actually
received contraceptives under these programs or even, as the
plaintiffs here allege in detail, that his children were at a
heightened risk of availing themselves of that program. Id.
at 758. And the Secretary made the same argument against
standing that the panel adopted in this case: that since
Deanda never alleged that his children took advantage of the
contraception program, it did not injure him. Id.
The Fifth Circuit properly rejected that view as “a
puzzling argument,” holding that Deanda’s “parental right[]
to notice and consent” was invaded by the mere existence of
the state-run program that provided contraceptives to minors
without informing parents or obtaining their consent. Id. at
759. As the court explained, the program acted to “nullify[]
[Deanda’s] parental rights” by creating a workaround to
parental consent. Id. at 760. That conferred standing for
Deanda “because the Secretary [sought] to preempt
his … right to consent to his children’s obtaining
contraceptives.” Id. 2
The Fifth Circuit considered Deanda’s right in the context of “his stateconferred right” to direct the care and upbringing of his children.
Deanda, 96 F.4th at 760. But I don’t read Deanda’s analysis as
dependent on that state right since, unless that state right mapped onto
the federal parental right, the Fifth Circuit could not have held that it

2

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 15

Deanda’s reasoning maps neatly onto this case. There’s
no reasonable dispute that Washington’s legal regime
intentionally allows for and encourages minors to seek and
obtain gender transition services over the objections of fit
parents. There’s also no reasonable dispute that fit parents
have a constitutional right to make major health decisions on
behalf of their minor children. So just like Title X’s
contraceptive distribution program, Washington’s legal
regime does “not merely ‘inva[de]’ [plaintiffs’] parental
rights …. [i]t w[ill] obliterate them.” Deanda, 96 F.4th at
757 (first alteration in original) (quoting Warth v. Seldin, 422
U.S. 490, 500 (1975)).
I wonder if my colleagues would fault these parents for
complaining of “[d]amages ‘inflicted by [their] own hand’”
if this case involved injuries that were not yet so strongly
championed by political actors in Washington. For now,
Washington law defines “protected healthcare services” as
so-called “gender-affirming treatment,” which excuses these
shelters from notifying parents that their children are
receiving these procedures. 2023 Wash. Legis. Serv., ch.
408, § 13.32A.082(2)(c)(ii). But what if Washington
expanded that definition to include “Medical Assistance in
Dying” among the “protected healthcare services”?
When exactly would the panel concede that the parental
right was implicated by a state-run, assisted-suicide-insecret program? Would parents of a suicidal teenager who
threatened to run away have standing to sue? What if these
parents lived in fear that their child would commit suicide at
preempted Title X’s regulations. See id. at 768 (enjoining the
implementation of Title X); see also United States v. Missouri, 114 F.4th
980, 986 (8th Cir. 2024), cert. denied, No. 24-796, 2025 WL 2823708
(U.S. Oct. 6, 2025) (“[A] State cannot invalidate federal law to itself.”).

16 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

this state-run shelter without their involvement and
accordingly altered their parenting style to discourage that
from happening? 3 Following its logic in this case, the panel
would hold that the parents haven’t actually been injured
until “their children’s behavior has … brought them within
the reach of the Statutes,” and that any pain involved in
avoiding that outcome is merely self-inflicted. Is our court’s
position really that, in such a hypothetical, a parent must first
have a dead child before it could sue? If not, then why must
these parents first have a secretly transitioning child before
suing? And what a perverse incentive we have now created
in parental rights cases: only those parents willing to first
subject their child to irreparable injury can ever have their
day in court.
Our court’s holding is as unworkable as it is illogical. So
long as Washington encourages minors to take the plunge
into gender transitions without the knowledge (or even over
the objection) of fit parents, parents lose their ability to direct
the care and upbringing of their children, regardless of
whether § 13.32A.082(2)(c)(ii)’s sword of Damocles ever
falls on that particular parent. The Fifth Circuit got this right
and our own court has tragically erred.
D.
Unfortunately, today’s confrontation isn’t unique.
Differing “approaches to parental rights are increasingly
clashing in courtrooms as parents challenge attempts by state
It’s not difficult to come up with examples of how this might work.
Parents could decide that their child could never leave the house
unsupervised, preventing him from attending school sports events,
spending time with friends, or even attending prom—all healthy parts of
a child’s development that parents might reasonably forbid due to the
heightened risks that would accompany such a hypothetical legal regime.

3

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 17

actors to substitute the state’s judgment for that of parents
with respect to children struggling with gender identity.”
Ryan Bangert, Parental Rights in the Age of Gender
Ideology, 27 Tex. Rev. L. & Pol. 715, 724 (2023). With
6,000 public schools estimated to have procedures in place
facilitating the secret transition of children against their
parents’ wishes, courts cannot continue to dodge this
growing conflict between gender identity and parental rights
indefinitely. See Poudre Sch. Dist. R-1, 2025 WL 2906469,
at *1 (Alito, J., concurring in the denial of certiorari). Our
court will need to weigh in on this “question of great and
growing national importance” soon, and this case presented
an ideal opportunity to do so. Parents Protecting Our
Child., UA v. Eau Claire Area Sch. Dist., Wisconsin, 145 S.
Ct. 14 (2024) (Alito, J., dissenting in the denial of certiorari).
Although public education is probably the environment
where gender ideology most often runs up against parental
rights, that setting presents unique and fact-specific
considerations that have made appellate review challenging
to obtain. For example, how a school implements its
guidance on gender ideology appears to matter a great deal
to our sister circuits. See Parents Protecting Our Child., UA
v. Eau Claire Area Sch. Dist., Wisconsin, 95 F.4th 501, 505–
06 (7th Cir.), cert. denied, 145 S. Ct. 14 (2024) (“All we have
before us is a policy on paper without concrete facts about
its implementation.”); Lee v. Poudre Sch. Dist. R-1, 135
F.4th 924, 935 (10th Cir. 2025), cert. denied, No. 25-89,
2025 WL 2906469 (U.S. Oct. 14, 2025) (“The parents don’t
explain how policies that presume the district knows better
than parents, or that discourage disclosure, directly caused
district staff to [harm the plaintiffs].”). That fact-specific
inquiry often limits opportunities to squarely address a
government’s infringement on parental rights surrounding

18 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

gender ideology, since a plaintiff will remain unable to
contest the factual findings about how a school policy is
effectuated even if the court resolves constitutional
questions about what rights parents have vis-à-vis gender
ideology. See Poudre Sch. Dist. R-1, 2025 WL 2906469, at
*1 (Alito, J., concurring in the denial of certiorari) (noting
the plaintiff’s failure to challenge the appellate court’s
dispositive holding that they had not plausibly alleged
municipal liability).
This case presents no such issues. The plaintiffs
plausibly allege that their right to parent has been abridged
by Washington’s fixed statutory regime governing the
treatment of runaway children experiencing gender
dysphoria—allegations this court must accept as true at this
stage of the proceedings. Their argument does not depend
on the factual nuances of how a school implements its own
informal guidance documents, which are subject to change
at a moment’s notice. Rather, the plaintiffs here sue to enjoin
the operation of several statewide laws that Washington
shelters are now obligated to follow. This court was well
equipped to interpret those statutes, alongside state shelters’
legal obligations under them, and to determine their
interference with established parental rights. We should
have taken the opportunity to do just that.
E.
Washington’s legal regime governing the treatment of
gender dysphoria infringes on the plaintiff parents’ right to
direct the care and upbringing of their children. Plaintiffs
plausibly alleged that they are chilled in carrying out this
constitutionally protected duty, and the panel’s decision to
the contrary narrows the parental right unjustly—creating a
clean split with the Fifth Circuit in the process. Because the

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 19

panel erred in construing injury to parental rights too
narrowly, the full court should have reheard this case to
properly define and apply that right in this context.
I respectfully dissent.
TUNG, Circuit Judge, joined by BUMATAY and
VANDYKE, Circuit Judges, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
This case is about whether parents with children who
suffer from gender dysphoria and are at risk of running away
have standing to challenge a Washington State law that
would prohibit shelters from notifying parents of the location
of their runaway child. The panel held that such parents lack
standing. Respectfully, I disagree. In concluding that the
parents’ allegations were insufficient to state an injury-infact, the panel runs afoul of Supreme Court and Ninth Circuit
jurisprudence governing standing, improperly construes the
parents’ complaint in the light most disfavorable to them,
and is inconsistent with the holdings of other circuits. En
banc review should have been granted to fix these errors.
I.
Under Washington law, when a licensed shelter takes in
a runaway child, it usually must notify the parents
immediately. See Wash. Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(1)(b)(i)
(2024). A longstanding exception provides that a shelter is
barred from notifying the parents if circumstances indicate
abuse or neglect; in that case, the shelter must instead make
a report to the State’s Department of Children, Youth, and
Families (the “Department”).
See id. and
§ 13.32A.082(2)(c)(i) (2024).

20 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

But recently, the legislature added another exception: a
shelter is prohibited from notifying the parents when the
runaway child “is seeking or receiving . . . gender-affirming
treatment.” Wash. Rev. Code §§ 13.32A.082(2)(c)(ii) and
13.32A.082(2)(d) (2024); see also 1 ER 11 (Mot. to Dismiss)
(“the shelter must contact [the Department] instead of
contacting the youth’s parents directly”). In the legislature’s
view, a child suffering from gender dysphoria must be
“protected” from parents who do not seek “gender-affirming
treatment” for their child and do not “affirm” the child’s
gender identity. State law thus places such parents, who
wish to raise their child in accordance with the child’s
biological sex, in the same category as parents who are
abusive or neglectful. Both categories of parents lose any
entitlement to be notified of their runaway child’s location.
State law restricts parental control in another way. Upon
receipt of the shelter’s report of the runaway child, the
Department “shall” offer to make “referrals on behalf” of the
child “for appropriate behavioral health services,” see Wash.
Rev. Code § 13.32A.082(3)(b)(i) (2024), which can include
“gender-affirming” treatment. And all this, too, can occur
without the parents’ knowledge or consent. Indeed, the law
appears designed to do just that—to prevent parents from
reuniting with their child (unless they “affirm” the child’s
gender identification) and to clear the path of obstacles for
the child to receive “gender-affirming” treatment.
II.
Perhaps unsurprisingly, several concerned parents
challenged this law. The individual plaintiffs here—
including four sets of parents—have children who suffer
from gender dysphoria. 1 ER 16, 18–19, 22. They do not
believe it is healthy or consistent with their deeply held

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 21

convictions to “affirm” their child’s gender identity contrary
to the child’s biological sex. 1 ER 16, 19, 23. They also fear
that “gender-affirming” treatment could result in permanent
bodily and psychological damage to their child. 1 ER 23.
Such views have caused divisions within the families
here. The parents’ children, defying their parents’ beliefs,
have threatened to run away—indeed, one child has already
done so (about a year before the filing of the complaint) and
another child has threatened to take a younger sibling to a
“safe place” away from their parents. 1 ER 18, 22, 45.
Having “socially transitioned,” the children accuse their
parents of being “transphobic” because the parents would
not use their children’s preferred pronouns. 1 ER 18, 22.
Another child was encouraged “to run away” by a “friend’s
family” because the parents “did not believe that a ‘trans
identity’ was authentic or healthy for him.” 1 ER 20. The
parents fear that the child’s younger brother (who suffers
from gender dysphoria too) will also run away and that, by
dint of these statutes, they will lose control over their
younger child’s treatment. 1 ER 20–21.
III.
All these facts, as alleged in the complaint, should have
been more than enough to establish standing—and in several
different ways. Standing requires an “injury in fact” that is
“actual or imminent, not conjectural or hypothetical,” Lujan
v. Defenders of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992) (quotation
marks omitted), and an injury is “imminent” if it is “certainly
impending” or “there is a substantial risk that the harm will
occur.” Susan B. Anthony List v. Driehaus, 573 U.S. 149,
158 (2014) (quotation marks omitted); Clapper v. Amnesty
Int’l USA, 568 U.S. 398, 414 n.5 (2013).

22 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

First, the parents’ asserted injuries are “certainly
impending”; at the very least, there is a “substantial risk” of
harm. Department of Commerce v. New York, 588 U.S. 752,
767 (2019) (citation omitted). More specifically, there is a
“substantial risk” that at least one child of the parents, having
run away before, would run away to a shelter offering
precisely the kind of “safe place” that would require
concealment from parents. Once the child arrives at the
shelter, and as a direct result of the challenged law, the
parents would be kept in the dark as to their child’s location
and course of medical treatment—a clear interference with
the parents’ asserted constitutional right to direct the
upbringing of their child.
The parents’ concern that the State would displace their
role as their child’s guardians with respect to the proper
treatment of gender dysphoria is plainly reasonable and far
from speculative. See Friends of the Earth, Inc. v. Laidlaw
Env’t Servs. (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 183–84 (2000)
(“reasonable concerns” of harm are sufficient to show
injury-in-fact); Covington v. Jefferson Cnty., 358 F.3d 626,
639 (9th Cir. 2004) (same). The parents should not have to
wait until their child has run away to a shelter and received
life-altering treatment before they are afforded the
opportunity to challenge the law—a law whose very object
is to prevent the parents from knowing, in the first place, of
their child’s arrival at the shelter and his or her receipt of
“gender-affirming” treatment.
See Harris v. Bd. of
Supervisors, Los Angeles Cnty., 366 F.3d 754, 762 (9th Cir.
2004) (plaintiffs need not “wait until they suffer” injury to
sue); see also Mahmoud v. Taylor, 606 U.S. 522, 559–60
(2025) (plaintiffs need not “wait and see” how a particular
book is used in a particular classroom before suing);
Clapper, 568 U.S. at 414 n.5 (“Our cases do not uniformly

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 23

require plaintiffs to demonstrate that it is literally certain that
the harms they identify will come about.”). By that time, it
may be too late to rehabilitate (in the parents’ view) the
damage done to their child. The requirements of standing
are strict, but they are not cruel.
Injury-in-fact is readily apparent here. When the
parents’ gender-dysphoric children have called the parents
“transphobic,” have already “socially transitioned,” have
been encouraged by others to leave their parents, and have
threatened to escape to a “safe place”—indeed, one of them
has already run away before—the risk of at least one child’s
flight to a shelter that would interfere with the parents’ right
to direct the child’s upbringing is substantial.
Second, the incentive that Washington law has created
for gender-dysphoric children to run away to licensed
shelters is also enough to confer standing. State law requires
licensed shelters to withhold parental notification with
respect to runaway children who are seeking or receiving
“gender-affirming” treatment. Shelters instead must report
to the Department, which in turn is obligated to offer
referrals on behalf of minors for “gender-affirming”
treatment. The law thus makes running away to those
shelters attractive for children suffering from gender
dysphoria and seeking “gender-affirming” treatment, and
accordingly, produces an increased risk of harm to the
parents of state interference with their child’s upbringing.
Combine that risk with the severity of the harm—potential
irreparable damage wrought upon children by such
treatment—and the parents have easily shown standing. See,
e.g., Mountain States Legal Found. v. Glickman, 92 F.3d
1228, 1234 (D.C. Cir. 1996) (“The more drastic the injury
that government action makes more likely, the lesser the
increment in probability necessary to establish standing.”).

24 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

Third, as the objects of the challenged Washington law,
the parents have standing to sue. “When a plaintiff is the
‘object’ of a government regulation, there should
‘ordinarily’ be ‘little question’ that the regulation causes
injury to the plaintiff and that invalidating the regulation
would redress the plaintiff’s injuries.” Diamond Alt. Energy,
LLC v. EPA, 606 U.S. 100, 114 (2025) (citing Lujan, 504
U.S. at 561); see also Meland v. Weber, 2 F.4th 838, 845 (9th
Cir. 2021). That holds true here: Washington law deems
parents who refuse to affirm their child’s gender identity or
support “gender-affirming” treatment as falling within the
same category as parents who abuse or neglect their child
(for purposes of the state’s shelter laws). Washington law
directs, as to such parents whose child runs away, that
shelters withhold notice.
That the law regulates shelters directly (and not parents)
does not render parents any less the objects of the law for
purposes of standing: the law seeks to alter the parents’
behavior by compelling them to “affirm” their child’s gender
identity, or suffer the consequences of not being able to
reunite with their runaway child and participate in their
child’s treatment for gender dysphoria. See Diamond Alt.
Energy, 606 U.S. at 115. Its object is to “protect” runaway
children with gender dysphoria from their parents who
might hinder their desired treatment. Those parents are the
clear “targets” of the law. Id. at 125.
Each of these different ways of viewing the injuries is
enough to establish standing. Together, they compel that
conclusion.
IV.
Unfortunately, the panel disregarded each of these points
that go to establish standing and thus erred in holding that

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 25

the parents failed to allege it. In several ways, the panel’s
ruling contravenes Supreme Court and Ninth Circuit
precedent and is inconsistent with the rulings of our sister
circuits. This court should have granted en banc review to
correct the panel’s errors.
The panel contravenes Supreme Court and Ninth Circuit
precedent by failing to properly analyze whether the facts as
alleged created a “substantial risk that harm will occur” and
whether the parents are the objects of the challenged law that
would give rise to standing—nowhere does the panel
opinion expressly acknowledge or apply these legal
standards. See Susan B. Anthony List, 573 U.S. at 158 (2014)
(“substantial risk”) (quotations omitted); Mahmoud, 606
U.S. at 560 (same); Department of Commerce, 588 U.S. at
767 (same); Monsanto Co. v. Geerston Seed Farms, 561 U.S.
139, 153–54 (2010) (same); Flaxman v. Ferguson, 151 F.4th
1178, 1185, 1187 (9th Cir. 2025) (same); Diamond Alt.
Energy, 606 U.S. at 114 (“‘object’ of a government
regulation”); Lujan, 504 U.S. at 561–62 (“object of the
action”).
Further, the panel’s opinion is inconsistent with other
circuits’ rulings recognizing that incremental risk
(particularly when viewed in light of the gravity of the harm)
presented by a challenged law is enough to show standing.
See, e.g., Glickman, 92 F.3d at 1234–35. While the panel
claims that the incremental-risk analysis is relevant only to
the redressability prong of standing (rather than injury-infact), see Op. at 23—a questionable contention—the panel
makes no attempt to reconcile its holding with other circuit
holdings that such an analysis does bear on injury-in-fact.
See, e.g., Glickman, 92 F.3d at 1234–35; Baur v. Veneman,
352 F.3d 625, 637 (2d Cir. 2003) (“Because the evaluation
of risk is qualitative, the probability of harm which a plaintiff

26 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

must demonstrate in order to allege a cognizable injury-infact logically varies with the severity of the probable
harm.”). This divergence justifies en banc review.
In refusing to find standing, the panel relies on Lujan.
But Lujan provides no such support. The plaintiffs there
failed to show “injury in fact”—which would have allowed
them to challenge a regulation limiting the scope of the
consultation requirements under the Endangered Species
Act—because, in the Court’s view, their “mere profession of
an intent, some day, to return” to places where endangered
species were located was “simply not enough.” Lujan, 504
U.S. at 564 & n.2. The Court reasoned that the concept of
“imminence” required for standing, though “somewhat
elastic,” has been “stretched beyond the breaking point
when, as here, the plaintiff alleges only an injury at some
indefinite future time, and the acts necessary to make the
injury happen are at least partly within the plaintiff’s own
control.” Id. (emphasis added).
Not so here. The parents’ alleged injuries are not within
their own control, and thus do not stretch the “imminence”
standard beyond the breaking point but comfortably meet it.
The parents’ children, unfortunately, present a flight risk
and, by operation of state law, licensed shelters who receive
them are banned from notifying the parents and must instead
report the incident to a state agency that would facilitate
“gender-affirming” treatment for those children. 1 And
Even those unlicensed shelters or individuals (such as family friends)
who receive a runaway child need not notify the parents under
Washington law, but can notify the Department instead. See Wash. Rev.
Code § 13.32A.082(1)(a) (“[A]ny person, unlicensed youth shelter, or
runaway and homeless youth program” who provides shelter to a
runaway child “shall promptly report the location of the child to the

1

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 27

again, by the law’s design, this could all be done without the
parents’ knowledge or consent. The parents have thus
alleged a credible threat of future injuries. 2
The panel erred in another fundamental way.
Undisputed here, basic principles of pleading require that
courts, at the motion-to-dismiss stage, accept all plaintiffs’
factual allegations as true and draw all reasonable inferences
in the plaintiffs’ favor. See Thomas v. County of Humboldt,
California, 124 F.4th 1179, 1186 (9th Cir. 2024); see also
National Rifle Association of America v. Vullo, 602 U.S.
175, 181 (2024). The panel did the very opposite.
One example is enough to prove the point. The panel
appears to acknowledge, in a footnote, that the parents who
have alleged (among other things) that their child previously
“ran away from home” present the strongest case for
standing. See Op. at 21 n.7. But in dismissing those
allegations, the panel reasoned that “Plaintiffs make no
claim that 5C ran away to a licensed shelter, did so without
parental permission, or is seeking or receiving genderaffirming care.” See id. That reasoning is deeply flawed and
construes the parents’ allegations in the most disfavorable
light.
First, contrary to the panel, the parents are not required
to allege that 5C ran away to a “licensed shelter.” The fact
that 5C ran away because of disagreement with 5C’s parents
parent, the law enforcement agency of the jurisdiction in which the
person lives, or the department.”) (emphasis added).
Judge VanDyke’s forceful dissent concludes that “actual” injury exists;
to the extent that the parents experience a current interference with their
ability to direct the upbringing of their children—due to the credible
threat of injury that Washington law poses—I would also find standing
on that basis.

2

28 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

about gender-identity affirmation supports a “substantial
risk” that 5C would run away again and that, next time, 5C
would run away to a shelter subject to the law requiring the
shelter to withhold parental notification, since that is the sort
of “safe place” affording the most “protection” (and thus
posing the most attraction) for a gender-dysphoric child. 1
ER 22–23. That is enough for standing. Only by drawing
inferences in favor of the State (rather than the plaintiffs)
could the panel conclude that standing was lacking.
Second, the panel faults the parents for not expressly
claiming that 5C ran away “without parental permission.”
Op. at 21 n.7. Respectfully, that criticism borders on the
risible. When the parents alleged that 5C “ran away,” the
only reasonable inference is that 5C ran away without their
permission. See Black’s Law Dictionary 1603 (12th ed.
2024) (defining “runaway” as “[s]omeone who is fleeing or
has escaped from custody, captivity, restraint, or control;
esp. a minor who has voluntarily left home without
permission and with no intent to return”) (emphasis added).
Simply grasping at straws here, the panel essentially
required the parents to recite vacuous “magic words” in their
complaint, while construing the parents’ complaint “in the
least charitable light.” Flaxman, 151 F.4th at 1187. Our
cases have repeatedly rejected that approach. See, e.g., id. at
1184 (citing Manzarek v. Saint Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co.,
519 F.3d 1025, 1030–31 (9th Cir. 2008)).
And finally, the panel says that the parents failed to
allege that 5C was “seeking or receiving gender-affirming
care.” The panel is wrong here, too. The parents alleged
that, after having run away once, their child (5C) “still
identifies as ‘transgender’ at school” and “currently sees a
school counselor” who supports 5C “in ‘transitioning.’” 1
ER 23. Moreover, the parents alleged, “5C has . . . in the

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 29

past seen therapists for a couple of years, and she has had
conversations with numerous therapists and behavior health
specialists about gender identity and ‘transitioning.’” Id.
Drawing inferences in the parents’ favor, one must conclude
that the fear they harbor that their child would seek or receive
“gender-affirming care” (as defined broadly under
Washington law) is reasonable and justifies standing. See
Wash. Rev. Code § 74.09.675(3) (“gender-affirming
treatment” means “a service or product that a health care
provider . . . prescribes to an individual to support and affirm
the individual’s gender identity.”).
Perhaps recognizing the weakness of these arguments,
the panel pivots to another. “In any event,” the panel states,
“the allegation that 5C ran away once is not sufficient to
suggest that 5C will do so again in the future.” Op. at 21 n.7.
But even here, the panel errs. Is it so unreasonable to
“suggest” that a child who suffers from gender dysphoria
and has run away because of the parents’ views on the matter
could run away again? Particularly, where the parents have
not changed their views in refusing to “affirm” the child’s
gender identity? We must draw all reasonable inferences in
the parents’ favor. Doing so requires us to conclude that
their concerns about their child’s flight risk are reasonable
and thus create standing.
City of Los Angeles v. Lyons, 461 U.S. 95 (1983), which
the panel cites, is hardly analogous. There was no indication
there that the plaintiff would commit another crime that
would subject him to the city’s chokehold policy and that the
police “would illegally choke him into unconsciousness”
(again). Id. at 105–06. But here, there is a substantial risk
that the parents’ child would seek shelter considering the
child’s past behavior, particularly where the motivations for
the child’s running away the first time remain. Indeed, the

30 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

whole point of the law was “to remove barriers” to accessing
shelters that would facilitate “gender-affirming” treatment
for runaway children. See Engrossed Substitute S.B. 5599
§ 1, 68th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Wash. 2023), enacted as 2023
Wash. Sess. Laws, ch. 408; see also 1 ER 10 (Mot. to
Dismiss) (same). It is “odd” for the State to champion the
law’s intended effects while denying them here in an attempt
to defeat standing. Diamond Alt. Energy, 606 U.S. at 118–
19.
*

*

*

This court has routinely found standing based on future
injuries in cases with alleged facts that appear more
attenuated than the facts alleged here. In cases where
plaintiffs have alleged risk of harms to aesthetic and
recreational enjoyment, harms to privacy interests, potential
exposure to chemicals, and other types of future harms, the
Court has had no problem finding standing. 3
See, e.g., Harris, 366 F.3d at 761–62 (holding that county residents
who claim to rely on the county health care system for their health needs
had standing to challenge the county’s decision to reduce the number of
hospital beds at a county hospital—even though they had no immediate
need for those beds—because plaintiffs alleged a “concrete risk of
harm,” and because the county’s “decision to pare down its healthcare
system . . . presents the proverbial accident waiting to happen” (citation
omitted)); Covington, 358 F.3d at 638–39 (holding that “the relevant
inquiry” for standing is whether defendants’ “actions have caused
‘reasonable concern’ of injury to” the plaintiffs, and concluding that
there was a reasonable concern, where the plaintiffs alleged that
violations of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act “increase[d]
the risks of . . . injuries to [them]” by threatening the “aesthetic and
recreational enjoyment of their property”) (quoting Laidlaw Env’t Servs.,
528 U.S. at 183); Krottner v. Starbucks Corp., 628 F.3d 1139, 1140–43
(9th Cir. 2010) (holding that plaintiffs “whose personal information has
been stolen but not misused” nevertheless have “suffered an injury

3

INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON 31

But when it comes to the fraught topic of gender identity
and whether parents have the right to direct the treatment of
a child suffering from gender dysphoria, courts have
appeared to use standing doctrine to dodge the issue,
characterizing the parents’ alleged harms as speculative
when they appear actual or imminent. 4 “Article III standing
is an important component of our Constitution’s structural
design,” and “[t]hat doctrine is cheapened when the rules are
not evenhandedly applied.” Murthy v. Missouri, 603 U.S.
43, 98 (2024) (Alito, J., dissenting).
In this case, the parents have alleged that Washington
law poses a substantial risk of harm to their ability to direct
the upbringing of their children and that the law violates their
constitutional rights. However difficult this issue may be for
sufficient to confer standing” where they “had alleged an act that
increased their risk of future harm,” and holding, too, that a plaintiff’s
allegation that he “has generalized anxiety and stress” as a result of the
theft suffices as “present injury”); Nat. Res. Def. Council v. EPA, 735
F.3d 873, 878 (9th Cir. 2013) (holding that an entity had standing to
challenge EPA’s decision to approve a pesticide, where the entity alleged
that the decision posed a “‘credible threat’ that its members’ children
will be exposed to [the allegedly harmful pesticide]”).
See John & Jane Parents 1 v. Montgomery Cnty. Bd. of Educ., 78 F.4th
622, 636 (4th Cir. 2023) (Niemeyer, J., dissenting) (arguing the majority
“reads the Parents’ complaint” in “an unfairly narrow way” to deny
standing), cert. denied sub nom. Jane Parents 1 v. Montgomery Cnty. Bd.
of Educ., 144 S. Ct. 2560 (2024); Parents Protecting Our Children, UA
v. Eau Claire Area Sch. Dist., Wisconsin, 95 F.4th 501, 506 (7th Cir.
2024); see generally Parents Protecting Our Children, UA v. Eau Claire
Area Sch. Dist., Wisconsin, 145 S. Ct. 14, 14–15 (2024) (Alito, J.,
dissenting from denial of certiorari) (“I am concerned that some federal
courts are succumbing to the temptation to use the doctrine of Article III
standing as a way of avoiding some particularly contentious
constitutional questions.”); Lee v. Poudre Sch. Dist. R-1, 607 U.S. --(2025) (Alito, J., concurring in denial of certiorari) (similar).

4

32 INT’L PARTNERS FOR ETHICAL CARE, INC V. FERGUSON

us to resolve, this court should have grasped the nettle and
held that there was standing in accordance with settled
Supreme Court and Ninth Circuit law. Respectfully, I
dissent from the denial of rehearing en banc.

