FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
SHERRY H. DETWILER,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 23-3710
D.C. No.
3:22-cv-01306-JR

v.
MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL
CENTER; CHERI MCCALL, an
individual; DOES, 1 through 50,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Oregon
Karin J. Immergut, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 13, 2025
Portland, Oregon
Filed September 23, 2025
Before: John B. Owens and Lawrence VanDyke, Circuit
Judges, and Richard Seeborg, Chief District Judge.*

*

The Honorable Richard Seeborg, United States Chief District Judge for
the Northern District of California, sitting by designation.

2

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

Opinion by Judge Seeborg;
Dissent by Judge VanDyke
SUMMARY**
Employment Discrimination / Religious
Accommodation
Affirming the district court’s dismissal, for failure to
state a claim, of an employment discrimination action under
Title VII and the parallel Oregon state statute, the panel held
that the plaintiff failed sufficiently to plead a bona fide
religious belief that conflicted with her employer’s policy
implementing the Oregon Health Authority’s administrative
rule requiring healthcare workers to be vaccinated against
COVID-19, absent an approved exemption.
The employer approved the plaintiff’s request for a
religious exemption from vaccination. As part of that
accommodation, it required the plaintiff to wear personal
protective equipment while in the office and to submit to
weekly antigen testing for COVID-19. The plaintiff sought
a further accommodation of exemption from the weekly
antigen testing on the basis that because her research showed
that the testing swab was carcinogenic, its use would conflict
with her Christian belief in protecting her body as the temple
of the Holy Spirit. The employer, however, denied the

**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

3

plaintiff’s requested accommodations of saliva testing or
full-time remote work and later terminated her employment.
The panel held that for a claim of religious
discrimination, the plaintiff must first plead a prima facie
case of failure to accommodate her religion. If she meets her
burden, then the employer must show that it was nonetheless
justified in refusing to accommodate. A plaintiff can meet
her prima facie burden by demonstrating that she had a bona
fide religious belief, the practice of which conflicted with an
employment duty; she informed her employer of the belief
and conflict; and the employer threatened her with or
subjected her to discriminatory treatment, including
discharge, because of her inability to fulfill the job
requirements.
Where
an
employee
seeks
an
accommodation, she must plead facts sufficient to show that
the accommodation request also springs from a bona fide
religious belief. Looking to First Amendment doctrine, the
panel held that the district court does not examine the
sincerity or the reasonableness of a belief. Instead, the court
need only determine if a plaintiff has pled enough facts to
plausibly show that her belief is religious, rather than purely
secular.
The panel concluded that the plaintiff’s complaint did
not sufficiently articulate a bona fide religious belief in
conflict with her former employer’s testing requirement
because her belief that the antigen testing swab was
carcinogenic was personal and secular, premised on her
interpretation of medical research. Disagreeing with other
circuits, the panel declined to adopt a lenient approach
allowing a complaint to survive with merely conclusory
statements about the religious nature of a belief. The panel
concluded that the plaintiff, by asserting a general religious
principle and linking that principle to her personal, medical

4

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

judgment via prayer alone, did not state a claim for religious
accommodation.
Dissenting, Judge VanDyke wrote that the majority
adopted a flawed mode of analysis purporting to distinguish
a category of purely secular claims incidentally linked to a
general religious principle from a category of truly religious
claims. Judge VanDyke wrote that he would follow other
circuits and assume as true the plaintiff’s allegation that she
requested a religious exemption from the COVID-19 testing
requirement, her employer rejected that request, and she was
fired because she declined to be tested. As pled, her religious
beliefs plainly constituted a fundamental element of her
objection to antigen testing.

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

5

COUNSEL
Matthew B. McReynolds (argued), Pacific Justice Institute,
Sacramento, California; Ray D. Hacke, Pacific Justice
Institute, Salem, Oregon; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
William G. Lockwood (argued), Diane Lenkowsky, and
Julie B. Haddon, Gordon Rees Scully Mansukhani LLP,
Portland, Oregon; for Defendants-Appellees.
OPINION
SEEBORG, Chief District Judge:
Some sacrifice of total autonomy is a natural
consequence of gainful employment. Even in the best of
times, job obligations may conflict with one’s personal
preferences. That said, an employment contract does not
terminate the right to exercise one’s religion. Federal and
state legislatures protect workers from discrimination,
harassment, and harms that rise above mere conflict with an
employee’s predilections.
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, employers
across the country instituted vaccine and testing
requirements to comply with government mandates. These
policies have surfaced the tension between individual beliefs
and the demands of the workplace. Employees across the
country have filed suits challenging these relatively new
obligations, and many assert these policies amount to
religious discrimination. Courts must tread carefully in
evaluating these claims. On the one hand, courts have long
safeguarded the rights of religious believers, even when their
beliefs are not mainstream, traditional, or even internally

6

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

consistent. On the other hand, legislatures crafted religious
discrimination statutes of limited scope, striking a balance
between individual entitlements and the reality of the
workplace. Accordingly, lower courts must consistently
enforce pleading requirements to respect this legislative
intent.
This appeal from the dismissal of a religious
discrimination claim asks what is sufficient to plead a bona
fide religious belief under Title VII and the parallel Oregon
state statute. To be sure, assertions of religious belief are
entitled to deference, particularly at the pleading stage.
However, courts have not uniformly agreed on a standard for
evaluating the nature of a belief. Supreme Court guidance
in the First Amendment context, considered alongside the
requirements of federal pleading, reflects that references to
generic religious principles cannot transform a specific
secular preference into a basis for a religious discrimination
claim.
Broad invocations of religion cannot shield
employees from any unwanted job obligation. Accordingly,
we affirm the trial court’s dismissal of this action for failure
to state a claim.
I.
Sherry M. Detwiler worked as a Privacy Officer and the
Director of Health Information for Defendant-Appellee
Mid-Columbia Medical Center (“MCMC”), a hospital in
The Dalles, Oregon, from September 14, 2020, through
December 20, 2021. In her own words, Detwiler is a
practicing Christian who believes her body is a temple of the
Holy Spirit and sincerely believes she has a “religious duty
to avoid defiling her ‘temple’ by taking in substances that
the Bible explicitly condemns or which could potentially
cause physical harm to her body.”

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

7

On September 28, 2021, Detwiler sought a religious
exemption from MCMC’s policy implementing the Oregon
Health Authority’s (“OHA”) administrative rule. The OHA
required healthcare workers to be vaccinated against
COVID-19, absent an approved exemption. Detwiler,
relying on sources she found online, determined that
COVID-19 vaccines were created from fetal cell lines and
contained “neurotoxins, attenuated viruses, carcinogens,
chemical wastes, and other potentially harmful substances.”
She then informed MCMC that her Christian beliefs against
abortion and the introduction of harmful substances into her
body conflicted with the vaccine requirement.
MCMC approved Detwiler’s request for a religious
exemption from vaccination on October 1, 2021.
As part of that accommodation, MCMC required
Detwiler to wear personal protective equipment while in the
office and to submit to weekly antigen testing for COVID19. MCMC’s test required a participant to insert a cotton
swab dipped in ethylene oxide (“EtO”) into one’s nostril,
swirl the swab against the skin to collect a sample from the
nasal tissue, and then submit the swab to a lab for analysis.
Detwiler requested a further accommodation, this time
seeking an exemption from the weekly antigen testing.
Detwiler informed MCMC that she found “multiple sources
indicating that EtO is a carcinogenic substance.” In her
second accommodation request, Detwiler cited to her belief
that her body is a “temple of God,” stating:
It is against my faith and my conscience to
commit sin. Sin is anything that violates the
will of God, as set forth in the Bible, and as
impressed upon the heart of the believer by

8

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

the Holy Spirit. In order to keep myself from
sin, and receive God’s direction in my life, I
pray and ask God for wisdom and direction
daily. As part of my prayers, I have asked
God for direction regarding the current
COVID testing requirement. As I have
prayed about what I should do, the Holy
Spirit has moved on my heart and conscience
that I must not participate in COVID testing
that causes harm. If I were to go against the
moving of the Holy Spirit, I would be sinning
and jeopardizing my relationship with God
and violating my conscience . . .
Ethylene Oxide (EtO) is carcinogenic to
humans. There is clear evidence that EtO is
genotoxic and evidence supports a mutagenic
mode of action, key precursor events are
anticipated to occur in humans and progress
to
tumors,
including
evidence
of
chromosome damage in humans exposed to
EtO . . .
. . . As a Christian protecting my body from
defilement according to God’s law, I invoke
my religious right to refuse any testing which
would alter my DNA and has been proven to
cause cancer. I find testing with carcinogens
and chemical waste to be in direct conflict
with my Christian duty to protect my body as
the temple of the Holy Spirit.
Detwiler proposed MCMC allow her either to submit to
saliva testing for COVID-19 or to work remotely full-time.
She believed the latter accommodation to be reasonable

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

9

because she had previously attended and conducted
meetings via videoconference, and expected most of her
other duties would not require her physical presence at the
MCMC facility.
On October 19, 2021, Cheri McCall, MCMC’s Chief
Human Resources Officer, informed Detwiler that MCMC
had granted her request for an exemption from the vaccine
requirement but denied her requested accommodations of
saliva testing or full-time remote work. McCall explained
saliva testing would be impractical because test results
would take 24 to 36 hours, and MCMC might ask Detwiler
to appear for same-day in-person work. McCall further
explained full-time remote work would create “a hardship on
[Detwiler’s] department and team,” citing increased
complaints and dissatisfaction with Detwiler’s work during
remote periods in the height of the pandemic. Finally,
McCall informed Detwiler MCMC was placing her on
unpaid leave until October 30, 2021, or until she complied
with the vaccine mandate or the terms of her approved
religious exemption.
MCMC later extended this deadline and offered Detwiler
the alternative option to accept reassignment to a different
role. Detwiler had until December 20, 2021, to agree to
antigen testing or to be reassigned. Because she did neither,
MCMC terminated Detwiler’s employment on December
20, 2021.
Detwiler filed her First Amended Complaint (“FAC”) on
November 4, 2022, against MCMC and Cheri McCall, as
well as unnamed Doe defendants. Detwiler sought damages
for Defendants’ averred religious discrimination in violation
of Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and Oregon’s
parallel anti-discrimination statute, Or. Rev. Stat.

10

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

§ 659A.030. She sued the individual Defendants for aiding
and abetting MCMC’s alleged discrimination.
On November 18, 2022, Defendants filed a motion to
dismiss the FAC for failure to state a claim. Defendants
argued Detwiler’s objection to antigen testing stemmed from
her secular, medical judgment rather than a bona fide
religious belief. On December 20, 2022, the assigned
magistrate judge issued her findings and recommendations
(“F&R”), concluding the district court should grant
Defendants’ motion to dismiss. The magistrate judge held
that although Detwiler’s complaint was “couche[d] in
religious terms,” the FAC demonstrated her request for
accommodation was based on her “secular, non-religious
belief that nasal swab testing contains hazardous materials.”
She then determined that because Detwiler’s underlying
claim of religious discrimination failed, her claims against
the individual Defendants were similarly insufficient. The
district judge adopted the F&R in full and dismissed the FAC
without prejudice.
Detwiler filed her Second Amended Complaint (“SAC”)
on July 19, 2023. The SAC clarified: “[w]hile [Detwiler]
declined to submit to nasal swab testing, at least in part, due
to medical and/or scientific judgment, she also exercised
religious judgment” and her belief “that her body is a temple
of the Holy Spirit [is] rooted in religion, as it is based on a
biblical passage namely, 1 Corinthians 6:19-20.” Detwiler
also asserted she confirmed this opposition to testing via
personal prayer.
Defendants filed another motion to dismiss, and the
magistrate judge again recommended dismissal, this time
with prejudice. The court “readily accept[ed]” Detwiler’s
bona fide religious belief that her body is a temple of the

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

11

Holy Spirit but noted Detwiler’s “specific determination of
what is harmful . . . was not, in this case, premised on the
Bible or any other religious tenet or teaching, but rather on
her research-based scientific medical judgments.” Again,
because Detwiler failed to plead the underlying claim, the
court also recommended dismissal of the aiding and abetting
claims.
The magistrate judge further recommended denying
leave to amend because Detwiler had not set forth any new
facts that cured the FAC’s deficiencies. Because Detwiler
had the opportunity to plead additional facts and failed to do
so, the magistrate judge concluded no such facts existed.
On November 2, 2023, the district court adopted the
magistrate judge’s recommendation in full and dismissed the
case with prejudice. The district court entered its final
judgment on the same day. Detwiler timely appealed.
II.
The Ninth Circuit has not yet endorsed a test for
determining the nature, whether religious or secular, of a
belief underlying a Title VII claim. That said, cases from the
First Amendment context, guidance from the Equal
Employment Opportunity Commission (“EEOC”), and a
slew of district court cases offer a logical approach. While
Detwiler would embrace a standard by which a pleading
passes muster whenever a practice is labeled “religious,” a
complaint must do more than rest on an unadorned
conclusion.
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6) requires
dismissal of a complaint when a plaintiff’s allegations fail to
set forth a set of facts that, if true, would entitle the
complainant to relief. Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 679

12

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

(2009); Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 555
(2007). On a motion to dismiss, a court accepts as true a
plaintiff’s well-pleaded factual allegations and construes all
factual inferences in the light most favorable to the plaintiff.
See Manzarek v. St. Paul Fire & Marine Ins. Co., 519 F.3d
1025, 1031 (9th Cir. 2008). However, a court is not required
to accept as true legal conclusions couched as factual
allegations. Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678 (“Threadbare recitals of
the elements of a cause of action, supported by mere
conclusory statements, do not suffice.”).
Detwiler brought her claims under Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 and Oregon’s parallel state law. Both
statutes make it unlawful for an employer to discriminate
against an individual based on their religion. 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000e-2; Or. Rev. Stat. § 659A.030(1)(a). Employers are
required to accommodate employees’ religious beliefs
unless doing so would impose an undue hardship. 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000e(j); Or. Rev. Stat. § 659A.030(1)(a).
Claims of failure to accommodate a religious objection
are analyzed under a burden-shifting framework. See
Bolden-Hardge v. Off. of Cal. State Controller, 63 F.4th
1215, 1222 (9th Cir. 2023); Dawson v. Entek Intern., 630
F.3d 928, 935 (9th Cir. 2011) (holding federal framework
also applies to discrimination claims brought under Or. Rev.
Stat. § 659A.030). The plaintiff must first plead a prima
facie case of failure to accommodate her religion. BoldenHardge, 63 F.4th at 1222. If the plaintiff meets her burden,
the employer must show it was nonetheless justified in
refusing to accommodate. See id. A plaintiff can meet her
prima facie burden by demonstrating “(1) [s]he had a bona
fide religious belief, the practice of which conflicted with an
employment duty; (2) [s]he informed [her] employer of the
belief and conflict; and (3) the employer threatened [her]

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

13

with or subjected [her] to discriminatory treatment,
including discharge, because of [her] inability to fulfill the
job requirements.” Heller v. EBB Auto Co., 8 F.3d 1433,
1438 (9th Cir. 1993). Where an employee seeks an
accommodation, she must plead facts sufficient to show the
accommodation request also springs from a bona fide
religious belief. See Tiano v. Dillard Dep’t Stores, Inc., 139
F.3d 679, 682–83 (9th Cir. 1998).
Evaluating the first factor of the prima facie case is a
delicate inquiry. Title VII defines religion to include all
aspects of observance and practice, as well as belief. Id. at
681 (citing 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j)). However, this protection
is not limitless and does not encompass secular preferences.
Id. at 682.
The EEOC interprets Title VII and existing caselaw to
conclude an employee’s request for an exemption from a
COVID-19 vaccination mandate can be denied if “the
employee’s objection . . . is not religious in nature.” What
You Should Know About COVID-19 and the ADA, the
Rehabilitation Act, and Other EEO Laws, U.S. Equal Emp.
Opportunity
Comm’n
(Mar.
1,
2022),
https://www.eeoc.gov/wysk/what-you-should-know-aboutcovid-19-and-ada-rehabilitation-act-and-other-eeo-laws
(“EEOC Guidelines”);1 see also Doe v. San Diego Unified
Sch. Dist., 19 F.4th 1173, 1180 (9th Cir. 2021) (citing same
EEOC guidelines). Accordingly, a plaintiff fails to state a
1

At some point between May 7, 2025, and May 16, 2025, the EEOC
archived this webpage. It now begins with the disclaimer: “This is
archived content from the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity
Commission. The information here may be outdated and links may no
longer function.” The EEOC has not since updated its guidelines, and
therefore this opinion treats the available information as merely
persuasive.

14

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

prima facie case if the belief motivating her accommodation
request is not, in fact, religious.
While as previously noted, the Ninth Circuit has not yet
endorsed a test for determining whether a belief is religious
or secular, this court regularly looks to First Amendment
doctrine for guiding principles to assess a plaintiff’s
assertions of religious belief. See, e.g., Keene v. City and
Cnty. of San Francisco, No. 22-16567, 2023 WL 3451687,
at *2 (9th Cir. May 15, 2023) (relying on Thomas v. Review
Bd., 450 U.S. 707, 714 (1981)); Bolden-Hardge, 63 F.4th at
1223.
Courts need not accept entirely conclusory assertions of
religious belief. See Bolden-Hardge, 63 F.4th at 1223
(relying on Oklevueha Native Am. Church of Haw., Inc. v.
Lynch, 828 F.3d 1012, 1016–17 (9th Cir. 2016) (holding the
same in a free exercise matter)); Wisconsin v. Yoder, 406
U.S. 205, 215–16 (1972) (noting “purely secular
considerations” do not merit constitutional protections for
religion)). Indeed, some inquiry into the religious or secular
nature of a belief is necessary to prevent religious labels
from becoming carte blanche to ignore any obligation. See,
e.g., Yoder, 406 U.S. at 215–16. Yet courts have struggled
to draw a line between the religious and the secular. See
Callahan v. Woods, 658 F.2d 679, 687 (9th Cir. 1981)
(noting for First Amendment purposes that “[a] secular
experience can stimulate a spiritual response; lives are not so
compartmentalized that one can readily keep the two
separate.”).
To be sure, courts may not substitute their own judgment
for that of the believer’s. See Heller, 8 F.3d at 1438 (“[I]t is
no business of courts to say . . . what is a religious practice
or activity.”). Nor can they adjudge the reasonableness of a

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

15

belief under the guise of a purely legal assessment of the
sufficiency of the claim. See id. Whether a belief is religious
should not “turn upon a judicial perception of the particular
belief or practice in question; religious beliefs need not be
acceptable, logical, consistent, or comprehensible to others
in order to merit First Amendment protection.” Thomas, 450
U.S. at 714. So too with Title VII protections. See BoldenHardge, 63 F.4th at 1223 (relying on Thomas in the Title VII
context); Keene, 2023 WL 3451687, at *2 (same).
Overlap between secular and religious bases for a belief
poses a particular problem.
A belief grounded in
overlapping secular and religious considerations is
“presumably protected” in the constitutional context.
Callahan, 658 F.2d at 684. The EEOC guidelines echo this
principle, stating “overlap between a religious and political
view does not place it outside the scope of Title VII’s
religious protections, as long as the view is part of a
comprehensive religious belief system and is not simply an
isolated teaching.” EEOC Guidelines. The challenge lies in
distinguishing purely secular concerns from preferences that
overlap with a bona fide religious belief.
III.
A plaintiff seeking a religious exemption must plead a
sufficient nexus between her religion and the specific belief
in conflict with the work requirement. To survive a motion
to dismiss, a plaintiff need not establish her belief is
consistent, widely held, or even rational. However, a
complaint must connect the requested exemption with a truly
religious principle. Invocations of broad, religious tenets
cannot, on their own, convert a secular preference into a
religious conviction. To hold otherwise would destroy the
pleading standard for religious discrimination claims,

16

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

allowing complainants to invoke magic words and survive a
dismissal without stating a prima facie case.
This standard does not direct lower courts to examine the
sincerity or the reasonableness of a belief. Instead, courts
need only determine if a plaintiff has pled enough facts to
show her belief is religious, rather than purely secular. This
analysis, while respecting plaintiffs’ well-pled assertions of
religious conviction, requires claims of religious
discrimination to meet the same level of plausibility as any
other prayer for relief.
Applying the typical plausibility standard here,
Detwiler’s SAC does not sufficiently articulate a bona fide
religious belief in conflict with her former employer’s
testing requirement. The deference owed to Detwiler’s
claims, both in procedural posture and due to their averred
religious nature, cannot cure the deficiencies in her
complaint.
The district court dismissed Detwiler’s SAC for failure
to state a prima facie case. Detwiler asserts the lower court
erred on multiple fronts. She primarily urges this panel to
adopt an extremely permissive standard for assessing the
nature of a Title VII claimant’s beliefs. In support of such a
standard, she relies on comments in First Amendment cases,
where this circuit and others have emphasized the significant
deference courts should give to a plaintiff’s professed belief
or belief system. Some Circuits have adopted this approach
in the employment discrimination context, allowing a
complaint to survive with merely conclusory statements
about the religious nature of a belief. However, such a
standard contravenes federal pleading requirements and
elevates claims of religious discrimination over all other
prayers for relief.

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

17

Detwiler also obfuscates the belief at issue. The District
Court acknowledged the sincerity and religiosity of
Detwiler’s belief in her body as a temple and even the
implied prohibition on ingesting harmful substances.
Therefore, at issue is Detwiler’s belief that the testing swab
is harmful, and specifically that EtO is a carcinogen. This
belief is personal and secular, premised on her interpretation
of medical research. In essence, Detwiler labels a personal
judgment based on science as a direct product of her general
religious tenet. Yet, her alarm about the test swab is far too
attenuated from the broad principle to treat the two as part of
a single belief. Moreover, Detwiler does not present a case
where a religious belief overlaps with a medical one.
Without Detwiler’s opinion that EtO is carcinogenic and
therefore harmful, she has no conflict with MCMC’s
COVID-19 testing requirement––her secular judgment
offers the sole basis of her objection. This concern about the
harmful nature of EtO has no relationship with her religious
beliefs.
Identifying Detwiler’s operative belief makes clear that
she has not plead a prima facie case. Detwiler’s other
arguments also fall short. She next avers that the district
court erred in examining at all whether her objection was
religious or secular. This overstates the law: a district court
must make a determination about the source of a belief to
examine a plaintiff’s prima facie case. See, Bolden-Hardge,
63 F.4th at 1223 (“[Deference to assertions of religious
belief] does not mean that courts must take plaintiffs’
conclusory assertions of violations of their religious beliefs
at face value.”); Tiano, 139 F.3d at 682 (“Title VII does not
protect secular preferences.”); Mason v. Gen. Brown Cent.
Sch. Dist., 851 F.2d 47, 51 (2d Cir. 1988) (“[A] threshold
inquiry into the ‘religious’ aspect of particular beliefs and

18

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

practices cannot be avoided if we are to determine what is in
fact based on religious belief, and what is based on secular
or scientific principles.” (citations and quotations omitted)).
Detwiler then claims the district court improperly
determined her belief was secular, in contravention of this
court’s recent opinion in Bolden-Hardge, 63 F.4th at 1223.
However, Bolden-Hardge examined whether the plaintiff’s
religious belief conflicted with her employment duty, rather
than religious nature of the objection itself. Id. The BoldenHardge court opined that the lower court’s role was “to
determine whether the line drawn represents an honest
conviction” and reiterated that, particularly at the motion to
dismiss phase, “the burden to allege a conflict with religious
beliefs is fairly minimal. Id. (relying on Thomas, 450 U.S.
at 716). The district court here acted in accordance with
Bolden-Hardge, examining Plaintiff’s prima facie case for a
religious belief in conflict with her employment duties.
Detwiler has not met that minimal burden here.2
2

Detwiler also relies on this Court’s unpublished opinion in Keene, in
which this court reversed the lower court’s decision to deny a
preliminary injunction to COVID-19 vaccine objectors. 2023 WL
3451687 at *1. Without explaining its reasoning, the district court
concluded plaintiffs did not demonstrate sincere religious beliefs in
conflict with receiving the vaccine. Id. The panel interpreted this silence
as the district court “erroneously [holding] that Appellants had not
asserted sincere religious beliefs because their beliefs were not
scientifically accurate.” Id.
Keene provides no help to Detwiler because there the lower court did not
actually examine the religious nature of the plaintiffs’ opposition to the
COVID-19 vaccine and provided no reasoning as to why plaintiffs failed
to plead a prima facie case. See id at *2. The district court here, by
contrast, clearly outlined Detwiler’s complaint’s deficiency. More
importantly, the claimants in Keene pled a specific religious belief in
opposition to receiving the vaccination––their opposition to the use of

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

19

Beyond Bolden-Hardge, Detwiler relies on cases outside
the employment arena, as well as decisions from other
circuits, in support of her lenient standard. In particular, she
relies on this circuit’s reasoning in Callahan, a First
Amendment case, which held “[s]o long as one’s faith is
religiously based at the time it is asserted, it should not
matter, for constitutional purposes, whether that faith
derived from revelation, study, upbringing, gradual
evolution, or some source that appears entirely
incomprehensible.” 658 F.2d at 687.
Of more relevance here, however, are the numerous
district courts––many within this circuit––that have held
when the religious principles are too broad, and the
connection to personal, medical judgments are too tenuous,
plaintiffs have not pled a religious belief. Plaintiffs in those
actions regularly invoke the same Christian belief as does
Detwiler––that their bodies are temples of the Holy Spirit.
Many then explain they reached their opposition to
vaccination or testing by conducting their own research and
individual prayer. Because these exemption requests are
fundamentally predicated on concerns about health
consequences, district courts have generally dismissed these
Title VII claims.
Lower courts have held plaintiffs cannot “couch” their
personal, secular beliefs in religious terms to claim Title VII
protections. See, e.g., Medrano v. Kaiser Permanente, No.
8:23-cv-02501-DOC-ADSX, 2024 WL 3383704, at *4

fetal cells used in developing the available vaccines–– and identified the
religious basis for their objection to vaccination as their Christian faith’s
opposition to abortion. Id.

20

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

(C.D. Cal. July 10, 2024)3; Trinh v. Shriners Hosps. for
Child., No. 3:22-cv-01999-SB, 2023 WL 7525228, at *7 (D.
Or. Oct. 23, 2023). Courts have expressed concerns with a
professed religious belief so broad as “to cover anything
[plaintiffs] train[] it on.” Ulrich v. Lancaster Gen. Health,
No. 22-cv-4945, 2023 WL 2939585, at *5 (E.D. Pa. Apr. 13,
2023) (quoting Finkbeiner v. Geisinger Clinic, 623 F. Supp.
3d 458, 465 (M.D. Pa. 2022)). In the words of one court, “it
takes more than a generalized aversion to harming the body
to nudge a practice over the line from medical to religious.”
Geerlings v. Tredyffrin/Easttown Sch. Dist., No. 21-cv4024, 2021 WL 4399672, at *7 (E.D. Pa. Sept. 27, 2021);
see also Kather v. Asante Health Sys., No. 1:22-cv-01842MC, 2023 WL 4865533, at *1, *5 (D. Or. July 28, 2023)
(distinguishing plaintiffs who sufficiently tied vaccine
objections to religion from those who made only secular
legal and economic objections to a vaccine mandate).
Invocation of prayer, without more, is still insufficient to
elevate personal medical judgments to the level of religious
significance. See, e.g., Coates v. Legacy Health, No. 3:23cv-00931-JR, 2024 WL 1181827, at *5–6 (D. Or. Jan 8,
2024). Indeed, crediting every secular objection bolstered
by a minimal reference to prayer as religious “would amount
to a blanket privilege and a limitless excuse for avoiding all
unwanted obligations.” Finkbeiner, 623 F. Supp. 3d at 465
(internal citations and quotations omitted); see also Ledezma
v. Optum Servs., Inc., No. 23-cv-06691-VC, 2025 WL
327743, at *1 (N.D. Cal. Jan. 29, 2025) (reaching the same
conclusion at summary judgment); Hand v. Bayhealth Med.
3

The plaintiff in this case has appealed the dismissal of the complaint,
but that panel has not yet heard argument or issued a decision. See 9th
Cir. Docket No. 24-6278.

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

21

Ctr., Inc., No. 22-cv-1548-RGA, 2024 WL 359245, at *5 (D.
Del. Jan. 31, 2024), aff’d sub nom. McDowell v. Bayhealth
Med. Ctr., Inc., No. 24-1157, 2024 WL 4799870, at *1 (3d
Cir. Nov. 15, 2024), cert. denied sub nom. Harvey v.
Bayhealth Med. Ctr., Inc., No. 24-996, 2025 WL 1787737,
at *1 (U.S. June 30, 2025).
Concern over this limitless expansion also appears in
First Amendment precedents. In Wisconsin v. Yoder, the
Supreme Court observed “the very concept of ordered liberty
precludes allowing every person to make his own standards
on matters of conduct in which society as a whole has
important interests.” 406 U.S. at 215–16. The Ninth Circuit
has endorsed this necessary limiting principle.
See
Callahan, 658 F.2d at 683 (“It is of course imaginable that
in some circumstances a person might assert a First
Amendment claim and attempt to justify it with a religious
belief which, though sincerely held, was simply irrelevant to
the claim.”) (relying on Yoder, 406 U.S. at 215–16).
Other circuits have been similarly wary of allowing
plaintiffs to anoint their claims with a divine mandate. See,
e.g., Africa v. Pennsylvania, 662 F.2d 1025, 1030–31 (3d
Cir. 1981). Beginning with Africa, the Third Circuit has
regularly declined to accept assertions of religious belief
wholesale. See, e.g., Gatto v. Johnson & Johnson Servs.,
Inc., No. 24-1992, 2025 WL 816732, at *2 (3d Cir. Mar. 14,
2025); Fallon v. Mercy Cath. Med. Ctr. of Se. Pa., 877 F.3d
487, 490–91 (3d Cir. 2017); McDowell, 2024 WL 4799870,
at *2 (affirming dismissal of pleadings that failed to “provide
facts from which we can plausibly infer that Plaintiffs’

22

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

objections . . . are based on religious beliefs and not on their
personal, secular, and medical beliefs”).4
Gatto is strikingly similar to this case. See Gatto, 2025
WL 816732, at *2. Gatto objected to her employer’s testing
requirement based on her views that her body is a temple of
the Holy Spirit which would be violated by nasal swab tests.
Id. The Third Circuit concluded her objections were not
religious in nature and affirmed the dismissal of her
complaint. See id. (relying on Fallon 877 F.3d at 488, 492
and Africa, 662 F.2d at 1033–34). Like the plaintiffs in
Fallon and Africa, Gatto had secular beliefs about what was
or was not healthy. See id. These ideas were not entitled to
Title VII protections because her belief that her body is a
temple lacked a sufficient nexus to her health concerns with
testing. See, e.g., id. (relying on Yoder, 406 U.S. at 216, to
observe that a “subjective evaluation and rejection of the
4

Recently, district courts in this Circuit have looked to the Third
Circuit’s Africa test as a starting point to determine the nature of a belief.
See, e.g., Medrano, 2024 WL 3383704, at *3; Stephens v. LegacyGoHealth Urgent Care, No. 3:23-cv-00206-SB, 2023 WL 7612395, at
*4 (D. Or. Oct. 23, 2023). In Africa, the Third Circuit formulated three
indicia of a religion: whether a plaintiff’s claimed religion 1) addresses
“fundamental and ultimate questions having to do with deep and
imponderable matters”; 2) is comprehensive in nature; and 3) has certain
recognizable formal and external signs. 662 F.2d at 1032; see also
Alvarado v. City of San Jose, 94 F.3d 1223, 1230 (9th Cir. 1996)
(endorsing the Africa test in the First Amendment context).
To be sure, the Africa factors are of limited applicability here. That
test was designed to evaluate objections based on less well-established
religions. Africa, 662 F.2d at 1032. The religiosity of Detwiler’s
underlying Christian belief system is not at issue. The Africa cases are
instead helpful in articulating a concern with the ballooning religious
discrimination claims. See id. at 1031 (relying on Yoder, 406 U.S. at
215–16).

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

23

contemporary secular [and medical] values accepted by the
majority” are claims that “would not rest on a religious
basis”). Such bare allegations give rise to, at most, the “mere
possibility” that religious beliefs informed objections to the
vaccine and to testing. McDowell, 2024 WL 4799870, at *2
(relying on Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678–79).
Expanding Title VII claims runs the risk of stretching
these statutory protections far beyond their intended use. To
allow such claimants to go forward without limits would
“impermissibly cloak with religious significance [plaintiff’s]
fundamentally secular objections . . . and thereby create a
blanket privilege whenever an employee invokes scripture.”
Gatto, 2025 WL 816732, at *3 (internal quotations and
citations omitted).
Despite this concern, several circuits have adopted
Detwiler’s proposed lenient standard. In Ringhofer v. Mayo
Clinic, Ambulance, the Eighth Circuit considered religious
exemption requests advanced by two plaintiffs who objected
to their employer’s vaccine mandate and testing alternative.
102 F.4th 894 (8th Cir. 2024). One employee explained that
because “her body is a temple for the Holy Spirit that she is
duty bound to honor,” “[s]he does not believe in putting
unnecessary vaccines or medications into her body,” and the
other that “[s]hifting my faith from my Creator to medicine
is the equivalent of committing idolatry.” Id. at 902. The
Eighth Circuit reversed the dismissal of these plaintiffs’ Title
VII claims, concluding, “[b]y connecting their objection to
testing to specific religious principles,” the plaintiffs
satisfied their burden at the pleading stage. Id.
The Sixth Circuit has also concluded a plaintiff stated a
claim when she refused vaccination “as a result of her
beliefs” and personal prayer. Lucky v. Landmark Med. of

24

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

Mich., 103 F.4th 1241, 1243 (6th Cir. 2024). The court
emphasized that Title VII’s language did not, contrary to the
district court’s conclusion, require the plaintiff to explain in
more depth how any particular tenet of her religion
prohibited vaccination. See id. The panel determined that
Title VII, when read against the federal pleading
requirements, required only that the plaintiff allege facts
“supporting an inference that her refusal to be vaccinated . . .
was an ‘aspect’ of her ‘religious observance’ or ‘practice’ or
‘belief.’” Id. (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j)).
Similarly, a divided panel of the Seventh Circuit
determined that “[c]ourts should not undertake to dissect
religious beliefs . . . because [they] are not articulated with
the clarity and precision that a more sophisticated person
might employ.” Passarella v. Aspirus, Inc., 108 F.4th 1005,
1011 (7th Cir. 2024) (quoting Thomas, 450 U.S. at 715).
Accordingly, the majority concluded the plaintiff’s use of
religious vocabulary was sufficient to connect her medical
judgment to a religious belief. See id. at 1011.
These decisions—though less pervasive in the federal
circuits than the dissent portrays—offer Title VII protections
to the secular implementation of high-level, religiously
inspired goals.5 See id. at 1014 (Rovner, J., dissenting)
(expressing this concern with the majority’s reasoning).
This threshold is far too permissive. Take, for example, a
5

The cases from the First, Fifth, Sixth, and Seventh Circuits—cited by
the dissent for the proposition that today’s decision departs from a
national consensus—adjudicate challenges to vaccine mandates, not
testing requirements. See Bazinet v. Beth Isr. Lahey Health, Inc., 113
F.4th 9, 13 (1st Cir. 2024); Wright v. Honeywell Int’l, Inc., No. 24-30667,
2025 WL 2218131, at *1 (5th Cir. Aug. 5, 2025); Lucky v. Landmark
Med. of Mich., P.C., 103 F.4th 1241, 1242 (6th Cir. 2024); Passarella v.
Aspirus, Inc., 108 F.4th 1005, 1007 (7th Cir. 2024).

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

25

claimant who believes her body is a temple. She then
interprets that belief as a requirement to exercise daily and
finds evidence suggesting that such exercise is most
effective when done in the morning. While the generic
principle and the claimant’s chosen implementation are both
understandable, they are not equivalent. She may prefer to
exercise in the mornings, but she is not entitled to an
exemption from attendance at early meetings. Nothing in
her religion conflicts with morning work requirements.
Instead, such a plaintiff relies on personal and practical
preferences rather than a religious mandate. Even though
her belief in her body as a temple is religious, the rationale
for her specific exemption request is not.
The same is true here. To allow Detwiler’s claim to go
forward would open the door to unlimited religious
discrimination claims. Such a deluge would certainly
generate negative consequences. Employers incur costs in
the administration of religious accommodation requests and
the early stages of litigation. Courts would face greater
numbers of these claims, allocating further judicial resources
to complaints with no merit whatsoever. Detwiler offers no
limiting principle within her proposed standard. Therefore,
courts in this circuit must hold assertions of religious belief
to the routine plausibility standard and examine whether
there is any nexus between religion and a plaintiff’s
viewpoint.
Ultimately, Detwiler’s objection to testing is grounded
in the secular belief that the nasal swabs in antigen tests are
carcinogenic. She failed to plead facts demonstrating her
belief in the harmfulness of the swabs was related to her
Christian faith. Detwiler’s references to prayer and a broad
belief that her body is a temple do not render her medical

26

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

evaluation of the swabs religious. Such personal preferences
are not entitled to Title VII protections.
IV.
Detwiler, by asserting a general religious principle and
linking that principle to her personal, medical judgment via
prayer alone, did not state a claim for religious
accommodation. Detwiler’s proposed standard would result
in an unmanageable expansion of Title VII protections. If
Detwiler’s assertions were sufficient to state a prima facie
claim for a religious exemption, there would be no bounds
on otherwise-secular preferences that an employee could
characterize as religious and therefore demand an employer
accommodate. The District Court properly determined
Detwiler’s objection was based on her secular belief, not a
religious one. Accordingly, the dismissal of Detwiler’s
complaint for failure to state a claim is hereby affirmed.
AFFIRMED.
VANDYKE, Circuit Judge, dissenting:
Plaintiff Sherry Detwiler alleges that Mid-Columbia
Medical Center (“MCMC”) discriminated against her
religious beliefs in violation of Title VII by denying her an
exemption from MCMC’s policy requiring her to undergo a
nasal-swab test for COVID-19. The district court dismissed
the complaint with prejudice for failure to state a claim. But
Detwiler pled with sufficient specificity to show her claim
has facial plausibility, satisfying her minimal burden. The
majority errs by concluding otherwise.
The majority adopts a flawed mode of analysis that
purports to distinguish a category of “purely secular” claims

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

27

incidentally “link[ed]” to “a general religious principle”
(which are not cognizable) from “truly religious” claims
(which are cognizable). That approach is unworkable and
will necessarily embroil courts in resolving intractable
questions about how much of a claimant’s religiously
motivated objection is “truly religious,” versus how much of
the objection derives from an erroneous “personal judgment
based on science.” Effectively all religiously motivated
actions could be characterized as based on some “general
religious principle” combined with some view of how the
world factually (or “scientifically,” or “medically,” or
“actually”—pick your preferred adverb) works. Because of
this, the majority’s new test ultimately allows judges to
divine what is “really doing the work” in someone’s sincere
religious objection. Is it the claimant’s “truly religious”
belief, or is it just a merely “general religious principle”
combined with the claimant’s wrongheaded view of reality?
While I’m sure my colleagues in the majority don’t
intend this result, it should be clear that such a test is just a
pathway for right-thinking judges to decide which religious
claims merit protection, and which are too benighted to
qualify. I would avoid that path. Following instead the
majority of other circuits that have evaluated claims
indistinguishable from Detwiler’s, I would reverse the
district court’s order dismissing her complaint and allow her
claim to proceed.
I.
On a motion to dismiss, “[w]e accept the plaintiff’s
allegations as true and view them in the light most favorable
to her.” Soo Park v. Thompson, 851 F.3d 910, 918 (9th Cir.
2017). A complaint survives a motion to dismiss if it alleges
“enough facts to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its

28

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

face.” Taylor v. Yee, 780 F.3d 928, 935 (9th Cir. 2015)
(quoting Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 570
(2007)). “Dismissal is proper only where there is no
cognizable legal theory or an absence of sufficient facts
alleged to support a cognizable legal theory.” Id. (quoting
Navarro v. Block, 250 F.3d 729, 732 (9th Cir. 2001)).
Title VII “requires employers to accommodate the
religious practice of their employees.” Groff v. DeJoy, 600
U.S. 447, 453 (2023). To establish a prima facie claim for
religious discrimination based on a failure to accommodate,
an employee must show that (1) she had a bona fide religious
belief that conflicted with an employment duty, (2) she
informed her employer of the conflict, and (3) the employer
subjected her to an adverse employment action because she
could not fulfill the employment duty. See Peterson v.
Hewlett-Packard Co., 358 F.3d 599, 606 (9th Cir. 2004).
Detwiler alleges, and therefore we must assume as true,
that she requested a religious exemption from the COVID19 testing requirement, MCMC rejected that request, and
Detwiler was fired because she declined to be tested. All
that is left for us to determine is whether Detwiler pled
sufficient facts to support an inference that her opposition to
the testing was an aspect of “religious observance and
practice” or “belief.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j). In my view, as
pled, Detwiler’s religious beliefs plainly constitute a
fundamental element of her objection.
Both the text of Title VII and EEOC guidance applying
the statute confirm that an employee can object on a mixture
of religious and nonreligious grounds—a partially secular
objection can still survive a motion to dismiss if some
element of the objection is plausibly connected to religion.
Title VII defines “religion” to include “all aspects of

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

29

religious observance and practice, as well as belief.” Id. We
have noted the breadth of this definition: “[t]he very words
of the statute (‘all aspects of religious observance and
practice . . . .’) leave little room for . . . a limited
interpretation.” Heller v. EBB Auto Co., 8 F.3d 1433, 1438
(9th Cir. 1993) (first ellipsis in original) (quoting Redmond
v. GAF Corp., 574 F.2d 897, 900 (7th Cir. 1978)). The
EEOC has interpreted the definition accordingly: religious
exemptions from workplace policies may consist of both
religious and secular elements. See What You Should Know
About COVID-19 and the ADA, the Rehabilitation Act, and
Other EEO Laws, U.S. EEOC (Mar. 1, 2022),
https://www.eeoc.gov/wysk/what-you-should-know-aboutcovid-19-and-ada-rehabilitation-act-and-other-eeo-laws
(“[O]verlap between a religious and political view does not
place it outside the scope of Title VII’s religious protections,
as long as the view is part of a comprehensive religious belief
system and is not simply an isolated teaching.”). There is
nothing improper under Title VII about an employee
objecting to an employer’s mandate on the grounds that it
both violates her religious beliefs and is unhealthy. What is
improper is for a court to parse a sincere religious objection
into separate “religious” and “secular” elements and then
dismiss the complaint because the secular part is not
religious.
The district court found that Detwiler’s “specific
determination of what is harmful . . . was not, in this case,
premised on the Bible or any other religious tenet or
teaching.” In making this determination, the district court
erred by artificially segregating Detwiler’s “religious” and
“secular” beliefs. As a result, the district court ruled on the
religiosity of Detwiler’s belief that the chemical on the nasal
swabs is carcinogenic. But the relevant question in this case

30

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

is whether Detwiler’s belief that she cannot be swabbed is
religious. If the district court had considered the correct
question in this case (examining Detwiler’s failure-toaccommodate claim as a whole), it would have concluded
that the facts as alleged “allow[] the court to draw the
reasonable inference” that the beliefs in question were
sufficiently religious. Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678
(2009).
Detwiler made clear that she believed her religion
forbade her from being tested by nasal swab, a belief reached
through careful study and prayer. “It is not within the
judicial ken to question the centrality of particular beliefs or
practices to a faith, or the validity of particular litigants’
interpretations of those creeds.” Hernandez v. Comm’r, 490
U.S. 680, 699 (1989). And “a judge’s disbelief of a
complaint’s factual allegations” may not affect his decision
on a motion to dismiss. Neitzke v. Williams, 490 U.S. 319,
327 (1989). The district court ignored such admonitions,
instead determining that Detwiler’s “request for alternate
accommodations stems from her belief that nasal swab
testing contains hazardous materials” and that her belief was
“secular” and “non-religious.” The court granted that
Detwiler’s belief is the result of her own religious experience
(prayer), but concluded that it could not plausibly be
considered a religious belief. In doing so, the district court
disregarded the explicitly religious elements of Detwiler’s
claim, precedent forbidding courts from determining the
validity of a party’s interpretation of his own religious
experience, see W. Va. State Bd. of Educ. v. Barnette, 319
U.S. 624, 642 (1943) (“If there is any fixed star in our
constitutional constellation, it is that no official, high or
petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics,
nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion or force

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

31

citizens to confess by word or act their faith therein.”), and
federal pleading standards, Iqbal, 556 U.S. at 678 (“To
survive a motion to dismiss, a complaint must contain
sufficient factual matter, accepted as true, to ‘state a claim to
relief that is plausible on its face.’” (quoting Twombly, 550
U.S. at 570)).
Furthermore, in concluding that Detwiler’s beliefs are
not “premised on the Bible or any other religious tenet or
teaching,” the district court engaged in analysis that the
Supreme Court has repeatedly rejected. Detwiler presented
scriptural support that she interpreted as forbidding her from
undergoing a nasal swab. In concluding that Detwiler’s
beliefs are not premised on the Bible, the district court
necessarily rejected her interpretation of Scripture. Supreme
Court precedent bars such a heavy-handed judicial intrusion
into the legitimacy of religious beliefs. See, e.g., Thomas v.
Rev. Bd. of the Ind. Emp. Sec. Div., 450 U.S. 707, 716 (1981)
(“[I]t is not within the judicial function and judicial
competence to inquire whether” a party “correctly perceived
the commands of their . . . faith. Courts are not arbiters of
scriptural interpretation.”); Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores,
Inc., 573 U.S. 682, 724 (2014) (emphasizing that “federal
courts have no business addressing []whether the religious
belief asserted . . . is reasonable”); Frazee v. Ill. Dep’t of
Emp. Sec., 489 U.S. 829, 833 (1989) (warning that the
orthodoxy of a claimant’s belief is “irrelevant”); United
States v. Ballard, 322 U.S. 78, 86 (1944) (“Religious
experiences which are as real as life to some may be
incomprehensible to others.”).
By affirming the district court, the majority creates a
circuit split. When faced with the question of whether
religious objections to COVID-19 policies mirroring
Detwiler’s objection were sufficiently pled, our sister

32

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

circuits have consistently answered in the affirmative. See
Bazinet v. Beth Isr. Lahey Health, Inc., 113 F.4th 9, 15–17
(1st Cir. 2024); Wright v. Honeywell Int’l, Inc., No. 2430667, 2025 WL 2218131, at *3 (5th Cir. Aug. 5, 2025);
Lucky v. Landmark Med. of Mich., P.C., 103 F.4th 1241,
1243–44 (6th Cir. 2024); Ringhofer v. Mayo Clinic,
Ambulance, 102 F.4th 894, 901–02 (8th Cir. 2024);
Passarella v. Aspirus, Inc., 108 F.4th 1005, 1009 (7th Cir.
2024); Brokken v. Hennepin Cnty., 140 F.4th 445, 451–52
(8th Cir. 2025). While many of these cases dealt with
requested exemptions to vaccine mandates as opposed to
testing requirements, they are not distinguishable.
In Ringhofer v. Mayo Clinic, Ambulance, for instance,
plaintiffs’ exemption request cited concerns that COVID
vaccines were created using fetal cells and argued that
“[plaintiffs’] anti-abortion beliefs, rooted in religion, prevent
using [the resulting] product.” 102 F.4th at 898. The
majority attempts to distinguish such claims, calling
“opposition to the use of fetal cells” a “specific religious
belief.” But so is Detwiler’s Scripture-based belief that her
body is a temple. The objection in Ringhofer and cases
involving objections to COVID vaccines based on the belief
that they were developed using fetal cells takes the exact
same form as Detwiler’s: a factual belief about the world
(vaccines are made with fetal cells; nasal swab chemicals
cause cancer) that puts an employment requirement (vaccine
mandates; required swab testing) in tension with an
underlying religious belief (the Bible forbids abortion; the
Bible requires Christians to safeguard their bodies). When
faced with this parallel objection, the Eighth Circuit found
that the Ringhofer plaintiffs “adequately connect[ed] their
refusal of the vaccine with their religious beliefs.” Id. at 901;
see also, e.g., Bazinet, 113 F.4th at 16 (finding that an

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

33

employee who believed COVID vaccines were developed
with fetal cells lines had “sufficiently pleaded a religious
belief that conflicts with receiving the COVID-19 vaccine”);
Passarella, 108 F.4th at 1009 (holding that employees’
vaccination exemption requests were connected to their
“Christian beliefs regarding the sanctity of the human
body”); Wright, 2025 WL 2218131, at *1, *3 (concluding
that “a reasonable jury could find that [the plaintiff] held at
least a mixed motive for his vaccine refusal” based on his
belief that “[the] creator gave [him the] gift to choose” what
to put in his body).1
Implicitly recognizing that these cases are not
meaningfully distinguishable from Detwiler’s, the majority
simply criticizes them as “far too permissive.” But that
criticism puts our court at odds with every published circuit
court decision on this issue, an action we should avoid absent
a compelling reason. See United States v. Cuevas-Lopez,
934 F.3d 1056, 1067 (9th Cir. 2019) (“[A]bsent a strong
reason to do so, we will not create a direct conflict with other
circuits.” (alteration in original) (quoting United States v.
Chavez-Vernaza, 844 F.2d 1368, 1374 (9th Cir. 1987))).
This court long ago recognized that we (and other circuits)
have interpreted Title VII generously because that is what
the statute’s broad text requires. See EBB Auto Co., 8 F.3d
at 1438 (emphasizing that “the very words of the
statute . . . leave little room for . . . a limited interpretation”
(quoting Redmond, 574 F.2d at 900)). The text being too
“permissive” for the majority’s preferences is not the sort of
1

The Third Circuit is the only federal court of appeals other than ours to
reject a claim like this, but it reached its conclusion in an unpublished
decision. See McDowell v. Bayhealth Med. Ctr., Inc., No. 24-1157, 2024
WL 4799870 (3d Cir. Nov. 15, 2024).

34

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

“strong reason” that justifies creating a lop-sided circuit
split.
II.
The majority’s idiosyncratic approach relies heavily on
a court’s dubious ability to separate “purely secular” beliefs
from “truly religious” beliefs from mixtures of religious and
secular beliefs. For the category of “mixed beliefs”—which
I suspect is how so-called “secular” beliefs could essentially
always be characterized—the majority’s approach requires
the even more dubious ability to judicially ascertain how
much of a given belief is “truly religious” (and not merely a
“broad, religious tenet[],” which per the majority is
apparently not religious enough) versus how much of a
claimed belief is “secular.” And then the majority’s
approach requires judges to draw a line for when the
“secular” portion of a religious belief becomes too
significant, such that it defeats a Title VII claim. To work
well, the majority’s mode of analysis must be capable of
objective, impartial, and consistent application. If not, such
analysis opens wide the door to the discriminatory treatment
of religious beliefs. Those beliefs christened by a judge as
“truly religious” will be protected, and those condemned as
too mixed with “secular” beliefs will be left unprotected.
The majority’s approach requires the impossible—we are
judges, not theologians or philosophers. Judges are illequipped to parse mixed claims into the “truly religious” and
“purely secular” silos that the majority purports to discern.
First, many philosophers would tell us that our scientific
views depend on more fundamental beliefs—philosophical
or religious—about the nature of reality. See, e.g., Alister E.
McGrath, Re-Imagining Nature: The Promise of a Christian
Natural Theology 56 (2016) (arguing that religion provides

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

35

“a framework or lens through which we may ‘see’ the world”
in explaining how religion shapes Christians’ scientific
views). Disentangling the “purely secular” from this
religious backdrop is far more difficult than the majority
appears to assume. Consider Christian Scientists, who
believe that “human experiences show the falsity of all
material things” and that “error, sin, sickness, disease, [and]
death … [are] the false testimony of false material sense.”
Mary Baker Eddy, Science and Health with Key to the
Scriptures 108 (Christian Sci. Bd. of Dirs. 2015) (1875).
Under this arguably Matrix-like view of reality, where
everything bad is merely an illusion of “false material
sense,” foundational religious beliefs will inevitably shape
beliefs that the majority would deem “purely secular.” Or
take certain Buddhist schools of thought, which question
humans’ ability to accurately perceive reality and which
view many physical phenomena (like disease) as stemming
from different causes than what the mainstream scientific
perspective would discern. Chogyal Namkhai Norbu, The
Crystal and the Way of Light: Sutra, Tantra, and Dzogchen
99–100 (2000) (“[We] are utterly unaware of our own true
condition, so that we experience a radical separation
between our person . . . and that which we take for an
external world.”); id. at 32 (“Certain illnesses, such as
cancer, are caused by disturbances of the energy, and cannot
be cured simply by surgery or medication. Similarly, many
mental illnesses . . . are caused by poor circulation of
energy.”). Alternatively, imagine a traditional Christian who
believes that the existence of a rational God means that the
world is governed by rational, scientifically discernable
laws. When she accepts scientific findings, she is doing so
partly because her religious presuppositions guide her to
trust scientific findings. See generally Nancy R. Pearcey &

36

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

Charles B. Thaxton, The Soul of Science: Christian Faith
and Natural Philosophy (1994). The religious beliefs of the
individuals in these examples shape the weight that they
afford to any given “secular” scientific view.
In the same way, discerning “purely religious” beliefs
may not be as easy as the majority apparently thinks.
Knowledge of science may shape a person’s religious views.
Consider a Christian’s opposition to abortion, which stems
not only from Scripture but from a scientific understanding
of fetal development. The majority’s “truly religious”
category seems to capture only rare cases like where a
religious adherent claims her deity spoke directly to her.
Outside of that type of scenario, scientific and religious
views feed into each other in innumerable, nonobvious ways.
Pinning our analysis on the hope of cleanly delineating
“purely secular” and “truly religious” views is unrealistic.
Recognizing that many (if not all) so-called “secular”
beliefs involve religious and non-religious components,
what the majority’s analysis must account for is not whether
a claim is “purely secular,” but instead how to distinguish
between claims that are “sufficiently secular” versus
“sufficiently religious.” The majority fails to provide a
workable distinction. The majority’s reasoning boils down
to this: if a nonreligious conclusion is the but-for cause of
the ultimate belief, the ultimate belief is not religious and
therefore not protected by Title VII. Because Detwiler’s
“secular” conclusion that nasal swabs are carcinogenic is the
but-for cause of refusing to be swabbed, her refusal must be
secular too. But the majority can’t consistently apply its
approach. When distinguishing vaccine exemption cases
involving objections to the alleged use of fetal cells in the
vaccines, the majority ignores the fact that those vaccine
objections, too, depend on disputed factual claims. The

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

37

Bible says nothing about the hotly disputed factual question
of whether fetal cells are used in COVID vaccines. Only
“secular” sources can answer that question, which under the
majority’s framework would make those “secular” beliefs
the but-for cause of the ultimate refusal to take the vaccine—
just like Detwiler’s “secular” beliefs about nasal swabs being
carcinogenic. Yet the majority inexplicably characterizes
opposition to COVID vaccines based on their development
using fetal cells as a “religious belief” properly protected
under Title VII. The majority’s inconsistent application of
its own analysis illustrates that cases will end up turning on
judges’ personal assessments of whether a claim is or is not
“religious,” embroiling courts in unprincipled line-drawing
to decide when a belief is “‘primarily’ or ‘mostly’ or
‘minimally’ or ‘tangentially’” religious. Passarella, 108
F.4th at 1010. That’s a dangerous development, particularly
in an area that the Supreme Court has warned is beyond “the
judicial ken to question.” Hernandez, 490 U.S. at 699.
The majority’s approach has other undesirable results,
too. Apart from the judicial manipulability of the approach,
it inherently discriminates against more traditional religious
claims while privileging more exotic ones. If an employee
requests an exemption by claiming that God spoke directly
to him, the majority’s analysis would apparently allow it:
such a request would be “truly religious” in the majority’s
analysis. Yet someone with a sincere religious belief
coupled with an arguably incorrect “secular” view of how
the world works, as in this case, gets no protection. The
majority’s analysis also allows secular components of a
religious objection to effectively trump the undisputedly
religious aspects. The majority makes the religiosity of
mixed beliefs turn on a judge’s view of the correctness of the
scientific, nonreligious part of the belief.
Because

38

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

Detwiler’s belief that nasal swab chemicals can cause cancer
is not the mainstream view, the majority ignores the religious
components of her objection. So if there is ever a component
of a religious objection that a court considers factually
suspect, that will trump whatever elements of the objection
are religious. But if scientific research suddenly discovered
that nasal swabs do, in fact, cause cancer, for example,
suddenly Detwiler’s objection would ripen into a cognizable
religious claim. The fact that, under the majority’s approach,
the cognizability of many Title VII religious claims will turn
entirely on whether they comport with mainstream “secular”
beliefs should give us pause. Instead of protecting religious
beliefs that depart from secular orthodoxy, the majority’s
approach makes the latter the judge of the former.
The majority is not shy about why it prefers a less
“permissive” reading of Title VII, notwithstanding the
statute’s capacious definition of “religion.” Underlying the
majority’s parsimonious reading of Title VII is a fear of
“open[ing] the door to unlimited religious discrimination
claims.” But there is good reason to prefer the approach in
other circuits over the majority’s.
First, and most
importantly, the more permissive interpretation of “religion”
applied by our sister circuits simply gives effect to the broad
language of Title VII. EBB Auto Co., 8 F.3d at 1438;
Passarella, 108 F.4th at 1009. The statute’s broad definition
of religion—“all aspects of religious observance and
practice, as well as belief,” 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(j)—easily
encompasses even “mixed” beliefs with more attenuated
links to religion. And of course, if the majority is in fact
correct that the broad definition of “religion” in Title VII is
“too permissive” and thus leads to overprotection of
religious liberty with disastrous results, Congress is free to
address the problem by amending Title VII. We should not

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

39

judicially constrict the statute just because we think
Congress struck the wrong balance.
Second, the majority’s attempt to judicially cabin Title
VII’s supposedly too-permissive protection of religious
objections does not even fix the problem the majority is
concerned about. The majority worries that allowing a claim
like Detwiler’s would allow anyone to “transform a specific
secular preference into a basis for a religious discrimination
claim.” But the majority’s approach does not eliminate that
concern—all a claimant needs to do is say that “God directly
told me not to do the thing I also have a specific secular
objection against.” See, e.g., Lucky, 103 F.4th at 1243
(reversing the district court’s dismissal of a plaintiff’s claim
when the plaintiff pled that “God spoke to [her] in her
prayers and directed her that it would be wrong to receive
the COVID-19 vaccine” (alteration in original)). The
concern that allowing religious exemptions from generally
applicable laws will lead to abuses of that protection is
neither new nor unfounded. See Emp. Div. v. Smith, 494
U.S. 872, 879 (1990) (expressing concerns about “mak[ing]
the professed doctrines of religious belief superior to the law
of the land” (quoting Reynolds v. United States, 98 U.S. 145,
167 (1878))). But courts must respect the balance struck by
Congress, and it is up to Congress—not us—to fix Title VII
if its broad definition of “religion,” properly applied, results
in an unmanageable “deluge” of requests for a religious
accommodation.
Third, applying Title VII’s broad definition of religion
properly respects the Supreme Court’s repeated admonitions
that courts are ill-suited to be religious arbiters. See Hobby
Lobby, 573 U.S. at 724 (warning against assessing the
reasonableness of religious beliefs); Frazee, 489 U.S. at 833
(warning against assessing the orthodoxy of religious

40

DETWILER V. MID-COLUMBIA MEDICAL CENTER

beliefs). As explained, the majority’s parsing of religious
claims into “truly religious” and “secular” components is
impossible—or at least practically unadministrable—and
will inevitably lead to discriminatory treatment of religious
claims. If Congress asked us to engage in such fine grading
of religious claims, we would do our best consistent with our
constitutional obligations. But Congress defined “religion”
broadly in Title VII. It is the majority that seeks to
artificially limit that definition, and in doing so pits secular
orthodoxy against the religious beliefs of Title VII
claimants.
* * *
Detwiler pled that her religion teaches that her body is a
temple and that a nasal swab would violate the religious
principles that govern how she treats that temple. Her
objection is grounded in Scripture, prayer, and religious
experience. Those grounds directly connect Detwiler’s
rejection of the nasal swab to religious principles and
support a plausible inference of religious beliefs protected
under Title VII—the only conclusion consistent with the
published decisions of other federal courts of appeals.
Detwiler pled with sufficient specificity to show her claim
has facial plausibility, making dismissal improper. The
majority’s artificial parsing of Detwiler’s beliefs into
religious and “purely secular” components, and then its
reliance on the “secular” component to reject her Title VII
claim, suffers from a host of problems ranging from the
philosophical to the practical. But the biggest shortcoming
with the majority’s approach is textual: Title VII’s generous
and inclusive definition of “religion” cannot be reconciled
with the majority’s miserly approach. Accordingly, I
respectfully dissent.

