FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
EMPLOYEES AT THE CLARK
COUNTY GOVERNMENT
CENTER AND/OR ON ITS
PROPERTY,
v.

No. 25-6625
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-01818APG-VCF

Plaintiffs - Appellees,

MONSANTO COMPANY;
PHARMACIA LLC; SOLUTIA
INC.,
Defendants - Appellants,
and
UNION PACIFIC RAILROAD
COMPANY, CALNEV PIPE LINE,
LLC, KINDER MORGAN
PIPELINE, LLC, KINDER
MORGAN, INC., KINDER
MORGAN ENERGY PARTNERS,
L.P., CITY OF LAS VEGAS
DOWNTOWN REDEVELOPMENT
AGENCY,
Defendants.

OPINION

2 EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO.

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Andrew P. Gordon, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 18, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed December 29, 2025
Before: Kim McLane Wardlaw and Eric D. Miller, Circuit
Judges. *
Opinion by Judge Miller
SUMMARY **
Class Action Fairness Act
The panel reversed the district court’s order remanding
to state court an action brought by a class of individual
plaintiffs who alleged they were injured while working at the
Clark County Government Center because they were
exposed to toxic waste dumped at the site.

Judge Sandra S. Ikuta, who died on December 7, 2025, was originally
a member of this panel. Judge Wardlaw and Judge Miller decided the
appeal as a two-judge quorum. See 28 U.S.C. § 46(d); 9th Cir. Gen.
Ord. 3.2(h).
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO. 3

Plaintiffs originally brought this case in Nevada state
court alleging that some of the waste dumped at the site
contained polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs), and that the
former Monsanto Company (Old Monsanto) manufactured
more than 99 percent of all PCBs sold in the United
States. Old Monsanto’s corporate successors—Pharmacia
LLC, Solutia Inc., and Monsanto Co—removed this case to
federal court under the Class Action Fairness Act
(“CAFA”). The district court granted plaintiffs’ motion to
remand this case to state court, holding that this case falls
within CAFA’s “local controversy exception.”
The panel held that CAFA’s local controversy exception
does not apply because plaintiffs cannot satisfy the
“principal injuries” element of the exception, which directs
the federal court to decline to exercise jurisdiction if, among
other requirements, the “principal injuries resulting from the
alleged conduct or any related conduct of each defendant
were incurred in the State in which the action was originally
filed.” 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(4)(A)(i)(III). Here, the
principal injuries of Old Monsanto’s alleged conduct were
not incurred in Nevada. Plaintiffs made no allegations
suggesting that the injuries from PCBs in Nevada were more
significant than those in other States. Accordingly, the panel
reversed the district court’s order remanding the case to state
court.

COUNSEL
Lindsay A. Dibler (argued), The Law Office of Lindsay A.
Dibler LLC, St. Louis, Missouri; Craig A. Mueller, Mueller
& Associates Inc., Las Vegas, Nevada; for PlaintiffAppellee.

4 EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO.

Lauren R. Goldman (argued), Gibson Dunn & Crutcher
LLP, New York, New York; Amir C. Tayrani, Russell B.
Balikian, and Andrew Ferguson, Gibson Dunn & Crutcher
LLP, Washington, D.C.; Chad R. Fears and Kelly A. Evans,
Evans Fears Schuttert McNulty Mickus, Las Vegas, Nevada;
for Defendants-Appellants.
OPINION
MILLER, Circuit Judge:
The Class Action Fairness Act of 2005 (CAFA), Pub. L.
No. 109-2, 119 Stat. 4, permits defendants in certain class
actions to remove the actions from state court to federal
court. But CAFA also contains a provision known as the
“local controversy exception,” which directs the federal
court to decline to exercise jurisdiction if, among other
requirements, the “principal injuries resulting from the
alleged conduct or any related conduct of each defendant
were incurred in the State in which the action was originally
filed.” 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(4)(A)(i)(III). This case was
originally filed in Nevada state court, but it involves injuries
allegedly caused by toxic chemicals that were distributed
nationwide. Because the principal injuries resulting from
that conduct were not incurred in Nevada, we reverse the
district court’s order remanding the case to state court.
Plaintiffs are 169 individuals who worked at the Clark
County Government Center, a municipal building in Las
Vegas. The building was constructed on a site previously
owned by Union Pacific Railroad, which used it as a rail
yard. The Las Vegas Downtown Redevelopment Agency
acquired the site from Union Pacific and later sold it to Clark

EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO. 5

County. Plaintiffs allege that they were injured while
working there because they were exposed to toxic chemicals
present at the site.
According to plaintiffs, Union Pacific dumped diesel
fuel and other waste at the site. Plaintiffs allege that some of
that waste contained polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs),
which were used in a variety of industrial applications until
Congress banned their production in the late 1970s. See 15
U.S.C. § 2605(e). Plaintiffs further allege that the former
Monsanto Company (Old Monsanto) manufactured more
than 99 percent of all PCBs sold in the United States. Old
Monsanto’s corporate successors—Pharmacia LLC, Solutia
Inc., and Monsanto Co. (collectively, Pharmacia)—inherited
its liability arising from the production, sale, and distribution
of PCBs.
Plaintiffs brought this action in Nevada state court
against various defendants, including Union Pacific, the Las
Vegas Downtown Redevelopment Agency, and Pharmacia.
They asserted claims for compensatory and punitive
damages based on their allegations that Union Pacific
“contaminated the property with various toxic chemicals,
including PCBs manufactured, sold, and distributed by
Monsanto,” and that Union Pacific and the Las Vegas
Downtown Redevelopment Agency “failed to remediate the
toxic materials” before the land was transferred to Clark
County. Plaintiffs allege that their exposure to the toxins
caused serious injuries, including neurological disorders,
cancer, and, in some cases, death.
Pharmacia removed the case to federal court under
CAFA. Plaintiffs moved to remand to state court, and the
district court granted the motion. The district court
determined that CAFA jurisdiction existed but that the local

6 EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO.

controversy exception applied because the case “is isolated
to people who worked at the Clark County Government
Center on land that had been previously contaminated,” and
although the PCBs “could have caused injuries
elsewhere, . . . the issues and the injuries in this case are
localized here.”
Pharmacia sought permission to appeal the remand order
under 28 U.S.C. § 1453(c), and a motions panel of this court
granted the petition. We review the district court’s remand
order de novo. Perez v. Rose Hills Co., 131 F.4th 804, 807
(9th Cir. 2025).
Under CAFA, district courts have jurisdiction over class
actions if the amount in controversy exceeds $5 million and
there is minimal diversity, that is, if “any member of a class
of plaintiffs is a citizen of a State different from any
defendant.” 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(2). A “mass action”—
defined as a civil action in which the “monetary relief claims
of 100 or more persons are proposed to be tried jointly on
the ground that plaintiffs’ claims involve common questions
of law or fact”—is “deemed to be a class action” under
CAFA. Id. § 1332(d)(11)(A), (B)(i).
Plaintiffs do not challenge CAFA jurisdiction in this
appeal, and we agree with the district court that jurisdiction
exists. The case is a mass action because there are more than
100 plaintiffs, minimal diversity is present, and—although
the complaint does not specify damages—the notice of
removal plausibly alleges that the amount in controversy
exceeds $5 million given the number of plaintiffs and the
seriousness of the injuries alleged. See Dart Cherokee Basin
Operating Co. v. Owens, 574 U.S. 81, 89 (2014); Perez, 132
F.4th at 808. We have not previously decided whether each
plaintiff in a mass action must individually satisfy the

EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO. 7

$75,000 amount-in-controversy threshold that generally
applies to diversity cases, see 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(11)(B)(i);
Tanoh v. Dow Chem. Co., 561 F.3d 945, 953 n.4 (9th Cir.
2009), and we need not do so here because the notice of
removal plausibly alleges that plaintiffs meet that threshold
as well.
The issue in this appeal is whether this case falls within
CAFA’s local controversy exception. That exception is “a
narrow one,” and a plaintiff seeking remand has the burden
of establishing its applicability. Benko v. Quality Loan Serv.
Corp., 789 F.3d 1111, 1116 (9th Cir. 2015). CAFA provides
that a district court “shall decline to exercise jurisdiction” if
(1) more than two-thirds of the plaintiffs are citizens of the
forum State; (2) there is at least one local defendant “whose
alleged conduct forms a significant basis for the claims” and
“from whom significant relief is sought”; (3) the “principal
injuries resulting from the alleged conduct or any related
conduct of each defendant were incurred in the State in
which the action was originally filed”; and (4) no other class
action based on the same or similar allegations has been filed
in the previous three years. 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(4)(A).
Pharmacia argues that plaintiffs cannot satisfy several
elements of the exception. We focus on the third—the
“principal
injuries”
element.
28
U.S.C.
§ 1332(d)(4)(A)(i)(III). We have not previously addressed
the requirements of that provision, but the statutory text is
clear and prescribes the inquiry we must undertake.
The statute requires the principal injuries from the
alleged conduct “of each defendant” to have been incurred
in the forum State. 28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(4)(A)(i)(III)
(emphasis added). In other words, each defendant’s conduct
must be analyzed independently. For any given defendant, a

8 EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO.

court must first isolate the “alleged conduct or any related
conduct of [that] defendant.” Id. It then must determine
whether the “principal injuries resulting from” that conduct
“were incurred” in the forum State. Id. The “principal”
injuries are the most important or significant injuries. See
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 1802 (2002)
(“most important [or] consequential”); Black’s Law
Dictionary 1230 (8th ed. 2004) (“Chief; primary; most
important.”). The statute thus requires a comparative
analysis of the injuries incurred in the forum State and the
injuries incurred elsewhere to see whether those incurred in
the forum State are the most significant.
Notably, the relevant injuries are not just those suffered
by the plaintiffs. Otherwise, plaintiffs could strategically
avoid CAFA removal simply by defining the plaintiff class
to include only people injured in the forum State. Instead,
the statute requires considering all injuries caused by “the
alleged conduct or any related conduct of [the] defendant.”
28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(4)(A)(i)(III). A court must consider the
full scope of the defendant’s conduct to determine whether
its most significant harms occurred in the forum State.
Applying those principles, we readily conclude that the
principal injuries of Old Monsanto’s alleged conduct were
not incurred in Nevada. According to the complaint, Old
Monsanto sold PCBs as “liquid mixtures” to a “variety of
industrial customers, for a variety of industrial uses.” Those
mixtures were “incorporated into many other products,”
including products “routinely used by [Union Pacific] and
other Railroad companies at rail yard sites,” such as
“hydraulic lubricants, insulators for transformers,
capacitors, paints, various solvents, cements, sealants,
adhesives, [and] caulk.” Old Monsanto “knew or should
have known that the PCBs would be released in locations

EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO. 9

where they were used, would remain a contaminant for
decades after their release, and would pose a health risk to
any individuals who could be expected to be present at those
locations in the future.” Nevertheless, it continued to
“produce, market, distribute, and sell its PCBs” while
“hiding from the public, its customers, and applicable
government authorities the true health risks associated with
PCBs.”
Plaintiffs’ allegations against Old Monsanto strongly
suggest that its alleged conduct in producing and selling
PCBs caused injury to people everywhere that products
containing PCBs were used. Because plaintiffs allege that
Old Monsanto sold “more than 99 percent of all PCBs . . . in
the United States”—including to “a variety of industrial
customers, for a variety of industrial uses”—and that
products containing PCBs would “pose a health risk to any
individuals who could be expected to be present” at the
locations those products ended up, the most logical inference
is that its alleged conduct led to injuries in many, if not all,
States.
Crucially, plaintiffs make no allegations suggesting that
the injuries from PCBs in Nevada were more significant than
those in other States. For example, plaintiffs do not allege
that PCBs were primarily sold or used in Nevada, that PCBs
were unusually likely to be released into the environment in
Nevada, or that PCBs caused particularly severe injuries in
Nevada. At most, plaintiffs allege that some unknown
fraction of all PCBs sold by Old Monsanto “ultimately made
their way onto the [Union Pacific] Rail Yard site.” But the
same could be said of any location where PCBs were
released into the environment and caused harm. Thus, the
allegations do not establish that the principal injuries arising
from Old Monsanto’s conduct were incurred in Nevada.

10 EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO.

Our examination of the complaint is sufficient to
demonstrate that the principal injuries element of the local
controversy exception is not satisfied here, and thus we need
not rely on evidence introduced by Pharmacia. In Coleman
v. Estes Express Lines, Inc., we held that a court should look
only at the complaint in determining whether a different
element of the local controversy exception is satisfied—
namely, whether there is at least one local defendant whose
“alleged conduct forms a significant basis for the claims”
and “from whom significant relief is sought.” 631 F.3d 1010,
1015 (9th Cir. 2011) (discussing 28 U.S.C.
§ 1332(d)(4)(A)(i)(II)(aa)–(bb)). We have not previously
considered whether the same is true of the principal injuries
element, and we need not do so here. But we note that
Pharmacia identifies dozens of cases that have been filed
against it in States around the country, all based on injuries
resulting from environmental contamination caused by
PCBs sold and distributed by Old Monsanto. The
geographical diversity of those cases would further confirm
our conclusion.
Relying on CAFA’s legislative history, plaintiffs argue
that “environmental disasters” should be covered by the
local controversy exception. As we have already explained,
the statutory text is clear, and “[l]egislative history, for those
who take it into account, is meant to clear up ambiguity, not
create it.” Milner v. Department of the Navy, 562 U.S. 562,
574 (2011). Moreover, the relevant legislative history here is
a report of the Senate Judiciary Committee that was not
printed until ten days after the President signed CAFA into
law and “is therefore of minimal, if any, value” in construing
the statute. Tanoh, 561 F.3d at 954 n.5.
In any event, even if we were to consider the Senate
Report, we would conclude that it supports our

EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO. 11

interpretation. The report explains that the purpose of the
local controversy exception is “to identify a truly local
controversy—a controversy that uniquely affects a particular
locality to the exclusion of all others,” and that the purpose
of the principal injuries element is “to ensure that this
exception is used only where the impact of the misconduct
alleged by the purported class is localized.” S. Rep. No. 109–
14, at 39–40 (2005). The report does not discuss
“environmental disasters” as such, but it offers a specific
example of an environmental tort case involving localized
harms: “[A] class action in which local residents seek
compensation for property damage resulting from a
chemical leak at a manufacturing plant in that community
would fit this criterion, provided that the property damage
was limited to residents in the vicinity of the plant.” Id. at
40. By contrast, the report continues, “if the defendants
engaged in conduct that could be alleged to have injured
consumers throughout the country or broadly throughout
several states, the case would not qualify for this exception,
even if it were brought only as a single-state class action.”
Id. Plaintiffs’ allegations almost exactly match this latter
example, with the only difference being that the injuries
were suffered not by the direct consumers of Old
Monsanto’s products but by those who were exposed to the
(widely dispersed) sites at which the products were used.
In reaching a contrary conclusion, the district court relied
on our unpublished decision in Aarstad v. BNSF Railway
Co., 833 Fed. App’x 94 (9th Cir. 2020). That case involved
a mass action against BNSF for injuries resulting from the
railroad’s transportation of asbestos-laden minerals “in and
around Libby, Montana.” Id. at 98. BNSF urged the court to
consider not only the conduct in Libby alleged by the
plaintiffs, but also its additional, unalleged conduct—

12 EMPLOYEES AT CLARK COUNTY GOV’T. CTR. V. MONSANTO, CO.

namely, its transportation of asbestos-laden material in other
places. Id. at 97. Thus, the case turned on whether BNSF’s
unalleged conduct was sufficiently related to its alleged
conduct such that the court had to consider both in
determining where the principal injuries were incurred. See
28 U.S.C. § 1332(d)(4)(A)(i)(III) (referring to the “alleged
conduct or any related conduct of each defendant”
(emphasis added)). We concluded that BNSF’s conduct
elsewhere was not related to the conduct at issue in the case
because there was “no evidence that the injuries suffered in
Montana resulted from a corporate policy of malfeasance
that affected victims nationwide.” 833 Fed. App’x at 98. We
also noted that BNSF had identified only a “single out-ofstate alleged victim,” suggesting that the injuries incurred in
Montana predominated over any injuries incurred elsewhere.
Id.
Because Aarstad is an unpublished disposition, it does
not establish the law of this circuit. See 9th Cir. R. 36-3(a);
Gilbert v. 7-Eleven, Inc., 157 F.4th 1057, 1070 n.8 (9th Cir.
2025). We need not decide whether its analysis of related
conduct is correct because this case does not involve the
statute’s “related conduct” provision. As we have explained,
plaintiffs allege that Old Monsanto engaged in a single,
nationwide course of conduct, including selling PCBs to “a
variety of industrial customers,” and ultimately selling
“more than 99 percent of all PCBs . . . ever sold and used in
the United States,” all without providing adequate warnings
of the dangers of PCBs. The principal injuries resulting from
that conduct were not incurred in Nevada, so CAFA’s local
controversy exception does not apply.
REVERSED and REMANDED.

