FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
JOHNATHAN LESLIE ALLEN,
AKA Johnathan Allen, AKA Ghost,

No. 24-804
D.C. Nos.
2:23-cr-00113RMP-1
2:23-cr-00002RMP-2

Defendant - Appellant.

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Washington
Rosanna Malouf Peterson, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 23, 2025
Coeur d’Alene, Idaho
Filed November 17, 2025
Before: Richard C. Tallman, N. Randy Smith, and Ryan D.
Nelson, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge R. Nelson

2

USA V. ALLEN

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed Johnathan Allen’s convictions in a
case in which he contended that the district court erred by
(1) dismissing his original and superseding indictments
without prejudice for a violation of the Speedy Trial Act
(STA), and (2) admitting unauthenticated documents.
The panel held that the district court, which properly
weighed each of the factors listed in 18 U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2),
did not abuse its discretion when it dismissed the indictments
without prejudice. As to the first factor, the district court
agreed with the government that, as Allen did not dispute,
Allen’s offense was serious. The district court soundly
analyzed the second factor when it considered the facts and
circumstances of the case, reasoning that the facts leading to
the STA violation were technical. Third, the district court
did not abuse its discretion when it recognized that the
efficient-administration-of-justice factor tipped toward
dismissal without prejudice.
The panel held that the district court did not abuse its
discretion by admitting a set of incriminating Facebook
screenshots (the Facebook records) tying Allen to the
crimes.
The panel rejected Allen’s argument that the Facebook
records were not properly authenticated. The Facebook
records are self-authenticating under Fed. R. Evid. 902(11)
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. ALLEN

3

and 803(6) as certified records maintained by Facebook in
the regular course of its business, and those records’
underlying substantive content was authenticated under Fed.
R. Evid. 901(a) through the government’s proffered extrinsic
evidence.
The panel held that the Facebook records (1) were
admissible under Fed. R. Evid. 404(b) to support the
government’s theory on identity; and (2) complied with Fed.
R. Evid. 403, where the records were relevant in tying Allen
to his crimes, unfairly prejudicial references were redacted,
and duplicative exhibits were excluded.
The panel addressed other issues in a concurrently filed
memorandum disposition.

COUNSEL
David M. Herzog (argued), Assistant United States
Attorney, Appeals Chief; Vanessa R. Waldref, United States
Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Spokane, Washington; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Zachary L. Ayers (argued), Ayers Law Firm PLLC,
Spokane, Washington; Stephen R. Hormel, Hormel Law
Office, Spokane Valley, Washington; for DefendantAppellant.

4

USA V. ALLEN

OPINION
R. NELSON, Circuit Judge:
Johnathan Allen challenges his convictions on two
grounds, contending that the district court erred by
(1) dismissing his indictment without prejudice for a
violation of the Speedy Trial Act (STA), and (2) admitting
unauthenticated documents. We reject these challenges and
affirm.
I
Jonathan Allen has a long criminal history that includes
convictions for first degree robbery, theft, promoting
prostitution, possession of weapons capable of producing
harm, possession of controlled substances, resisting arrest,
obstructing a law enforcement officer, and unlawful
possession of a firearm. Allen was known to law
enforcement officers as a person who engaged in drug and
firearm distribution in the Spokane, Washington area.
Starting in 2022, undercover agents with the Bureau of
Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives (ATF)
investigated drug and firearm distribution in Spokane. The
ATF
discovered
that
Allen
had
distributed
methamphetamine and possessed a firearm.
Allen and three codefendants were indicted by a federal
grand jury on January 4, 2023. Allen was indicted for one
count of distribution of methamphetamine and one count of
felon in possession of a firearm. On February 7, 2023, Allen
was arrested at the Northern Quest Casino outside Spokane,
with a loaded 9mm handgun in his pocket. Thereafter, all
the defendants were arraigned, and trial was set for April 10,
2023.

USA V. ALLEN

5

Several developments delayed Allen’s case proceeding
to trial in April. First, one of Allen’s codefendants moved
for a continuance to delay the trial until June 5, to which
Allen agreed. 1 Second, a grand jury returned a superseding
indictment on May 2, 2023, for Allen and his codefendants.
Allen was charged with conspiracy to distribute
methamphetamine, distribution of methamphetamine, and
two counts of possessing a firearm as a felon. Finally, on
that same day, Allen filed multiple substantive pretrial
motions—a motion to sever, a motion to suppress pretrial
identification, a motion for production of grand jury
transcripts regarding the original indictment, motions in
limine, a motion to dismiss for selective prosecution, a
motion for production of 404(b) evidence, and a motion to
dismiss based on improper government conduct during plea
negotiations. Despite these developments, Allen still
insisted on going to trial on June 5.
On May 23, 2023, Allen filed another motion to produce
grand jury transcripts. On May 26, Allen filed additional
motions with the court. Then on June 2, Allen filed a motion
for grand jury abuse.
On June 2, the district court held a hearing on some of
Allen’s pending motions and on whether trial could proceed
as scheduled. After denying several of Allen’s motions, the
district court concluded that at least one motion would
require additional briefing and a hearing, meaning trial
would need to be delayed. The court then suggested October
2 as the new trial date. On questioning, Allen’s counsel told
the court that the date worked for him and declined to raise
While another of Allen’s codefendants requested a second continuance,
Allen informed the court that he was opting out of all future motions for
continuance and wished to go to trial on June 5.

1

6

USA V. ALLEN

other issues or make additional arguments. On June 12, the
district court issued a written order, stating the Government
and Allen had agreed to a continuance until October 2, and
that the ends of justice were served by that continuance.
One week before the start of the new trial, Allen moved
to dismiss the indictment and superseding indictment with
prejudice under the STA, 18 U.S.C. § 3161. 2 Allen asserted
that his seventy-day Speedy Trial clock had elapsed and that,
between July 12 and October 2, none of the days were
excludable. 3
The district court granted the motion to dismiss without
prejudice. It reasoned that, when it proposed the new trial
date of October 2, it did not sufficiently explain that the fourmonth extension was an “ends of justice” continuance
permitted by the STA, 18 U.S.C. § 3161(h)(7)(A). See
United States v. Jordan, 915 F.2d 563, 565–66 (9th Cir.
1990). Further, Allen had not signed a Speedy Trial waiver
or expressly waived his Speedy Trial rights. So the district
court found that a STA violation had in fact occurred. Given
the STA violation, the district court dismissed both the
original indictment and the superseding indictment without
prejudice based on statutorily enumerated factors in 18
U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2). The next day, a grand jury returned a

2

Allen’s codefendants did not join the motion.

Allen waived his Speedy Trial rights until June 5, 2023. The
Government also agreed that, on October 2, 2023, more than seventy
days would have elapsed since July 14, 2023, when the Court denied
Defendant’s purported grand jury abuse motion. Even though the district
court recognized that some days following June 5, 2023, would be
excludable, for purposes of the STA violation analysis, the district court
used the period between June 5 and October 2, 2023.
3

USA V. ALLEN

7

new indictment charging Allen with the same offenses just
dismissed.
The case proceeded to trial. During the trial, the district
court admitted a set of incriminating Facebook screenshots
(the Facebook records) tying Allen to the crimes. Allen was
convicted and sentenced to a below-the-guidelines term of
180 months’ imprisonment. Allen appealed, challenging the
district court’s decisions to dismiss without prejudice for the
STA violation and to admit the Facebook records. 4
II
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. “We
review de novo a district court’s decision to dismiss on
[STA] grounds and its findings of fact for clear error.”
United States v. Olsen, 21 F.4th 1036, 1040 (9th Cir. 2022)
(citing United States v. Henry, 984 F.3d 1343, 1349–50 (9th
Cir. 2021)). We further “review the district court’s decision
to dismiss with or without prejudice for abuse of discretion.”
Id. at 1047–48.
We review for abuse of discretion the district court’s
decision to admit evidence and its acceptance of evidence as
authentic. See United States v. Aliverez, 831 F.3d 1115,
1120 (9th Cir. 2016). The defendant must establish that the
evidentiary error “was prejudicial, and that the verdict was
more probably than not affected as a result.” McCollough v.
Johnson, Rodenburg & Lauinger, LLC, 637 F.3d 939, 953
(9th Cir. 2011) (citation omitted). “We reverse only if we
are convinced firmly that the reviewed decision lies beyond

As addressed in the memorandum disposition filed concurrently, none
of Allen’s other arguments prove availing.
4

8

USA V. ALLEN

the pale of reasonable justification under the circumstances.”
Id. (cleaned up).
III
The district court did not abuse its discretion when it
dismissed the indictments without prejudice. The district
court properly weighed each of the statutory factors listed in
§ 3162(a)(2) before dismissing without prejudice. 5
The STA’s statutory structure works as follows. The
STA states that “the trial of a defendant” “shall commence
within seventy days” after he is charged with an information
or indictment, or makes an initial appearance, whichever is
later. 18 U.S.C. § 3161(c)(1). This timing requirement,
however, excludes delays because of certain enumerated
events. Id. § 3161(h). The clock stops for “delay resulting
from any pretrial motion, from the filing of the motion
through the conclusion of the hearing on, or other prompt
disposition of, such a motion.” Id. § 3161(h)(1)(D). The
clock also stops during “[a]ny period of delay resulting from
a continuance granted by any judge . . . [when] the court sets
forth, in the record of the case, either orally or in writing, its
reasons for finding that the ends of justice served by the
granting of such continuance outweigh the best interests of
the public and the defendant in a speedy trial.” Id.
§ 3161(h)(7)(A).
With these principles in mind, the district court did not
abuse its discretion by dismissing the indictments without
Allen did not raise a separate speedy trial violation under the Sixth
Amendment on appeal. Thus, the issue is forfeited. See Padgett v.
Wright, 587 F.3d 983, 985 n.2 (9th Cir. 2009). Even if not forfeited, the
“Speedy Trial Act affords greater protection to a defendant’s right to a
speedy trial than is guaranteed by the Sixth Amendment.” See United
States v. Baker, 63 F.3d 1478, 1497 (9th Cir. 1995).

5

USA V. ALLEN

9

prejudice. The district court determined that an STA
violation occurred because it had neither acquired a waiver
of Allen’s speedy trial rights from Allen nor sufficiently
explained why the ends of justice were served by the
continuance.
In the June 12 pretrial written order
(documenting the June 2 hearing), the district court noted
that the continuance was based on “(1) the denial of the
Motion to Sever; (2) the anticipated briefing and hearing
schedule for, and the anticipated disposition on, Defendant
Allen’s newly filed pretrial motion; and (3) finding that
failure to grant a continuance would deny the parties the
reasonable time necessary for effective preparation, taking
into account the exercise of due diligence.” However, the
district court continued: “the Court finds that the ends of
justice served by ordering a continuance of proceedings in
this matter outweigh the best interests of the public and
Defendant’s right to a speedy trial, pursuant to 18 U.S.C.
§ 3161(h)(7)(A).” Finding that this analysis may not be
sufficient to satisfy the requirements of the STA, the district
court found that Allen’s rights were violated.
However, § 3162(a)(2) does not require dismissal with
prejudice in every case. Instead, three statutory factors are
considered “[i]n determining whether to dismiss the case
with or without prejudice”: (1) “the seriousness of the
offense”; (2) “the facts and circumstances of the case which
led to dismissal”; and (3) “the impact of a
reprosecution . . . on the administration of justice.” Id.
§ 3162(a)(2); see also United States v. Taylor, 487 U.S. 326,
333 (1998). “The choice of whether to dismiss with or
without prejudice depends on a careful application of the
statutorily enumerated factors to the particular case; there is
no presumption in favor of either sanction.” United States
v. Clymer, 25 F.3d 824, 831 (9th Cir. 1994). And before

10

USA V. ALLEN

entering a dismissal without prejudice, a defendant has a
right to notice, counsel, and an opportunity to be heard
(requirements met here). United States v. Delgado-Miranda,
951 F.2d 1063, 1064 (9th Cir. 1991) (per curiam).
The district court considered each § 3162(a)(2) factor.
First, it agreed with the government that Allen’s offense was
serious; Allen does not dispute this fact. Second, the district
court reasoned that the facts leading to the STA violation
were technical ones. The district court reasoned that an STA
violation arose because it did not properly document that its
continuance met the ends-of-justice requirements in
§ 3161(h)(7)(A). While we may dispute that reasoning (after
reading the June 12 order), had the district court taken the
time to make its analysis more explicit, § 3161(h)(7)(A)’s
requirements would have been met. Finally, the district
court cited a lack of bad faith—both parties were ready to
proceed to trial. Allen did not allege any harm to his defense
due to the delay, and the court found none. The § 3162(a)(2)
factors thus leaned toward dismissal without prejudice,
allowing the government to seek a new indictment.
On this record, we conclude that the district court did not
abuse its discretion by dismissing without prejudice. See
Olsen, 21 F.4th at 1047–48. Allen’s charges—distributing
methamphetamine and possessing a firearm as a felon—are
serious as defined by the STA. See United States v. Lewis,
611 F.3d 1172, 1180 (9th Cir. 2010) (affirming dismissal
without prejudice because offenses carrying a maximum
sentence of five years are “‘serious’ within the context of the
Speedy Trial Act” (citation omitted)).
The district court also soundly analyzed the second
factor. The statute requires consideration of “the facts and
circumstances of the case which led to the dismissal.” 18

USA V. ALLEN

11

U.S.C. § 3162(a)(2). The sole reason an STA violation
requiring dismissal under § 3162(a)(2) occurred was
because the district court reasoned that it had not sufficiently
articulated reasons to support an ends-of-justice finding.
The district court also failed to obtain an affirmative STA
waiver from Allen. So penalizing the government for the
STA violation would have been inappropriate.
Had the district court conducted and memorialized a
more thorough analysis, it would have found the ends-ofjustice continuance requirements were met. The STA lists
factors that a judge must consider before excluding time
from the Speedy Trial clock under the ends-of-justice
provision. See id. § 3167(h)(7)(B). One of those factors is
whether “it is unreasonable to expect adequate preparation
for pretrial proceedings or for the trial itself within the
[STA’s] time limits.” Id. § 3161(h)(7)(B)(ii). Although the
district court did not couch its analysis in the statutory
factors, it reasoned that more time was needed to brief and
potentially hear argument on Allen’s new pretrial motions.
It also determined, consistent with the statute, that the failure
to grant a continuance would deny the parties the reasonable
time necessary for effective preparation, considering the
exercise of due diligence. See id. § 3161(h)(7)(B)(iv).
While the district court concluded that it had not adequately
analyzed the statutory factors to grant an ends-of-justice
continuance, the district court’s rationale suggests that its
continuance would have been justified under
§ 3167(h)(7)(B).
Caselaw confirms that dismissal without prejudice was
appropriate. See United States v. Medina, 524 F.3d 974, 981
(9th Cir. 2008). Where “violations of the Speedy Trial Act
[are] merely technical,” and “the continuances that
contributed to the Speedy Trial Act violation had been

12

USA V. ALLEN

granted for reasons that would have met the criteria of
§ 3161(h)(7)(B),” but did not meet such criteria only because
the court and the parties “failed to document that the
continuances met such criteria,” such “Speedy Trial Act
violations [do] not warrant dismissal with prejudice.” Id. at
981–82.
And finally, the third § 3162(a)(2) factor—the impact of
a reprosecution on the administration of justice—also
supports dismissal without prejudice. In a case like this—
where the evidence does not suggest that the STA violation
“was the result of bad faith on the part of the government”—
“the administration of justice and the consideration of the
Speedy Trial Act do not warrant dismissing the case with
prejudice.” Id. at 982 (cleaned up).
Allen asserts that the government employed delay tactics
to stop the case from going to trial. But the district court
instead concluded, in its discretion, that the government was
not to blame. In fact, Allen primarily caused the delays by
filing a deluge of pretrial motions that the district court
reasonably needed more time to decide. The STA permits
district courts to take such time. 18 U.S.C. § 3161(h)(1)(D).
Nor did the STA violation prejudice Allen. While
prejudice alone is not dispositive, “there is little doubt that
Congress intended [prejudice] to be relevant for a district
court’s consideration.” Taylor, 487 U.S. at 334. Allen did
not allege any harm to his defense based on the delay, such
as witnesses becoming unavailable or their memories fading.
See Clymer, 25 F.3d at 832. Nor does Allen’s incarceration
during the delay constitute actual prejudice. Cf. United
States v. Yuan Qing Jiang, 214 F.3d 1099, 1103 (9th Cir.
2000). The district court did not abuse its discretion when it
recognized that the efficient administration of justice factor

USA V. ALLEN

13

tipped toward dismissing Allen’s indictments without
prejudice.
“Dismissal, however, need not represent a windfall,”
when “a district court may fail to make the findings
necessary for an exclusion under subsection (h)(7) . . . .”
Bloate v. United States, 559 U.S. 196, 214 (2010). To the
contrary, district courts should consider “the party
responsible for the delay” and “may dismiss the charges
without prejudice.” Id. at 215 In this case, the district court
followed the statute and determined that all three factors
enumerated in § 3162(a)(2) counseled dismissing Allen’s
indictments without prejudice.
IV
Allen also raises two evidentiary challenges to the
district court’s admission of his Facebook records. First, he
argues that the records were not properly authenticated.
Second, he argues that the records should have been
excluded under Federal Rules of Evidence 404(b) and 403.
Both arguments lack merit.
A
The Facebook records were properly authenticated.
“Authentication is a condition precedent to admissibility,
and this condition is satisfied by evidence sufficient to
support a finding that the matter in question is what its
proponent claims.” Orr v. Bank of Am., NT & SA, 285 F.3d
764, 773 (9th Cir. 2002) (cleaned up); Fed. R. Evid. 901(a).
But self-authenticating evidence, see Fed. R. Evid. 902(11),
“governing certified domestic records of regularly
conducted activity,” automatically meets the authentication
requirement. United States v. Weiland, 420 F.3d 1062, 1072
(9th Cir. 2005).

14

USA V. ALLEN

Under Federal Rule of Evidence 902(11), the original or
copy of a domestic record that meets the requirements of
Rule 803(6)(A)–(C), accompanied by a certification by the
custodian of that record, qualifies as self-authenticating.
And Rule 803(6), cross referenced in Rule 902(11),
addresses business records. See Fed. R. Evid. 803(6).
Federal Rule of Evidence 803(6) is met when:
(A) the record was made at or near the time
by — or from information transmitted by —
someone with knowledge;
(B) the record was kept in the course of a
regularly conducted activity of a business,
organization, occupation, or calling, whether
or not for profit; [and]
(C) making the record was a regular practice
of that activity[.]
If certified business records meet the requirements of both
Rules 803(6) and 902(11), they are self-authenticating.
The district court did not abuse its discretion in admitting
the Facebook records as the evidence met the requirements
of both rules. The government offered certification from
Facebook’s record custodian satisfying Rule 902(11). That
sworn certification established that the record produced in
response to the government’s search warrant was made “at
or near the time the information was transmitted by [Allen]”
and kept by automated systems “in the course of regularly
conducted activity as a regular practice of [Facebook],” thus
meeting the requirements of Rule 803(6)(A)–(C). Since the
Facebook records satisfied the strictures of both Rules
902(11) and 803(6), they were self-authenticating.

USA V. ALLEN

15

Allen argues that because Facebook does not
authenticate the substantive content of its messages (i.e., the
discussion of Allen’s drug dealing found in the admitted
evidence), the Facebook records were not kept in
Facebook’s ordinary course of business as required by Rule
803(6). But the only function of Rule 902(11)—and by
extension Rule 803(6) in the authentication context—is to
certify that the Facebook records are what the government
claims they are (i.e., records from Facebook). The
government used Rules 902(11) and 803(6) to authenticate
the technical rather than the substantive attributes of the
Facebook records.
The government separately authenticated the underlying
content of the Facebook records through the normal process
under Rule 901(a). Under Rule 901(a), “[t]o satisfy the
requirement of authenticating or identifying an item of
evidence, the proponent must produce evidence sufficient to
support a finding that the item is what the proponent claims
it is.” Just to name a few pieces of evidence the government
offered: the Facebook profile photograph in the Facebook
records matched Allen’s appearance, the user had the same
birthday as Allen, and the messages referred to Allen’s drug
dealer moniker (“Ghost”) and cell phone number. Fed. R.
Evid. 901(b)(4) (permitting authentication based on
“appearance, contents, substance, internal patterns, or other
distinctive characteristics of the item, taken together with all
the circumstances”).
Allen claims several cases from other circuits require a
different analysis. We disagree. All those cases point
towards the conclusion that the government may
authenticate the substance of social media evidence through
circumstantial evidence linking a defendant to a social media
account. See, e.g., United States v. Lamm, 5 F.4th 942, 948

16

USA V. ALLEN

(8th Cir. 2021); United States v. Barber, 937 F.3d 965, 970
(7th Cir. 2019); United States v. Browne, 834 F.3d 403, 411–
14 (3d Cir. 2016). Our approach fully comports with that
approach. Rule 902(11) can authenticate the mechanical or
technical aspects of social media records. The type of
extrinsic evidence the government offered linking Allen to
the account depicted in the Facebook records can
authenticate the underlying substantive content of those
records under Rule 901(a).
The Facebook records were thus authenticated under
Rules 902(11) and 803(6) as records maintained by
Facebook in the regular course of its business. And those
records’ underlying content were authenticated under Rule
901(a) through the government’s proffered extrinsic
evidence. The Facebook records were fully authenticated
and were properly admitted as evidence at Allen’s trial.
B
Admitting the Facebook records also complied with
Federal Rules of Evidence 403 and 404(b). Allen filed a
motion in limine to exclude the records as unfairly
prejudicial under Rule 403 and as impermissible propensity
evidence under Rule 404(b). The records fell into two
categories: (1) evidence of Allen’s direct participation in the
charged offenses, and (2) evidence establishing that Allen
was the user of the John Allen account. For example, the
government offered as direct evidence the message in which
the user of the John Allen account said, “I need to go pick up
my shooter on Pines.” And for evidence of identity, the
government pointed to Facebook messages referring to the
user with Allen’s drug dealer moniker, “Ghost.”
Allen’s Rule 404(b) arguments mostly target the second
group of records: those used to show identity. The district

USA V. ALLEN

17

court disagreed with Allen that these records were
impermissible “other act” evidence under Rule 404(b) and
unfairly prejudicial under Rule 403. We review de novo
whether evidence is other act evidence under Rule 404(b),
but the admission of this evidence is reviewed for abuse of
discretion. United States v. Carpenter, 923 F.3d 1172,
1180–81 (9th Cir. 2019).
Under Rule 404(b), evidence of other acts is not
admissible to prove character but may be admissible to prove
“motive, opportunity, intent, preparation, plan, knowledge,
identity, absence of mistake, or lack of accident.” Fed. R.
Evid. 404(b)(2). Evidence under Rule 404(b) may be
admitted if: “(1) the evidence tends to prove a material
point; (2) the other act is not too remote in time; (3) the
evidence is sufficient to support a finding that [the]
defendant committed the other act; and (4) (in certain cases)
the other act is similar to the offense charged.” United States
v. Cox, 963 F.3d 915, 924 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting United
States v. Bailey, 696 F.3d 794, 799 (9th Cir. 2012)). Even if
the evidence is admissible under Rule 404(b), it remains
subject to the general balancing test under Rule 403. Id. at
925.
There was no error under Rule 404(b). Allen disputed
identity as to both the charged crimes and the user of the
Facebook account. The records—by suggesting that Allen
was the person behind the Facebook account—supported the
government’s theory on identity. Such evidence is expressly
permitted under Rule 404(b). See id. at 924–25 (over a Rule
404(b) objection, admitting prior messages involving child
pornography to identify the defendant as the person behind
an online moniker). The Facebook records evidence
“help[ed] establish identity,” meaning they were
“authorize[d]” under Rule 404(b) and were “subject only to

18

USA V. ALLEN

the relevancy criteria of Rule 403.” United States v. Miller,
688 F.2d 652, 659 (9th Cir. 1982).
And the admission of the records also complied with
Rule 403. Under that rule, the district “court may exclude
relevant evidence if its probative value is substantially
outweighed by a danger of one or more of the following:
unfair prejudice, confusing the issues, misleading the jury,
undue delay, wasting time, or needlessly presenting
cumulative evidence.” Fed. R. Evid. 403. The Facebook
records were relevant in tying Allen to his crimes.
Unicolors, Inc. v. H&M Hennes & Mauritz, L.P., 52 F.4th
1054, 1082 (9th Cir. 2022). The district court did not abuse
its discretion in admitting the records. In fact, it sought to
ensure that the Facebook records did not unduly bias the
jury. The district court required the government to redact
references that it thought were unfairly prejudicial. The
court also excluded exhibits that were unnecessarily
duplicative of other evidence.
V
The district court did not abuse its discretion either by
dismissing Allen’s indictments without prejudice or by
admitting the Facebook records evidence.
AFFIRMED.

