FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
TRISTON HARRIS STEINMAN,
Defendant - Appellee.

No. 23-1703
D.C. No.
3:22-cr-00068ART-CLB-1
ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Anne R. Traum, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted December 5, 2024
San Francisco, California
Filed March 5, 2025
Amended November 13, 2025
Before: MILAN D. SMITH, JR. and PATRICK J.
BUMATAY, Circuit Judges, and GEORGE H. WU, Senior
District Judge. *

The Honorable George H. Wu, United States Senior District Judge for
the Central District of California, sitting by designation.

*

2

USA V. STEINMAN

Order;
Amended Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.;
Concurrence by Judge George H. Wu
SUMMARY **
Criminal Law
The panel filed (1) an order withdrawing its opinion filed
March 5, 2025, and denying as moot a petition for panel or
en banc rehearing; and (2) an amended opinion reversing the
district court’s order suppressing evidence seized from
Triston Harris Steinman’s car following a traffic stop in a
case in which Steinman is charged with being a felon in
possession of ammunition and possession of unregistered
firearms.
The panel held that the district court erred in concluding
that Nevada State Trooper William Boyer violated
Steinman’s constitutional rights by unlawfully prolonging
the traffic stop. Trooper Boyer had reasonable suspicion of
an independent offense after he learned of Steinman’s felony
conviction, and he did not measurably prolong the traffic
stop up to that point.
The panel held that the district court erred in concluding
that Trooper Boyer lacked probable cause to seize
Steinman’s automobile. There was probable cause to
believe that Steinman violated Nevada law by possessing
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

USA V. STEINMAN

3

firearms as a felon. As to the issue of “cross-enforcement”
of the Fourth Amendment, the panel generally agreed with
the Government that state officers may consider violations
of federal law, as part of the totality of the circumstances, in
justifying a search and seizure. Here, Trooper Boyer could
seize Steinman’s vehicle pursuant to the automobile
exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement
because he had probable cause to believe that the vehicle
contained evidence of a federal crime (felon in possession of
ammunition) that was highly related to the state crime under
investigation (felon in possession of a firearm).
The panel held that the district court erred in concluding
that warrant overbreadth requires suppression. The panel
did not disturb the district court’s ruling that the search
warrant was unconstitutionally overbroad, but it was
nonetheless error for the district court to exclude the fruits of
the search because the search of Steinman’s vehicle would
have been permissible under the automobile exception to the
Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement. Thus, the
district court should not have suppressed the guns and
ammunition seized from Steinman’s vehicle.
District Judge Wu concurred with the majority opinion
except for Part II.B.2. He wrote that the panel need not—
and should not—break new ground by addressing the
undeveloped and potentially sweeping “cross-enforcement”
issue.

4

USA V. STEINMAN

COUNSEL
Peter H. Walkingshaw (argued), Assistant United States
Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Reno, Nevada; Mina Chang,
Assistant United States Attorney; Adam M. Flake and
Robert L. Ellman, Appellate Chiefs; Sigal Chattah, Acting
United States Attorney; Jason M. Frierson, United States
Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Las Vegas, Nevada; for PlaintiffAppellant.
Jeremy C. Baron (argued) and JoNell Thomas, Assistant
Federal Public Defenders; Rene L. Valladares, Federal
Public Defender; Federal Public Defender's Office, Las
Vegas, Nevada; Sean A. McClelland, Assistant Federal
Public Defender, Federal Public Defender's Office, Reno,
Nevada; for Defendant-Appellee.
Dallas R. Anselmo and Katherine Currie-Diamon Clark
County Office of the Public Defender, Las Angeles,
California; Christopher M. Peterson, American Civil
Liberties Union of Nevada, North Las Vegas, Nevada; for
Amici Curiae Nevada Attorneys for Criminal Justice.
Vincent Brunkow, Chief Appellate Attorney; Daniel J.
Yadron Jr., Appellate Attorney; Kasha Castillo, Executive
Director; Federal Defenders of San Diego Inc., San Diego,
California; for Amici Curiae Ninth Circuit Federal Public
and Community Defender Offices.

USA V. STEINMAN

5

ORDER
The opinion captioned United States v. Steinman, 130
F.4th 693 (9th Cir. 2025), filed on March 5, 2025, is hereby
withdrawn.
An amended opinion will be filed
contemporaneously with this order.
Appellee’s petition for panel or en banc rehearing (Dkt.
58) is denied as moot. Pursuant to Ninth Circuit General
Order 5.3(a), the parties can file new petitions for panel or
en banc rehearing.

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
The district court suppressed evidence seized from
Triston Harris Steinman’s car on multiple grounds,
including that a law enforcement officer violated his Fourth
Amendment rights during a traffic stop. The Government
appeals the suppression order, contending that Steinman’s
constitutional rights were not violated and that the evidence
should not be suppressed. We agree with the Government.
Exercising appellate jurisdiction pursuant to 18 U.S.C.
§ 3731, we reverse.
FACTUAL AND PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
I. The Traffic Stop and Subsequent Search
This case arises out of a traffic stop conducted on August
12, 2022, by Trooper William Boyer of the Nevada State
Police. While Trooper Boyer was driving on a highway in
Wells, Nevada, he observed a gray BMW driving in the

6

USA V. STEINMAN

opposite direction and determined that the BMW was
travelling at 89 miles per hour, well above the posted speed
limit. Trooper Boyer turned on his emergency lights and, at
approximately 3:51pm, pulled over the BMW, which was
driven by Defendant Triston Harris Steinman. The events
that followed were recorded by Trooper Boyer’s body-worn
camera and dashcam.
While approaching the BMW, Trooper Boyer observed
movement within the vehicle’s cab, which he determined to
be Steinman moving around within the cab. Arriving at the
passenger-side window, Trooper Boyer observed an
ammunition box on the front right floor of the vehicle and
items covered by a blanket in the back seat. Trooper Boyer
requested Steinman’s license and registration, and Steinman
told Trooper Boyer that he was moving from Washington to
Utah, which involved passing through Nevada. Trooper
Boyer inquired about the move while inspecting Steinman’s
documentation. In response to Trooper Boyer’s question,
Steinman said that there was “stuff” under the blanket in the
back seat. When Trooper Boyer inquired further, Steinman
denied that there was anything that he wished to hide in the
back seat and reiterated that it was only his “stuff.”
Steinman admitted having ammunition but denied having
guns in the car. Trooper Boyer returned to his patrol car to
run a driver’s license check, which would show if
Steinman’s license was valid and whether Steinman had any
outstanding warrants or protection orders.
Trooper Boyer approached the BMW again to check the
VIN number to make sure it matched the registration and so
he could request Steinman’s insurance information.
Steinman did not have his insurance information, and he
requested it telephonically from his girlfriend. Trooper
Boyer asked Steinman to come sit in his patrol car, but

USA V. STEINMAN

7

Steinman demurred, asking if he could just receive the
citation instead. Trooper Boyer asked, “Don’t want to talk
to me?” and informed Steinman that he had the authority to
order Steinman out of the BMW. Following Trooper
Boyer’s instructions, Steinman left the BMW and walked to
the patrol car. Steinman sat in the right front seat of the
patrol car and, shortly thereafter, showed Trooper Boyer the
insurance information that he received from his girlfriend.
Trooper Boyer accessed his ticket-writer application. He
observed that Steinman appeared to be sweating. The cruiser
was air-conditioned but the passenger door was open for the
first few minutes of Steinman being inside. Trooper Boyer
conversed with Steinman about his travel plans and his
history while working on the citation on the computer.
Approximately ten minutes into the stop, Trooper Boyer
requested a criminal history check on Steinman from
dispatch, and Steinman again asked if he could just get a
ticket and leave. Trooper Boyer indicated to Steinman that
the ticket-writing process was not yet completed. The two
continued conversing while Trooper Boyer worked on the
citation. At about 4:05pm, about three minutes after
requesting it, Trooper Boyer received Steinman’s criminal
history record. Trooper Boyer reviewed the criminal history
record for about three-and-a half to four minutes, observing
that there was at least one entry listed as “felony with a guilty
disposition.” During his review of the records, Trooper
Boyer effectively paused the citation-writing process. He
continued conversing with Steinman while reviewing the
records, including about the parameters of the ticket that he
was going to issue.
Trooper Boyer then returned to writing the citation. He
signed the citation at about 4:10 pm, approximately nineteen

8

USA V. STEINMAN

minutes into the stop. He continued filling out other fields
in the ticket-writer application and chatting with Steinman,
including asking Steinman how he obtained the money to
purchase his BMW. Trooper Boyer asked Steinman whether
he had ever been in any trouble, and pressed him after
Steinman responded, “a little bit.” Steinman stated that he
had an assault charge but that he did not think he had any
felonies besides a juvenile one. Trooper Boyer asked
Steinman if he still shot guns, and Steinman responded, “not
really,” and explained that he just had ammunition because
he was bringing it home. Shortly afterwards, Trooper Boyer
continued filling out the citation and explained the fine that
Steinman would be facing.
At approximately 4:20 pm—just under thirty minutes
into the stop—Trooper Boyer informed Steinman that
Steinman had some felonies on his background and
ammunition in his BMW, which provided “a little” probable
cause to search the vehicle. He asked for Steinman’s consent
to search the BMW, but Steinman refused and recanted his
earlier admission that there was ammunition in the car,
saying that the ammunition box was empty. Steinman also
accused Trooper Boyer of investigating him and asking him
questions instead of just giving him a ticket.
Other officers, including a sergeant, arrived at Trooper
Boyer’s request. While Steinman waited on the side of the
road talking on his cell phone, Trooper Boyer
(1) unsuccessfully reached out to a K-9 unit, (2) reached out
to dispatch to confirm that Steinman had felony convictions
rather than just felony charges, and (3) did a few other tasks

USA V. STEINMAN

9

related to the seizure, including requesting a tow. 1 At
4:38pm, Trooper Boyer explained the citation to Steinman
and returned some of his documentation. Trooper Boyer
then explained that the BMW was being seized and that
Steinman would not have access to it.
At approximately 5:25pm—about ninety minutes after
the start of the stop—Steinman received his license back and
began to walk towards the nearest town (although he had
been offered a ride). The tow company arrived shortly
thereafter and took the BMW. The sergeant picked
Steinman up and drove him to town.
Trooper Boyer authored a request for a search warrant.
A lay justice of the peace approved Trooper Boyer’s
application for a search warrant, and officers searched the
BMW. They recovered a substantial cache of weapons and
other incriminating evidence; specifically, they found thirtyeight firearms, silencers, ammunition, marijuana, and drug
paraphernalia. That included one loaded firearm located
directly beneath the driver’s seat, within Steinman’s easy
reach.
II. Procedural History
Steinman was charged by superseding indictment with
(1) being a felon in possession of ammunition, see 18 U.S.C.
Trooper Boyer also called a number of his fellow officers and a justice
of the peace regarding the existence of probable cause and the procedure
for filling out a search warrant. Steinman attaches importance to these
events, but, as with the other events occurring during the time frame,
these calls are ultimately irrelevant to the ultimate question before us
because these calls occurred after Trooper Boyer developed reasonable
suspicion and probable cause. In any event, any statements by Trooper
Boyer suggesting that he had a subjective doubt as to whether there was
probable cause do not shed any light on the issues before us.
1

10

USA V. STEINMAN

§ 922(g)(1), and (2) possession of unregistered firearms, 26
U.S.C. §§ 5841, 5861(d), 5871.
Steinman moved to suppress the evidence collected as a
result of the traffic stop, contending that his Fourth
Amendment rights were violated. Steinman argued, inter
alia, that (1) even if the stop was justified at its inception, it
was unconstitutionally prolonged without the required
reasonable suspicion; (2) the warrantless seizure of his
BMW was not supported by probable cause; and (3) the
search warrant ultimately obtained was facially overbroad
and otherwise invalid. 2 According to Steinman, the fruit of
these constitutional violations—namely, the guns and
ammunition—should be suppressed.
The Government opposed Steinman’s motion to
suppress. The Government first argued that the traffic stop
was not unconstitutionally prolonged because criminal
history checks during a traffic stop are objectively
reasonable and, even if the stop was prolonged, that
prolongation was properly supported by reasonable
suspicion. It also argued that there was probable cause to
seize Steinman’s car because (1) Trooper Boyer had
probable cause to believe that there were firearms in the car,
the possession of which by Steinman would be a crime under
state law and (2) Trooper Boyer had probable cause to
suspect that there was ammunition in the car, which violates
a federal statute, 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1). Finally, the
Steinman also raised other arguments, including that the stop itself was
not supported by reasonable suspicion because there was insufficient
evidence that he was speeding and that his statements to Trooper Boyer
should be suppressed because he was not given Miranda warnings.
Steinman does not renew these arguments in his appellate briefing,
though, and they are unpersuasive in any event.

2

USA V. STEINMAN

11

Government contended that the search warrant was valid,
that officers relied upon the warrant in good faith, and that,
even if the warrant were invalid, Steinman’s car could have
been searched under the automobile exception because of the
existence of probable cause.
The district court held an evidentiary hearing on
Steinman’s motion to suppress. Trooper Boyer testified at
the hearing, and a variety of exhibits were admitted,
including the search warrant affidavit and warrant itself,
Steinman’s criminal history records, and the officers’ police
reports. Among other things, Trooper Boyer testified that he
had made thousands of traffic stops during his time in law
enforcement, and that, in his experience, the usual length for
a traffic stop was around fifteen minutes, although there was
considerable variation. Trooper Boyer testified that he did
not, as a routine matter, request criminal history when
checking documentation during a traffic stop; instead, he did
so only when the circumstances made him suspicious. He
specifically testified that he ran the criminal history check
on Steinman because he had become “suspicious” of
Steinman.
Later that same day, the district court issued an oral
ruling granting the motion to suppress. The district court
first concluded that there was a violation of Steinman’s
Fourth Amendment rights by the unconstitutional
prolongation of the traffic stop. Specifically, it reasoned that
“the traffic stop was unreasonably prolonged when Mr.
Steinman was removed from his vehicle for the purpose of
interrogation,” and was further prolonged “by the detailed
questioning of Mr. Steinman” as well as the “criminal
history checks,” which delayed the writing of the speeding
citation. The district court concluded that this was not a case
where a routine criminal-history check was conducted for

12

USA V. STEINMAN

officer safety. And even if the original criminal records
check was justified, the citation-writing process was still
slowed by Trooper Boyer’s investigation and research on the
criminal history. The district court further concluded that
the prolongation was not supported by reasonable suspicion.
Next, the district court concluded that the seizure, search,
and prolongation could not be justified by Trooper Boyer’s
interest in enforcing the federal prohibition on possession of
ammunition by a felon because Trooper Boyer was a state
law enforcement officer. Relatedly, it reasoned that there
was no probable cause to seize the vehicle based on an
alleged violation of either federal or state law.
As to the search warrant, the district court concluded that
it was not supported by probable cause and that it was
impermissibly overbroad in violation of constitutional
safeguards. The district court finished by remarking:
So to be clear, I am suppressing on multiple
independent grounds. There was a prolonged
detention unsupported by reasonable
suspicion that far exceeded the scope of a
normal traffic stop and mission. There was no
probable cause to seize the vehicle. The
warrant is invalid and cannot be saved by
severance or good faith.
The Government timely filed an appeal of the
suppression order.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
The district court had original jurisdiction over this case
pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 3231. We have jurisdiction over the

USA V. STEINMAN

13

Government’s appeal of the suppression order pursuant to 18
U.S.C. § 3731.
“We review de novo the district court’s ruling on a
motion to suppress and for clear error any underlying
findings of historical fact.” United States v. Willy, 40 F.4th
1074, 1079 (9th Cir. 2022). “We must ‘give due weight to
inferences drawn from th[e] facts by resident judges and
local law enforcement officers.’” Id. (alteration in original)
(quoting Ornelas v. United States, 517 U.S. 690, 699
(1996)).
ANALYSIS
The Government challenges the district court’s order
granting Steinman’s motion to suppress on multiple bases.
First, the Government argues that the district court erred in
its conclusion that Trooper Boyer unconstitutionally
prolonged the traffic stop without the requisite reasonable
suspicion, in part because it improperly considered Trooper
Boyer’s subjective motivation. Second, the Government
contends that the district court erred in concluding that
Trooper Boyer lacked probable cause to seize Steinman’s
BMW.
Steinman disagrees with the Government on those two
points and further insists that because the Government failed
to challenge the district court’s ruling that the search warrant
was overbroad—an “independent basis for suppression”—
we must uphold the suppression order. In response to this
additional argument, the Government insists that the
overbreadth of the warrant is immaterial because Trooper
Boyer had probable cause to believe that the BMW
contained evidence of a crime, so it could be searched
without a warrant pursuant to the automobile exception to
the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement.

14

USA V. STEINMAN

We agree with the Government on all three points, and
we reverse the suppression order.
I. Whether the Traffic Stop was Unconstitutionally
Prolonged
The district court concluded that the fruits of the traffic
stop could be suppressed because Trooper Boyer
unconstitutionally extended the traffic stop without the
requisite reasonable suspicion. This was error.
A. Legal Standards
“A seizure for a traffic violation justifies a police
investigation of that violation.” Rodriguez v. United States,
575 U.S. 348, 354 (2015). “Under the Fourth Amendment,
a seizure for a traffic stop is ‘a relatively brief encounter,’
‘more analogous to a so-called Terry stop than to a formal
arrest.’” United States v. Taylor, 60 F.4th 1233, 1239 (9th
Cir. 2023) (quoting Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 354). “To be
lawful, a traffic stop must be limited in its scope: an officer
may ‘address the traffic violation that warranted the stop,’
make ‘ordinary inquiries incident to the traffic stop,’ and
‘attend to related safety concerns.’” Id. (quoting Rodriguez,
575 U.S. at 354–55). “The stop may last ‘no longer than is
necessary to effectuate’ these purposes and complete the
traffic ‘mission’ safely.” Id. (quoting Rodriguez, 575 U.S.
at 354–55); see also Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 354 (“Authority
for the seizure . . . ends when tasks tied to the traffic
infraction are—or reasonably should have been—
completed.”).
Lawful inquiries incident to a traffic stop can include
checking a driver’s license, determining whether there are
outstanding warrants, and inspecting the automobile’s
registration and proof of insurance. See United States v.

USA V. STEINMAN

15

Ramirez, 98 F.4th 1141, 1144 (9th Cir. 2024). Attending to
related safety concerns includes “certain negligibly
burdensome precautions in order to complete [the traffic]
mission safely.” Id. (quoting Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 356).
“So, for example, an officer may order the driver of a vehicle
to exit the vehicle during a traffic stop.” Id.; see also
Pennsylvania v. Mimms, 434 U.S. 106, 110 (1977) (per
curiam). These safety precautions fall within the mission of
the traffic stop because “[t]raffic stops are ‘especially
fraught with danger to police officers.’” Rodriguez, 575
U.S. at 356 (quoting Arizona v. Johnson, 555 U.S. 323, 330
(2009)).
Building on these principles, a traffic stop “‘can become
unlawful if it is prolonged beyond the time reasonably
required to complete the mission of issuing a’ ticket for the
violation.” United States v. Hylton, 30 F.4th 842, 847 (9th
Cir. 2022) (quoting Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 354); see also
Ramirez, 98 F.4th at 1144 (“[A] traffic stop ‘exceeding the
time needed to handle the matter for which the stop was
made violates the Constitution’s shield against unreasonable
seizures.’” (quoting Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 350)). However,
“the Fourth Amendment tolerate[s] certain unrelated
investigations that [do] not lengthen the roadside detention.”
Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 354. But an officer may not make
unrelated investigation inquiries “in a way that prolongs the
stop.” United States v. Landeros, 913 F.3d 862, 866 (9th
Cir. 2019) (quoting Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 355). That
includes investigations that result in only a “de minimis”
prolongation of the stop. See Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 355–
56; United States v. Nault, 41 F.4th 1073, 1078 n.2 (9th Cir.
2022). That is because “[o]n-scene investigation into other
crimes[] . . . detours” from the traffic-stop mission.

16

USA V. STEINMAN

Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 356. “So too do safety precautions
taken in order to facilitate such detours.” Id.
That is not to say, of course, that law enforcement
officers can never extend a stop to investigate matters other
than the original traffic violation without running afoul of
the Fourth Amendment. To the contrary, “a stop ‘may be
extended to conduct an investigation into matters other than
the original traffic violation’ so long as ‘the officers have
reasonable suspicion of an independent offense.’” Taylor,
60 F.4th at 1239 (quoting Landeros, 913 F.3d at 867).
In short, if a traffic stop is constitutionally justified at its
inception—which is not seriously disputed in this appeal—
our analysis is twofold. Was the stop prolonged, and, if so,
was the prolongation justified by reasonable suspicion based
on the information available at that juncture? See Landeros,
913 F.3d at 867–88; United States v. Evans, 786 F.3d 779,
788 (9th Cir. 2015).
B. Discussion
Applying these rules here, we conclude that Steinman’s
Fourth Amendment rights were not violated by an
unconstitutional prolongation of the traffic stop. Our
conclusion flows from two key premises. First, nothing up
until the point when Trooper Boyer finished reviewing
Steinman’s criminal history and learned that he had a felony
conviction (approximately 4:08pm according to the bodycamera footage)
constituted
an
unconstitutional
prolongation of the traffic stop. All of the actions taken by
Trooper Boyer up until that point either (1) were within the
legitimate mission of the traffic stop, including protecting
officer safety or (2) did not prolong the traffic stop. Second,
after Trooper Boyer reviewed the criminal history and
learned that Steinman had a felony conviction, he had

USA V. STEINMAN

17

reasonable suspicion to believe that Steinman was engaged
in criminal activity—namely, that Steinman possessed
firearms in violation of Nevada law. Thus, even if we
assume that Trooper Boyer did prolong the stop at some
point after he learned that Steinman had a felony conviction,
it is of no moment because he was entitled to do so based on
his reasonable suspicion of an independent offense.
1. Whether Trooper Boyer Prolonged the Stop
Before Learning of Steinman’s Criminal
History
We begin by narrowing the relevant timeframe to focus
on the period between the start of the traffic stop and the
point at which Trooper Boyer learned that Steinman had a
felony conviction (the point when, as explained below, see
infra § I.B, Trooper Boyer developed reasonable suspicion
that Steinman had committed a criminal infraction
independent of the traffic violation). We agree with the
Government’s position that this is the “relevant timeframe”
for purposes of determining whether there was prolongation.
We conclude that Trooper Boyer did not unconstitutionally
prolong the traffic stop in any way during this period.
As detailed above, during this period, Trooper Boyer
pulled over Steinman, asked him a number of questions
while checking his documentation, ordered Steinman out of
his BMW and into the patrol car, and asked him questions
while filling out a traffic citation. Trooper Boyer also
requested, waited for, and reviewed a criminal history
records check. In our assessment, all of these activities were
lawful under the Fourth Amendment because they were
either geared towards the mission of the traffic stop
(including ensuring officer safety) or did not measurably
prolong the stop. In reaching a contrary conclusion, the

18

USA V. STEINMAN

district court pointed to three specific actions that it said
resulted in an unlawful prolongation of the stop: ordering
Steinman out of the car, questioning Steinman, and running
a criminal history check on Steinman. Because all of these
actions were lawful and permissible, the district court erred.
First, it did not prolong the stop for Trooper Boyer to ask
Steinman to exit the BMW and come with him to the patrol
car. It is black-letter law that a trooper may do so in the
interest of officer safety. See Ramirez, 98 F.4th at 1144;
Mimms, 434 U.S. at 110. Given the “inordinate risk
confronting an officer as he approaches a person seated in an
automobile,” Mimms, 434 U.S. at 110, it was objectively
reasonable for Trooper Boyer to order Steinman out of the
BMW and into his patrol car during the stop—particularly
since Trooper Boyer had observed ammunition as well as
Steinman’s moving around in the vehicle. The district
court’s ruling to the contrary improperly relied on Trooper
Boyer’s subjective motivation in wanting to continue the
investigation and question Steinman. But Trooper Boyer’s
“subjective motivations are irrelevant because ‘the Fourth
Amendment’s concern with “reasonableness” allows certain
actions to be taken, whatever the subjective intent.’” Taylor,
60 F.4th at 1240 (quoting Whren v. United States, 517 U.S.
806, 814 (1996)). Indeed, our opinion in Taylor makes
pellucid that even if Trooper Boyer was subjectively
motivated by a desire to question Steinman further, that is
irrelevant because Trooper Boyer’s “subjective motivations,
whatever they may have been, could not change the
objective reasonableness of [his] actions.” Id. 3
We observe, parenthetically, that the circumstances of this case
illustrate precisely why officers are given the latitude to order drivers out

3

USA V. STEINMAN

19

Second, we also reject the position that Trooper Boyer’s
questioning of Steinman while he filled out the citation
prolonged the traffic stop. We note that many of the initial
questions that Trooper Boyer asked, such as those about
Steinman’s documentation and what was in the vehicle, were
clearly related to the mission of the traffic stop and the
interest in ensuring officer safety. See Taylor, 60 F.4th at
1239 (“Once Taylor was stopped on the side of the street,
[the officer] was permitted to ask Taylor basic questions,
such as whether Taylor knew why he had been pulled over,
whether he had identification, whether he had been arrested
before, and whether he had any weapons in the vehicle.”).
Additionally, much of the questioning focused on
Steinman’s travel plans, which generally falls within the
purview of the traffic-stop mission. See United States v.
Chavez-Valenzuela, 268 F.3d 719, 724 n.4 (9th Cir. 2001)
(“Questions asked initially during a traffic stop must be
reasonably related to the justification for the stop. [The
officer’s] inquiries about Chavez-Valenzuela’s starting
point, destination and general travel plans were probably
justifiable.” (citation omitted)), abrogated on other grounds
by Muehler v. Mena, 544 U.S. 93 (2005); accord United
States v. Cole, 21 F.4th 421, 429–31 (7th Cir. 2021); United
States v. Braddy, 11 F.4th 1298, 1311 (11th Cir. 2021).
But even assuming that Steinman is correct that some of
Trooper Boyer’s questioning during the relevant period fell
outside the purview of the traffic-stop mission, Trooper
Boyer did not violate Steinman’s Fourth Amendment rights.
Again, “the Fourth Amendment tolerate[s] certain unrelated
investigations that [do] not lengthen the roadside detention.”
of their vehicles. Recall that law enforcement found a loaded firearm
under the driver seat, within Steinman’s easy reach.

20

USA V. STEINMAN

Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 354. The key inquiry is whether the
questioning “measurably extend[ed] the duration of the
stop.” Johnson, 555 U.S. at 333.
Here, it did not. Trooper Boyer’s body camera footage
shows that the arguably investigatory questioning took place
while Trooper Boyer was in the process of filling out the
citation or while he was waiting for the results of the criminal
history check (which was permissible, as discussed below).
Because Trooper Boyer asked these questions while he was
filling out the citation and waiting for the results of the
criminal history check, he did not measurably extend the
duration of the traffic stop. See United States v. Mendez, 476
F.3d 1077, 1079–80 (9th Cir. 2007) (“[T]he stop was not
unnecessarily prolonged.
[One officer’s] questioning
occurred while [another officer] was running a check on
Mendez’s identification. It could not have expanded the
duration of the stop since the stop would, in any event, have
lasted until after the check had been completed.”); accord
Cole, 21 F.4th at 429 (“[N]o one disputes that an officer may
ask questions unrelated to the stop[] . . . if doing so does not
prolong the traffic stop.”). This is not a case where, for
example, completing a traffic citation was suspended for the
purpose of questioning or questioning occurred after the
traffic stop had been effectively completed. Cf. Landeros,
913 F.3d at 866–68; United States v. Gorman, 859 F.3d 706,
715 (9th Cir. 2017) (concluding that there was prolongation
when, after a decision had been made not to issue a citation,
the officer inquired about a number of things, including how
the driver afforded the vehicle).
To the extent that Steinman argues that simultaneous
questioning or discussion inherently slows down the
citation-writing process—and thus extends traffic stops—
because it is distracting and reduces the capacity of officers

USA V. STEINMAN

21

to work diligently, we are unpersuaded. Police officers are
not automatons required to work with the maximum possible
efficiency at all costs. Nor are they required to sit in stony
silence like schoolchildren taking an exam during the
process of filling out a traffic citation.
In opposing this conclusion, Steinman contends that the
district court made a factual finding that the questioning
added to the time necessary to complete the citation
and that Trooper Boyer “slow played” the citation process. 4
According to Steinman, this factual finding can be reviewed
only for clear error, and clear error is not present here.
This argument is flawed, and we are unpersuaded. The
district court’s finding that the citation process took longer
than it should was based on erroneous legal conclusions,
including about the legality of ordering Steinman out of the
car and requesting a criminal history check. Moreover,
although the district court did find that Trooper Boyer’s
questioning resulted in an overall prolongation of the traffic
stop, the district court did not focus on the questioning
during the period that we are concerned with—namely,
between the initial stop and the point when Trooper Boyer
reviewed Steinman’s criminal history. Quite the contrary:
the district court’s framing of the issue suggests that it was
most concerned about the questioning that occurred after the
first criminal history check. We are thus unpersuaded that
Steinman also points to the opinion of our sister circuit in United States
v. Peralez, 526 F.3d 1115, 1121 (8th Cir. 2008), for the proposition that
questioning that “blend[s]” permissible inquiries with impermissible
ones can be violative of the Fourth Amendment. But besides not being
binding, Peralez involved an admission that the blending of topics
actually prolonged the detention. See id. at 1120; see also id. at 1121
(“The off-topic questions more than doubled the time Peralez was
detained.”).
4

22

USA V. STEINMAN

the district court made a factual finding that the questioning
during the period at issue prolonged the stop. 5
In sum, because Trooper Boyer’s arguably investigatory
questioning occurred simultaneously with tasks that fell
within the mission of the traffic stop—viz., filling out the
citation form and requesting and reviewing a criminal
history records check—we cannot say that the questioning
measurably prolonged the stop. Thus, it does not implicate
Steinman’s Fourth Amendment rights.
Third, Trooper Boyer did not prolong the stop by
requesting Steinman’s criminal history, waiting for the
results, and reviewing the history. Such a precaution falls
within the officer-safety aspect of the traffic stop. As we
explained in Hylton, law enforcement officers may conduct
criminal history checks without unconstitutionally
prolonging a traffic stop because “a criminal history check
is a negligibly burdensome precaution required for officer
safety.” Id. at 846; id. at 848 (“[B]ecause a criminal history
check ‘stems from the mission of the stop itself,’ it is a
‘negligibly burdensome precaution[]’ necessary ‘to
complete [the stop] safely.’” (alterations in original)
(quoting Rodriguez, 575 U.S. at 356)). In this way, a
Even if the district court had made such a factual finding, under the
clear-error standard we could reverse that finding if we have a “definite
and firm conviction that a mistake has been committed.” Hylton, 30
F.4th at 846 (quoting United States v. Perkins, 850 F.3d 1109, 1115 (9th
Cir. 2017)).
Although this standard is deferential, it is not
insurmountable, and even if we were to accept Steinman’s view of the
district court’s factual findings—which we do not—we would
nevertheless reverse. Our review of the body camera footage and the
record shows that any finding that Trooper Boyer’s discussion with
Steinman during the relevant period extended the duration of the traffic
stop would be clearly erroneous.
5

USA V. STEINMAN

23

criminal records check is different from activities that are
more investigative in nature, such as the ex-felon registration
check that we discussed in Evans, which “in no way
advanced officer safety.” 786 F.3d at 787.
Under the circumstances of this case, 6 Trooper Boyer’s
actions in requesting Steinman’s criminal history and
reviewing it were reasonably justified by a concern for
officer safety. After pulling over Steinman, Trooper Boyer
observed possible signs of danger, including the ammunition
box in the BMW and Steinman’s moving around in the cab
of the vehicle. On these facts, a reasonable officer would
feel that a criminal-history check was justified. That is true
even though Steinman was generally compliant and did not
seem to pose an active threat while in the passenger seat of
the patrol car.
The district court reached the opposite conclusion by
relying on Trooper Boyer’s testimony regarding his
subjective intent in conducting the criminal history check,
including his testimony that he did not routinely conduct
such checks during traffic stops and did so here only because
of his suspicions of Steinman. But “what matters, under
Hylton, is that conducting a criminal records check in
connection with a traffic stop is objectively reasonable.”
The parties disagree as to whether, as some courts have concluded,
criminal history checks can in some circumstances be violative of the
Fourth Amendment or whether they are always justified as a matter of
officer safety. See United States v. Hunter, 88 F.4th 221, 226 (3d Cir.
2023) (“[W]e acknowledge that under other circumstances, a criminal
record check may be unreasonable if it is more than negligibly
burdensome and thus exceeds the stop’s mission.”). But because we
conclude that the criminal records check at issue here was reasonably
justified by a concern for officer safety, we need not decide whether
criminal records checks are always reasonable during traffic stops.

6

24

USA V. STEINMAN

Taylor, 60 F.4th at 1241; see also Ramirez, 98 F.4th at 1145–
46. Hence, regardless of what Trooper Boyer “might have
subjectively believed” or intended as a justification for the
criminal history check, the check was permissible if a
reasonable officer would have believed it to be justified by
officer safety. Taylor, 60 F.4th at 1241. That standard is
met here.
In sum, all of Trooper Boyer’s actions up until the point
when he reviewed Steinman’s criminal history
(approximately seventeen minutes into the stop) were lawful
because they fell within the mission of the traffic stop or
otherwise did not measurably prolong the stop. Thus,
nothing during this period infringed Steinman’s Fourth
Amendment rights.
2. Whether Trooper Boyer Had Reasonable
Suspicion of an Independent Offense
Steinman relies heavily on Trooper Boyer’s actions after
the criminal-history check in arguing that Trooper Boyer
unreasonably prolonged the stop by taking investigatory
measures. For example, he points to Trooper Boyer’s
questioning about whether Steinman had ever been in
trouble before and whether he still shot guns. But we need
not decide the issue.
Even assuming arguendo that Trooper Boyer deviated
from the traffic-stop mission to conduct an independent
investigation after he finished reviewing the criminal history
check, an independent investigation was justified because
Trooper Boyer had reasonable suspicion that Steinman was
engaged in criminal activity. Put otherwise, “even if,” after
the initial criminal history-check, Trooper Boyer “prolonged
the encounter beyond the original mission of the traffic stop,
[he] had a sufficient basis to do so”—namely, reasonable

USA V. STEINMAN

25

suspicion of an independent offense. See Taylor, 60 F.4th at
1242; see also Nault, 41 F.4th at 1081 (concluding that there
was no prolongation of a stop until the point when
reasonable suspicion attached and that “continued detention
from that point on was supported by independent reasonable
suspicion of a DUI”).
“Reasonable suspicion ‘exists when an officer is aware
of specific, articulable facts which, when considered with
objective and reasonable inferences, form a basis for
particularized suspicion.’” Evans, 786 F.3d at 788 (quoting
United States v. Montero-Camargo, 208 F.3d 1122, 1129
(9th Cir. 2000) (en banc)). “The reasonable suspicion
standard ‘is not a particularly high threshold to reach’ and is
less than probable cause or a preponderance of the
evidence.” Taylor, 60 F.4th at 1241 (quoting United States
v. Valdes-Vega, 738 F.3d 1074, 1078 (9th Cir. 2013) (en
banc)). But a “mere hunch” is insufficient. Valdes-Vega,
738 F.3d at 1078 (quoting United States v. Arvizu, 534 U.S.
266, 274 (2002)).
The district court concluded that, based on the totality of
the circumstances, Trooper Boyer would not have had
reasonable suspicion that Steinman was committing an
independent criminal offense. Reviewing the issue of
whether there is reasonable suspicion de novo, United States
v. Guerrero, 47 F.4th 984, 984 (2022) (per curiam), we
disagree and conclude that Trooper Boyer had “reasonable
suspicion of an independent offense,” namely that Steinman
possessed a firearm as a felon in violation of Nevada law.
Taylor, 60 F.4th at 1242 (quoting Landeros, 913 F.3d at
867).
After Trooper Boyer had viewed Steinman’s criminal
history report, he had (1) observed an ammunition box in

26

USA V. STEINMAN

Steinman’s vehicle; (2) observed a blanket covering a
number of items in the back seat; (3) heard Steinman’s
arguably evasive answer about what was under the blanket;
(4) observed furtive movements by Steinman in the BMW;
(5) heard Steinman’s admission that there was ammunition
(though not guns) in the vehicle; and (6) learned that
Steinman had felony convictions. Considering the totality
of the circumstances, this was sufficient to give Trooper
Boyer reasonable suspicion to extend the traffic stop to
investigate whether Steinman had firearms in the vehicle in
violation of Nevada law. See Taylor, 60 F.4th at 1242
(concluding that there was reasonable suspicion for a felon
being in possession of a firearm when the officers knew that
the motorist was on supervision for being a felon in
possession of a firearm and could clearly see an unzipped,
empty fanny pack); cf. United States v. Baker, 850 F.2d
1365, 1369 (9th Cir. 1988) (“[H]aving found rounds of .45
caliber ammunition on the defendant’s person, and two
magazines for an Uzi rifle, the officer had probable cause to
believe that firearms were in the vehicle.”); accord United
States v. Sample, 136 F.3d 562, 564 (8th Cir. 1998)
(“Considering all of the circumstances—including [the
defendant’s] initial failure to stop, and particularly the
handgun ammunition and ammunition clips in the car, the
currency in the vents, and the configuration of the
dashboard, we find that there was a fair probability that guns,
or other contraband or evidence of a crime, would be
found . . . .”); United States v. Cooper, 19 F.3d 1154, 1163

USA V. STEINMAN

27

(7th Cir. 1994) (“The empty ammunition box raises an
inference that its contents had been used in a firearm.”). 7
Steinman’s arguments to the contrary are unavailing.
First, Steinman argues that reasonable suspicion could not
have attached because of the unreliability of the criminal
history search, as demonstrated by the fact that Trooper
Boyer later requested confirmation that Steinman had been
convicted rather than only charged. Trooper Boyer’s later
caution does not indicate that the initial results were
unreliable—particularly under the lenient reasonablesuspicion standard. Second, Steinman insists that the facts
articulated above are simply insufficient to establish
reasonable suspicion (or probable cause). Steinman is
mistaken; reviewing the issue de novo, the totality of the
circumstances supported at least reasonable suspicion to
believe that there were firearms in the vehicle.
3. Conclusion as to Prolongation of the Traffic
Stop
In sum, the district court’s decision that there was an
unconstitutional prolongation of the traffic stop was
erroneous. Trooper Boyer did not prolong the traffic stop in
violation of the Fourth Amendment by any of the actions that
he took up through the point where he reviewed the criminalhistory check, at around 4:08 p.m. And even if there was
prolongation after that point, Trooper Boyer had reasonable
suspicion that Steinman had committed an independent

As we explain below, see infra § II.B, the totality of the circumstances
at this point (or shortly thereafter) sufficed to give Officer Boyer
probable cause to search and seize the automobile. It follows that, a
fortiori, there would also be reasonable suspicion.

7

28

USA V. STEINMAN

criminal offense in violation of Nevada law, so he could
deviate from the traffic stop to investigate that offense.
II. Whether Trooper Boyer Had Probable Cause to
Seize the BMW
The district court also suppressed the fruits of the search
on the ground that there was no probable cause for Trooper
Boyer to seize Steinman’s BMW. Reviewing the probablecause determination de novo, see Guerrero, 47 F.4th at 984,
we disagree. The information available to Trooper Boyer
would have given him probable cause to believe that the
BMW contained (1) evidence that Steinman possessed
firearms in violation of state law and (2) evidence that
Steinman possessed ammunition in violation of federal law.
Accordingly, Trooper Boyer could seize the BMW, and
suppression was not warranted on this basis.
A. Legal Standard
The warrantless towing of Steinman’s car qualifies as a
seizure within the meaning of the Fourth Amendment. See
Miranda v. City of Cornelius, 429 F.3d 858, 862 (9th Cir.
2005). “Because warrantless searches and seizures are per se
unreasonable, the government bears the burden of showing
that a warrantless search or seizure falls within an exception
to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement.” United
States v. Cervantes, 703 F.3d 1135, 1141 (9th Cir. 2012).
Here, all parties agree that, in order to seize the BMW,
Trooper Boyer must have had probable cause that the BMW
contained evidence of a crime. This is derived from the
“‘automobile exception’” to the Fourth Amendment’s
warrant requirement, “under which a warrantless search of a
vehicle is permitted ‘if there is probable cause to believe that
the vehicle contains evidence of a crime.’” United States v.

USA V. STEINMAN

29

Faagai, 869 F.3d 1145, 1150 (9th Cir. 2017) (quoting United
States v. Brooks, 610 F.3d 1186, 1193 (9th Cir. 2010)); see
also California v. Acevedo, 500 U.S. 565, 580 (1991) (“The
police may search an automobile and the containers within
it where they have probable cause to believe contraband or
evidence is contained.”).
This exception applies to
warrantless automobile seizures as well as searches. See
United States v. Bagley, 772 F.2d 482, 491 (9th Cir. 1985).
“‘Probable cause exists when, under the totality of the
circumstances, “there is a fair probability that contraband or
evidence of a crime will be found in a particular place.”’”
United States v. Rodgers, 656 F.3d 1023, 1028 (9th Cir.
2011) (quoting United States v. Luong, 470 F.3d 898, 902
(9th Cir. 2006)). “The test for probable cause is not
reducible to ‘precise definition or quantification.’” Florida
v. Harris, 568 U.S. 237, 243 (2013) (quoting Maryland v.
Pringle, 540 U.S. 366, 371 (2003)). “Finely tuned standards
such as proof beyond a reasonable doubt or by a
preponderance of the evidence . . . have no place in the
[probable-cause] decision.” Id. at 243–44 (omission and
alteration in original) (quoting Illinois v. Gates, 462 U.S.
213, 235 (1983)). All that is required is “the kind of ‘fair
probability’ on which ‘reasonable and prudent [people,] not
legal technicians, act.’” Id. at 244 (alteration in original)
(quoting Gates, 462 U.S. at 238). In determining whether
probable cause exists, we “evaluate[] the totality of the
circumstances.” United States v. Scott, 705 F.3d 410, 417
(9th Cir. 2012).
B. Discussion
We conclude that Trooper Boyer was entitled to seize the
BMW because he had probable cause that it contained a

30

USA V. STEINMAN

firearm in violation of state law and ammunition in violation
of federal law.
1. Probable Cause to Seize Based on Evidence of
Possession of Firearm in Violation of State
Law
The seizure (and search) of the BMW was constitutional
because there was probable cause to believe that Steinman
had violated Nevada law by possessing firearms as a felon.
See Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 202.360 (West 2022) (prohibiting
the possession of firearms by felons). Specifically, the
totality of the circumstances, including the circumstantial
evidence of firearm possession, gave Trooper Boyer
probable cause to believe that the BMW contained firearms,
which is evidence of a violation of Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§ 202.360. Thus, Trooper Boyer could seize the automobile.
We reach this conclusion without much difficulty. As
noted above regarding the issue of reasonable suspicion, by
the time the BMW was seized, Trooper Boyer had
(1) observed an ammunition box in the vehicle; (2) observed
a blanket covering a number of items in the back seat;
(3) heard Steinman’s arguably evasive answer about what
was under the blanket; (4) observed Steinman moving
around in the BMW as he approached; (5) heard Steinman’s
admission that there was ammunition (though not guns) in
the vehicle; and (6) learned that Steinman had felony
convictions. Additionally, going into the probable-cause
calculus is the fact that Trooper Boyer learned that Steinman
had been untruthful about his felony convictions. This was
sufficient to give Trooper Boyer probable cause to seize the
vehicle on the grounds that it could contain a firearm.
Trooper Boyer was, of course, permitted to disbelieve
Steinman’s assertion that there were no firearms in the

USA V. STEINMAN

31

vehicle. See United States v. Malik, 963 F.3d 1014, 1016
(9th Cir. 2020) (per curiam).
We find it particularly salient that the BMW contained
an ammunition box in plain view. Indeed, we have found
the presence of ammunition (or other indicia of firearm
ownership) on a defendant’s person to be highly important
in the probable-cause analysis. See Baker, 850 F.2d at 1369
(“[H]aving found rounds of .45 caliber ammunition on the
defendant’s person, and two magazines for an Uzi rifle, the
officer had probable cause to believe that firearms were in
the vehicle.”); accord United States v. Childers, 73 F.4th
960, 965 (8th Cir. 2023) (“Upon lawful discovery and
seizure of the bullets from Childers’s person, the officers had
probable cause to believe that Childers had committed a
felony involving a firearm.”). Steinman attempts to
distinguish Baker on the basis that it involved ammunition
being found on a defendant’s person rather than in an
automobile, but we do not see how that distinction is of any
moment. There is also persuasive—though not binding—
authority suggesting that the presence of bullets in an
automobile can give rise to probable cause that the
automobile contains firearms. See United States v. Young,
213 F.3d 645, 2000 WL 278430, at *1 (9th Cir. Mar. 14,
2000) (unpublished table disposition) (considering bullets
found loose in the trunk of a car); United States v. Horn, 234
F. App’x 466, 467 (9th Cir. 2007) (considering the existence
of a bag the officer believed to contain bullets); accord
Sample, 136 F.3d at 564 (discussing bullets found in the
passenger compartment of an automobile); Cooper, 19 F.3d
at 1163 (discussing an empty ammunition box). As a panel
of our court cogently articulated, “[b]ullets strongly suggest
the presence of a gun.” Young, 213 F.3d 645, 2000 WL
278430, at *1. Although that statement was made in an

32

USA V. STEINMAN

unpublished—and thus nonprecedential—case, we firmly
agree with that common-sense sentiment.
Moreover, the ammunition box does not stand alone.
Trooper Boyer also saw arguably furtive movements as he
approached the BMW and shortly thereafter found a blanket
in the back seat that appeared to cover a number of items.
See United States v. Spencer, 1 F.3d 742, 746 (9th Cir. 1992)
(discussing “concealing movements in the automobile’s
front seat”); Rodgers, 656 F.3d at 1029 (discussing the
relevance of furtive movements). And Steinman’s response
to Trooper Boyer’s inquiry about the blanket—that it was
just “his stuff” was evasive. Furthermore, Trooper Boyer
was aware that Steinman was not telling the complete truth
about his felon status. Taken together, the totality of the
circumstances was sufficient to establish probable cause that
the vehicle contained firearms.
In arguing against this conclusion, Steinman relies
heavily on United States v. Nora, 765 F.3d 1049, 1058–59
(9th Cir. 2014). But Nora is inapposite. There, we
addressed whether an officer’s observation that the
defendant was holding a handgun when he went into his
house gave officers probable cause to search the house for
other firearms and ammunition. See id. at 1058. We
concluded that it did not because, although there was
probable cause to look for the specific handgun that the
officers had seen the defendant with, “the officers’ firsthand
observation of [the defendant] with a gun in his hand did not
give them reasonable grounds to believe that any additional
firearms would be found in the house.” Id. at 1059. But the
inference at issue in this case—that because a person has
bullets, he may have a firearm—is far less of a logical leap
than the inference in Nora that because a person has a
firearm, he may have more firearms. And, again, this case

USA V. STEINMAN

33

involves indicia that contraband was hidden in the car—such
as Steinman’s movements within the BMW, the blanket
covering the items, and Steinman’s lies about his felony
past—that were utterly absent in Nora.
Thus, the district court erred in concluding that there was
not probable cause to seize (and search) the BMW on the
ground that it contained evidence that Steinman was
violating Nevada’s proscription on felons possessing
firearms. It follows that Trooper Boyer did not violate
Steinman’s Fourth Amendment rights in seizing his BMW,
so that is not a basis for suppressing the guns and
ammunition.
2. Probable Cause to Seize Based on Evidence of
Possession of Ammunition in Violation of
Federal Law
The Government raises the further argument that
Trooper Boyer had a second basis to seize the BMW because
he had probable cause to believe that it contained evidence
of a federal crime—namely, that Steinman possessed
ammunition as a felon in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1).
Steinman does not truly dispute that the totality of the
circumstances would be sufficient to give Trooper Boyer
probable cause to believe that the BMW contained evidence
of possession of ammunition by a felon. Nor could he. After
all, Trooper Boyer saw an ammunition box in plain view in
the vehicle, Steinman initially admitted that there was
ammunition in the vehicle, and Trooper Boyer knew that
Steinman had at least one felony conviction.
Instead, Steinman contends that Trooper Boyer, a state
law enforcement officer, “had no basis to seize the car for a
potential federal law violation.” The parties agree that
possession of ammunition is only prohibited by federal law

34

USA V. STEINMAN

and is not a crime under Nevada law. Compare 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(g)(1) (prohibiting possession or transportation of “any
firearm or ammunition”), with Nev. Rev. Stat. Ann.
§ 202.360 (prohibiting ownership or possession of a
“firearm”). Analogizing to our opinion in United States v.
$186,416.00 in U.S. Currency (U.S. Currency), 590 F.3d 942
(9th Cir. 2010), Steinman says that the seizure of the BMW
cannot be retroactively justified on the grounds that a state
law enforcement officer suspected that there was evidence
of a federal crime when that same conduct was not unlawful
under state law. Steinman also points to district court cases,
United States v. Talley, 467 F. Supp. 3d 832, 836 (N.D. Cal.
2020), and United States v. Jones, 438 F. Supp. 3d 1039,
1053–54 (N.D. Cal. 2020), involving marijuana (which is
legal to possess under the laws of certain states but remains
unlawful to possess as a matter of federal law) that generally
support his position that a state law enforcement officer
cannot have probable cause to seize or search based only on
a violation of federal law.
The district court agreed with Steinman, reasoning that
“[t]he weight of authority supports the defense’s position
that . . . state . . . officers cannot justify the search . . . by
relying on the proposition that they could have been
enforcing an exclusively federal law.” The district court
thought it was highly relevant that Trooper Boyer, as a
Nevada law enforcement officer, is “only tasked with
enforcing Nevada law,” and that “Nevada law does not
authorize Trooper Boyer to enforce federal law to seize
property for a punitive violation of federal law.”
Whether state officers can rely on suspected violations
of federal law in justifying a search or seizure is an issue that

USA V. STEINMAN

35

our court has never squarely addressed. 8 And it is a question
that has divided the few courts that have addressed it. See
Orin S. Kerr, Cross-Enforcement of the Fourth Amendment,
132 HARV. L. REV. 471, 475 (2018). Indeed, academics have
commented on the “[s]urprisingly” unsettled state of the law
in this area. Id. In simple terms, the question at issue is
“whether an officer employed by one government can justify
a search or seizure based on a violation of a different
government’s law.” Id. at 474. This has been called the
issue of “cross-enforcement” of the Fourth Amendment. Id.
After considering the arguments raised by both parties,
we generally agree with the Government: state officers may
consider violations of federal law, as part of the totality of
the circumstances, in justifying a search and seizure. In
reaching this outcome, we consider the following:
First, section 922(g)(1), which makes it unlawful for
felons to possess ammunition, is a provision of federal law.
The Supremacy Clause makes clear that federal law “shall
be the supreme Law of the Land.” U.S. Const., art. VI, cl. 2.
As Judge Learned Hand remarked in a case involving state
enforcement of federal prohibition laws, the Supremacy
Clause makes federal law “as valid a command within the
borders of [a state] as one of its own statutes.” Marsh v.
United States, 29 F.2d 172, 174 (2d Cir. 1928). And, at least
where there are no indications to the contrary, we may
assume that states are “concerned with the apprehension of
offenders against laws of the United States, valid within
[their] borders, though they cannot be prosecuted in [their]
See United States v. Malik, 963 F.3d 1014, 1015 n.1 (9th Cir. 2020)
(per curiam) (declining to decide this issue); United States v. Martinez,
811 F. App’x 396, 398 (9th Cir. 2020) (same); United States v. Gray,
772 F. App’x 565, 567 & n.2 (9th Cir. 2019) (same).
8

36

USA V. STEINMAN

own courts.” Id.; see also Kerr, supra, at 503–06, 530
(discussing Judge Learned Hand’s opinion in Marsh and its
relevance to the cross-enforcement issue). Applying this
reasoning here, we can presume that the State of Nevada has
an interest in ensuring that federal felon-in-possession-ofammunition laws are enforced even if Nevada has chosen
not to criminalize that same conduct. Relatedly, “[s]ince the
time of the Founding, Congress has looked to state and local
law enforcement to help enforce federal criminal laws”—
particularly given the fact that there are few roving federal
law enforcement officers. Kerr, supra, at 530. Accepting
Steinman’s approach would almost certainly lead to the
under-enforcement of federal criminal statutes, and we
cannot adopt an approach that fails to acknowledge the
reality that, from the Founding onward, many federal
prosecutions arise out of encounters with state law
enforcement officers. See id.
Second, it is important to recognize that although the
Fourth Amendment has been incorporated against the states,
it remains a quintessentially federal standard whose
protections do not vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction. See
Virginia v. Moore, 553 U.S. 164, 172 (2008) (“‘[W]hether
or not a search is reasonable within the meaning of the
Fourth Amendment’ . . . has never ‘depend[ed] on the law of
the particular State in which the search occurs.’” (first and
third alterations in original) (quoting California v.
Greenwood, 486 U.S. 35, 43 (1988))). Thus, “state law
[does] not alter the content of the Fourth Amendment.” Id.
For example, even if state law makes clear that a
misdemeanor is not an arrestable offense, “[i]f an officer has
probable cause to believe that an individual has committed
even a very minor criminal offense in his presence, he may,
without violating the Fourth Amendment, arrest the

USA V. STEINMAN

37

offender.” Atwater v. City of Lago Vista, 532 U.S. 318, 354
(2001). Although this principle is not determinative of the
cross-enforcement question before us, it does cast some light
on the issue. Moore, Atwater, and similar cases suggest that
the fact that certain conduct is not criminalized under state
law is ultimately irrelevant to whether a state law
enforcement officer violates the Fourth Amendment by
searching and seizing based on evidence of a federal crime.
Such an approach makes sense: if conduct (such as seizing a
car based on probable cause that it contains evidence of a
violation of federal law) is not violative of the Fourth
Amendment in one state, it is not violative of the Fourth
Amendment in another state.
Third, we have previously observed that “[t]he general
rule is that local police are not precluded from enforcing
federal statutes.” Gonzales v. City of Peoria, 722 F.2d 468,
474 (9th Cir. 1983), overruled on other grounds by HodgersDurgin v. De La Vina, 199 F.3d 1037 (9th Cir. 1999) (en
banc). We see no reason to deviate from this general rule
here.
In particular, we disagree with Steinman’s attempts to
analogize this case to situations in which state law
enforcement officers are affirmatively prohibited by state
law from arresting, searching, or seizing based on evidence
of a federal offense—a circumstance common in cases
relating to the presence of marijuana. Courts that have
concluded that state law enforcement officers cannot search
or seize based on the suspected presence of marijuana where
marijuana is legal under state law have relied upon this
factor. See Talley, 467 F. Supp. 3d at 837 (concluding that
“federal law cannot provide an alternate basis for probable
cause” in the context of marijuana that was legal under state
law because of a state statute providing that “‘no conduct

38

USA V. STEINMAN

deemed lawful by this section shall constitute the basis for
detention, search, or arrest’” (quoting Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 11362.1(c))); Commonwealth v. Craan, 13 N.E.3d
569, 577–78 (Mass. 2014) (discussing the impact of
decriminalization of marijuana on the authority of state law
enforcement officers to search or seize). See generally Kerr,
supra, at 479–82, 484–86 (discussing how some courts allow
cross-enforcement if it is authorized by state law or, at a
minimum, if it is not prohibited by state law).
Assuming arguendo that it is relevant whether state law
prohibits state law enforcement officers from searching or
seizing based on evidence of a federal crime, 9 we still see
this case as distinct from the marijuana cases because, here,
there is no provision of Nevada law prohibiting state law
The Government suggests that Talley and the other cases holding that
state law enforcement officers cannot have probable cause to search or
seize based on evidence of marijuana possession are wrongly decided
because those decisions fail to grapple with the rule from Moore and
Atwater that whether officers have state statutory authority to investigate
a crime is irrelevant to the Fourth Amendment inquiry. Some academics
seem to agree, see Kerr, supra, at 481–82, 518–19 (suggesting that
authority that relies on state authorization for cross-enforcement is
inconsistent with modern Supreme Court jurisprudence), and other
courts have rejected the approach taken in Talley, see, e.g., United States
v. Sanders, 248 F. Supp. 3d 339, 347 (D.R.I. 2017).

9

However, we need not decide whether it is relevant that state law
prohibits arrest, search, or seizure based on the federally illegal conduct
because (unlike in the marijuana cases) Steinman has not shown that any
Nevada law restricts the authority of state law enforcement officers to
search or seize based on the presence of ammunition. Accordingly, there
is no need at this juncture to directly opine on the viability of Talley and
similar cases because even assuming that those cases were correctly
decided, they do not help Steinman. So, the effect of a state statute
prohibiting or limiting cross-enforcement remains a question for another
day and not one that we must decide here.

USA V. STEINMAN

39

enforcement officers from enforcing the federal ban on
felons possessing ammunition. Quite the contrary: Nevada
law appears to affirmatively authorize Trooper Boyer’s
conduct. After all, it authorizes law enforcement officers to
investigate “crimes” generally and not state crimes
specifically. See Nev. Rev. Stat. § 171.123.1 (West 2023)
(“Any peace officer may detain any person whom the officer
encounters under circumstances which would reasonably
indicate that the person has committed . . . a crime or civil
infraction.” (emphasis added)). We thus see this case as
different from Talley and the other marijuana-based cases on
which Steinman relies.
Fourth, we find support in the decisions of our sister
circuits that have concluded that evidence of federal crimes
may be seized by state officers if that evidence is in plain
view. In United States v. Smith, 899 F.2d 116, 118 (1st Cir.
1990), the First Circuit (per then-Judge Breyer) rejected an
argument by the defendant that evidence of a federal crime
(namely, a firearm) could not be seized because “state police
lacked ‘authority’ to seize the weapon.” The Smith court
observed that it was “not aware of any state or federal law
that prohibits state police from seizing a weapon, in plain
view, that they reasonably believe constitutes evidence of a
federal crime.” Id. Thus, there was no unreasonable seizure
as would be prohibited by the Fourth Amendment. Id. The
Tenth Circuit agreed with the approach in Smith and
concluded that state law enforcement officers could seize
evidence of federal crimes if that evidence was in plain view.
See United States v. Le, 173 F.3d 1258, 1271 (10th Cir.
1999). Although the question before us is somewhat
distinct, we find both Smith and Le instructive. As in those
cases, we are aware of no binding authority stating that state
law enforcement officers cannot search or seize an

40

USA V. STEINMAN

automobile based on evidence that it contains a federal
crime.
Finally, it bears remembering that suppression of
evidence is an extraordinary remedy that carries a substantial
cost to society. See Davis v. United States, 564 U.S. 229,
237 (2011). Thus, although the “bitter pill” of suppression
must be swallowed when necessary to deter Fourth
Amendment violations, it remains a “‘last resort.’” Id.
(quoting Hudson v. Michigan, 547 U.S. 586, 591 (2006)).
We thus conclude that Trooper Boyer could seize
Steinman’s BMW pursuant to the automobile exception to
the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement because he
had probable cause to believe that the vehicle contained
evidence of a federal crime (felon in possession of
ammunition) that was highly related to the state crime under
investigation (felon in possession of a firearm).
In arguing against the doctrine of cross-enforcement,
Steinman relies heavily on our opinion in U.S. Currency, 590
F.3d 942. But U.S. Currency casts minimal light on the
question before us. In that case, the Los Angeles Police
Department (LAPD) applied for a search warrant to search a
facility based on suspected violations of state marijuana
laws. Id. at 946–47. The LAPD seized currency pursuant to
the warrant, and the federal government subsequently sought
forfeiture of that currency. Id. at 947. However, it was later
determined that the warrant was not supported by probable
cause as to the violation of state law. Id. We concluded that
the currency must be suppressed, reasoning that although
there may have been probable cause to seek a warrant based
on a violation of federal law, “that was not what the LAPD
was doing” because “[n]othing in the documents prepared at
the time the warrant was obtained from the state court or in

USA V. STEINMAN

41

the procedure followed to obtain that warrant supports the
proposition that the LAPD thought it was pursuing a
violation of federal law.” Id. at 948.
We read U.S. Currency as standing only for the
proposition that an invalid warrant that was sought for a
violation of state law could not be saved because,
counterfactually, officers perhaps could have sought the
warrant based on a violation of federal law. Whether one of
the exceptions to the warrant requirement could justify the
seizure was simply not at issue in U.S. Currency. That case
accordingly casts little light on the question before us
today—whether, in the context of a warrantless seizure,
probable cause can be based on a suspected violation of
federal law. Indeed, U.S. Currency arguably cuts against
Steinman because we found it notable in U.S. Currency that
the LAPD had never sought a federal search warrant or
“indicated that it was pursuing a violation of federal law”—
which implies that the LAPD could have taken these actions
but did not in that case. See id. at 948.
Our view is not changed by the fact that, in this case,
Trooper Boyer did eventually seek a search warrant that was
based entirely on state law violations. Trooper Boyer did so
after seizing the car, and the key question here is whether his
seizure could be justified by one of the exceptions to the
warrant requirement. U.S. Currency is thus of no help in
resolving this issue. 10
10
Nor does it matter that the BMW was later searched pursuant to the
state-law-focused warrant. As will be discussed below, see infra § III,
the warrant is invalid and so we must consider whether the search could
be justified under the automobile exception to the warrant requirement.
That is different from the inquiry at issue in U.S. Currency, which was

42

USA V. STEINMAN

We are also unpersuaded by the district court’s reliance
on Ker v. California, 374 U.S. 23 (1963). To be sure, the
Ker court stated that “the lawfulness of arrests for federal
offenses is to be determined by reference to state law insofar
as it is not violative of the Federal Constitution.” Id. at 37.
But the Supreme Court has moved away from this rule, see
Moore, 553 U.S. at 172–73, and we find it to be of limited
use in resolving the cross-enforcement issue. See Kerr,
supra, at 481–82, 514–19 (discussing the irrelevance of Ker
and related cases to the cross-enforcement issue). Moreover,
even assuming that the rule from Ker is applicable, this is
not a situation where state law prohibits Trooper Boyer’s
conduct; to the contrary, state law arguably authorizes
Trooper Boyer’s conduct here. See Nev. Rev. Stat.
§ 171.123.1.
*

*

*

In sum, the district court erred in concluding that there
was not probable cause to seize (and search) the BMW.
There was probable cause to believe that Steinman violated
Nevada law by possessing firearms as a felon. And, on the
facts before us, the direct evidence that Steinman possessed
ammunition in violation of federal law likewise supported
that conclusion. After all, prior convictions may support
probable cause, “especially where the previous arrest or
conviction involves a crime of the same general nature” as
the crime being investigated. Greenstreet v. Cnty. of San
Bernardino, 41 F.3d 1306, 1309 (9th Cir. 1994).
Accordingly, evidence of a current federal law violation,
concerned only with whether, counterfactually, a seizure conducted
pursuant to an invalid state warrant could be saved if probable cause
existed under federal law. Cf. 590 F.3d at 948. Simply put, U.S.
Currency cannot sustain the heavy weight that Steinman puts upon it.

USA V. STEINMAN

43

especially when that violation is closely related to a state
crime, as here, is at a minimum relevant to the probable
cause analysis. And, of course, evidence of a federal crime
may be seized by state officers if that evidence is in plain
view or found during a constitutional search. So, Trooper
Boyer was permitted to seize evidence of the federal crime—
namely the ammunition—that was in plain view.
In the end, Trooper Boyer did not violate Steinman’s
Fourth Amendment rights in seizing his BMW.
III. Whether Warrant Overbreadth Provides a Basis to
Affirm the District Court’s Suppression Order
Finally, Steinman also argues that even if the district
court did err in concluding that the stop was
unconstitutionally prolonged and the seizure was not
justified by probable cause, we should still affirm the district
court’s suppression order because of warrant overbreadth.
According to Steinman, the district court reasoned that
warrant overbreadth was an independent ground for
suppression, and the Government has failed to challenge this
ruling on appeal.
Steinman is partly right and partly wrong. We agree with
Steinman that the Government has waived any challenge to
overbreadth and that the district court saw warrant
overbreadth as an independent basis for exclusion. 11 Thus,
for purposes of this appeal, we accept the proposition that
the search warrant was overbroad and thus could not justify
a search of Steinman’s automobile. But we disagree with
The Government asserts in passing that the district court never made a
formal ruling on warrant overbreadth. This is a surprising and
unpersuasive contention in light of the clarity of the district court’s oral
ruling and articulation of the bases for suppression.
11

44

USA V. STEINMAN

Steinman that this overbreadth requires suppression of the
evidence found in the automobile.
Instead, we agree with the Government that the
overbreadth of the warrant is ultimately immaterial because
a warrantless search of the BMW was permissible under the
automobile exception to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant
requirement. 12 In Coolidge v. New Hampshire, 403 U.S.
443, 453 (1971), the Supreme Court clarified that evidence
seized pursuant to a defective warrant could possibly still be
admitted if the search and seizure that found the evidence
was lawful under “some other theory,” including exceptions
to the warrant requirement. And even if Coolidge did not
settle this issue, courts across the nation have declined to
suppress the fruits of searches that were conducted pursuant
to a defective warrant if an exception to the warrant
requirement would otherwise have justified the search. See
United States v. Martinez, 78 F.3d 399, 401 (8th Cir. 1996)
(“Because probable cause existed for the search and the
[arguably invalid] warrant was unnecessary, the search was
valid.”); United States v. McCoy, 977 F.2d 706, 710 (1st Cir.
1992) (“Assuming, without deciding, the search warrant was
invalid, we nonetheless conclude that . . . the search was
permissible under the ‘automobile exception’ to the Fourth
Amendment warrant requirement.”); United States v. Poole,
718 F.2d 671, 675 (4th Cir. 1983) (“Since no warrant was
required, any defects in the warrant that was obtained cannot
serve as a basis on which to suppress . . . .”); United States
v. Clark, 559 F.2d 420, 426 (5th Cir. 1977) (“It is well
To the extent that Steinman suggests that he has not had a fair
opportunity to litigate this issue because it is largely discussed in the
Government’s reply brief, we are unpersuaded—particularly given the
fact that we granted Steinman’s request to file supplemental briefing on
this issue.

12

USA V. STEINMAN

45

established that evidence gained by a search conducted
under authority of a defective search warrant may still be
admissible if an exception to the warrant requirement is
present.”); see also Commonwealth v. Campbell, 807 S.E.2d
735, 738–39 (Va. 2017) (“We conclude, as have a number
of other courts, that the procurement of a defective warrant
does not require suppression if the search is nonetheless
justified on an alternate ground.”). See generally 2 Wayne
R. LaFave SEARCH & SEIZURE § 4.1(b) (6th ed.), Westlaw
(database updated Mar. 2024). We join these courts and hold
that the fruits of a search conducted pursuant to an overbroad
or otherwise unlawful warrant need not be suppressed if the
search could have been conducted pursuant to an exception
to the Fourth Amendment’s warrant requirement.
In response, Steinman asserts that law enforcement has a
choice—either to get a warrant or to search pursuant to an
exception to the warrant requirement—and that because the
Government opted to get a warrant here, it cannot rely on
any of the exceptions to the warrant requirement to support
admissibility of the evidence. But Steinman offers no
support for this contention, and we would find his position
unpersuasive even leaving aside the consensus of authority
on this point. Steinman’s proposed approach would actually
disincentivize law enforcement from seeking warrants in
cases like these. Such an outcome is clearly to be avoided;
law enforcement should not be penalized for caution and
concern for procedure. In the words of another court that
came to the same conclusion as we do, “[p]olice officers
should not be punished for trying to comply with Fourth
Amendment requirements in those situations where, as here,
they could have conducted a warrantless search in the first
instance.” State v. Tomah, 586 A.2d 1267, 1269 (Me. 1991).

46

USA V. STEINMAN

Moreover, as noted above, modern exclusionary-rule
jurisprudence recognizes the substantial costs of the
exclusionary rule and that exclusion of probative evidence is
a “last resort.” Davis, 564 U.S. at 237 (quoting Hudson, 547
U.S. at 591). We are disinclined to apply such a costly
remedy when the evidence sought to be excluded would be
admissible under a valid exception to the warrant
requirement.
Thus, notwithstanding the overbreadth of the warrant,
the fruits of the search of Steinman’s BMW—namely, the
guns and ammunition—need not be suppressed if the search
could have been justified pursuant to one of the exceptions
to the warrant requirement. Such a justification is present in
this case. As indicated above, Trooper Boyer had probable
cause to search and seize the BMW without a warrant
pursuant to the automobile exception to the Fourth
Amendment’s warrant requirement because he had probable
cause to believe that it contained evidence of violations of
state and federal law. See Acevedo, 500 U.S. at 569–70;
Faagai, 869 F.3d at 1150. And the automobile exception
may apply even if the automobile has been towed back to the
police station or elsewhere. See Acevedo, 500 U.S. at 570;
Chambers v. Maroney, 399 U.S. 42, 51–52 (1970); Scott,
705 F.3d at 417. Thus, the fruits of the search need not be
suppressed.
CONCLUSION
We are compelled to reverse the district court’s
suppression order because it committed multiple errors.
First, the district court erred in concluding that Trooper
Boyer violated Steinman’s constitutional rights by
unlawfully prolonging the traffic stop. We conclude that
Trooper Boyer had reasonable suspicion of an independent

USA V. STEINMAN

47

offense after he learned of Steinman’s felony conviction and
that he did not measurably prolong the traffic stop up to that
point. Second, the district court erred in concluding that
Trooper Boyer lacked probable cause to seize Steinman’s
automobile. To the contrary, Trooper Boyer had probable
cause to believe that the automobile contained evidence of
possession of firearms in violation of Nevada law and
possession of ammunition in violation of federal law. Third,
the district court erred in concluding that warrant
overbreadth requires suppression. Even though we do not
disturb the district court’s ruling that the search warrant is
unconstitutionally overbroad, it was nonetheless error for the
district court to exclude the fruits of the search because the
search of Steinman’s vehicle would have been permissible
under the automobile exception to the Fourth Amendment’s
warrant requirement. Thus, the district court should not have
suppressed the guns and ammunition seized from
Steinman’s vehicle.
REVERSED.
Wu, District Judge, concurring:
Because we need not—and should not—break new
ground today by addressing the undeveloped and potentially
sweeping “cross-enforcement” issue, I concur with the
majority opinion except for Part II.B.2.
As a general rule, courts should not decide a
constitutional question unless it is necessary to do so. See
Ashwander v. Tennessee Valley Auth., 297 U.S. 288, 347
(1936) (Brandeis, J., concurring) (‘“It is not the habit of the
Court to decide questions of a constitutional nature unless

48

USA V. STEINMAN

absolutely necessary to a decision of the case.’”) (quoting
Burton v. United States, 196 U.S. 283, 295 (1905));
Christopher v. Harbury, 536 U.S. 403, 417 (2002)
(highlighting “the obligation of the Judicial Branch to avoid
deciding constitutional issues needlessly”). Several panels
of this Court have previously declined to address “crossenforcement” arguments when it was unnecessary to the
disposition of the appeal. See, e.g., United States v. Malik,
963 F.3d 1014, 1015 n.1 (9th Cir. 2020) (declining to reach
the question of whether a Nevada state officer had probable
cause to search based upon federal marijuana laws because
the officer had probable cause to search based upon
violations of Nevada state law); United States v. Gray, 772
F. App’x. 565, 567 n.2 (9th Cir. 2019). So, too, should we.
Because we conclude “without much difficulty” that
Trooper Boyer had probable cause to seize Steinman’s
BMW based upon a violation of Nevada state law, there is
no reason for the majority to consider the question of
whether the prospect of Steinman’s possession (as a felon)
of ammunition (which is not a crime under Nevada law)
provides another basis for that seizure. 1
Additionally, I cannot join Part II.B.2 because it rests on
doubtful assumptions and thrusts Fourth Amendment
jurisprudence into a precarious position with no clear
limiting principles. This is especially true in the contexts of
immigration and marijuana laws, where federal and state
priorities often diverge.

This is especially so where Steinman’s possession of the ammunition
was already considered as part of the totality of circumstances which
established probable cause to believe that his BMW contained firearms.
See Part II.B.1, supra.

1

USA V. STEINMAN

49

Firstly, I find unconvincing the majority’s conclusion
that Nevada has an interest in ensuring the federal felon-inpossession-of-ammunition statute is enforced. Unlike the
federal government, Nevada could have—but has chosen not
to—criminalize a felon’s possession of ammunition.
Compare 18 U.S.C. § 922(g)(1), with Nev. Rev. Stat.
§ 202.360. The majority opinion initially references the
Supremacy Clause. U.S. Const., art. VI, cl. 2. But the
Supremacy Clause—which “invalidates state laws that
‘interfere with, or are contrary to,’ federal law,”
Hillsborough Cnty., Fla. v. Automated Med. Lab’ys, Inc.,
471 U.S. 707, 712 (1985) (quoting Gibbons v. Ogden, 9
Wheat. 1, 22 (1824) (Marshall, C.J.))—is not directly
implicated here. Furthermore, it is implicit in the concept of
federalism that federal and state governments may have
different, if not fully divergent, policy and political
priorities. See Printz v. United States, 521 U.S. 898, 918–19
(1997) (“Although the States surrendered many of their
powers to the new Federal Government, they retained ‘a
residuary and inviolable sovereignty.’”) (citing The
Federalist No. 39, at 245 (James Madison)). That Nevada
has not promulgated its disapproval of the federal felon-inpossession-of-ammunition statute does not establish a
converse interest in enforcing it, as the majority assumes.
Secondly, despite the majority’s apparent attempt to
cabin its ruling to the present case, there is simply nothing
preventing today’s new rule from being applied in other
cases where the “cross-enforcement” issue is more fraught
and more common. As this issue arises with some frequency
in the context of immigration and marijuana laws, what if a
state does not want its officers assisting in the enforcement
of federal law? The majority opinion offers no explanation
on how today’s rule would not naturally extend to cases

50

USA V. STEINMAN

where a state has gone so far as to codify its opposition to
“cross-enforcement” by its police officers as to a particular
federal law. See footnote 9, supra. Indeed, the majority
opinion assumes only for the sake of argument that state law
is even relevant to the “cross-enforcement” issue. And in
Martinez-Medina v. Holder, a previous panel of this Court
decided in dicta that a state law enforcement officer’s
violation of an Oregon law that explicitly forbid state officers
from enforcing federal immigration laws did not warrant a
finding of a Fourth Amendment violation. 673 F.3d 1029,
1037 (9th Cir. 2011) (citing Virginia v. Moore, 553 U.S. 164,
173–74 (2008)). Despite its reliance on Orin S. Kerr, CrossEnforcement of the Fourth Amendment, 132 HARV. L. REV.
471 (2018), the majority opinion makes no mention of Kerr’s
proposed limitations on “cross-enforcement”—nor does it
demarcate a rule of its own. 2
The inescapable conundrum with the majority’s
unrestricted endorsement of “cross-enforcement” is that
Trooper Boyer—a Nevada state law enforcement officer
entrusted to enforce the laws of Nevada—is determined
today to have committed no Fourth Amendment violation for
seizing Steinman’s automobile based on conduct that is
entirely legal under Nevada law. In other words, the
majority’s new rule opens the door, as one district court has
prudently observed, “to the paradoxical result of allowing
For example, Kerr proposes this rule: “Officers can rely on a
government’s criminal law to justify a search or seizure only when that
government has authorized the officer to search or seize. Authorization
of the enacting government, not the officer’s home government, should
control.” Kerr, supra, at 477. I would not necessarily endorse this
approach, but I note Kerr’s proposal here simply to say that the article
upon which the majority opinion relies suggests some limitations to
“cross-enforcement” that the majority does not mention.

2

USA V. STEINMAN

51

state law enforcement officers to defy the state laws they are
entrusted with upholding so that they might enforce federal
laws which they cannot be compelled to enforce.” United
States v. Talley, 467 F. Supp. 3d 832, 837 (N.D. Cal. 2020)
(citing Printz, 521 U.S. at 918–19).
In the end, the government’s “cross-enforcement”
argument is but one of several contentions set forth in this
appeal, and the full ramifications of it have not been fully
developed in the record before us. Because we find “without
much difficulty” that Trooper Boyer was justified in seizing
Steinman’s automobile based upon a violation of state law,
it is unnecessary to reach the “cross-enforcement” issue
today. The majority’s decision to nevertheless break new
ground does more than start a conversation on a novel
constitutional law doctrine—it sweeps with it a whole host
of critical Fourth Amendment issues without announcing a
rule or limiting principle to be used in future cases. For these
reasons, I respectfully concur in the majority opinion except
for Part II.B.2.

