FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
RICHARD GIBSON; ROBERTO
MANZO,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,

No. 24-3576
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00140MMD-DJA

v.
CENDYN GROUP, LLC; THE
RAINMAKER GROUP
UNLIMITED, INC.; CAESARS
ENTERTAINMENT, INC.;
TREASURE ISLAND, LLC; WYNN
RESORTS HOLDINGS, LLC;
BLACKSTONE INC.;
BLACKSTONE REAL ESTATE
PARTNERS VII L.P.; JC
HOSPITALITY, LLC,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Miranda M. Du, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 12, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 15, 2025

2

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

Before: Carlos T. Bea and Ana de Alba, Circuit Judges, and
Jeffrey Vincent Brown, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Bea
SUMMARY **
Antitrust
Affirming the district court’s dismissal of a putative
antitrust class action, the panel held that plaintiffs failed to
state a claim under Section 1 of the Sherman Act by alleging
that competing hotels independently purchased licenses for
software that provided pricing recommendations.
The panel concluded that the choice of several
competitors to contract with the same service provider,
followed by higher prices, was not sufficient to require
antitrust scrutiny under the rule of reason. Section 1 requires
a causal link between a contested agreement and an
anticompetitive restraint of trade in the relevant market, but
here, neither the terms nor the operation of the disputed
software licensing agreements imposed any such
anticompetitive restraints in the market of hotel-room rentals
on the Las Vegas strip.

The Honorable Jeffrey Vincent Brown, United States District Judge for
the Southern District of Texas, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

3

COUNSEL
Steve W. Berman (argued), Hagens Berman Sobol Shapiro
LLP, Seattle, Washington; Rio S. Pierce, Hagens Berman
Sobol Shapiro LLP, Berkeley, California; for PlaitniffsAppellants.
Melissa A. Sherry (argued), Graham Haviland, Christopher
J. Brown, and Anna M. Rathbun, Latham & Watkins LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Sadik H. Huseny, Timothy L. O'Mara,
and Brendan A. McShane, Latham & Watkins LLP, San
Francisco, California; Jon C. Williams, Campbell &
Williams, Las Vegas, Nevada; Arman Oruc, Goodwin
Procter LLP, Los Angeles, California; Alicia Rubio-Spring,
Goodwin Procter LLP, Boston, Massachusetts; Nicholas J.
Santoro, Spencer Fane LLP, Las Vegas, Nevada; Boris
Bershteyn, Sam Auld, Michael Menitove, and Ken
Schwartz, Skadden Arps Slate Meagher & Flom LLP, New
York, New York; Adam Hosmer-Henner, Chelsea Latino,
and Jane Susskind, McDonald Carano Wilson LLP, Reno,
Nevada; Patrick J. Reilly, Arthur A. Zorio, Emily Garnett,
and Eric D. Walther, Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck LLP,
Las Vegas, Nevada; Mark C. Holscher and Tammy
Tsoumas, Kirkland & Ellis LLP, Los Angeles, California;
Matthew Solum, Kirkland & Ellis LLP, New York, New
York; Daniel R. McNutt and Matthew Wolf, McNutt Law
Firm PC, Las Vegas, Nevada; Matthew L. McGinnis, Ropes
& Gray LLP, Boston, Massachusetts; Kasey J. Curtis, James
C. Martin, and Charles P. Hyun, Reed Smith LLP, Los
Angeles, California; for Defendants-Appellees.
David C. Kiernan (argued) and Matthew J. Silveira, Jones
Day, San Francisco, California, for Amicus Curiae the
International Center for Law & Economics.

4

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

Joshua P. Davis and Matthew Summers, Berger Montague
PC, San Francisco, California; Randy Stutz and David O.
Fisher, American Antitrust Institute, Washington, D.C.; for
Amicus Curiae American Antitrust Institute.
Kellie Lerner, Shinder Cantor Lerner LLP, New York, New
York; Gary I. Smith Jr., Hausfeld LLP, San Francisco,
California; David M. Cialkowski, Zimmerman Reed LLP,
Minneapolis, Minnesota; David B. Rochelson and Deborah
A. Elman, Garwin Gerstein & Fisher LLP, New York, New
York; Anthony J. Stauber, Gustafson Gluek PLLC,
Minneapolis, Minnesota; for Amicus Curiae the Committee
to Support the Antitrust Laws.
Sandeep Vaheesan and Tara Pincock, Open Markets
Institute, Washington, D.C., for Amicus Curiae Open
Markets Institute.
Jon J. Sullivan, Stratton C. Strand, Nickolai G. Levin, and
Daniel E. Haar, Attorneys, Antitrust Division; Spencer D.
Smith, Yixi Cheng, and Alice A. Wang, Counsels to the
Assistant Attorney General; David B. Lawrence, Policy
Director; Andrew J. Forman and John W. Elias, Deputy
Assistant Attorneys General; Doha G. Mekki, Principal
Deputy Assistant Attorney General; Jonathan S. Kanter,
Assistant Attorney General; United States Department of
Justice, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae United States
of America.

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

5

OPINION
BEA, Circuit Judge:
Does it violate Section 1 of the Sherman Act (“Section
1”) for competing hotels each to purchase a license to use the
same price-recommendation software?
It would
undoubtedly violate Section 1 were those competing hotels
to agree among themselves to abide by a third party’s pricing
recommendations when pricing their own hotel rooms. But
the question this case presents, by contrast, is whether
Plaintiffs sufficiently state a Section 1 claim when they
allege that the competing hotels independently purchased
licenses for the same software, which software is alleged to
have provided pricing recommendations, and which
software did not share any licensing hotel’s confidential
information among the competing licensees.
Plaintiffs argue that the mere identification of a contract
(in this case, the licensing agreement between a hotel and a
software-provider), when paired with the allegation that
prices rose after the adoption of the contract, is sufficient to
allege a Section 1 violation. According to Plaintiffs’ logic,
the district court erred when it dismissed Plaintiffs’
complaint for failure to allege a restraint of trade without
first analyzing the contested agreement under the “rule of
reason”. Here, however, Plaintiffs did not allege facts
sufficient to permit a plausible inference that the agreements
for the provision of the revenue-management software
effected a restraint of trade in the relevant market—hotelroom rentals on the Las Vegas Strip. Neither the terms nor
the operation of the licensing agreements are alleged to have
harmed competition by affecting the competitive incentives

6

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

in the relevant market, nor did the licensing agreements
restrain any party’s ability to compete in the relevant market.
Plaintiffs push for a rule in which the choice of several
competitors to contract with the same service-provider,
when followed by higher prices, is sufficient to require
antitrust scrutiny under the rule of reason. But Section 1
requires a causal link between the contested agreement and
an anticompetitive restraint of trade in the relevant market.
Because, as alleged here, neither the terms nor the operation
of the disputed licensing agreements imposed any such
anticompetitive restraints, we affirm the judgment of the
district court which dismissed Plaintiffs’ Section 1 claims
with prejudice.
I.
Plaintiffs, a putative class, regularly traveled to Las
Vegas, Nevada, and rented hotel rooms on the Las Vegas
Strip. In their present complaint, Plaintiffs alleged that they
paid higher prices for their hotel rooms due to Defendants’
anticompetitive conduct. Plaintiffs initially alleged two
anticompetitive agreements in violation of Section 1 of the
Sherman Act. First, they alleged that certain hotels on the
Las Vegas Strip (“Hotel Defendants”) 1 agreed among
The Hotel Defendants are Caesars Entertainment, Inc. (“Caesars”,
operator of Bally’s, Caesars Palace, The Cromwell Hotel and Casino,
Flamingo Las Vegas, Harrah’s Las Vegas, The Linq Hotel and Casino,
Paris Las Vegas, and Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino); Treasure
Island, LLC (“Treasure Island”, operator of Treasure Island Hotel and
Casino); Wynn Resorts Holdings, LLC (“Wynn”, operator of Wynn Las
Vegas and Encore Wynn Las Vegas); Blackstone Inc. and Blackstone
Real Estate Partners VII L.P., (collectively “Blackstone”, operator of
The Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas); JC Hospitality LLC (“JC Hospitality”,
operator of Virgin Hotels Las Vegas, LLC and Hard Rock Hotel &
Casino Las Vegas).
1

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

7

themselves to purchase the license to the same revenuemanagement software products from Defendant Cendyn
Group, LLC (“Cendyn”) 2 and to abide by Cendyn’s pricing
algorithms’ recommendations. (As discussed in more detail
below, Plaintiffs “abandon[ed]” their appeal of the district
court’s dismissal of this claim.) Second, Plaintiffs alleged
that the number of individual agreements between Cendyn
and Hotel Defendants to license Cendyn’s software products
resulted, “[i]n the aggregate,” in anticompetitive effects in
the form of artificially inflated prices. 3 Plaintiffs define the
relevant antitrust market as the rental of hotel rooms from
hotels located on the Las Vegas Strip, a four-mile stretch in
the unincorporated towns near Las Vegas, Nevada.
According to the allegations in the complaint, Cendyn is
a private company that provides technology for the
hospitality industry. Plaintiffs’ allegations concern three of
Cendyn’s software products: GuestRev, GroupRev, and
RevCaster (the “software products” or “revenuemanagement software”).
GuestRev is a pricing algorithm that recommends prices
for individual hotel rooms. GuestRev is the “core element”
Defendant The Rainmaker Group, Unlimited, Inc. (“Rainmaker”)
developed the software products at issue and licensed them to Hotel
Defendants before 2019. In 2019, Cendyn acquired Rainmaker and
licensed the products thereafter. Nothing in this case turns on the details
or timing of Defendants’ corporate parentage. For the sake of simplicity,
we refer to the software provider as “Cendyn.”

2

3
While Plaintiffs styled this claim as being aimed at the “set” of
agreements between Cendyn and each individual Hotel Defendant,
Count 2 on its own terms does not allege an agreement among Hotel
Defendants to act so as to make the “set.” Rather, the term “set” is
Plaintiffs’ conclusory term for the number of individual agreements
between Cendyn and each Hotel Defendant.

8

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

of Cendyn’s revenue-management platform.
To use
GuestRev, hotels provide GuestRev with granular pricing
and occupancy data on a continuous basis. GuestRev then
generates pricing recommendations for a hotel’s guest rooms
on an at-least daily basis. GuestRev provides personalized
pricing for every guest and is directly integrated with hotel
operators’ property management system. Licensees can
even set GuestRev on “autopilot,” such that its prices are
directly and automatically uploaded into the hotel’s property
management system. While GuestRev requires its licensees
to have “override permissions” to deviate from GuestRev’s
recommended prices, GuestRev does not require a hotel to
implement its pricing recommendations. 4
GroupRev is “a pricing algorithm specifically tailored
for quoting custom rates for group travel.” GroupRev
appears frequently to have been licensed to clients who also
licensed GuestRev. The complaint does not specify whether
GroupRev offers the same “autopilot” functionality, nor
does it state whether deviation from its recommendations
requires override permissions.
RevCaster is “a ‘rate shopping’ tool integrated into
GuestRev.”
RevCaster “collect[s] public pricing
information” so that “competitor pricing is easily
incorporated as a factor in setting pricing.” A “key part of
According to the complaint, “GuestRev’s pricing function allows
pricing managers to ‘mark pricing recommendations for upload, override
and mark for uploads, make a recommendation or an override persistent,
and send the recommendation or override to the [property management
system].’” However, “to override a pricing recommendation, a revenue
manager must have override permissions.” Without the permissions, the
software would not permit a user to override the recommendations. The
complaint does not allege which employees had override permissions,
nor does it allege the requirements for obtaining override permissions.
4

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

9

what makes GuestRev effective” is that it provides the
ability for hotels to “use competitor pricing in implementing
their own pricing.”
Although the precise rate at which Hotel Defendants
implemented
the
software
products’
pricing
recommendations is not in the record, Plaintiffs allege that
“Cendyn has repeatedly touted on its website and in
marketing
materials
that
GuestRev’s
pricing
recommendations are accepted 90% of the time.”
Plaintiffs allege that each user provides Cendyn with
non-public pricing and occupancy data, which the software
products then use in their algorithms to generate
recommendations. Plaintiffs, however, do not allege that
Cendyn pools, shares, or uses the confidential information
provided by a given Hotel Defendant into the pricing
recommendations it generates for any other Hotel
Defendant.
The Hotel Defendants adopted the relevant revenuemanagement products over the course of a decade. Caesars
began using the software that would become GuestRev in
late 2004, Wynn in 2008, Treasure Island by around 2010,
Hard Rock by at least 2014, and Cosmopolitan of Las Vegas
by at least 2014. All Hotel Defendants were using GuestRev
in 2015, when Rainmaker acquired RevCaster, which
allowed competitor pricing to be integrated easily into the
pricing recommendations GuestRev offered. All Hotel
Defendants used GuestRev until at least 2021—two years

10

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

after Cendyn acquired Rainmaker. 5 All Hotel Defendants
licensed GroupRev as well.
Procedural History
Plaintiffs sued Defendants, alleging two violations of
Section 1 of the Sherman Act. In their first claim (“Count
1”), Plaintiffs allege that Hotel Defendants participated in an
illegal “hub-and-spoke” agreement in which Hotel
Defendants agreed among themselves to adopt Cendyn’s
revenue-management software and abide by the pricing
algorithms’ recommendations. The district court found that
even accepting the factual allegations as true and drawing all
reasonable inferences in Plaintiffs’ favor, Plaintiffs failed to
plead sufficient facts from which the court could infer such
an agreement indeed existed among Hotel Defendants. The
district court thereby dismissed Count 1 under Rule 12(b)(6).
Although Plaintiffs initially argued in support of Count
1 in their appellate briefing, they ultimately “abandoned[ed]
their appeal of the [district] court’s dismissal of the separate
hub-and-spoke claim Plaintiffs [brought] in Count [1].”
In their second claim (“Count 2”), Plaintiffs allege that
the number of individual agreements between Cendyn and
each Hotel Defendant to license Cendyn’s software products
resulted, “[i]n the aggregate,” in anticompetitive effects in
the form of artificially inflated prices for hotel rooms on the
Las Vegas Strip. 6
At this stage of the proceeding, nothing in this case turns on whether or
when Hotel Defendants stopped using Cendyn’s revenue-management
software.

5

Although both claims arise under Section 1 of the Sherman Act and out
of the same set of facts, the counts allege different agreements. Count 1
regards an agreement among Hotel Defendants to use Cendyn, whereas

6

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

11

II.
We exercise appellate jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1291. We review the dismissal of a complaint under Rule
12(b)(6) de novo. Kendall v. Visa U.S.A., Inc., 518 F.3d
1042, 1046 (9th Cir. 2008). We accept all allegations of
material fact as true and construe them in the light most
favorable to the nonmoving party. Burgert v. Lokelani
Bernice Pauahi Bishop Tr., 200 F.3d 661, 663 (9th Cir.
2000).
III.
A.
“The antitrust laws of the United States aim to protect
consumers by maintaining competitive markets.” In re
Musical Instruments and Equip. Antitrust Litig., 798 F.3d
1186, 1191 (9th Cir. 2015). Section 1 of the Sherman Act
thereby prohibits “[e]very contract, combination . . ., or
conspiracy, in restraint of trade or commerce” in interstate
commerce. 15 U.S.C. § 1.
The Supreme Court has clarified that, despite the text of
Section 1, not every agreement in restraint of trade violates
Section 1. United States v. Topco Assoc’s, Inc., 405 U.S.
596, 606-607 (1972). Rather, only unreasonable restraints
of trade are illegal. Id. And those unreasonable restraints
must be “effected by a contract, combination, or
conspiracy.” Bell Atl. Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544, 553
(2007) (citation omitted).

Count 2 alleges several individual agreements, each being between an
individual Hotel Defendant and Cendyn. Thus, Plaintiffs allege distinct
Section 1 violations, not alternative theories of liability.

12

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

Agreements can be tacit or express. Id. Evidence parties
“signed agreements assigning certain contract rights”
evinces “an agreement among two or more entities.”
Paladin Assoc’s. Inc. v. Mont. Power Co., 328 F.3d 1145,
1154 (9th Cir. 2003) (cleaned up).
Contracts, like “[e]very agreement concerning trade,”
restrain trade. Bd. of Trade v. United States, 246 U.S. 231,
238 (1918). “To bind, to restrain, is of their very essence.”
Id. But to allege a Section 1 violation requires more than
merely identifying a contract. “Rather, the plaintiff must
allege an ‘actual adverse effect on competition’ caused by”
the disputed agreement. Brantley v. NBC Universal, Inc.,
675 F.3d 1192, 1200 (9th Cir. 2012) (citation omitted). And
of course, “to plead injury to competition . . . sufficiently to
withstand a motion to dismiss, ‘a [Section 1] claimant may
not merely recite the bare legal conclusion that competition
has been restrained unreasonably.’” Id. at 1198 (citation
omitted).
Once an agreement that restrains trade is alleged, to state
a Section 1 claim a Plaintiff must allege sufficient facts from
which the court could infer the agreement is unreasonable.
Topco, 405 U.S. at 606-607. To determine whether an
agreement in restraint of trade is unreasonable, courts apply
different standards for evaluating different types of
agreements. Antitrust law characterizes these different types
of agreements as “horizontal,” “vertical,” or “hub-andspoke,” based on the economic relationships of the parties to
the agreement in restraint of trade. See Musical Instruments,
798 F.3d at 1192-93.
A horizontal agreement is “an agreement among
competitors on the way in which they will compete with one
another.” Aya Healthcare Servs., Inc. v. AMN Healthcare,

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

13

Inc., 9 F.4th 1102, 1108 (9th Cir. 2021) (citation omitted).
Some horizontal agreements, such as “agreements among
competitors to fix prices, divide markets, and refuse to deal”
are “per se” violations of Section 1. Musical Instruments,
798 F.3d at 1191. Once such a horizontal agreement is
proven, “no further inquiry into the practice’s actual effect
on the market or the parties’ intentions is necessary to
establish a [Section 1] violation.” Id. Those restraints of
trade are per se violations of Section 1 because they “have
such predictable and pernicious anticompetitive effect, and
such limited potential for procompetitive benefit.” State Oil
Co. v. Khan, 522 U.S. 3, 10 (1997).
Vertical agreements, by contrast, are “agreements made
up and down a supply chain, such as between a manufacturer
and a retailer.” Musical Instruments, 798 F.3d at 1191. To
determine whether a restraint of trade caused by a vertical
agreement is unreasonable, it is “analyzed under the rule of
reason, whereby courts examine ‘the facts peculiar to the
business, the history of the restraint, and the reason why it
was imposed,’ to determine the effect on competition in the
relevant product market.” Id. at 1191-92 (citation omitted).
Under the rule of reason, courts ask whether “the challenged
conduct has a substantial anticompetitive effect that harms
consumers in the relevant market.” CoStar Grp., Inc. v.
Com. Real Est. Exch., Inc., 141 F.4th 1075, 1084 2025 (9th
Cir. 2025) (cleaned up).
“A hub-and-spoke conspiracy is simply a collection of
vertical and horizontal agreements.” Musical Instruments,
798 F.3d at 1192. The respective horizontal and vertical
agreements composing such a conspiracy are analyzed
according to the per se rule and the rule of reason, as
applicable. Id. at 1192-93.

14

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

B.
Plaintiffs appeal from the district court’s order
dismissing with prejudice Plaintiffs’ complaint for failure to
state a claim. To determine whether Plaintiffs sufficiently
alleged a Section 1 violation, it is important first to delineate
with which allegations we are dealing, and with which
allegations we are no longer concerned.
Plaintiffs
“abandon[ed]” their appeal of the district court’s dismissal
of Count 1. Count 1 regarded the alleged “hub-and-spoke”
agreement—namely, the allegation that Hotel Defendants
agreed among themselves to abide by Cendyn’s pricing
recommendations. We therefore do not address the district
court’s decision that Plaintiffs failed to allege sufficient facts
from which could be inferred the existence of an agreement
among Hotel Defendants to license Cendyn’s revenuemanagement software and abide by its pricing
recommendations. See Adriana Intern. Corp. v. Thoeren,
913 F.2d 1406, 1408 n.1 (9th Cir. 1990).
C.
In Claim 2, Plaintiffs allege that the number of
agreements between Cendyn and each Hotel Defendant “[i]n
the aggregate” “resulted in anticompetitive effects in the
form of artificially inflated prices in the relevant market of
hotel rooms in the Las Vegas Strip market.”
The district court found, and Defendants do not dispute
on appeal, that Plaintiffs sufficiently alleged that all Hotel
Defendants “licensed and used” Cendyn’s software
products. 7 An agreement to license software services (i.e., a
licensing agreement) is an “agreement” within the meaning
Throughout this opinion, we refer to the agreement for the provision of
the software products as “licensing agreements” or “contracts.”

7

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

15

of Section 1. See Paladin, 328 F.3d at 1154; see also Bd. of
Trade., 246 U.S. at 238. To determine whether the licensing
agreements violate Section 1, we must determine whether
the agreements are alleged to restrain trade in the relevant
market. Only if so, do we determine whether such restraints
are unreasonable.
There can be no question that the licensing agreements
restrain some trade. Bd. of Trade, 246 U.S. at 238. That is,
such a licensing agreement would impose on a Hotel
Defendant the obligation to pay money to Cendyn, which
money would be restrained from its use elsewhere. And it
would restrain Cendyn from refusing to provide to that Hotel
Defendant use of the software identified in the agreement.
To determine whether “an injury to competition flows from”
this agreement, however, we must analyze the operation of
the restraint of trade imposed by the agreement alleged in the
relevant antitrust market. Brantley, 675 F.3d at 1201.
The parties characterized the agreements between
Cendyn and each Hotel Defendant as “vertical,” but that
description is not an accurate use of the term “vertical” in the
antitrust context. A vertical restraint is a “restraint[] . . .
imposed by agreement between firms at different levels of
distribution.” Bus. Electr. Corp. v. Sharp Electr. Corp., 485
U.S. 717, 730 (1988). In other words, vertical restraints
operate “up and down a supply chain, such as between a
manufacturer and a retailer.” Musical Instruments, 798 F.3d
at 1191.
Here, relative to Hotel Defendants, Cendyn is not up or
down the supply chain in the relevant market: hotel-room
rentals on the Las Vegas Strip. The relevant market is
defined by the products that can serve as effective substitutes
for each other. Ohio v. Am. Express Co., 585 U.S. 529, 543

16

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

(2018). Thus, companies can operate in the same industry
(the hotel industry) without operating in the same market
(the market for hotel-room rentals on the Las Vegas Strip).
Hotel Defendants provide hotel-room rentals, and Cendyn
provides revenue-management software to Hotel
Defendants. While hotels may use Cendyn’s revenuemanagement software to maximize profits, the software is
not an input that goes into the production of hotel rooms for
rentals. See Input, 7 Oxford English Dictionary (2nd ed.
1989) (“The total of resources necessary to production,
including raw materials, use of machinery, and manpower,
which are deducted from output in calculating assets and
profits.”). Cendyn’s provision of advisory services to the
hotel industry does not thereby render Cendyn “up the
supply chain” from Hotel Defendants in the market for hotelroom rentals on the Las Vegas Strip.
This distinction may seem opaque here, especially given
that Cendyn provides pricing advice—a service that can
appear to be wrapped up in the production of the product
itself. But take, for example, a tax adviser of whom a hotel
is a client. A tax adviser could also provide suggestions to
that hotel. A tax adviser could affect that hotel’s bottom line,
inasmuch as he could charge a fee (eating into a company’s
profits) or make a suggestion regarding tax loopholes
(increasing a company’s profits). But that a tax adviser
provides suggestions to a hotel does not mean that he
operates in the production of hotel-room rentals “at [a]
different level[] of distribution” from the hotel that receives
his advice. Bus. Electr. Corp., 485 U.S. at 730. So too here.
Cendyn’s revenue-management software products serve a
“back-office” function; they are not used to make hotel
rooms available in the first instance.

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

17

This is not to say that service-providers cannot be in
vertical relationships with their clients. Nor is this to say that
Cendyn is incapable of being in a vertical relationship with
Hotel Defendants as a general matter. The distinction here
lies in the relationship of the parties to the relevant market.
Here, Cendyn does not contribute the raw materials, capital,
or labor necessary for Hotel Defendants’ production of
hotel-room rentals on the Las Vegas Strip—such rentals
constituting the relevant antitrust market. Cendyn and Hotel
Defendants therefore do not have a vertical relationship in
the relevant antitrust market.
D.
Given that the licensing agreement between Cendyn and
an individual Hotel Defendant is not horizontal (as it is not
between competitors) and given that it is not vertical (as the
parties to the agreement do not operate at different levels of
distribution in the relevant market), where does that leave
us? This agreement appears to be an “ordinary sales
contract,” which, according to a leading antitrust treatise,
“does not restrain trade” and “without [which], trade would
be impossible.” 6 Phillip E. Areeda & Hovenkamp, Antitrust
Law (5th Ed. 2023) ¶ 1437a.
While we do not have occasion to state whether it is
always true that ordinary sales contracts do not restrain trade,
we can say that the agreements here, as alleged, do not
restrain trade in the relevant market. As alleged, the
licensing agreements certainly imposed obligations on
Cendyn and on each Hotel Defendant as to each other for
the provision of and payment for the software products. But
the licensing agreements do not restrain trade in the market
for hotel-room rentals on the Las Vegas Strip because the
licensing agreements do not restrain competition among

18

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

Hotel Defendants in that market, nor do they restrain the
parties’ abilities to compete in that market.
1.
First, the licensing agreements as alleged here do not
affect the competitive incentives in the market for hotelroom rentals on the Las Vegas Strip. Competition is “[t]he
struggle for commercial advantage; the effort or action of
two or more commercial interests to obtain the same
business from third parties.” Competition, Black’s Law
Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). Black’s Law Dictionary further
notes that “[t]he essence of competition is rivalry.” Id
(quotation marks and citation omitted). In a competitive
market, a firm’s incentive to make more money by raising
prices is “tempered by price competition as individual firms
attempt to capture greater market share.”
Musical
Instruments, 798 F.3d at 1194 n.8.
An agreement among Hotel Defendants to follow
Cendyn’s pricing recommendations would harm
competition because individual hotels would no longer be
motivated to compete on price were they to know that they
could price their goods without risk of their rivals
undercutting their prices and capturing their market share.
But here, Plaintiffs do not contest the district court’s finding
that they failed to allege facts from which such an agreement
among Hotel Defendants could be inferred. And that an
agreement between competitors to obtain and use Cendyn’s
software products would stifle competition does not render
the individual Hotel Defendants’ independent choices to use
Cendyn’s software products anticompetitive.
Rather,
competitors engage in what antitrust law calls “parallel
conduct” when they make the same independent business
decisions as each other. Musical Instruments, 798 F.3d at

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

19

1193. But allegations of parallel conduct, “such as
competitors adopting similar policies around the same time
in response to similar market conditions,” are “insufficient
to state a claim” under Section 1. Id. And even consciously
parallel conduct—i.e., similar conduct resulting from
“observation of [one’s] competitors’ decisions” and “the
pressures of an interdependent market”—does not violate
Section 1. Id. at 1195.
Thus, even were all Hotel Defendants aware of their
competitors’ adoption and use of Cendyn’s software
products, their subsequent choices to adopt Cendyn’s
software products themselves, absent evidence of agreement
among Hotel Defendants to do so, is insufficient to state a
Section 1 claim. 8 (And, of course, to the extent Plaintiffs
allege facts suggesting an agreement of Hotel Defendants to
license Cendyn’s software products, that would go only to
Count 1, the appeal of which claim has been waived.)
Rather than eliminating competition, pricing one’s hotel
rooms in a manner calculated to maximize profits is how one
competes.
Cendyn’s revenue-management software,
therefore, holds itself out as a tool in the struggle for
commercial advantage; by itself, it does not take away that
struggle.
Why don’t the independent choices of Hotel Defendants
to obtain pricing advice from the same company harm
competition, as alleged here? Because here, obtaining
information from the same source does not reduce the
incentive to compete. Take, for example, a hypothetical firm
This analysis might change if Plaintiffs had alleged that Cendyn shared
the confidential information of each competing hotel among the
licensees. But Plaintiffs do not allege such information-sharing occurred
here.

8

20

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

that specializes in market research of the preferences of
customers who patronize hotels on the Las Vegas Strip.
Many hotels on the Las Vegas Strip would perceive a
business advantage to learning about their customers’
preferences, and they might hire the firm as a result. Hotels
that hired the research firm might take advantage of this
newfound knowledge of their consumer base by making
changes to their properties and services offered. For
example, hotels that learned that their potential customers
prioritize sleeping late after a night at the casino might offer
a later check-out time for a premium. Here, you see how
hotels privy to this market research might make better
informed decisions regarding their offerings and charge
higher prices as a result. Competing hotels with the same
knowledge might also make the same changes. But the fact
that competing hotels possess the same knowledge regarding
the preferences of their potential customers does not take
away any hotel’s incentive to compete on quality or price;
they remain just as motivated to compete with each other as
before they obtained the research.
While antitrust law restricts agreements between
competitors regarding how to compete, it does not require a
business to turn a blind eye to information simply because
its competitors are also aware of that same information. Nor
does it require businesses to decline to take advantage of a
service because its competitors already use that service.
Holding otherwise would impose a rule that businesses
cannot use the same service providers as their competitors.
In the example above, such a holding would require hotels
whose competitors hired the research firm to either seek
consumer research from another (possibly inferior) firm or
to refrain from obtaining such research regarding its
customers altogether. Plaintiffs cite no authority for such a

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

21

rule. Indeed, such a requirement could ultimately harm
competition, as it would take away a means by which
competitors might compete.
In light of Plaintiffs’ decision to “abandon[]” their appeal
of Claim 1, we assume that there is no agreement among
Hotel Defendants to license Cendyn’s software products.
Given that assumption, the independent licensing
agreements alleged do not harm the competitive incentives
in the market for hotel-room rentals on the Las Vegas Strip
because the provision of the pricing information does not
affect the incentive to compete in that market. The disputed
agreements therefore do not restrain trade by harming
competition. 9
2.
Second, as alleged, the licensing agreements, which
agreements were for the provision of and payment for
Cendyn’s software products, did not restrain the abilities of
Hotel Defendants to compete in the relevant market. The
absence of restraints limiting any party’s ability to compete
9
Plaintiffs argue that Cendyn’s software “effect[ed] a fundamental
change in [Hotel Defendants’] business strategy,” resulting in “a shift
from [Hotel Defendants’] historical focus on maximizing revenue by
increasing occupancy to focus on maximizing ‘profitability’ by charging
higher room rates—even though this decreases occupancy.” To the
extent Plaintiffs’ argument depends on an anticompetitive agreement
among Hotel Defendants, this argument is unavailing after Plaintiffs
“abandon[ed]” that claim. And while Plaintiffs characterize Cendyn as
effecting a change in Hotel Defendants’ business strategy, they identify
only a “shift from . . . maximizing revenue” to “maximizing
‘profitability.’” Assuming this shift in focus occurred, it would not be
anticompetitive for a firm to maximize profitability—indeed, a basic
economic assumption is that a firm’s aim is to maximize profit, not gross
revenue.

22

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

in the relevant market distinguishes this case from other
cases on which Plaintiffs rely. In Musical Instruments, we
cited to Leegin Creative Leather Products Inc., v. PSKS, Inc.
for the proposition that as a general matter, “purely vertical
restraints may unreasonably restrain trade in violation of
[Section 1].” Musical Instruments, 798 F.3d at 1192 n.3
(citing 551 U.S. 877, 898-89 (2007)). In Leegin, the
Supreme Court held that a vertical agreement in which “a
manufacturer [agreed] with its distributor to set the
minimum price the distributor [could] charge for the
manufacturer’s goods” was subject to evaluation pursuant to
the rule of reason to determine whether the agreement
violated Section 1. 551 U.S. at 881-82. There, the
agreement between the manufacturer and the distributor
restrained the distributor’s ability to compete in the relevant
antitrust market because it limited how a distributor could
price the products it sold in that market. Id. at 882-84.
By contrast, here the relevant antitrust market is that of
hotel-room rentals on the Las Vegas Strip, but the restraint—
which provides for the payment for and provision of
software products, not the rental price of the hotel rooms—
is not alleged to have limited the parties’ abilities to compete
in the market for hotel-room rentals on the Las Vegas Strip.
Plaintiffs cite Plymouth Dealers’ Association of
Northern California v. United States, 279 F.2d 128 (9th Cir.
1960), for the proposition that antitrust law does not require
that an agreement affirmatively restrain a party’s decisionmaking to restrain trade. In Plymouth, we affirmed the
judgment of conviction under Section 1 of a car-dealership
association that “published a price list and circulated it to its
members.” 279 F.2d at 130, 135. This non-binding price
list was used by car dealers as “an agreed starting point” for
the selling price of cars. Id. at 132. Plaintiffs argue that

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

23

Cendyn’s recommended prices function similarly to the nonbinding price list and likewise violate Section 1. In
Plymouth, however, we held the starting point in the price
list was “agreed upon between competitors.” 279 F.2d at
132. That the price list on its own terms did not bind the
dealers is of no matter because it is the agreement among
competitors to use the price list that restrained competition.
And such an agreement, even if imperfectly followed or not
fully enforced, “interfere[d] with ‘the freedom of traders and
thereby restrain[ed] their ability to sell in accordance with
their own judgment.’” Id. (citation omitted). Here, by
contrast, Plaintiffs have not alleged an agreement among
Hotel Defendants to each use Cendyn’s services.
Lacking an agreement among Hotel Defendants that
interferes with their individual freedoms to rent hotel rooms
in accordance with each Hotel Defendant’s own judgment,
we look to Cendyn’s licensing agreement to determine
whether it contains such restraints. And here, the agreement
for the provision of and payment for software products does
not restrain any Hotel Defendant’s ability to sell hotel rooms
“in accordance with their own judgment.” 10 Id. (citation
omitted). While a hotel might adopt Cendyn’s pricing
recommendations at high rates because it trusts the
recommendations or wants the ease of implementing the
recommendations, the agreement for the provision of the

Of course, the fact that Hotel Defendants were not required to accept
the pricing recommendations of Cendyn’s software products would not
immunize Hotel Defendants from Section 1 liability for horizontal pricefixing. After all, Cendyn could provide non-binding recommendations
and competing hotels could all agree to abide by those recommendations.
But such an agreement among competing hotels would be a hub-andspoke conspiracy, any claim of which was waived here.
10

24

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

recommendations itself is not a restraint of a hotel’s ability
to price its hotel-room rentals.
Contrast the disputed licensing agreements here with a
type of vertical agreement that can violate Section 1:
exclusive dealing.
“Exclusive dealing involves an
agreement between a vendor and a buyer that prevents the
buyer from purchasing a given good from any other vendor.”
Allied Orthopedic Appliances Inc. v. Tyco Health Care Grp.
LP, 592 F.3d 991, 996 (9th Cir. 2010). These agreements
violate Section 1 when the agreement’s effect “foreclose[s]
competition in a substantial share of the line of commerce
affected.” Id. (citation omitted). An exclusive dealing
agreement that prevents a buyer from purchasing goods from
a different vendor restrains that buyer’s ability to compete in
the market in which the goods of the foreclosed vendors
would have been used. Here, by contrast, the alleged
agreement is for the provision of certain software products—
with no exclusion of other software products. The
agreement does not prevent Hotel Defendants from using
other services, nor does it dictate how Hotel Defendants may
otherwise compete in the market for hotel-room rentals on
the Las Vegas Strip. Hotel Defendants’ trade is not
restrained in the market for its hotel-room rentals.
Plaintiffs rely on Northwest Wholesale Stationers, Inc. v.
Pacific Stationery & Printing Co., 472 U.S. 284 (1985), and
Board of Trade for the proposition that whenever a contract
is identified, that contract must be analyzed pursuant to the
rule of reason. See Nw. Wholesale Stationers, Inc. v. Pac.
Stationery & Printing Co., 472 U.S. 284, 289 (1985)
(“[E]very commercial agreement restrains trade. Whether
this action violates [Section 1] of the Sherman Act depends
on whether it is adjudged an unreasonable restraint.”
(citation omitted)); Bd. of Trade, 246 U.S. at 238 (“[T]he

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

25

legality of an agreement or regulation cannot be determined
by so simple a test, as whether it restrains competition. . .
[T]he court must ordinarily consider the facts peculiar to the
business to which the restraint is applied; its condition before
and after the restraint was imposed; the nature of the restraint
and its effect, actual or probable.”).
But Plaintiffs’ cited cases do not support the notion that
every contract a business enters opens it up to antitrust
scrutiny as to any other aspect of the business. In Northwest
Wholesale, for example, the Supreme Court held that a
party’s expulsion from a joint buying cooperative must be
analyzed under the rule of reason, as opposed to per se
analysis. 472 U.S. at 298. There, the Court held that the
restraint (a concerted refusal to deal) should have been
analyzed to determine whether “the cooperative possesses
market power or unique access to a business element
necessary for effective competition.” Id. In other words, the
agreement not to deal with a specific party must be analyzed
in the context of the market in which the respective
businesses are competing. But Plaintiffs, in arguing that
every contract warrants scrutiny under the rule of reason, ask
for more. By their logic, a hotel would have to defend its
business practices in the market for hotel-room rentals under
the rule of reason were it to, say, enter a contract with a
painter for the painting of the hotel’s dining room, or a
contract to sponsor a matching campaign for a charitable
cause. A hotel could expect this litigation even when the
contracts for the painter or for participation in the matching
campaign do not harm competition or prevent a hotel from
competing in the market for hotel-room rentals. This
interpretation of Section 1 misreads its purpose and our
caselaw. The statement that as a general matter a restraint of
trade is analyzed under the rule of reason does not support

26

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

the holding that every contract triggers scrutiny pursuant to
the rule of reason—regardless whether the contract imposes
a restraint of trade in the relevant market at all.
Because the licensing agreements for the provision of
software services did not restrain how Hotel Defendants
could compete in the market for hotel-room rentals on the
Las Vegas Strip as alleged, they do not restrain trade in the
relevant market. 11 Absent this restraint of trade in the
relevant market, the district court did not err in finding that
the agreement did not violate Section 1 without first
applying the rule of reason.
E.
Plaintiffs style Claim 2 as being aimed at the “set” of
agreements between Cendyn and Hotel Defendants and
argue that the agreements restrain trade “in the aggregate.”
To the extent the term “set” implies the existence of a
conspiracy between the Hotel Defendants as members of the
“set,” any such claim would go to an agreement between
competitors—i.e., a horizontal agreement. Count 2 cannot
act as a backdoor to find such an agreement because
Plaintiffs waived a finding of any such horizontal agreement
when they abandoned Count 1. Additionally, Count 2 on its
This case does not present the question regarding whether an
agreement in which a firm independently delegates binding pricing
decisions to a third party is necessarily a restraint of trade. Of course,
any such parties might be structurally incapable of enacting certain
restraints of trade. Here, for example, Cendyn and an individual Hotel
Defendant cannot enter a price-fixing agreement (because the agreement
is not between competitors) or a resale-price-maintenance agreement (as
neither party is selling the products of the other). But the question
whether a binding delegation of pricing to a third party restrains trade
was not presented by Plaintiffs’ allegations, so we do not reach that issue
here.
11

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

27

own terms contains no factual allegations of a horizontal
component to the agreements. Rather, it challenges the mere
existence of a number of (non-horizontal and non-vertical)
licensing agreements, and calling that number of agreements
a “set” is not an allegation of fact; it is merely a conclusion
of the pleader. Alleging the existence of a number of
licensing agreements, however, absent the allegation of any
horizontal conspiracy, does not sufficiently allege a Section
1 violation because antitrust law provides no mechanism by
which courts can evaluate the independent agreements
between Cendyn and each Hotel Defendant “in the
aggregate.”
In Atlantic Richfield, this Court found that a grouping of
individual agreements could not be “aggregated” for the
purposes of determining whether together they acted as an
unreasonable restraint of trade because the plaintiffs did not
allege that each agreement had a discrete effect on
competition. William O. Gilley Enters., Inc. v. Atlantic
Richfield Co., 588 F.3d 659, 665 (9th Cir. 2009) (per
curiam). As alleged here, the agreements between Cendyn
and each Hotel Defendant do not have a “discrete effect” on
competition; indeed, for the reasons provided above, the
agreements do not restrain competition in the relevant
market at all.
Plaintiffs argue that “each agreement here does have a
discrete effect on competition: the higher prices charged by
each [Hotel Defendant] compared to relevant benchmarks.”
True, increased prices can serve as evidence of “a substantial
anticompetitive effect” in the context of certain agreements.
PLS.Com, LLC v. Nat’l Ass’n of Realtors, 32 F.4th 824, 834
(9th Cir. 2022) (citation omitted). But that does not mean an
individual firm’s independent choice to charge higher prices
itself harms competition. Here, Plaintiffs confuse cause and

28

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

effect—higher prices can be a possible result of
anticompetitive behavior, but charging a higher price by
itself is not anticompetitive. Indeed, an allegation that “an
agreement has the effect of . . . increasing prices to
consumers does not sufficiently allege an injury to
competition” because raising prices can be “fully consistent
with a free, competitive market.” Brantley, 675 F.3d at
1202. Plaintiffs therefore fail to plead facts which
demonstrate each agreement has a discrete effect on
competition.
Neither does footnote 3 of Musical Instruments provide
for the aggregation of the individual licensing agreements.
In Musical Instruments, we noted that a “rimless hub-andspoke conspiracy” is “a collection of purely vertical
agreements,” and that “such a conspiracy may yet
unreasonably restrain trade.” 798 F.3d at 1192 n.3. In other
words, where different parties (the “spokes”) enter
individual agreements with a central party (the “hub”) but
there is no agreement between the spokes (the “rim”), that
configuration constitutes a collection of purely vertical
agreements. We made this observation in the context of
noting that “the respective vertical and horizontal
agreements [of a hub-and-spoke conspiracy] can be analyzed
either under the rule of reason or as violations per se.” Id. at
1192. In other words, just as a single vertical agreement
might unreasonably restrain trade, so too might “a collection
of purely vertical agreements.” Id. at 1192 n.3. But the
reference to a “collection of purely vertical agreements,”
absent a “conspiracy,” does not provide a basis for the
aggregation of non-vertical agreements—none of which

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

29

individually restrains trade in the relevant market—to find a
restraint of trade. 12
Plaintiffs essentially argue for a rule in which a
business’s entry into any contract typical in its industry,
when followed by higher prices, is sufficient to trigger
antitrust scrutiny under the rule of reason as to any other
aspect of the business. This rule does not comport with the
logic of Section 1 or our precedents. To make out a Section
1 claim, Plaintiffs must allege a restraint of trade in the
relevant market that causes an “actual adverse effect on
competition.” Brantley, 675 F.3d at 1200 (citation omitted).
Here, where the disputed licensing agreements are not
alleged to affect the competitive incentives in the relevant
market, and where the alleged agreements between Cendyn
and each Hotel Defendant are not alleged to restrain a party’s
ability to compete in the relevant market, Plaintiffs fail to
plead a restraint of trade that causes an actual adverse effect
on competition in the relevant market. Because the
agreement for the provision of software and its payment does
not operate as a restraint in the relevant market at all, in
Count 2 Plaintiffs fail to plead a Section 1 violation. Thus,
no analysis under the rule of reason is required.
IV.
Plaintiffs have failed to allege sufficient nonconclusory
facts to support the plausible inference that the individual
agreements between Cendyn and Hotel Defendants

Indeed, in footnote 3 we cited to Dickson v. Microsoft Corp., which
noted that “the Supreme Court was clear: a wheel without a rim is not a
single conspiracy.” 309 F.3d 192, 203-204 (4th Cir. 2002); Musical
Instruments, 798 F.3d at 1192 n.3.
12

30

GIBSON V. CENDYN GROUP, LLC

unreasonably restrained trade in the market for hotel-room
rentals on the Las Vegas strip.
AFFIRMED.

