FOR PUBLICATION
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JORDAN SPATZ Ph. D., M.D.,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 24-2997
D.C. No.
3:21-cv-09605-LB

v.
REGENTS OF THE UNIVERSITY
OF CALIFORNIA,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Laurel D. Beeler, Magistrate Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 2, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 18, 2025
Before: Consuelo M. Callahan, Bridget S. Bade, and Lucy
H. Koh, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Koh

2

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

SUMMARY *
Age Discrimination Act
Affirming the district court’s grant of summary
judgment for the Regents of the University of California on
Jordan Spatz’s claims under the Age Discrimination Act of
1975, the panel held that the Age Act did not apply to the
University of California San Francisco’s refusal to admit
Spatz to its neurological surgery residency program.
Spatz alleged that he was denied admission to the
medical residency program due to age-based discrimination
and retaliation. By its terms, the Age Act exempts from its
coverage “any employment practice of any
employer.” Giving the terms “employer” and “employment
practice” their ordinary common-law meaning, the panel
concluded that ranking medical residents is an employment
practice to which the Age Act does not apply. To the
extent that Spatz’s Age Act claim is not barred, Spatz failed
to demonstrate a genuine issue of material fact.

COUNSEL
Dow W. Patten (argued), Forthright Law PC, San Francisco,
California, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Don Willenburg (argued), Gordon Rees Scully Mansukhani
LLP, Walnut Creek, California; Michael D. Bruno and
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

3

Rachel Wintterle, Gordon Rees Scully Mansukhani LLP,
San Francisco, California; for Defendant-Appellee.

OPINION
KOH, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiff-appellant Jordan Spatz appeals the district
court’s grant of summary judgment for defendant-appellee
the Regents of the University of California on plaintiff’s
claims under the Age Discrimination Act of 1975, 42 U.S.C.
§ 6101 et seq. (the “Age Act”). 1 In the district court, plaintiff
alleged that he was improperly denied admission to a
medical residency program at the University of California
San Francisco (“UCSF”) due to age-based discrimination
and retaliation. For the reasons set forth below, we conclude
the Age Act does not apply to UCSF’s refusal to admit
plaintiff to its medical residency program and we
accordingly affirm the district court.
I.
Plaintiff Dr. Jordan Spatz graduated from UCSF’s
medical school in 2021. At the time of his graduation,
plaintiff was 36 years old. In 2017 and 2018, while plaintiff
was in medical school, plaintiff was purportedly subject to
two instances of harassment based upon his age. Plaintiff
reported both incidents to the school, but it declined to
investigate. Plaintiff’s performance in medical school was
mixed. Plaintiff received positive performance evaluations
Plaintiff does not appeal the dismissal of his non-Age Act claims, and
accordingly we do not address them.
1

4

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

in many of his classes and clinical internships but received
some negative evaluations as well, particularly in connection
with his sub-internships. Although the parties dispute
exactly how well plaintiff performed, plaintiff concedes that,
overall, his grades in medical school were “middle of the
pack.”
Medical school graduates must complete a residency
program at a certified institution before they can become
fully licensed doctors. Medical students are placed in
residency programs through the National Resident Matching
Program (the “Match”). As part of this process, medical
schools rank the applicants they would like to accept into
their program, and applicants do the same with respect to the
medical school residency programs they would like to join.
These rankings are then fed into a centralized algorithm
which matches students with programs based on a variety of
factors. There is no guarantee that every medical student will
be matched with a residency program.
Plaintiff first applied to medical residency programs in
the 2020 match year. In that year, plaintiff ranked 18
neurological surgery programs and listed UCSF’s
neurological surgery program as his first choice. However,
plaintiff was not accepted into any medical residency
program, either at UCSF or elsewhere. Plaintiff applied to
residency at UCSF and elsewhere again in 2021, and he
again failed to match with any program. It is undisputed that
UCSF did not rank plaintiff in either year. Plaintiff claims,
and defendant does not dispute, that had UCSF ranked
plaintiff in either year he would have matched with its
program.
Plaintiff claims that UCSF’s refusal to rank him, and by
extension accept him into UCSF’s neurological surgery

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

5

residency program, was the product of age-based
discrimination and retaliation. To support this accusation,
plaintiff cites various statements made by interviewers that
are indicative of age-based animus, a written interview
evaluation indicating that plaintiff’s age was an area of
concern, and conversations plaintiff had with UCSF faculty
that suggested to plaintiff that his age was discussed during
the meeting where faculty ranked residency candidates.
Plaintiff also claims that his non-ranking was in
retaliation for reports of discrimination he had previously
made to the school. First, plaintiff claims he was retaliated
against for reporting the two instances of age-based
harassment in 2017 and 2018. Second, plaintiff claims he
was retaliated against for filing a formal complaint of
discrimination in February 2020, which alleged that
plaintiff’s age, disability, and birth in the United States was
playing a determinative role in UCSF’s residency selection
process. In response to this 2020 complaint, UCSF
investigated plaintiff’s allegations of disability and national
origin discrimination and found no wrongdoing. However,
UCSF did not investigate the allegations of age-based
discrimination. 2
Beyond his non-ranking to UCSF’s medical residency program,
plaintiff identifies only two other allegedly discriminatory or retaliatory
acts: (1) plaintiff was removed from the website of the laboratory of Dr.
Manish Aghi where plaintiff worked while he was a student at UCSF,
and (2) plaintiff was denied authorship credit on articles that he was
purportedly promised by Dr. Aghi. However, undisputed evidence
suggests that neither act was the product of discriminatory or retaliatory
animus. Instead, it is undisputed that plaintiff was removed from the
website as the result of an inadvertent mistake, and was not given
authorship credit on the papers in question because plaintiff did not meet
the preexisting objective criteria for obtaining such credit. It is also
2

6

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

In contrast, defendant claims that plaintiff failed to
match with UCSF’s program because he had mediocre
grades and performed poorly during his sub-internships.
Defendant cites various documents that corroborate this
purportedly poor performance. Defendant also highlights
that UCSF’s neurosurgery residency program accepts only 3
or 4 residents per year out of an applicant pool of over 300,
amounting to a 1% acceptance rate. Moreover, defendant put
forward declarations of participants in the match selection
meeting generally stating that plaintiff’s age was not
discussed at the meeting, the declarant either did not know
about or did not consider plaintiff’s complaints of age
discrimination, and, with one exception, age played no role
in their decision-making process.
After plaintiff failed to match with UCSF in 2022, and
he was not given an interview by the school, plaintiff filed
the instant lawsuit. Plaintiff’s complaint asserted seven
causes of action: (1) age discrimination in violation of the
Age Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6101 et seq.; (2) age discrimination in
violation of California’s Fair Employment and Housing Act
(“FEHA”), Cal. Gov’t Code § 12900 et seq.; (3) disability
discrimination in violation of the FEHA; (4) harassment in
violation of the FEHA; (5) retaliation in violation of the
FEHA; (6) failure to prevent discrimination and retaliation
in violation of the FEHA; and (7) whistleblower retaliation
in violation of California Health & Safety Code § 1278.5.3
undisputed that plaintiff was added back on to the website once the error
was pointed out, and plaintiff was given the opportunity to appear as an
author on other papers where he did meet the authorship criteria.
While the case was pending, plaintiff moved for a preliminary
injunction, seeking an order to either place him in a neurosurgery
residency at UCSF or create a new neurosurgery residency position for
him. The district court denied plaintiff’s motion and a motions panel of

3

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

7

After discovery, defendant moved for summary judgment on
all of plaintiff’s claims. Plaintiff’s opposition addressed
solely his Age Act claim.
The district court granted defendant’s motion in its
entirety. With respect to plaintiff’s Age Act claim, the
district court concluded that the Age Act does not apply to
the residency selection process because it constitutes an
“employment practice” beyond the scope of the Act. The
district court further found that, even if the Age Act were
applicable, there was no genuine dispute of material fact as
to the merits of that claim. Finally, the district court
concluded that summary judgment was appropriate on
plaintiff’s remaining claims because he did not oppose
defendant’s motion and had not otherwise presented
sufficient evidence to support those claims. This appeal
followed.
II.
The threshold question we must address is whether the
Age Act applies to the challenged conduct. By its terms, the
Age Act exempts from its coverage “any employment
practice of any employer.” 42 U.S.C. § 6103(c)(1). As set
forth more fully below, we conclude that the decision not to
admit plaintiff to UCSF’s neurological surgery residency
program constitutes an “employment practice of an[]
employer” and the Age Act accordingly does not apply to

this court affirmed in a memorandum disposition. See Spatz v. Regents
of Univ. of Cal., 2023 WL 5453456, at *1 (9th Cir. Aug. 24, 2023). In a
footnote, that order noted that the Age Act may not even apply to
plaintiff’s claim if the residency ranking constituted an “employment
practice,” but ultimately declined to resolve the issue. Id. at *1 n.1.

8

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

the conduct challenged by plaintiff. We therefore affirm the
district court’s grant of summary judgment.
A.
The district court’s grant of summary judgment is
reviewed de novo. See Desire, LLC v. Manna Textiles, Inc.,
986 F.3d 1253, 1259 (9th Cir. 2021). “Summary judgment is
appropriate if ‘the movant shows that there is no genuine
dispute as to any material fact and the movant is entitled to
judgment as a matter of law.’” S. Cal. Darts Ass’n v. Zaffina,
762 F.3d 921, 925 (9th Cir. 2014) (quoting Fed. R. Civ. P.
56(a)). “Viewing the facts in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party, [the court] must determine whether a
genuine issue of material fact exists, and whether the district
court applied the law correctly.” Id.
B.
The sole claim at issue on appeal asserts violations of the
Age Act. The Age Act states that “no person in the United
States shall, on the basis of age, be excluded from
participation in, be denied the benefits of, or be subjected to
discrimination under, any program or activity receiving
Federal financial assistance.” 42 U.S.C. § 6102. A private
cause of action was added to the Age Act in 1978, permitting
“any interested person” to sue “to enjoin a violation of th[e]
Act by any program or activity receiving Federal financial
assistance” and to recover “reasonable attorney’s fees.” 42
U.S.C. § 6104(e)(1).
The Age Act stands in contrast to the Age Discrimination
in Employment Act of 1967 (“ADEA”), which generally
prohibits age-based employment discrimination and is only
indirectly relevant here. The ADEA makes it unlawful for an
employer to, among other things, “fail or refuse to hire or to

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

9

discharge any individual or otherwise discriminate against
any individual with respect to his compensation, terms,
conditions, or privileges of employment, because of such
individual’s age.” 29 U.S.C. § 623(a)(1). Unlike the Age
Act, an ADEA plaintiff may also recover damages for
violations of the ADEA. See 29 U.S.C. § 626(c).
Significantly, however, the ADEA’s protections are
categorically “limited to individuals who are at least 40 years
of age.” 29 U.S.C. § 631(a).
Plaintiff was under 40 at the time of the relevant conduct
and accordingly could not rely on the ADEA to pursue his
claims. Plaintiff instead brought suit under the Age Act,
which has no similar requirement that the plaintiff be at least
40 years of age for it to apply. However, the Age Act
contains another limitation that is significant here.
The Age Act provides that “[n]othing in this chapter
shall be construed to authorize action under this chapter by
any Federal department or agency with respect to any
employment practice of any employer, employment agency,
or labor organization, or with respect to any labormanagement joint apprenticeship training program.” 42
U.S.C. § 6103(c)(1); see also 45 C.F.R. § 90.3(b)(2) (“The
Age Discrimination Act of 1975 does not apply to . . . [a]ny
employment practice of any employer, employment agency,
labor organization, or any labor-management joint
apprenticeship training program, except for any program or
activity receiving Federal financial assistance for public
service employment under the Comprehensive Employment
and Training Act of 1974 (CETA), (29 U.S.C. 801 et
seq.).”). The Age Act further provides that “[n]othing in this
chapter shall be construed to amend or modify the [ADEA]
. . . or to affect the rights or responsibilities of any person or
party pursuant to” that act. 42 U.S.C. § 6103(c)(2).

10

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

Accordingly, insofar as the conduct challenged by plaintiff
constitutes an “employment practice of any employer,” the
Age Act does not apply. 4
C.
The central question is whether the decision not to accept
plaintiff into UCSF’s neurological surgery residency
program constitutes an “employment practice of any
Plaintiff does not dispute that the Age Act does not apply to
“employment practice[s] of any employer.” 42 U.S.C. § 6103(c)(1).
However, it is worth noting that Section 6103(c)(1), which exempts
“employment practice[s] of any employer” from the Age Act, is worded
such that it arguably only applies to actions brought by “any Federal
department or agency” and not to suits by private plaintiffs to enforce
the Age Act. Id. Notwithstanding this phrasing, every district court that
has addressed the question has found that Section 6103(c)(1)’s limitation
on the scope of the Age Act applies to suits brought by private parties as
well. See Kamakeeaina v. Armstrong Produce, Ltd., No. 18-cv-00480,
2019 WL 1320032, at *4 (D. Haw. Mar. 22, 2019) (“Although this
language could be construed as limiting only a federal department or
agency from bringing an action against an employer, the Court agrees
with, as far as this Court can tell, every district court to have addressed
the issue that an individual also does not have authority to bring an action
under the Age Discrimination Act against an employer.” (citation
omitted)). We agree.
4

The language of Section 6103(c)(1) was included in the original
version of the Age Act when it was passed in 1975. See Older Americans
Amendments of 1975, Pub. L. No. 94-135, 89 Stat. 713, 729–30,
§ 304(c)(1). When the Age Act was first passed, the Act did not contain
a private right of action, and accordingly it makes sense that Section
6103(c)(1)’s limitation applied only to the federal agencies, who were its
sole enforcers. When a private right of action was added in 1978,
Congress did not amend Section 6103(c)(1), but there is no indication
Congress thereby intended to permit Age Act suits by private parties
against employers concerning their employment practices. See
Comprehensive Older Americans Act Amendments of 1978, Pub. L. No.
95-478, 92 Stat. 1513, 1555–56, § 401(c).

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

11

employer.” 42 U.S.C. § 6103(c)(1). Neither the Age Act nor
its implementing regulations define the terms “employer” or
“employment practice.” See 42 U.S.C. § 6107; 45 C.F.R.
§ 90.4. Nor do the parties cite any case construing these
terms in the context of the Age Act. We accordingly give
these terms their ordinary common-law meaning. See
Nationwide Mut. Ins. Co. v. Darden, 503 U.S. 318, 322–23
(1992) (stating that when “asked to construe the meaning of
‘employee’ where the statute containing the term does not
helpfully define it,” courts typically infer that Congress
intended to incorporate the common-law meaning of the
term); Cmty. for Creative Non–Violence v. Reid, 490 U.S.
730, 739–40 (1989) (similar). Adopting the common law
definition of these terms is particularly appropriate given
that we have previously adopted a common-law agency test
in construing the term “employee” under the ADEA. See
Barnhart v. N.Y. Life Ins. Co., 141 F.3d 1310, 1312–13 (9th
Cir. 1998). The Age Act picks up where the ADEA leaves
off, governing non-employment age discrimination by
recipients of federal funding. See 42 U.S.C. § 6103(c). The
Age Act and ADEA are accordingly in pari materia and
should “be construed as if they were one law.” California v.
Trump, 963 F.3d 926, 947 n.15 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting
Erlenbaugh v. United States, 409 U.S. 239, 243 (1972)); see
id. (“[S]tatutes addressing the same subject matter should be
construed in pari materia.” (citation and internal quotation
marks omitted)).
At common law, an “employee” is generally defined as
“[s]omeone who works in the service of another person (the
employer) under an express or implied contract of hire,
under which the employer has the right to control the details
of work performance.” Employee, Black’s Law Dictionary
(12th ed. 2024); see also Restatement (Second) of Agency

12

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

§ 220(1) (“A servant is a person employed to perform
services in the affairs of another and who with respect to the
physical conduct in the performance of the services is
subject to the other’s control or right to control.”). An
employer is “[a] person, company, or organization for whom
someone works; esp., one who controls and directs a worker
under an express or implied contract of hire and who pays
the worker’s salary or wages.” Employer, Black’s Law
Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). In the ADEA context, courts
consider the following factors to determine if an individual
is an employee:
1) the skill required; 2) source of the
instrumentalities and tools; 3) location of the
work; 4) duration of the relationship between
the parties; 5) whether the hiring party has
the right to assign additional projects to the
hired party; 6) the extent of the hired party’s
discretion over when and how long to work;
7) the method of payment; 8) the hired
party’s role in hiring and paying assistants;
9) whether the work is part of the regular
business of the hiring party; 10) whether the
hiring party is in business; 11) the provision
of employee benefits; and 12) the tax
treatment of the hired party.
Barnhart, 141 F.3d at 1312–13 (quoting Darden, 503 U.S.
at 323–24).

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

13

Although the record here is not as well developed as it
could be, virtually every one of the factors above suggests
that ranking medical residents is akin to hiring an employee:
1): residency requires substantial skill,
including a degree from a medical school;
2) & 3): the hospital provides both the
“instrumentalities” and “location” of
work;
4): the “duration” of the residency is long,
lasting upwards of four years;
5), 6), 9) & 10): medical residents work
extremely long hours—up to 80 hours a
week—and are directly responsible for
providing patient care, which suggests
medical residents are “part of the regular
business of the” hospital and the hospital
has substantial control over the work
residents perform; and
7), 11) & 12): medical residents are paid a
salary, provided with benefits by UCSF,
and are taxed as employees. See Mayo
Found. for Med. Educ. & Rsch. v. United
States, 562 U.S. 44, 48, 60 (2011)
(discussed below).
Precedent likewise reinforces that residency bears many
similarities to employment. The United States Supreme
Court has found that medical residents can be treated as
employees, rather than students, for purposes of taxation
under the Federal Insurance Contributions Act. See Mayo,
562 U.S. at 60. The California Supreme Court has found that

14

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

medical residents are employees entitled to collective
bargaining rights under state law. See Regents of Univ. of
Cal. v. Pub. Emp. Rels. Bd., 715 P.2d 590, 593–605 (Cal.
1986) (“[A]lthough [residents] did receive educational
benefits in the course of their programs, this aspect was
subordinate to the services they performed.”). The NLRB
has reached the same conclusion under federal law. See Bos.
Med. Ctr. Corp., 330 N.L.R.B. 152, 160–61 (1999) (“Almost
without exception, every other court, agency, and legal
analyst to have grappled with this issue has concluded that
interns, residents, and fellows are, in large measure,
employees.”). Finally, the California Court of Appeals has
held that the decision to dismiss a medical resident from a
residency program was not entitled to academic deference—
as would be true if a typical student were involved—because
“the predominant relationship between a medical resident
and a hospital residency program is an employee-employer
relationship.” Khoiny v. Dignity Health, 76 Cal. App. 5th
390, 396, 399–403 (2022) (noting that residents are “paid
ordinary taxable income,” “much of the service [residents]
provide is indistinguishable from that provided by fully
licensed physicians” and “residents have been found to
spend 75 percent to 80 percent of their time providing
services to the medical centers or hospitals”).
Ultimately, we need not definitively categorize medical
residents as employees or students to resolve the case before
us. Instead, we hold that ranking medical residents is an
employment practice to which the Age Act does not apply. 5
Our holding today follows from the text of the Age Act. We
acknowledge that there are educational aspects of medical residency that
may have different ramifications for other statutes. See, e.g., Doe v.
Mercy Catholic Med. Ctr., 850 F.3d 545, 557 (3d Cir. 2017) (concluding
5

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

15

Plaintiff offers two arguments in response, neither of
which is persuasive.
First, plaintiff argues that the “legislative and regulatory
history” of the Age Act “demonstrates its specific
application to Medical Schools.” Plaintiff’s reply brief
seemingly quotes legislative history that suggests the Age
Act was enacted, in part, in response to medical schools
refusing to admit older applicants, but plaintiff does not
actually provide any citations to the documents being
quoted. When asked about the source of these quotes at oral
argument, plaintiff’s counsel was unable to provide any
clarification. Plaintiff’s failure to provide appropriate
citations is sufficient grounds to disregard this argument. See
Fed. R. App. P. 28(a)(8)(A) (stating that an appellate brief
“must contain . . . appellant’s contentions and the reasons for
them, with citations to the authorities and parts of the record
on which the appellant relies”).
Even setting this aside, taken on its own terms the
argument lacks merit. A handful of scattered citations to
legislative history cannot overcome the clear text of the Age
Act. And the language quoted by plaintiff refers only to
“medical schools,” but says nothing about medical residency
programs. So even if the Age Act applies to the admission of
medical students to medical schools, a question we are not
called on to consider, it does not follow that it also covers
admission to medical residency programs.
Second, plaintiff argues that the relevant discrimination
occurred while he was a student in UCSF’s medical school,
that plaintiff plausibly alleged medical residency program constituted
“education program or activity” for purposes of Title IX); Lipsett v. Univ.
of P.R., 864 F.2d 881, 897 (1st Cir. 1988) (similar). We express no view
on this matter.

16

SPATZ V. REGENTS OF THE UNIV. OF CALIFORNIA

rather than a medical resident, and so the Age Act applies to
the conduct. This misunderstands the relevant inquiry. The
question is not whether plaintiff was a student at the time of
the relevant conduct. Rather, the question is whether UCSF’s
refusal to rank (i.e., to hire) plaintiff was an “employment
practice of an employer.” 42 U.S.C. § 6103(c)(1). Insofar as
medical residents are employees, and the hospital is their
employer, the decision not to select plaintiff for residency at
UCSF constitutes an “employment practice of an employer”
exempt from the Age Act, regardless of plaintiff’s status as
a medical student at the time the conduct occurred.
To be sure, some of the allegedly discriminatory conduct
identified by plaintiff—such as Dr. Aghi’s refusal to credit
plaintiff for publications or plaintiff’s removal from Dr.
Aghi’s laboratory’s website—is arguably independent from
plaintiff’s non-admission to medical residency, and so to that
extent could form the basis of a claim for violation of the
Age Act. However, defendants have offered evidence
establishing non-discriminatory and non-retaliatory reasons
for this independent conduct that plaintiff has failed to
refute. See supra note 2. Accordingly, the district court also
correctly granted summary judgment on plaintiff’s claim
with respect to this conduct.
III.
For the reasons discussed above, the district court
correctly granted defendants’ motion for summary
judgment.
AFFIRMED.

