FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LARRY STEVEN WILKINS; WILL
STANTON,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,

No. 25-37
D.C. No.
9:18-cv-00147DLC

v.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Montana
Dana L. Christensen, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 4, 2025
Portland, Oregon
Filed December 29, 2025
Before: MILAN D. SMITH, JR., JACQUELINE H.
NGUYEN, and HOLLY A. THOMAS, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.

2

WILKINS V. USA

SUMMARY *
Quiet Title Act / Law of the Case
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the government, in which the district
court applied the law of the case doctrine and held that the
statute of limitations had run on plaintiffs’ claims seeking to
quiet title on properties that they acquired in 1991 and 2004,
respectively.
The properties are subject to an easement that plaintiffs’
predecessors-in-interest
granted
to
the
United
States. Plaintiffs initiated this action against the government
in 2018 based on their concern that public use of the
Easement interfered with their use and enjoyment of their
properties. The district court held that plaintiffs’ claims
were time barred by the twelve-year statute of limitations set
forth in the Quiet Title Act (QTA). This court issued (1) a
memorandum disposition holding that plaintiffs’ claims
were time-barred and (2) an opinion holding that the QTA’s
statute of limitations is jurisdictional. The Supreme Court
granted certiorari and reversed and remanded, holding that
the QTA’s statute of limitations is a non-jurisdictional
claims-processing rule rather than a jurisdictional rule.
The panel held that the district court did not err in
applying the law of the case doctrine to bar reconsideration
of the question when plaintiffs’ claims accrued. Even if the
district court erred, the panel affirmed the judgment after a
de novo review of the motions for summary judgment. It
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

WILKINS V. USA

3

was not error for the district court to conclude that plaintiffs’
claims accrued prior to August 2006 because the long history
of public use of the Easement triggered the limitation period
much earlier than 2006. Accordingly, the district court did
not err in holding that plaintiffs had not raised a genuine
dispute regarding whether their claims were timely filed,
which necessarily means that the district court did not err in
denying plaintiffs’ cross-motion for summary judgment.
The panel further held that, assuming without deciding
that equitable estoppel is available in QTA cases, the district
court did not abuse its discretion by rejecting plaintiffs’
equitable estoppel argument for lack of affirmative
misconduct.
Finally, the panel held that the district court did not err
by dismissing their second claim for relief as accruing at the
same time as their first claim.
COUNSEL
Jeffrey W. McCoy (argued) and Damien M. Schiff, Pacific
Legal Foundation, Sacramento, California; Ethan Blevins,
Pacific Legal Foundation, Bountiful, Utah; James M.
Manley, Pacific Legal Foundation, Phoenix, Arizona; for
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Jacob D. Ecker (argued), Mark S. Smith, Amber Blaha, John
E. Bies, and Kevin W. McArdle, Attorneys; Adam R. F.
Gustafson, Acting Assistant Attorney General; United States
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Babak
Rastgoufard, Attorney, Office of the General Counsel,
United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, D.C.;
for Defendant-Appellee.

4

WILKINS V. USA

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
FACTUAL BACKGROUND
Plaintiffs-Appellants Jane B. Stanton 1 and Larry Steven
Wilkins (Plaintiffs) filed this action to quiet title on
properties that they acquired in 1991 and 2004, respectively.
The properties are subject to an easement that Plaintiffs’
predecessors-in-interest granted to the United States for part
of Robbins Gulch Road in 1962 (the Easement). Robbins
Gulch Road is located off Highway 93 near Connor,
Montana, and traverses private property for about one mile
before it crosses the boundary of Bitterroot National Forest.
The deed conveyed a 60-foot easement to the United
States “and its assigns” “for a road as now constructed and
in place and to be re-constructed, improved, used, operated,
patrolled, and maintained and known as the Robbins Gulch
road, Project Number 446.” The United States originally
acquired the Easement to be used in connection with timber
harvesting. However, the public has historically used the
Easement to access Bitterroot National Forest.
In 2007, the U.S. Forest Service (Forest Service) began
a nationwide process (the Travel Management Plan) to
provide “clear identification of roads, trails, and areas for
motor vehicle use on each National Forest.” Travel
Management; Designated Routes and Areas for Motor
Vehicle Use, 70 Fed. Reg. 68264, 68264 (Nov. 9, 2005).
The Forest Service published the Bitterroot National Forest
Will Stanton was substituted for Jane B. Stanton after Ms. Stanton
passed away while this appeal was pending.

1

WILKINS V. USA

5

Travel Management Planning Proposed Action Scoping
Document (Proposed Scoping Document) in September
2007, which indicated that there would be no public
motorized vehicle use on a portion of Robbins Gulch Road
in the National Forest. Wilkins discussed his concerns about
public use of the Easement with then-Darby District Ranger
Chuck Oliver, and Oliver stated that Wilkins could “relax”
because “Robbins Gulch Road[] is slated to be closed”
through the Travel Management Plan. However, the Forest
Service did not issue a final decision until 2016, and it
allowed public motor vehicle use of the Easement in the
summer and fall.
PRIOR PROCEEDINGS
Plaintiffs initiated the instant action against the
government in 2018 based on their growing concern with
public use of the Easement, which interferes with their use
and enjoyment of their properties. Before filing suit,
Plaintiffs’ counsel sent a letter to the U.S. Department of
Agriculture Office of the General Counsel in May 2018. The
Office of the General Counsel responded to the letter, stating
the Forest Service’s position that the Easement allows public
access: “Where the national forest lands are open to the
public the Forest Service may allow the public to utilize the
easement for ingress and egress to the national forest as an
implied licensee of the agency without the need for recitation
in the easement of this use.” Plaintiffs then filed their
complaint, objecting to “current and ongoing excessive use
of the Robbins Gulch Road by a wide range of parties, and
the failure of the U.S. Forest Service to manage, patrol, and
maintain this road in accordance with the intended limited
use of the road for U.S. Forest Service administrative
purposes.” According to Plaintiffs, they relied on the Forest

6

WILKINS V. USA

Service’s statements (both by Oliver and in the Proposed
Scoping Document) to delay filing suit.
The complaint contained two counts. First, Plaintiffs
sought to quiet title to their property to “confirm the limited
scope of the 1962 easement for the Robbins Gulch Road.”
They alleged that “[t]he 1962 easement was not granted to
the United States for general public use.” Rather, they
alleged “that the 1962 easement was granted only for
restricted purposes [related to timber harvest] for the United
States and its assigns.”
Second, Plaintiffs sought quiet title to their property “to
confirm and enforce the Forest Service’s obligations under
the 1962 easement for the Robbins Gulch Road.” They
alleged that the Forest Service “has an obligation to take
affirmative steps to patrol and maintain the Robbins Gulch
Road,” but instead it “is authorizing and facilitating the
current ongoing unrestricted use by the general public.”
According to Plaintiffs, the obligation is “to ensure that the
road is secure and that unauthorized trespasses are not
occurring.”
The government moved to dismiss the action pursuant to
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) after extensive
discovery. In relevant part, the government argued that the
court lacked subject matter jurisdiction over Plaintiffs’
claims because they were time-barred by the Quiet Title Act
(QTA)’s twelve-year statute of limitations. See 28 U.S.C.
§ 2409a(g). The district court granted the motion. 2 See
Wilkins v. United States, 2020 WL 2732251, at *9 (D. Mont.
May 26, 2020) (Wilkins I).
The district court also denied Plaintiffs’ motion to alter or amend the
judgment pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 59(e).

2

WILKINS V. USA

7

We affirmed in bifurcated opinions. We issued a
memorandum disposition affirming the district court’s
holding that Plaintiffs’ claims are time-barred. See Wilkins
v. United States, 2021 WL 4200563, at *2 (9th Cir. Sep. 15,
2021). We also affirmed the district court’s holding that
Plaintiffs’ two claims accrued at the same time and the
district court did not err by evaluating them together. Id. In
addition, we issued an opinion upholding the QTA’s statute
of limitations as jurisdictional. See Wilkins v. United States,
13 F.4th 791 (9th Cir. 2021), rev’d, 598 U.S. 152 (2023).
The Supreme Court granted Plaintiffs’ petition for
certiorari and reversed and remanded, holding that the
QTA’s statute of limitations is a non-jurisdictional claimsprocessing rule rather than a jurisdictional rule. See Wilkins
v. United States, 598 U.S. 152, 165 (2023).
On remand, the parties cross-moved for summary
judgment on both counts. The district court granted
summary judgment in favor of the government (the
Summary Judgment Order), applying the law of the case
doctrine and holding that the statute of limitations has run on
Plaintiffs’ claims. Plaintiffs timely appealed.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
The district court had jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 1346(f), and we have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 1291.
“We review applications of law of the case doctrine for
abuse of discretion.” Cont’l Ins. Co. v. Fed. Express Corp.,
454 F.3d 951, 954 (9th Cir. 2006). “We review de novo a
district court’s grant or denial of summary judgment.” Davis
v. United States, 854 F.3d 594, 598 (9th Cir. 2017).
Typically, “[w]hen ‘the accrual of the statute of limitations

8

WILKINS V. USA

in part turns on what a reasonable person should have
known, we review this mixed question of law and fact for
clear error.’” Kingman Reef Atoll Invs., LLC v. United
States, 541 F.3d 1189, 1195 (9th Cir. 2008) (quoting Rose v.
United States, 905 F.2d 1257, 1259 (9th Cir. 1990)). But
here, it is less clear whether we should apply the clear error
standard to evaluate the district court’s accrual
determination. Due to the unique posture of this case, where
the district court relied on the law of the case doctrine on
summary judgment using its earlier decision ruling on a
motion to dismiss, we review the parties’ cross-motions for
summary judgment, including the district court’s accrual
determination, de novo. Our de novo inquiry would serve
no useful purpose if we applied a deferential standard of
review to the underlying accrual determination because the
district court used the law of the case to make that
determination. 3 Regardless, we would reach the same
outcome reviewing for clear error. Last, we review a district
court’s rejection of an equitable estoppel argument for abuse
of discretion, 4 since “estoppel is an equitable concept that is
invoked by the court in its discretion.” Hoefler v. Babbitt,
139 F.3d 726, 727 (9th Cir. 1998); see also Red Lion Hotels
Franchising, Inc. v. MAK, LLC, 663 F.3d 1080, 1087 (9th
Cir. 2011).

We have also reviewed accrual determinations de novo when reviewing
at summary judgment in the past. See Nevada v. United States, 731 F.2d
633, 635–36 (9th Cir. 1984).

3

We have also reviewed equitable estoppel claims de novo. See
Mukherjee v. INS, 793 F.2d 1006, 1009 (9th Cir. 1986). The standard
does not make a difference here, however, because Plaintiffs’ claims
would fail under either.

4

WILKINS V. USA

9

ANALYSIS
Plaintiffs raise several challenges to the Summary
Judgment Order. First, they challenge the district court’s
application of the law of the case doctrine. Second, they
argue that the district court erred in granting summary
judgment in the government’s favor, and in denying their
cross-motion, because it erred in its determination that there
is no genuine dispute as to whether Plaintiffs’ claims were
untimely. According to Plaintiffs, their claims were timely,
and even if they were not, the district court erred by allowing
the government to raise a statute-of-limitations defense.
They argue that the government should be equitably
estopped from doing so. Last, Plaintiffs argue that the
district court erred in determining that both counts of the
complaint accrued at the same time. We address each
argument in turn.
I. Law of the Case
The law of the case doctrine “generally preclude[s] [a
court] from reconsidering an issue that has already been
decided by the same court, or a higher court in the identical
case.” Thomas v. Bible, 983 F.2d 152, 154 (9th Cir. 1993).
In its Summary Judgment Order, the district court applied
the law of the case doctrine to bar reconsideration of the
question when Plaintiffs’ claims accrued. It relied upon
Wilkins I and our memorandum disposition holding that the
statute of limitations had expired on Plaintiffs’ claims to
conclude that “the Supreme Court’s decision did not disturb
the lower Courts’ findings with respect to the time bar.”
The district court then determined that “[t]he question
therefore becomes whether a finding on a motion to dismiss
for lack of jurisdiction informs the analysis on cross motions
for summary judgment.” The district court concluded that it

10

WILKINS V. USA

does. Specifically, the district court concluded that Wilkins
I and our decision became the law of the case because “the
record reveals no new evidence or no dispute of material
fact” that “might change the law applied by the appellate
court.”
On appeal, Plaintiffs argue that the district court’s use of
the doctrine was improper. Notably, while the government
maintains that such use was proper, it argues that we need
not reach the question or rely exclusively on the law of the
case. We hold that the district court did not abuse its
discretion in applying the law of the case doctrine here.
There are certain factors that courts consider when
determining whether to apply the law of the case doctrine.
See United States v. Jingles, 702 F.3d 494, 502–03 (9th Cir.
2012). Courts may depart from the law of the case when:
“(1) the decision is clearly erroneous and its enforcement
would work a manifest injustice, (2) intervening controlling
authority
makes
reconsideration
appropriate,
or
(3) substantially different evidence was adduced at a
subsequent trial.” 5 Id. (quoting Gonzalez v. Arizona, 677
F.3d 383, 389 n. 4 (9th Cir. 2012) (en banc)).
Regarding the first factor, the parties do not argue that
either Wilkins I or our memorandum disposition was clearly
erroneous on the relevant question: whether Plaintiffs’
claims were timely. Neither the Supreme Court nor our
court on remand mentioned our memorandum disposition,
which held that “[t]he district court [in Wilkins I] did not
The district court applied the five exceptions listed in Thomas, 983 F.2d
at 155, but we noted in Jingles that “[o]ur en banc court . . . has
consistently identified only three exceptions[.]” 702 F.3d at 503 n.3
(citations omitted). However, this error was harmless.
5

WILKINS V. USA

11

clearly err in concluding that Appellants’ claims were
untimely.” Wilkins, 2021 WL 4200563, at *2.
The parties also do not argue that there is a substantial
change in the record. Nor could they. Discovery was not
reopened on remand, and neither party requested
supplemental discovery. In applying the law of the case
doctrine, the district court determined that Plaintiffs “fail[ed]
to proffer any evidence rendering the facts relied upon in
Wilkins I and [our] decision in dispute.” Instead, “[t]he
evidence in the record remains the same.”
The parties do, however, dispute one factor: whether
intervening controlling authority makes reconsideration
appropriate on remand. But Plaintiffs overread the Supreme
Court’s decision to say that it is intervening controlling
authority that bears on the earlier determination that
Plaintiffs’ claims were untimely. The Supreme Court did
not reverse and remand our or the district court’s
determination that the statute of limitations for Plaintiffs’
claims has expired. Because we bifurcated our rulings, only
the jurisdictional question was before the Supreme Court.
See Wilkins v. United States, 142 S. Ct. 2776 (2022) (mem.).
And while the Court clarified that QTA’s statute of
limitations is a non-jurisdictional claims-processing rule, it
did not change the law that instructs courts on how to
evaluate whether a claim pursuant to the QTA is time-barred,
see generally Wilkins, 598 U.S. 152, which is the law that
we and the district court applied to evaluate when Plaintiffs’
claims accrued, see Wilkins, 2021 WL 4200563, at *2.
There are some differences in this case on remand, but
these differences do not change the result. First, Wilkins I
and our memorandum disposition used a different burden of
proof. These earlier rulings were issued pursuant to the

12

WILKINS V. USA

government’s motion to dismiss pursuant to Federal Rule of
Civil Procedure 12(b)(1), which placed the burden on
Plaintiffs to prove that their claims were timely. See
Kokkonen v. Guardian Life Ins. Co. of Am., 511 U.S. 375,
377 (1994). Conversely, the burden is on the government to
prove its non-jurisdictional statute of limitations defense at
summary judgment. See Payan v. Aramark Mgmt. Servs.
Ltd. P’ship, 495 F.3d 1119, 1122 (9th Cir. 2007).
Second, Wilkins I and our memorandum disposition
were evaluated pursuant to different standards. In Wilkins I,
the district court was able to resolve factual disputes with no
presumption of truthfulness attached to Plaintiffs’
allegations. See Augustine v. United States, 704 F.2d 1074,
1077 (9th Cir. 1983). But all disputed facts must be
construed in favor of the nonmoving party at summary
judgment. See Marable v. Nitchman, 511 F.3d 924, 929 (9th
Cir. 2007).
The district court discussed whether the differing
standards should affect its application of the law of the case
doctrine and concluded they did not. It primarily relied upon
Leibel v. City of Buckeye, 556 F. Supp. 3d 1042 (D. Ariz.
2021). In Leibel, the district court evaluated whether the law
of the case doctrine applied in summary judgment
proceedings on remand after we reversed its earlier ruling on
a motion to dismiss pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 12(b)(6). See id. at 1057. The Leibel court
concluded that a court’s prior ruling may be applied as the
law of the case when the facts that were presumed true at the
motion to dismiss stage are proven true at summary
judgment. See id. at 1057–58.
The district court’s reliance upon Leibel is not entirely
persuasive because courts evaluating motions to dismiss

WILKINS V. USA

13

pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1) do not
presume facts to be true. In Leibel, both the earlier decision
and the decision on remand used a standard that favored the
plaintiff, and the court evaluated the motion for summary
judgment without any evidence on the relevant issue,
making it a “purely legal” question. Id. at 1058 (quoting
Bollinger v. Oregon, 172 F. App’x 770, 771 (9th Cir. 2006)).
Here, the standards point in opposite directions, and the
district court was presented with plenty of evidence to
review. See Bollinger, 172 F. App’x at 771.
That being said, the district court also relied upon Pubali
Bank v. City National Bank, 777 F.2d 1340 (9th Cir. 1985),
which is more on point. In Pubali, we evaluated a district
court’s summary judgment holding on remand after our
court reversed the district court’s ruling on a motion to
dismiss pursuant to Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 41(b).
See id. at 1342. The issue was whether the district court
could use the earlier appellate ruling. See id. We stated that
the court could “decide the motion in accordance with the
law of the case, based on the appellate conclusions, if no
evidence that affect[ed] the appellate ruling [wa]s offered in
opposition to the summary judgment.” Id. Yet we also
noted that “[t]he trial court [could not] grant the motion
solely in reliance on the appellate holdings” but “must
examine whatever materials the defendant present[ed] in
opposition to the summary judgment.” Id.
Here, the Summary Judgment Order demonstrates that
the district court “properly examined” the Plaintiffs’
material in opposition to summary judgment. See id. The
district court stated that “the law of the case may be applied
where the record reveals no new evidence or no dispute of
material fact, ‘the resolution of which might change the law
applied by the appellate court.’” The district court then

14

WILKINS V. USA

proceeded to evaluate “whether the facts relied upon at the
Rule 12(b)(1) stage are in dispute.”
Ultimately, the district court concluded that “Plaintiffs
fail to proffer any evidence rendering the facts relied upon
in Wilkins I and the Ninth Circuit’s decision in dispute.”
Rather, the district court determined that “the undisputed
facts,” such as the historical maps, “are more than sufficient”
to meet the standard for claim accrual pursuant to the QTA.
Accordingly, the district court did not abuse its
discretion in applying the law of the case doctrine here,
consistent with Pubali. Even if it did err, we still affirm the
judgment after a de novo review of the motions for summary
judgment, as discussed below. In Pubali, we determined that
where “[i]t is not clear . . . whether the district court properly
examined [the] . . . material in opposition to summary
judgment, or simply applied the holding of [the earlier
ruling] to [the] motion papers,” we can “examine the
problem afresh because we review a summary judgment de
novo.” 777 F.2d at 1342.
II. Summary Judgment
We therefore evaluate the parties’ cross-motions for
summary judgment de novo. 6 Because the parties crossmoved for summary judgment, we consider two related
questions: (i) whether Plaintiffs have raised a genuine
dispute of material fact regarding whether their claims were
untimely filed; and (ii) in the alternative, whether the
undisputed facts demonstrate that Plaintiffs’ claims were
timely filed. We hold that the district court did not err by
Because Plaintiffs dispute whether their claims simultaneously accrue,
this section is focused on Plaintiffs’ first claim. We later conclude that
the district court did not err by evaluating Plaintiffs’ claims together.

6

WILKINS V. USA

15

granting summary judgment in favor of the government
because, while Plaintiffs genuinely dispute certain facts,
there is no genuine dispute that their claims accrued in the
1970s based on the history of public use of the Easement,
and thus, the claims were untimely filed.
The QTA’s statute of limitations requires Plaintiffs to
bring a case “within twelve years of the date upon which [the
claims] accrued.” 28 U.S.C. § 2409a(g). Accrual occurs “on
the date the plaintiff or his predecessor in interest knew or
should have known of the claim of the United States.” Id.
Because Plaintiffs filed their complaint on August 23, 2018,
their claims were not timely if it accrued prior to August 23,
2006. Plaintiffs argue that their claims did not accrue until
September 2006, when the Forest Service commissioned a
sign to be installed along Robbins Gulch Road reading
“Public Access Thru Private Lands.”
According to Plaintiffs, Michel v. United States, 65 F.3d
130 (9th Cir. 1995) (per curiam), supplies the applicable
standard to determine when a plaintiff or his predecessor in
interest “knew or should have known of the [government’s]
claim,” 28 U.S.C. § 2409a(g). Plaintiffs use Michel to argue
that “when a quiet title claim involves a non-possessory
interest such as an easement, a claim accrues when the
government acts adversely to the interests of plaintiffs with
respect to the easement.”
However, this case is distinct from Michel because the
plaintiff in that case claimed an easement over government
land; here, it is the opposite: the government claims an
easement over private land. See Michel, 65 F.3d at 131. In
effect, Plaintiffs use Michel to argue that a higher standard
(i.e., affirmative adverse action) applies to easement-related
claims such that the government must demonstrate when a

16

WILKINS V. USA

plaintiff should have known that the government’s claim was
contrary to the plaintiff’s interest.
But in other
circumstances, we use a relatively lower standard: “notice of
a government claim that creates even a cloud on that title
may be sufficient to trigger the limitations period.” Id. at
132.
Read in full, Michel does not stand for the broad
easement-related assertion that Plaintiffs argue it does.
Michel states that “[a] plaintiff’s cause of action for an
easement across government land only accrues when the
government, ‘adversely to the interests of plaintiffs, denie[s]
or limit[s] the use of the roadway for access to plaintiffs’
property.’” Id. (quoting Werner v. United States, 9 F.3d
1514, 1516 (11th Cir. 1993) (alterations in original)
(emphasis added)). The court explained that “when [a]
plaintiff claims a non-possessory interest such as an
easement, knowledge of a government claim of ownership
may be entirely consistent with [that] plaintiff’s claim.” Id.
In other words, when a plaintiff claims an easement on
government-owned land, the plaintiff already knows that the
government has an ownership interest over that land; such
claim is necessarily “entirely consistent” with their
easement. Id. In that case, something more is required for
their QTA claim to accrue. See McFarland v. Norton, 425
F.3d 724, 726–27 (9th Cir. 2005).
The instant case does not require anything more. We
cited Michel in our memorandum disposition to state that
“[t]o start the limitations period, the government’s claim
must be adverse to the claim asserted by the [plaintiffs].”
Wilkins, 2021 WL 4200563, at *2 (alterations in original).
This just means that the government’s interest must conflict
with Plaintiffs’ claim; it does not mean that the government
must act “in a manner openly hostile and adverse to a

WILKINS V. USA

17

landowner’s interest.” 7 Shultz v. Dep’t of Army, 886 F.2d
1157, 1160 (9th Cir. 1989) (emphasis added).
Plaintiffs rely on Elk Mountain Safari, Inc. v. Bureau of
Land Management, 645 F. Supp. 151 (D. Wyo. 1986), to
argue to the contrary. But Elk Mountain, in addition to being
non-binding, is distinguishable. In Elk Mountain, a
landowner granted a right-of-way easement to the United
States, and a successor in interest later sued the United
States, alleging that the right-of-way was limited and not
open to the public. See id. at 152. The district court rejected
the government’s argument that an internal agency
memorandum was sufficient to provide the plaintiff with
reasonable awareness that the United States claimed an
adverse interest in their property. See id. at 155–56. Instead,
the court concluded that the plaintiff’s claim only accrued
when the government “expressed” “its position that the
roadway should be open to the general public.” Id. at 156.
But, as the government argues, the instant case does not rely
on internal agency documents; it relies on public information
to evaluate when its interest was “expressed.”

Here, the government’s claim to Plaintiffs’ property can be adverse to
(i.e., conflict with) Plaintiffs’ claim without the government taking
affirmative adverse action, such as denying or limiting use of its own
Easement. See, e.g., George v. United States, 672 F.3d 942, 947 (10th
Cir. 2012) (holding that “[r]ecords, not actions, were enough to put the
plaintiffs on notice”). Thus, Plaintiffs’ reliance on Waibel Ranches, LLC
v. United States, 2024 WL 3384233 (9th Cir. July 12, 2024), which relies
on a similar standard, is not helpful. See id. at *2 (reversing a district
court’s determination that the plaintiffs’ claims were time-barred by
evaluating when the government “adopted a position in conflict” with
the plaintiffs’ interests).
7

18

WILKINS V. USA

A. Public Use of the Easement
We first evaluate whether the United States’ actions
related to the historic public use of the Easement would have
alerted a reasonable landowner that the government claimed
an interest in the Easement. The record shows that the public
has regularly used Robbins Gulch Road to access the
National Forest since at least the 1960s. The record also
shows that both Plaintiffs were aware of such public use both
when they purchased their properties and after purchasing it.
And as the government argues, a reasonable landowner with
such awareness likely should have conducted further inquiry
if that landowner believed their easement prohibited public
use. Accordingly, it was not error for the district court to
conclude that Plaintiffs’ claims accrued prior to August 23,
2006, based on the public’s historic use of the Easement and
the fact that the Forest Service did not act to restrict such use.
Plaintiffs counter that there is a genuine dispute here
because the evidence shows that Ida Wildung, the grantor of
one of the relevant Easements (and who is not a plaintiff),
believed that the Easement was not meant to allow public
access.
Marion Dial (another neighboring private
landowner) stated in her declaration that Wildung (who is
now deceased) was surprised when the Forest Service
indicated in 2007 that it believed that the Easement allowed
public use. 8 According to Plaintiffs, if the grantor of the
Easement did not know until 2007 that the Forest Service
believed that the Easement allowed for public use, then no
“Ida told me that they never intended to give a public road to the Forest
Service. Instead, she told me that she negotiated an easement that would
give the Forest Service easier access for forest management and in
dealing with forest fires. She told me that the Forest Service agreed to
maintain the road in exchange for an easement.”

8

WILKINS V. USA

19

other landowner along Robbins Gulch Road could
reasonably be expected to know of the government’s claim
that the Easement allowed for public use.
But Wildung’s subjective understanding of the Easement
is not enough to raise a genuine dispute of material fact
“whether [Plaintiffs or their] predecessors-in-interest
reasonably should have been aware of a claim by the
government of interest in the roadway.” Shultz, 886 F.2d at
1161. The record of public use here is enough to “alert[]” a
reasonable landowner to “make reasonable inquiry” about
their understanding of the Easement. See Park Cnty. v.
United States, 626 F.2d 718, 721 n.6 (9th Cir. 1980). This
is an objective standard. Thus, the district court did not err
by concluding that “Plaintiffs’ claims likely accrued
sometime in the 1970’s [sic].”
We also reject Plaintiffs’ argument that even if they were
aware of public access prior to 2006, there is no evidence
that the public accessed Robbins Gulch Road with the Forest
Service’s permission, alerting them to the government’s
interest in the Easement. This argument is not persuasive
because, as discussed above, we reject Plaintiffs’ assertion
that affirmative adverse action by the Forest Service is
required here. Instead, we rely on the fact that the Forest
Service was aware of such public use and allowed it, by not
acting to stop it.9 Plaintiffs’ argument that the public was
using the road for illegal purposes, such as trespass or
underage drinking, does not move the needle.

Plaintiffs do not argue that the Forest Service was unaware of the public
use. Indeed, Plaintiffs’ second claim relies on the Forest Service
“authorizing and facilitating the current ongoing unrestricted use by the
general public.”

9

20

WILKINS V. USA

B. Historic Forest Service Maps
The historic Forest Service maps are more complicated.
It is undisputed that Robbins Gulch Road has been shown on
official, publicly available Forest Service maps from as early
as 1950. Such maps (excluding the 1950 map) label the road
as “446,” which designates Robbins Gulch Road as part of
the National Forest road system. The question is whether a
reasonable landowner would interpret these maps to
conclude that Robbins Gulch Road is a National Forest road
that is open to the public.
According to Plaintiffs, there is a genuine dispute
whether they do so because the Forest Service’s historic
maps are ambiguous. Whether the maps are ambiguous is
relevant because, as Plaintiffs argue, the statute of
limitations for a QTA claim does not begin to run if the
United States’ claim is ambiguous or vague. See Shultz, 886
F.2d at 1160. They emphasize that not all Forest System
Roads are open to the public. Rather, some Forest System
roads are merely “administrative,” and these roads are not
open to the public.
Plaintiffs first argue that it is unreasonable to interpret
the historic Forest Service maps to suggest that Robbins
Gulch Road is open to the public because the Forest Service
itself admitted that the maps were ambiguous regarding that
question. We reject this argument. Plaintiffs rely on the
Proposed Scoping Document, which states that certain
“motorized recreation designations can be confusing and
complex.” However, Robbins Gulch Road was not marked
with those “confusing and complex” designations; it was
designated without restrictions on the relevant 2005 map.
We similarly reject Plaintiffs’ argument based on the
Forest Service’s webpage for the Medicine Bow-Routt

WILKINS V. USA

21

National Forest and Thunder Basin National Grassland,
which directs users to consult the current Forest Service map
because “not all roads/trails on GPS/maps are open for
public access.” Even assuming the webpage’s language
refers to Forest Service maps and not generic commercial
maps, the quoted language does not demonstrate that maps
of Robbins Gulch Road and Bitterroot National Forest
specifically are ambiguous.
The parties then dispute the proper way to interpret the
maps of Bitterroot National Forest and Robbins Gulch Road.
The record includes maps from: 1950, referring to the Road
as a “[g]ood motor road”; 1964, referring to the Road as a
“[d]irt [r]oad”; 1972, referring to the same; 1981, referring
to the Road as an “[i]mproved [r]oad” rather than a “[r]oad
or [t]rail with [r]estrictions”; 1993, “[i]mproved [r]oad”; and
2005, referring to the Road as a “[l]ight [d]uty [r]oad, [d]irt.”
According to the government, the maps demonstrate that
Robbins Gulch Road is open to the public because it is
merely designated as an “improved road,” despite other
roads on the map being depicted as “road[s] . . . with
restrictions.”
However, as Plaintiffs persuasively argue, it is a question
of fact whether roads outside the National Forest boundaries
are noted with such restrictions, and it would be reasonable
to assume that the Forest Service only noted gates in areas
where it owned the underlying land, within the National
Forest boundaries. For example, the 2005 map explicitly
states in its legend that the listed restrictions “pertain[ ] only
to Bitterroot National Forest System lands.” While the other
maps’ legends do not contain a limiting phrase, whether the
maps labeled any privately owned roads with restrictions is
disputed, and a de novo review of the maps suggests that
they are not clear on that question.

22

WILKINS V. USA

Thus, Plaintiffs raise a genuine dispute whether the
historic Forest Service maps demonstrate that Robbins
Gulch Road was open for unrestricted public access. But
even still, the district court did not err by determining that
“Plaintiffs’ claims likely accrued sometime in the 1970’s
[sic].” “The existence of one uncontroverted instance of
notice suffices to trigger the limitations period.” Nevada v.
United States, 731 F.2d 633, 635 (9th Cir. 1984). As
discussed above, we conclude that the long history of public
use of the Easement triggered the limitations period in the
1970s. Thus, the dispute regarding the historic Forest
Service maps does not suffice to preclude summary
judgment.
C. The May 2006 Closure Order
On May 3, 2006, Forest Supervisor David Bull signed a
special order temporarily closing the road to the public at its
junction with Highway 93 because of unsafe road
conditions. The government argues that this order (the May
2006 Closure Order) demonstrates that Plaintiffs were aware
of its interest in the Easement for public use in at least May
2006. Forest Service regulations required the agency to
implement the closure by, among other things, placing a
“Road Closed” sign at the site. See 36 C.F.R. § 261.51(b)
(2005). Bull, a forest supervisor from 2002 to 2009, testified
in his deposition that the Forest Service typically acted
according to its regulations.
Plaintiffs counter that there is a genuine dispute whether
the May 2006 Closure Order triggered their claim’s accrual.
Plaintiffs argue that they and their neighbors do not recall
seeing the May 2006 Closure Order or physical barriers
posted along the road. Instead, Wilkins testified that when
“[t]hey would put a sign down . . . at the bottom [of the

WILKINS V. USA

23

Road], at the highway, that would say road closed ahead,
which means they closed it at the [National Forest]
boundary,” which was past the Easement on Robbins Gulch
Road. And Wilkins testified that “they never would close
this section of the road.”
The fact that Plaintiffs do not recall the Closure Order
may raise a genuine dispute as to whether the Closure Order
could start the limitations period. Constructive notice may
be enough to trigger the limitations period. See, e.g., Park
Cnty., 626 F.2d at 720–21 (determining that a sign gave
sufficient notice even when it was located far from the
county seats that challenged the government’s claim).
However, that does not mean that testimony affirmatively
contradicting the government’s theory of notice cannot raise
a genuine dispute, such as evidence that the landowners
perceived the Closure Order to be inapplicable to the
Easement. But we need not resolve this question here. Even
if there is a genuine dispute regarding the Closure Order, it
was not error for the district court to conclude that Plaintiffs’
claims accrued prior to August 2006. As discussed above,
the long history of public use of the Easement triggered the
limitation period much earlier than 2006.
***
Thus, while Plaintiffs raise a genuine dispute regarding
whether the historic Forest Service maps spurred the
limitations period, and may also do so with the May 2006
Closure Order, 10 the history of public use of the Easement to
10
This conclusion is slightly different than our memorandum
disposition, which concluded that “[t]ogether with the historic public use
of the road, the historic maps should have alerted a reasonable landowner
of the government’s view regarding public access of the easement more
than twelve years before Appellants filed suit. And the government’s

24

WILKINS V. USA

access the National Forest is enough for us to conclude that
the district court did not err in its determination that
“Plaintiffs’ claims likely accrued sometime in the 1970’s
[sic], [but] at the latest, on May 3, 2006.” Accordingly, the
district court did not err in holding that Plaintiffs have not
raised a genuine dispute regarding whether their claims were
timely filed. This conclusion necessarily means that the
district court did not err in denying Plaintiffs’ cross-motion
for summary judgment.
III. Equitable Estoppel
The Supreme Court left open the possibility that
equitable estoppel may be available in QTA cases in United
States v. Beggerly, 524 U.S. 38, 49–50 (1998) (Stevens, J.,
concurring). See also Wilkins, 598 U.S. at 164. We assume
without deciding that equitable estoppel is available in QTA
cases, although the government urges us to find it does not. 11
To establish that a defendant is estopped from raising the
statute of limitations as a defense, a plaintiff bears the burden
to establish: “(1) knowledge of the true facts by the party to
be estopped, (2) intent to induce reliance or actions giving
rise to a belief in that intent, (3) ignorance of the true facts
by the relying party, and (4) detrimental reliance.” Est. of
Amaro v. City of Oakland, 653 F.3d 808, 813 (9th Cir. 2011).
However, the district court began with the “threshold
requirement[]” for equitable estoppel claims against the
government, which requires affirmative misconduct. See
temporary closure of the road in 2006 was consistent with this
understanding.” Wilkins, 2021 WL 4200563, at *2. However, our earlier
ruling reviewed the district court’s ruling for clear error, not de novo,
and was based on a motion to dismiss.
The government argues that equitable estoppel is unavailable under
the QTA for the same reason that equitable tolling is unavailable.

11

WILKINS V. USA

25

Watkins v. U.S. Army, 875 F.2d 699, 707 (9th Cir. 1989) (en
banc).
“[A]ffirmative misconduct” must go beyond “mere
negligence” and “cause a serious injustice.” Id. (quoting
Wagner v. Dir., Fed. Emergency Mgmt. Agency, 847 F.2d
515, 519 (9th Cir. 1988)). “There is no single test for
detecting the presence of affirmative misconduct; each case
must be decided on its own particular facts and
circumstances.” Id. But affirmative misconduct generally
requires “an affirmative misrepresentation or affirmative
concealment of a material fact by the government, although
it does not require that the government intend to mislead a
party.”
Id. (citation omitted).
Instead, affirmative
misconduct includes a “deliberate lie” or “pattern of false
promises.” Mukherjee v. INS, 793 F.2d 1006, 1009 (9th Cir.
1986).
We conclude that the district court did not abuse its
discretion by rejecting Plaintiffs’ equitable estoppel
argument for lack of affirmative misconduct. 12
According to Plaintiffs, the Forest Service and its
officials affirmatively concealed “vital information” from
the landowners even if it did not intend to mislead them.
Specifically, Plaintiffs argue that the government “concealed
that [it] believed any quiet title claim had accrued,” that it
“apparently did not believe its statements that previous maps
The district court declined to consider the remainder of the factors
under the equitable estoppel test because it concluded that there is no
affirmative misconduct here. We do not review the district court’s
rejection of Plaintiffs’ equitable estoppel argument de novo because the
district court addressed it for the first time at summary judgment. Thus,
there is no concern with the district court’s application of the law of the
case doctrine.
12

26

WILKINS V. USA

were confusing,” and “that the agency had no intention of
resolving any dispute without litigation.” Plaintiffs support
their argument with the statement from then-Darby District
Ranger Oliver to Wilkins in 2007 that he could “relax”
because “Robbins Gluch Road[] is slated to be closed” in the
Travel Management Plan. 13 Recall that the Proposed
Scoping Document indicated that there would be no public
motorized vehicle use on a portion of Robbins Gulch Road
in the National Forest.
According to Plaintiffs, they relied on the Forest
Service’s statements (both by Oliver and in the Proposed
Scoping Document) to delay filing this suit. They argue that
“[i]f [they] had not waited over eight years for the Forest
Service to complete the travel management process, and had
not relied on District Ranger Oliver’s statements when Mr.
Wilkins brought up his concerns, they would have filed in
2007, about a year after the 2006 Road Closure Order . . .
and fewer than two years after the final pre-travel
management rule map was published.”
The district court rejected Plaintiffs’ argument that the
Proposed Scoping Document is affirmative misconduct
sufficient to establish equitable estoppel. It determined that
“the travel management notice upon which Plaintiffs rely
proposes only that parts of the road will be closed to
motorized, and not public, access.” It further noted that the
relevant portion of the road (mile 1.5 to mile 3.1) did not
include the Easement.
The district court similarly rejected Plaintiffs’ other
arguments. Regarding Oliver’s statement that Wilkins could
They also rely on Forest Service statements that its historic maps are
ambiguous. As discussed above, we reject this argument.
13

WILKINS V. USA

27

“relax,” the district court determined that “[t]he facts of this
case are readily distinguishable from [a] pervasive pattern of
deception,” and “without more, [it could not] say that
Oliver’s statements—even if true—justify estopping the
Government.” It also concluded that Wilkins had not “acted
diligently to protect his own interests,” and “[h]ad Wilkins
properly consulted the scoping document, he would have
seen that the proposal did not close the entirety of Robbins
Gulch Road to public use.” See Lavin v. Marsh, 644 F.2d
1378, 1384 (9th Cir. 1981) (noting that courts examine
“whether the citizen dealing with the government has acted
diligently to protect his own interests”).
The district court did not abuse its discretion by rejecting
Plaintiffs’ arguments. Perhaps most significantly, the
release of the Proposed Scoping Document and Oliver’s
conversation with Wilkins about that document did not occur
until 2007. As discussed above, there is no genuine dispute
whether Plaintiffs’ claims accrued in the 1970s, meaning
that the limitations period had expired long beforehand. And
as the government argues, although “equitable estoppel can
be used to stop a limitations period from continuing to run
after it has already begun to run,” Socop-Gonzalez v. INS,
272 F.3d 1176, 1184 (9th Cir. 2001), overruled on other
grounds by Smith v. Davis, 953 F.3d 582, 599 (9th Cir. 2020)
(en banc), it cannot be used to restart the limitations period
on a claim that has already expired.
Plaintiffs’ arguments are relevant only if their claims
began to accrue with the May 2006 Closure Order, which is
not supported by the record. And regardless, even if
Plaintiffs’ claim accrued in 2006, there is no genuine dispute
about affirmative misconduct here. There is no evidence of
a deliberate lie or pattern of false promises—by Oliver
specifically or the Forest Service generally—that were

28

WILKINS V. USA

intended to delay a suit by Plaintiffs. There is no evidence
that they were even aware of the risk of a lawsuit by
Plaintiffs in 2007. Wilkins testified that he “started reading
the easement” around 2017, and Stanton testified that she did
not know about the Easement until 2018.
IV. Simultaneous Accrual
Last, Plaintiffs argue that the district court erred by
dismissing their second claim for relief, which sought quiet
title to their property “to confirm and enforce the Forest
Service’s obligations under the 1962 easement for the
Robbins Gulch Road,” as accruing at the same time as their
first claim. The district court dismissed the claim for two
reasons. First, it explained that “[t]o the extent Plaintiffs’
second claim sought to impose an affirmative action duty on
the Forest Service to ‘maintain and patrol’ Robbins Gulch
Road,” that “allegation seem[ed] to take th[e] claim outside
of the QTA.” Second, the district court stated that it
“scoured” Plaintiffs’ complaint but found “no allegation that
the Forest Service failed to ‘patrol’ or ‘maintain’ against any
threat other than public use.”
We hold that the district court did not err by dismissing
the claim. First, as the government argues, Plaintiffs
forfeited this argument by not renewing it on remand.
Second, even if Plaintiffs had not forfeited the argument, the
district court did not err in dismissing the claim. As we
stated in our memorandum disposition, “[a]ll of Appellants’
claims—despite being organized as two separate causes of
action in the complaint—were ultimately premised on the
public’s alleged unauthorized use of the road.” Wilkins,
2021 WL 4200563, at *2. And therefore, “[t]he claims . . .
accrued at the same time—when a reasonable landowner
should have known of the government’s position that its

WILKINS V. USA

29

easement allowed for public use of the road.” Id. The claim
is “premised on patrolling and maintaining the road against
public use and thus . . . accrued at the same time as the public
use claim.” Id. (emphasis in original).
It is illogical to argue that Plaintiffs believed that the
government had a duty to maintain the Easement against
excessive public use while also arguing that they believed
that the Easement did not allow public use at all. While
Plaintiffs argue that their second claim encompasses
“problems beyond mere public use,” including “trespassing,
illegal hunting, speeding and disrespectful activities,” the
complaint is focused on addressing “current ongoing
unrestricted use by the general public.”
CONCLUSION
The district court’s order is AFFIRMED.

