FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
TRADER JOE’S COMPANY, a
California corporation,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

Nos. 24-720, 2826
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-05664HDV-MAR

v.
TRADER JOE’S UNITED,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Hernán D. Vera, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 7, 2025
Pasadena, California
September 8, 2025
Before: Gabriel P. Sanchez and Holly A. Thomas, Circuit
Judges, and James Donato, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Sanchez
The Honorable James Donato, United States District Judge for the
Northern District of California, sitting by designation.

*

2

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

SUMMARY **
Lanham Act / Labor Law
The panel reversed the district court’s dismissal of an
action brought under the Lanham Act by Trader Joe’s Co.
against Trader Joe’s United, a labor union; vacated the
district court’s order awarding attorneys’ fees; and remanded
for further proceedings.
Trader Joe’s alleged that the union sold products that
infringed on Trader Joe’s federal registered trademarks
because they were likely to cause consumer confusion and
dilute the trademarks. The district court disagreed and
granted the union’s motion to dismiss the complaint with
prejudice for failure to state a claim.
Reversing the dismissal of the trademark infringement
claim, panel held that, viewing the allegations in the light
most favorable to Trader Joe’s, the district court erred when
applying the fact-specific likelihood-of-confusion test
articulated in AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341
(9th Cir. 1979). The panel concluded that the strength of the
marks, the relatedness of the parties’ goods, and the
similarity of the marks weighed in favor of Trader Joe’s, and
the other five Sleekcraft factors were neutral. Accordingly,
this was not one of the rare trademark infringement cases in
which there was no plausible likelihood that a reasonably
prudent consumer would be confused about the origin of the
goods allegedly bearing the Trader Joe’s distinctive marks.
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

3

The panel held that the district court erred in dismissing
Trader Joe’s trademark dilution claim under the nominative
fair use doctrine without providing Trader Joe’s an
opportunity to respond or applying the requisite three-factor
test.
The panel also held that the district court prematurely
concluded that the Norris-LaGuardia Act barred it from
granting injunctive relief in this matter without further
development of the record or the parties’ positions. The Act
prohibits courts from issuing injunctions in any case
“involving or growing out of a labor dispute,” but it was not
clear whether the trademark infringement claims and the
nature of the injunctive relief sought by Trader Joe’s related
to or grew out of the parties’ labor dispute.

COUNSEL
Melissa A. Sherry (argued), Latham & Watkins LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Laura Washington, and Jessica S. Bina,
Latham & Watkins LLP, Los Angeles, California; Jennifer
L. Barry, Latham & Watkins LLP, San Diego, California;
for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Sonya Z. Mehta (argued), Siegel Yee Brunner & Mehta,
Oakland, California; Seth L. Goldstein and Retu Singla,
Goldstein & Singla PLLC, New York, New York; Dat Phan,
Kramer Brown Hui LLP, Los Angeles, California; for
Defendant-Appellee.

4

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

OPINION
SANCHEZ, Circuit Judge:
This case lies at the intersection of two federal statutes,
the Norris-LaGuardia Act (“NLGA”), 29 U.S.C. § 101 et
seq., which restricts the power of federal courts to issue
injunctions in labor disputes under certain circumstances,
and the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1051 et seq., which
protects trademark owners against infringement, dilution,
and unfair competition by other parties. Trader Joe’s
Company (“Trader Joe’s”) sued Trader Joe’s United
(“TJU”), a labor union that represents some of its employees,
alleging that TJU sells products that infringe on Trader Joe’s
federally registered trademarks. TJU operates a website
where it markets and sells apparel, mugs, buttons, and
reusable tote bags. Some of TJU’s items allegedly use the
Trader Joe’s trademark, including the distinctive typed word
mark, unique red coloring, capitalized lettering, and similar
style of font. Trader Joe’s contends that TJU’s items are
likely to cause consumer confusion and dilute its trademarks.
The district court disagreed and granted TJU’s motion to
dismiss the complaint with prejudice.
We reverse the dismissal order and vacate TJU’s
attorneys’ fees award. Viewing the allegations in the light
most favorable to Trader Joe’s, the district court erred when
applying the fact-specific likelihood-of-confusion test
articulated in AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341,
348–49 (9th Cir. 1979). The district court further erred in
dismissing Trader Joe’s dilution claim under the nominative
fair use doctrine without providing Trader Joe’s an
opportunity to respond or applying the requisite three-factor
test. Finally, the district court prematurely concluded that

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

5

the NLGA barred it from granting injunctive relief in this
matter without further development of the record or the
parties’ positions. We remand for further proceedings.
I.
Trader Joe’s is a national chain of grocery stores. Trader
Joe’s alleges that it “has continuously used its distinctive
TRADER JOE’S name and trademarks comprised of or
incorporating TRADER JOE’S” in commerce in the United
States since 1967. Many of its marks feature the company’s
red typeface logo,
. The U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office granted Trader Joe’s trademark
registrations in “the typed word mark TRADER JOE’S, the
stylized word mark TRADER JOE’S, and the TRADER
JOE’S (and design) logo.”
Trader Joe’s does not franchise or license the Trader
Joe’s trademarks. In addition to grocery products, Trader
Joe’s sells merchandise at its stores bearing its marks,
including reusable tote bags and other branded goods.
Trader Joe’s alleges that its tote bags “have garnered
tremendous consumer attention and serve as a valuable
source of organic marketing for Trader Joe’s.” Trader Joe’s
tote bags “range from traditional canvas totes to a city-andstate series.” Trader Joe’s Registration Number 5,221,626
specifically covers “merchandise bags” and “[a]ll-purpose
reusable carrying bags” as displayed below.

6

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

TJU is a labor union that represents certain Trader Joe’s
employees. TJU operates a website where it markets and
sells various products for profit, including apparel, mugs,
buttons, and reusable tote bags. Trader Joe’s alleges that
certain TJU products “use the TRADER JOE’S typed word
mark and stylized word mark, the unique Trader Joe’s
typeface and red coloring, and/or the concentric circle design
and general composition of the registered TRADER JOE’S
logo.” TJU’s website header itself features a logo that
allegedly uses the distinctive red typeface and concentric
circle design of the Trader Joe’s logo.

TJU allegedly began using the Trader Joe’s marks in
commerce in June 2023 in connection with merchandise sold
on its website. For example, Trader Joe’s alleges that TJU
“affixe[d] its infringing product designs to reusable carrying
bags,” showing a side-by-side comparison of Trader Joe’s
and TJU’s tote bags in the complaint. Trader Joe’s alleges

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

7

that it never authorized TJU to use its intellectual property
to advertise and sell merchandise.

On June 27, 2023, Trader Joe’s sent TJU a cease-anddesist letter requesting that it stop any further sales of its
infringing products on TJU’s website. TJU responded that
it would not do so and claimed that the company’s assertion
of Lanham Act violations constituted retaliation against its
unionization efforts. On July 5, 2023, Trader Joe’s reiterated
its demand that TJU cease selling its infringing products and
denied TJU’s retaliation claims. In its demand letter, Trader
Joe’s noted that it “has not taken issue with [TJU]’s
reference to Trader Joe’s for the purpose of identifying the
union or discussing the union’s cause; rather, Trader Joe’s
demand is directed solely at [TJU]’s commercial use of
Trader Joe’s trademarks on merchandise sold to consumers
on [TJU]’s commercial website.” TJU refused to comply.
Trader Joe’s sued TJU in July 2023, asserting claims of
trademark infringement under 15 U.S.C. §§ 1114–1118,
1125; unfair competition, false association, and false

8

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

designation of origin under 15 U.S.C. § 1125(a); trademark
dilution under 15 U.S.C. § 1125(c); unfair competition under
California Business and Professions Code § 17200; and
common law trademark infringement. The complaint
alleged that TJU’s “unauthorized use of Trader Joe’s
valuable trademarks on merchandise sold to the general
public is irreparably harming and, unless enjoined, will
continue to irreparably harm, Trader Joe’s and its
trademarks, business, reputation, and goodwill.” The
complaint asserted that Trader Joe’s does not demand that
TJU “stop using the phrase ‘Trader Joe’s’ for the purpose of
identifying Trader Joe’s or communicating [TJU]’s message
or using the phrase ‘Trader Joe’s United’ for the purpose of
identifying [TJU] or communicating its message.” Rather,
Trader Joe’s sought to permanently enjoin TJU from using
Trader Joe’s trademarks in connection with the sale of
commercial merchandise on the union’s website. Trader
Joe’s further sought the destruction of all infringing
merchandise and the recovery of damages.
TJU moved to dismiss the complaint, arguing that Trader
Joe’s filed its trademark infringement complaint in
retaliation over an ongoing labor dispute. TJU pointed out
that Trader Joe’s filed its complaint against the union six
days after the National Labor Relations Board issued a
consolidated complaint against Trader Joe’s for unlawful
labor practices. TJU asserted that there is no plausible
likelihood that a consumer would believe that the products
sold on TJU’s website are sponsored, endorsed, or approved
by Trader Joe’s, and that the NLGA deprived the district
court of jurisdiction to enter injunctive relief of any kind in
this matter.
The district court agreed with TJU, finding that there was
no plausible likelihood of confusion to support the

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

9

complaint’s assertions of trademark infringement and unfair
competition.
Applying the Sleekcraft likelihood-ofconfusion factors, the district court noted several differences
between Trader Joe’s and TJU’s marks and observed that
Trader Joe’s does not sell many of the products sold on
TJU’s website, including buttons, t-shirts, and mugs. The
district court also concluded that a reasonable consumer was
unlikely to be confused about the origin of these products
because TJU’s website clearly identifies itself as a website
of a labor union and is openly critical of Trader Joe’s labor
practices.
Finally, the district court held that the NLGA deprived it
of jurisdiction to enter injunctive relief of any kind, finding
that Trader Joe’s lawsuit grew out of an existing nationwide
labor dispute. In doing so, the district court relied in part on
out-of-circuit decisions involving employer trademark
infringement suits against labor unions which had used the
employers’ names in organizational efforts. The district
court granted TJU’s motion to dismiss the complaint and
denied leave to amend. TJU then moved for attorneys’ fees,
asserting that Trader Joe’s complaint was frivolous and
improperly motivated. The district court granted TJU’s
motion in part, awarding $112,622.12 in attorneys’ fees.
Trader Joe’s timely appealed both orders.
II.
We review de novo the district court’s dismissal under
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), taking “all wellpleaded factual allegations in the complaint as true” and
“construing them in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party.” Abcarian v. Levine, 972 F.3d 1019, 1022
(9th Cir. 2020) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). In reviewing a Rule 12(b)(6) dismissal, “we may

10

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

consider only the complaint, materials incorporated into the
complaint by reference, and matters of which the court may
take judicial notice.” Id. (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted). “The decision to take judicial notice
and/or incorporate documents by reference is reviewed for
an abuse of discretion.” Khoja v. Orexigen Therapeutics,
Inc., 899 F.3d 988, 998 (9th Cir. 2018). “[O]ur review of the
district court’s decision on fees awarded under the Lanham
Act is for abuse of discretion.” SunEarth, Inc. v. Sun Earth
Solar Power Co., 839 F.3d 1179, 1181 (9th Cir. 2016) (en
banc) (per curiam).
III.
A.
To prevail on its trademark infringement claim, Trader
Joe’s must establish “(1) that it has a protectible ownership
interest in the mark; and (2) that the defendant’s use of the
mark is likely to cause consumer confusion.” Lerner &
Rowe PC v. Brown Engstrand & Shely LLC, 119 F.4th 711,
718 (9th Cir. 2024) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). In determining “whether a ‘reasonably prudent
consumer’ in the marketplace is likely to be confused as to
the origin of” the defendant’s products, we consider the eight
factors set forth in our decision in Sleekcraft:
(1) strength of the mark; (2) proximity of the
goods; (3) similarity of the marks;
(4) evidence
of
actual
confusion;
(5) marketing channels used; (6) type of
goods and the degree of care likely to be
exercised by the purchaser; (7) defendant’s
intent in selecting the mark; and

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

11

(8) likelihood of expansion of the product
lines.
Punchbowl, Inc. v. AJ Press, LLC, 90 F.4th 1022, 1027 (9th
Cir. 2024) (first quoting Dreamwerks Prod. Grp., Inc. v.
SKG Studio, 142 F.3d 1127, 1129 (9th Cir. 1998); and then
quoting Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348–49).
“[B]ecause a ‘careful assessment of the pertinent factors
that go into determining likelihood of confusion usually
requires a full record,’” dismissal of trademark disputes at
the pleading stage is generally disfavored. See Yuga Labs,
Inc. v. Ripps, 144 F.4th 1137, 1167 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting
Thane Int’l, Inc. v. Trek Bicycle Corp., 305 F.3d 894, 901–
02 (9th Cir. 2002)). Indeed, we have often observed that
many trademark infringement suits are not suitable for
resolution even on summary judgment. See, e.g., AuTomotive Gold, Inc. v. Volkswagen of Am., Inc., 457 F.3d
1062, 1075 (9th Cir. 2006) (“Because the likelihood of
confusion is often a fact-intensive inquiry, courts are
generally reluctant to decide this issue at the summary
judgment stage.”); Rearden LLC v. Rearden Com., Inc., 683
F.3d 1190, 1210 (9th Cir. 2012) (“Given the open-ended
nature of this multi-prong inquiry, it is not surprising that
summary judgment on ‘likelihood of confusion’ grounds is
generally disfavored.”); Multi Time Mach., Inc. v.
Amazon.com, Inc., 804 F.3d 930, 939 (9th Cir. 2015) (“The
likelihood of confusion is often a question of fact.”); Yuga
Labs, 144 F.4th at 1174 (“[G]iven the nature of this inquiry,
summary judgment on likelihood of confusion grounds is
generally disfavored.” (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted)).

12

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

1. Strength of the Mark
The first factor we consider is the “strength of [Trader
Joe’s] mark.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. “The stronger a
mark—meaning the more likely it is to be remembered and
associated in the public mind with the mark’s owner—the
greater the protection it is accorded by the trademark laws.”
Network Automation, Inc. v. Advanced Sys. Concepts, Inc.,
638 F.3d 1137, 1149 (9th Cir. 2011) (quoting Brookfield
Commc’ns, Inc. v. W. Coast Ent. Corp., 174 F.3d 1036, 1058
(9th Cir. 1999)). Here, the district court correctly found, and
TJU does not dispute, that Trader Joe’s mark is strong. 1 This
factor thus weighs strongly in favor of Trader Joe’s. Acad.
of Motion Picture Arts & Scis. v. Creative House
Promotions, Inc., 944 F.2d 1446, 1455 (9th Cir. 1991) (“A
strong mark is ‘afforded the widest ambit of protection from
infringing uses.’” (citation omitted)).
2. Proximity or Relatedness of the Goods
The second factor we consider is the “proximity of the
goods.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. “Related goods are
generally more likely than unrelated goods to confuse the
public as to the producers of the goods. [T]he danger
presented is that the public will mistakenly assume there is
an association between the producers of the related goods,
though no such association exists.” Network Automation,
638 F.3d at 1150 (citations omitted). “The proximity of
goods is measured by whether the products are:
1
The parties agree that Trader Joe’s “has a protectible ownership
interest in the mark.” Lerner & Rowe, 119 F.4th at 718 (quoting Network
Automation, 638 F.3d at 1144). Trader Joe’s has established through its
federal trademark registrations that it owns valid trademarks and has the
exclusive right to use those marks. See Applied Info. Scis. Corp. v. eBay,
Inc., 511 F.3d 966, 969–70 (9th Cir. 2007).

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

13

(1) complementary; (2) sold to the same class of purchasers;
and (3) similar in use and function.” Id. A plaintiff “need
not establish that the parties are direct competitors to satisfy
the proximity or relatedness factor.” Ironhawk Techs., Inc.
v. Dropbox, Inc., 2 F.4th 1150, 1163 (9th Cir. 2021) (quoting
Rearden, 683 F.3d at 1212). This inquiry instead turns “on
whether the consuming public is likely somehow to
associate” each party’s products. Fortune Dynamic, Inc. v.
Victoria’s Secret Stores Brand Mgmt., Inc., 618 F.3d 1025,
1035 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting Brookfield Commc’ns, 174
F.3d at 1056).
Trader Joe’s alleges that it offers various merchandise in
addition to grocery products, including reusable tote bags
and other branded goods. Trader Joe’s tote bags “range from
traditional canvas totes to a city-and-state series that Trader
Joe’s enthusiasts are known to collect.” Meanwhile, TJU
sells only non-grocery products, including apparel, mugs,
buttons, and reusable tote bags.
The district court found that the reusable tote bag is the
only product currently sold by both parties. But we have
held that the “basic premise—that a trademark provides
protection only when the defendant uses the mark on directly
competing goods—is no longer good law.” Halicki Films,
LLC v. Sanderson Sales & Mktg., 547 F.3d 1213, 1228 (9th
Cir. 2008) (citation omitted). Rather, the “core question in
noncompetitive goods cases, as in most trademark
infringement cases, is whether customers are likely to be
confused about the source or sponsorship of the products.”
Id. (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). Here, the
district court erred in taking too narrow of an approach by
focusing solely on reusable tote bags, rather than considering
a broader category of similar non-grocery goods. While
Trader Joe’s may not currently sell t-shirts or mugs, such

14

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

items are sufficiently complementary in nature to tote bags
that consumers may nevertheless be confused about the
source or sponsorship of these products if they are labeled
with a mark similar to Trader Joe’s. Even if we confined our
analysis to the parties’ tote bags, these products are clearly
related and identical in use and function. The tote bags target
the same class of purchasers—the general public. And
according to Trader Joe’s complaint, its tote bags “have
garnered tremendous consumer attention and serve as a
valuable source of organic marketing.” Viewing the
allegations in the light most favorable to Trader Joe’s, the
proximity of the goods weighs in favor of a likelihood of
confusion.
In finding that this factor weighed against a likelihood of
confusion, the district court emphasized the context in which
TJU’s products are sold—on the union’s website which is
openly critical of the company’s labor practices. The district
court reasoned that consumers are unlikely to be confused
about the relatedness of the products given that they are
connected to union organization efforts. The district court
noted that “[c]ourts have often found that a labor union’s use
of an employer’s trademark as part of communications about
the employer’s labor practices is unlikely to cause confusion
in context,” citing Silgan Containers LLC v. International
Ass’n of Machinists & Aerospace Workers, No. 18-C-213,
2018 WL 5840766 (E.D. Wis. Nov. 8, 2018); Cintas Corp.
v. Unite Here, 601 F. Supp. 2d 571 (S.D.N.Y. 2009); and
Medieval Times U.S.A., Inc. v. Medieval Times Performers
United, 695 F. Supp. 3d 593 (D.N.J. 2023).
Context does matter, but the district court overlooked a
key distinction in these cases. The cases cited by the district
court dealt not with the merchandizing of consumer goods,
but with a union’s use of its employer’s name for the sole

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

15

purpose of identifying the union and discussing its cause.
See Silgan, 2018 WL 5840766, at *3 (finding that the
union’s use of the employer’s name was “limited solely to
social media platforms in conjunction with its attempt to
organize employees,” and that the union was “not offering a
competing product or service”); Cintas, 601 F. Supp. 2d at
575–80 (finding no likelihood of confusion because the
union’s operation of a website, cintasexposed.org, included
only informational postings and bulletins that incorporated
the employer “CINTAS” name). Here, in contrast, Trader
Joe’s alleges that its “demand is directed solely at [TJU’s]
commercial use of Trader Joe’s trademarks on merchandise
sold to consumers,” including products allegedly bearing
Trader Joe’s unique typeface, red lettering, and concentric
circle design.
3. Similarity of the Marks
The third factor we consider is the “similarity of the
marks.” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348. The similarity factor is
“always important in determining whether a likelihood of
confusion exists because when ‘marks are entirely
dissimilar, there is no likelihood of confusion.’” Pom
Wonderful LLC v. Hubbard, 775 F.3d 1118, 1127 (9th Cir.
2014) (citation omitted). “[A]s the similarities between two
marks increase, so too does the likelihood of confusion.” Id.
The following three principles guide our similarity analysis:
“(1) similarity is best evaluated by appearance, sound, and
meaning; (2) marks should be considered in their entirety
and as they appear in the marketplace; and (3) similarities
weigh more heavily than differences.” Id. at 1127–28. With
these principles in mind, we conclude that this factor weighs
in favor of a likelihood of confusion.

16

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

To begin, Trader Joe’s and TJU’s marks are strikingly
similar. The name “Trader Joe’s” in both parties’ marks uses
capitalized lettering, the same red color and similarly
stylized fonts, and both marks are found within concentric
circles. See id. at 1128–29 (holding that a “stylized second
letter” where “the ‘o’ in ‘POM’ is heartshaped, and the ‘o’
in ‘pom’ has a breve over it” supported the similarity factor).
It is true, as the district court concluded in discounting
the similarity of the marks, that Trader Joe’s “has not taken
issue with [TJU]’s reference to Trader Joe’s for the purpose
of identifying the union or discussing the union’s cause.”
Trader Joe’s appears to recognize that seeking to enjoin a
union from using an employer’s name to identify the union
or to support organizational efforts would be inconsistent
with labor laws. See, e.g., Marriott Corp. v. Great Am. Serv.
Trades Council, 552 F.2d 176, 178–80 (7th Cir. 1977)
(holding that union’s use of “Great America” name on
printed authorization cards and newspaper advertisement
distributed to employees of theme park could not be enjoined
under the NLGA); Senco Prods., Inc. v. Int’l Union of Elec.,
Radio & Mach. Workers, 311 F. Supp. 590, 591–92 (S.D.
Ohio 1970) (holding that injunctive relief was not permitted
when employer contested the use of its name on union
handbills). But TJU’s permissible use of the Trader Joe’s
name for organizational or identification purposes does not
mean that its commercial use of Trader Joe’s marks cannot
be subject to a Lanham Act claim. Indeed, the court in Senco
highlighted this very distinction, noting that “[t]his is not a
case in which the defendant Union is selling a product or
thing or process in the ordinary commercial sense and using
the plaintiff’s name.” 311 F. Supp. at 592. Senco further
observed that “[t]here is room for accommodation between
Lanham and Norris LaGuardia. . . . [I]n a pure ‘commercial

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

17

case’ a union is, of course, subject to a Lanham injunction,
or unfair competition injunction.” Id. at 592 n.2.
TJU argues that its marks are dissimilar because they
“inherently criticize[] Trader Joe’s labor practices and/or
communicate[] the union’s message.” TJU highlights that
its marks include the union’s name, “TRADER JOE’S
UNITED,” with the “social justice image of the raised fist”
holding a neon green boxcutter. But TJU’s argument
requires us to assume that reasonable consumers would
equate the Trader Joe’s mark, when combined with a raised
fist holding a boxcutter, with TJU’s labor protest message,
rather than their concluding that Trader Joe’s itself was
expressing solidarity with social justice causes. Indeed, as
the cases cited in TJU’s brief exemplify, a raised fist can
signify different things. See, e.g., Davis v. Am. Broad. Co.,
No. 22-cv-5944, 2024 WL 1178014, at *18 (S.D.N.Y. Mar.
19, 2024) (stating that “a raised fist in protest is a wellrecognized gesture of solidarity” connected to “theme[s] of
race and Black culture”); Think Rubix, LLC v. Be Woke.
Vote, No. 21-cv-00559, 2022 WL 1750969, at *1 (E.D. Cal.
May 31, 2022) (discussing the image of a raised fist used in
connection with a “WOKE VOTE initiative”). How a
reasonable consumer might interpret the image of a raised
fist holding a boxcutter is a question of fact that cannot be
resolved at the pleading stage. Therefore, despite some
differences between the marks at issue, the similarities
discussed above are sufficient to establish a plausible
likelihood of confusion. See JL Beverage Co., LLC v. Jim
Beam Brands Co., 828 F.3d 1098, 1109–10 (9th Cir. 2016);
Pom Wonderful, 775 F.3d at 1128–30.

18

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

4. Marketing Channels Used
Next, we consider the “marketing channels used” for
Trader Joe’s and TJU’s products. Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at
348.
“Convergent marketing channels increase the
likelihood of confusion.” Network Automation, 638 F.3d at
1151 (citation omitted). “In assessing marketing channel
convergence, courts consider whether the parties’ customer
bases overlap and how the parties advertise and market their
products.” Pom Wonderful, 775 F.3d at 1130. The
complaint alleges that TJU markets and sells its products
online via its website. Trader Joe’s promotes its products
and services online, but it sells products only in stores. The
district court concluded that “the point of sale is most
relevant on these particular facts” because “[c]onsumers
only encounter the Union’s products in the context of its
website, which is steeped in the language of labor activism.”
Trader Joe’s argues that the district court erred when it
failed to consider initial interest confusion. We have held
that consumers may be initially confused through an
infringer’s online advertising. See Dr. Seuss Enters., L.P. v.
Penguin Books USA, Inc., 109 F.3d 1394, 1405 (9th Cir.
1997) (holding that the use of another’s trademark “to
capture initial consumer attention, even though no actual
sale is finally completed as a result of the confusion, may be
still an infringement”). Under an initial interest theory,
consumers searching “Trader Joe’s tote bags” online could
be diverted to TJU’s merchandise website such that TJU
improperly benefits from the goodwill that Trader Joe’s has
developed in its marks. On the other hand, we have also
observed that “[t]oday, it would be the rare commercial
retailer that did not advertise online, and the shared use of a
ubiquitous marketing channel does not shed much light on
the likelihood of consumer confusion.” Lerner & Rowe, 119

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

19

F.4th at 725–26 (citation omitted). Given these competing
possibilities, we conclude that this factor is neutral.
5. Type of Goods and the Degree of Care Exercised
When Purchasing
Next, we consider the “type of goods and the degree of
care likely to be exercised by the purchaser.” Sleekcraft, 599
F.2d at 348. “In analyzing the degree of care that a consumer
might exercise in purchasing the parties’ goods, the question
is whether a ‘reasonably prudent consumer’ would take the
time to distinguish between the two product lines.”
Surfvivor Media, Inc. v. Survivor Prods., 406 F.3d 625, 634
(9th Cir. 2005) (quoting Brookfield Commc’ns, 174 F.3d at
1060). “Low consumer care . . . increases the likelihood of
confusion.” Playboy Enters., Inc. v. Netscape Commc’ns
Corp., 354 F.3d 1020, 1028 (9th Cir. 2004). We have
previously held that “[u]nlike purchasers of expensive
goods—whom we expect to be more discerning and less
easily confused—purchasers of inexpensive goods ‘are
likely to exercise less care, thus making confusion more
likely.’” Pom Wonderful, 775 F.3d at 1127 (quoting
Brookfield Commc’ns, 174 F.3d at 1060).
While the complaint alleges that Trader Joe’s products
are “affordable,” it does not allege the actual price of its
products or TJU’s products. “With respect to small,
inexpensive goods,” like buttons, “the consumer is likely to
exercise very little care.” Surfvivor Media, 406 F.3d at 634.
However, “[n]o clear standard exists for analyzing
moderately priced goods, such as non-designer clothing.”
Id. The district court noted that TJU’s website sells
moderately priced goods, such as mugs sold for $20, t-shirts

20

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

for $32, tote bags for $32, and sweatshirts for $60. 2 Given
that TJU sells moderately priced goods and Trader Joe’s
allegedly sells “affordable” products, it is unclear from the
pleadings whether consumers would exercise little or
significant care when purchasing products from TJU’s
website. See id. (holding that the “‘degree of consumer care’
factor does not favor either party” with respect to moderately
priced goods such as clothing).
The district court concluded that a reasonable consumer
exercising ordinary caution would not be confused.
Specifically, the district court found that, upon encountering
TJU’s website, users would click several buttons before
purchasing merchandise, learning about the union in the
interim and obviating any risk that they would believe they
were purchasing products from Trader Joe’s. But Trader
Joe’s is correct that it is simply too early to know at the
pleading stage how consumers will purchase TJU’s tote bags
online. While some consumers might purchase a TJU tote
bag after navigating through the “About Us” page on TJU’s
website, others might purchase a tote bag without ever
accessing the “About Us” page. Given the paucity of
information we have at the pleading stage, this factor weighs
neither in favor of nor against a likelihood of confusion.

2
The district court appropriately considered TJU’s website under the
doctrine of incorporation by reference, as Trader Joe’s extensively
referenced TJU’s website throughout its complaint. See Khoja, 899 F.3d
at 1005; see also Knievel v. ESPN, 393 F.3d 1068, 1076 (9th Cir. 2005)
(“The rationale of the ‘incorporation by reference’ doctrine applies with
equal force to internet pages as it does to printed material.”).

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

21

6. Actual Confusion, Intent, and Likelihood of Product
Expansion
We have repeatedly held that the remaining three
factors—“evidence of actual confusion,” “defendant’s intent
in selecting the mark,” and “likelihood of expansion of the
product lines,” Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348–49—are not
necessary to find a likelihood of confusion. See Network
Automation, 638 F.3d at 1151 (“[A]ctual confusion is not
necessary to a finding of likelihood of confusion under the
Lanham Act.” (citation omitted)); Pom Wonderful, 775 F.3d
at 1131 (“[E]vidence of the defendant’s intent to confuse
customers or of product expansion is not required for a
finding of likelihood of confusion.”). Here, Trader Joe’s
failed to plausibly allege actual confusion between its
products and TJU’s products, TJU’s intent to deceive, or
either party’s plans to expand their products into new
markets. Therefore, the district court properly found that
these remaining factors were neutral.
*

*

*

Construing the allegations in the light most favorable to
Trader Joe’s, we conclude that three Sleekcraft factors weigh
in favor of Trader Joe’s (strength of mark, relatedness of
goods, and similarity of marks), and five factors are neutral
(marketing channel convergence, degree of care used when
purchasing, actual confusion, defendant’s intent, and
product expansion). This is not one of the rare trademark
infringement cases in which there is no plausible likelihood
that a reasonably prudent consumer would be confused about
the origin of the goods allegedly bearing the Trader Joe’s

22

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

distinctive marks. We therefore reverse the district court’s
dismissal of Trader Joe’s trademark infringement claim. 3
B.
“[T]he Lanham Act creates a cause of action for the
dilution of famous marks, which can succeed without
likelihood of confusion.” Jack Daniel’s Props., Inc. v. VIP
Prods. LLC, 599 U.S. 140, 147 (2023). “Dilution occurs
when consumers form new and different associations with
the plaintiff’s mark.” Visa Int’l Serv. Ass’n v. JSL Corp.,
610 F.3d 1088, 1090 (9th Cir. 2010). To plead a trademark
dilution claim, Trader Joe’s must show that “(1) the mark is
famous and distinctive; (2) the defendant is making use of
the mark in commerce; (3) the defendant’s use began after
the mark became famous; and (4) the defendant’s use of the
mark is likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by
tarnishment.” adidas Am., Inc. v. Skechers USA, Inc., 890
F.3d 747, 758 (9th Cir. 2018) (citation omitted).
Trader Joe’s asserts a dilution by blurring theory, in
which the relevant inquiry is “whether the ‘association
arising from the similarity between a mark or trade name and
a famous mark . . . impairs the distinctiveness of the famous
mark.’” Jada Toys, Inc. v. Mattel, Inc., 518 F.3d 628, 635
(9th Cir. 2008) (citation omitted). Courts “may consider all
relevant factors in making this determination,” including the
factors specified in the Lanham Act. Id. at 635–36 (citing
factors); see also adidas Am., 890 F.3d at 758–59.
Because Trader Joe’s claims under § 43(a) of the Lanham Act and
California unfair competition and trademark infringement laws are
“substantially congruent” with its Lanham Act trademark infringement
claim, we reverse the district court’s dismissal of these claims as well.
See Cleary v. News Corp., 30 F.3d 1255, 1262–63 (9th Cir. 1994);
Brookfield Commc’ns, 174 F.3d at 1046.

3

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

23

Here, the district court did not analyze Trader Joe’s
dilution claim under the four factors outlined above because
it found that TJU’s use of the Trader Joe’s mark constituted
nominative fair use. But TJU never raised the nominative
fair use defense in its briefing before the district court. “In
our adversarial system of adjudication, we follow the
principle of party presentation.” United States v. SinenengSmith, 590 U.S. 371, 375 (2020). “That is, we rely on the
parties to frame the issues for decision and assign to courts
the role of neutral arbiter of matters the parties present.”
Greenlaw v. United States, 554 U.S. 237, 243 (2008). This
rule “avoids the potential for prejudice to parties who might
otherwise find themselves losing a case on the basis of an
argument to which they had no chance to respond.” United
States v. Yates, 16 F.4th 256, 270–71 (9th Cir. 2021). In the
context of trademark dilution claims, we have observed that
the nominative fair use defense applies “[i]n cases in which
the defendant raises a nominative use defense.” Playboy
Enters., Inc. v. Welles, 279 F.3d 796, 801 (9th Cir. 2002)
(concluding that when nominative fair use is asserted, the
three-factor test should replace the Sleekcraft likelihood-ofconfusion factors).
Because TJU never asserted a
nominative fair use defense below, the district court erred in
dismissing Trader Joe’s dilution claim on this ground. 4
IV.
In 1932, Congress passed the NLGA prohibiting courts
from issuing injunctions in any case “involving or growing
out of a labor dispute.” 29 U.S.C. § 101; Jacksonville Bulk
Even if TJU had asserted a nominative fair use defense, the district
court was required to apply the three-factor nominative fair use test
established in New Kids on the Block v. News America Publishing, Inc.,
971 F.2d 302 (9th Cir. 1992).
4

24

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

Terminals, Inc. v. Int’l Longshoremen’s Ass’n, 457 U.S. 702,
711–12 (1982). The NLGA defines a labor dispute as “any
controversy concerning terms or conditions of employment,
or concerning the association or representation of persons in
negotiating, fixing, maintaining, changing, or seeking to
arrange terms or conditions of employment.” 29 U.S.C.
§ 113(c). The NLGA lists nine specific acts over which
federal courts have no jurisdiction to enjoin. Id. § 104.
Before ruling on TJU’s motion to dismiss, the district
court took judicial notice of the fact that in 2022, employees
at multiple Trader Joe’s stores across the nation held union
elections which resulted in the certification of TJU as the
representative. The district court also took judicial notice of
the consolidated complaint issued by the National Labor
Relations Board on July 7, 2023, against Trader Joe’s for
unfair labor practices. Six days later, Trader Joe’s filed the
instant complaint. Based on these judicially noticed facts
and sequence of events, the district court concluded that this
case involved or grew out of a labor dispute within the
meaning of 29 U.S.C. § 104, and that it was therefore
divested of jurisdiction to issue injunctive relief of any kind
under the NLGA.
It was premature for the district court to reach this
conclusion at this early stage of the litigation. Neither party
has moved for preliminary injunctive relief and Trader Joe’s
has yet to establish its entitlement to such relief by prevailing
on any of its claims. As a result, no record has been
developed to establish whether the trademark infringement
claims and the nature of the injunctive relief sought by
Trader Joe’s relate to or grow out of the parties’ labor
dispute. As the Supreme Court explains, “[t]he critical
element” in determining whether the NLGA applies “is
whether ‘the employer-employee relationship [is] the matrix

TRADER JOE’S COMPANY V. TRADER JOES UNITED

25

of the controversy.’” Jacksonville Bulk Terminals, 457 U.S.
at 712–13 (citation omitted). The parties dispute the
significance of the timing of Trader Joe’s lawsuit and its
earlier demand letter to TJU; these disagreements
underscore that such issues are not capable of resolution at
the pleading stage. 5 We therefore vacate the district court’s
holding that it lacks jurisdiction to enter injunctive relief in
this matter and remand for further proceedings.
REVERSED, VACATED, and REMANDED. 6

Evaluation of whether the NLGA categorically bars injunctive relief
under § 104 would also involve analysis of issues such as which of the
nine enumerated acts under § 104 applies here, and whether the NLGA
applies in the context of a labor union’s alleged infringement of an
employer’s trademarks to sell commercial products to the general public.
These matters, too, are incapable of resolution at the pleading stage here.
5

Because we reverse the district court’s order granting TJU’s motion to
dismiss, we also vacate the order awarding attorneys’ fees to TJU.

6

