FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
SUPERTECH, INC.,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 24-2110
D.C. No.
1:23-cv-00002

v.
MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the District of Northern Mariana Islands
Ramona V. Manglona, Chief District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 6, 2025
Honolulu, Hawaii
Filed October 23, 2025
Before: William A. Fletcher, Morgan B. Christen, and
Roopali H. Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge W. Fletcher

2

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

SUMMARY*
Personal Jurisdiction
The panel reversed the district court’s order dismissing
for lack of personal jurisdiction an action brought by
SuperTECH, Inc. alleging that My Choice Software, LLC
failed to provide Microsoft software conforming to the
requirements of its bid for a contract with the Department of
Finance of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana
Islands.
Relying on a now-vacated three-judge panel decision in
Briskin v. Shopify, Inc., 87 F.4th 404 (9th Cir. 2023),
vacated, 101 F.4th 706 (9th Cir. 2024), the district court
concluded it lacked in personam jurisdiction over My
Choice. The decision of the three-judge panel was replaced
by the en banc decision in Briskin v. Shopify, Inc. (Briskin),
135 F.4th 739 (9th Cir. 2025) (en banc).
Applying the analysis provided in the en banc decision
in Briskin and in the three-judge panel decision in
Schwarzenegger v. Fred Martin Motor Co., 374 F.3d 797
(9th Cir. 2004), the panel held that SuperTECH alleged facts
sufficient to establish specific jurisdiction over My Choice
in the CNMI. First, My Choice was subject to personal
jurisdiction under either a purposeful availment or
purposeful direction analysis. My Choice purposefully
availed itself of the privilege of doing business in the CNMI,
and intentionally directed its communications and other
actions toward the CNMI. Second, neither party contended
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

3

that SuperTECH’s claims against My Choice did not arise
out of My Choice’s contracts with the CNMI. Third, My
Choice did not demonstrate that the exercise of specific
personal jurisdiction would be unfair or unjust.

COUNSEL
Michael W. Dotts (argued), Dotts Law Office, Saipan,
Northern Mariana Islands, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Richard C. Miller (argued) and Cong Nie, Banes Horey Nie
& Miller LLC, Saipan, Northern Mariana Islands, for
Defendant-Appellee.

4

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

OPINION
W. FLETCHER, Circuit Judge:
Appellant SuperTECH, Inc. (“SuperTECH”) offers
computer and networking services to customers in the
Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (“CNMI”).
Appellee My Choice Software, LLC (“My Choice”) is a
California-based distributor of Microsoft products. In this
suit, SuperTECH claims that My Choice failed to provide
Microsoft software conforming to the requirements of its bid
for a contract with the CNMI’s Department of Finance
(“DOF”).
Relying on a then-binding but subsequently vacated
decision of our court, the district court granted My Choice’s
motion to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction. We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We reverse.
I. Background
SuperTECH is a corporation incorporated in the CNMI
with its principal place of business in the CNMI. My Choice
is a limited liability company organized in California with
its principal place of business in California. We adopt
SuperTECH’s version of the facts for the purposes of this
appeal. See Schwarzenegger v. Fred Martin Motor Co., 374
F.3d 797, 800 (9th Cir. 2004).
My Choice is an “official distributor of Microsoft
Corporation” software. In an average year, My Choice
handles between 60,000 and 70,000 orders for software. An
overwhelming majority of those orders is placed online
through My Choice’s website. A customer placing an order
through the website agrees to a forum-selection clause. That
clause provides that should an “action or proceeding” arise

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

5

from the customer’s transaction, that action “must be
brought in the state or federal courts of California.” Terms
and
Conditions,
My
Choice
Software,
https://www.mychoicesoftware.com/pages/terms-andconditions (last visited July 17, 2025). However, as will be
detailed below, some orders, including the order at issue in
this case, were not placed through My Choice’s website and
were not subject to My Choice’s forum selection clause.
My Choice’s sales to the CNMI constitute “less than 1%
of the aggregate gross sales and profits generated from all
orders.” Because of its relatively few sales in the CNMI, My
Choice “has never had any manager, employee, agent,
office, or bank account” in the CNMI, nor “any CNMI
business license.” My Choice has “never advertised or
solicited business in any media, such as a local newspaper or
the CNMI phone book, within the CNMI.” My Choice’s
“website is not designed specifically to target potential
customers located in the CNMI or to promote business in the
CNMI,” but instead “is accessible to the general public all
over the world if they have internet access.”
Between 2015 and the filing of this suit, My Choice
received 194 orders from individuals or businesses in the
CNMI. Of those 194 orders, all but seven were placed
through My Choice’s website. Of the seven orders not
placed through the website, six were placed by SuperTECH.
SuperTECH’s first transaction with My Choice was in 2019.
While some of SuperTECH’s purchases from My Choice
were small, some—such as a January 5, 2021, software
purchase of $174,078.48—were quite large.
In February of 2022, the CMNI’s DOF began seeking
bids from companies able to obtain Microsoft 365 licensing.
On March 10, 2022, SuperTECH’s president, Marcelo V.

6

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

Masilungan, contacted My Choice by email. Masilungan
asked if My Choice would “please provide [him] a quote”
and attached a screenshot of DOF’s specifications. On
March 12, My Choice employee Gabe Magana asked
Masilungan for the “end user information” for the
transaction—in other words, the identity of the party who
would ultimately use the Microsoft product. Masilungan
replied that the end user was “the same as before. . . .
[R]emember the big purchase [SuperTECH] did[?]”
Magana confirmed and stated that he “wanted to make sure
it was for the same client.”
On March 19, Magana sent a quote to SuperTECH. On
March 25, Masilungan replied and asked, “[C]an [Magana]
make sure that [My Choice] meet[s] the 100%
specification?” Magana replied, stating that he “made sure
with [the] Microsoft team that [the quote] meets all
requirements [SuperTECH] need[s] in the quote request.”
Masilungan stated in a declaration that “[t]here were several
zoom meetings with Magana and the Microsoft Team where
[Masilungan] was assured that the product that [My Choice
was] providing conformed to [DOF’s] specifications.”
SuperTECH submitted its bid in April. The CNMI
government accepted the bid in May and authorized
SuperTECH to purchase the software. On May 25,
SuperTECH sent My Choice $844,800 via wire transfer as
payment for the software. My Choice then delivered the
software directly to DOF.
The software did not conform to DOF’s specifications.
As a result, DOF told SuperTECH that it wanted to cancel
its contract. SuperTECH then told My Choice that the
delivered software was not satisfactory. In response, My
Choice sent SuperTECH an updated quote for software that

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

7

met the agreed-upon specifications. That quote included an
additional $500,000 charge. SuperTECH sent DOF the new
quote from My Choice. The new quote was unacceptable to
the CNMI government. DOF canceled its contract with
SuperTECH and requested a refund from SuperTECH.
SuperTECH then requested a refund from My Choice. In
response, My Choice stated that it would refund
SuperTECH’s payment of $ 844,500 but would charge a
15% cancellation fee. SuperTECH objected to the additional
fee.
On January 20, 2023, SuperTECH filed suit against My
Choice in the District Court for the Northern Mariana
Islands. The operative complaint alleges fraud, breach of
contract, promissory estoppel, and unjust enrichment. On
April 20, 2023, My Choice moved to dismiss for lack of
personal jurisdiction, improper venue, and failure to state a
claim.
On March 8, 2024, the district court dismissed the case
for lack of personal jurisdiction. Relying on our nowvacated three-judge panel decision in Briskin v. Shopify, Inc.,
87 F.4th 404 (9th Cir. 2023), vacated, 101 F.4th 706 (9th
Cir. 2024), the court concluded that it lacked in personam
jurisdiction over My Choice. The decision of the three-judge
panel has now been replaced by an en banc decision. Briskin
v. Shopify, Inc. (Briskin), 135 F.4th 739 (9th Cir. 2025) (en
banc).
SuperTECH timely appealed. We reverse.
II. Standard of Review
“We review de novo a district court’s dismissal for lack
of personal jurisdiction.” Picot v. Weston, 780 F.3d 1206,
1211 (9th Cir. 2015).

8

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

III. Analysis
“The Due Process Clause protects an individual’s liberty
interest in not being subject to the binding judgments of a
forum with which he has established no meaningful
‘contacts, ties, or relations.’” Burger King Corp. v.
Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 471–72 (1985) (quoting Int’l Shoe
Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 319 (1945)). Because “no
applicable federal statute confers personal jurisdiction upon
the federal district court,” we “apply the law of the
[jurisdiction] in which the district court sits.” Briskin, 135
F.4th at 750. “The CNMI’s long-arm statute ‘subjects both
residents and nonresidents to [personal] jurisdiction to the
fullest extent allowable under the due process standards of
the U.S. Constitution.’” Saipan Air, Inc. v. Stukes, No. 1:12CV-00015, 2013 WL 670026, at *3 (D. N. Mar. I. Feb. 25,
2013) (quoting Bank of Saipan v. Superior Court, 6 N. Mar.
I. 242, 252 (2001) (per curiam)); accord 7 N. Mar. I. Code
§ 1102(e). “For a court to exercise personal jurisdiction over
a nonresident defendant, that defendant must have certain
minimum contacts with [the forum] such that the
maintenance of the suit does not offend traditional notions
of fair play and substantial justice.” Briskin, 135 F.4th at
750 (citation omitted).
The question before us is whether the district court has
specific personal jurisdiction over My Choice. We evaluate
specific personal jurisdiction under a three-part test:
(1) The non-resident defendant must
purposefully direct his activities or
consummate some transaction with the forum
or resident thereof; or perform some act by
which he purposefully avails himself of the
privilege of conducting activities in the

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

9

forum, thereby invoking the benefits and
protections of its laws; (2) the claim must be
one which arises out of or relates to the
defendant’s forum-related activities; and
(3) the exercise of jurisdiction must comport
with fair play and substantial justice, i.e. it
must be reasonable.
Id. at 750–51 (quoting Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802).
We examine each factor in turn.
A. Purposeful Availment or Purposeful Direction
“[T]he first prong of the personal jurisdiction test ‘may
be satisfied by purposeful availment, by purposeful
direction, or by some combination thereof.’” Id. at 751 n.10
(quoting Davis v. Cranfield Aerospace Sols., Ltd., 71 F.4th
1154, 1162 (9th Cir. 2023)).
[A plaintiff] must establish that [the
defendant] either purposefully availed itself
of the privilege of conducting activities in
[the forum state] or purposefully directed its
activities toward [the forum state]. We often
use the phrase “purposeful availment,” in
shorthand fashion, to include both purposeful
availment and purposeful direction, but
availment and direction are, in fact, two
distinct concepts. A purposeful availment
analysis is most often used in suits sounding
in contract. A purposeful direction analysis,

10

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

on the other hand, is most often used in suits
sounding in tort.
Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802 (internal citations
omitted). We conclude that My Choice is subject to personal
jurisdiction under either a purposeful availment or
purposeful direction analysis.
1. Purposeful Availment
To satisfy purposeful availment, “a defendant must have
‘performed some type of affirmative conduct which allows
or promotes the transaction of business within the forum
state.’” Boschetto v. Hansing, 539 F.3d 1011, 1016 (9th Cir.
2008) (citation omitted).
“Our evaluation of the
jurisdictional significance of a defendant’s contract or other
business in the forum is not rigid and formalistic, but rather
practical and pragmatic.” Id. (citation omitted).
My Choice relies on Davis v. Cranfield Aerospace Sols.,
Ltd. to argue against the exercise of personal jurisdiction. In
Davis, we held that “a federal court in Idaho [could not]
exercise personal jurisdiction over an English corporation in
an action brought by plaintiffs from Louisiana and Indiana
for an accident that occurred in Indiana.” 71 F.4th at 1159.
The facts in Davis are substantially different from the case
before us.
Tamarack Aerospace Group, a corporation with its
principal place of business in Idaho, contracted with a British
company, Cranfield Aerospace Solutions, for help in
obtaining certification from the European Aviation Safety
Agency and the Federal Aviation Administration (“FAA”)
for Tamarack’s Active Winglet Load System, which was
installed on existing airplanes. After the system was
approved by the FAA, it was installed on a Cessna aircraft.

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

11

The aircraft crashed in Indiana, killing the pilot and two
passengers. Id. at 1159–60. Representatives of the three
decedents brought suit in Idaho, asserting personal
jurisdiction over Cranfield.
We upheld the district court’s denial of jurisdiction,
concluding that Cranfield had not purposefully availed itself
of the privilege of doing business in Idaho. We wrote:
While Tamarack is an Idaho resident, there[]
[was] no evidence that Cranfield sought out
Tamarack in Idaho or benefitted from
Tamarack’s residence in Idaho. Neither the
contract’s
negotiations,
terms,
nor
contemplated consequences establish that
Cranfield formed a substantial connection
with Idaho. And while the course of dealings
show that Cranfield employees entered Idaho
several times, those transitory trips into the
forum state [did] not sufficiently reflect
purposeful availment.
Id. at 1163. Over a forceful dissent, see id. at 1166 (Baker,
J., dissenting), we held that there was no personal
jurisdiction over Cranfield in Idaho.
The fundamentals of the case before us are very different
from those in Davis. Ours is a much simpler and more
conventional case. A defendant delivered an allegedly
defective product to a plaintiff in a particular forum,
knowing that it was intended for use in that forum.
Specifically, My Choice entered into a contract with a CNMI
company; the contract required that My Choice deliver its
product to the CNMI; and My Choice knew that its product
was intended for use in the CNMI by the CNMI government.

12

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

Under these circumstances, we have no hesitation
concluding that My Choice purposely availed itself of the
privilege of doing business in the CNMI.
2. Purposeful Direction
“[T]he purposeful direction test requires that the
defendant (1) commit an intentional act, that is (2) expressly
aimed at the forum state, and (3) which causes harm that the
defendant knows will be suffered in the forum state.”
Briskin, 135 F.4th at 751 (citing Brayton Purcell LLP v.
Recordon & Recordon, 606 F.3d 1124, 1128 (9th Cir.
2010)).
“Express aiming does not require differential
targeting,” or a forum-specific focus. Id. at 757. Instead, a
defendant “expressly aims” at a forum “when its contacts are
its ‘own choice and not random, isolated, or fortuitous.’” Id.
at 758 (quoting Ford Motor Co. v. Mont. Eighth Jud. Dist.
Ct., 592 U.S. 351, 359 (2021)).
My Choice intentionally directed its communications
and other actions toward the CNMI. See id. at 756 (“[E]ach
of Shopify’s actions in its regular course of business is an
intentional act.”). Its actions were expressly aimed at the
CNMI. My Choice knew SuperTECH was based in the
CNMI, that the software would be used in the CNMI, and
that the transaction was for a product that specifically
conformed to the requirements of the CNMI government.
See id. at 756 & n.12 (finding“[t]hat Shopify allegedly
committed its tortious activity knowing Briskin’s device was
in California” was enough for express targeting); Herbal
Brands, Inc. v. Photoplaza, Inc., 72 F.4th 1085, 1093 n.5
(9th Cir. 2023) (“The conduct purposefully directed at the
forum is the seller’s action of accepting the order and
causing the product to be delivered to the forum.”). The
circumstances of this case make clear that My Choice knew

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

13

that if it breached its obligations under the contract,
SuperTECH would feel that harm in the CNMI. See Briskin,
135 F.4th at 756 (“Shopify knows [that its conduct] will
cause harm to California consumers by violating the very
laws that the California legislature has enacted.”). My
Choice’s arguments to the contrary rely almost exclusively
on the proposition that differential targeting, in which a
company targets one forum more than another, is required
for express aiming. We expressly rejected that contention in
our en banc decision in Briskin. See id. at 757. We therefore
conclude that My Choice purposefully directed its activities
at the CNMI.
B. Arising Out of or Relating to Defendant’s Contacts
Because the district court concluded that My Choice
neither purposefully availed itself of the privilege of doing
business in the CNMI nor purposefully directed its conduct
towards the CNMI, it did not address whether this suit arises
out of or relates to My Choice’s contacts with the CNMI. On
appeal, neither party contends that SuperTECH’s claims
against My Choice did not arise out of My Choice’s contacts
with the CNMI.
C. Fair Play and Substantial Justice
The district court also did not address the factor of fair
play and substantial justice. SuperTECH insists that this
factor leans in favor of specific jurisdiction because the
CNMI has an interest “in providing its residents, such as
SuperTECH, with a convenient forum.” My Choice bears
“[t]he burden . . . to ‘present a compelling case’ that the
exercise of jurisdiction is not reasonable.” Briskin, 135 F.4th
at 760–61 (quoting Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802). My
Choice has not demonstrated that the exercise of specific
personal jurisdiction would be unfair or unjust.

14

SUPERTECH, INC. V. MY CHOICE SOFTWARE, LLC

Conclusion
Applying the analysis provided in our en banc decision
in Briskin and in our three-judge panel decision in
Schwarzenegger, we hold that SuperTECH has alleged facts
sufficient to establish specific jurisdiction over My Choice
in the CNMI. In so holding, we do not fault the district court.
When that court dismissed for want of jurisdiction, it
properly relied on the then-binding decision of our threejudge panel in Briskin. It did not have the benefit of our later
en banc decision in Briskin, in which we repudiated the
analysis of the three-judge panel.
REVERSED.

