FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JOHN DOE; ROBERT ROE,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,

No. 24-2829
D.C. No.
3:23-cv-04413-SI

v.
DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA
AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT;
LUFTHANSA GROUP BUSINESS
SERVICES NEW YORK LLC,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Susan Illston, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 12, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed October 30, 2025
Before: Sidney R. Thomas, William A. Fletcher, and Milan
D. Smith, Jr., Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Sidney R. Thomas
Partial Concurrence and Partial Dissent by Judge M. Smith

2

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

SUMMARY *
Personal Jurisdiction / Diversity Jurisdiction
The panel reversed the district court’s order dismissing
for lack of subject matter jurisdiction an action brought by
John Doe and Robert Roe against Deutsche Lufthansa
Aktiengesellschaft (“Lufthansa”) and Lufthansa Group
Business Services New York LLC (“LGBS”), a Lufthansa
subsidiary that provides IT support to Lufthansa.
Doe and Roe, a married same-sex couple who spent at
least part of each year living together in Saudi Arabia, where
homosexuality is a capital offense, booked tickets through
Lufthansa to travel from Saudi Arabia to San
Francisco. They alleged a breach of contract claim based on
Lufthansa’s contract for carrying Doe and Roe to California,
which included a privacy policy; and several tort claims
based on the disclosure of their marital status.
Lufthansa is based in Germany, but regularly operates
flights in and out of California, has offices at two California
airports, has dozens of employees in California, and has an
agent for service of process in California. LGBS’s sole
member is a corporation, whose principal place of business
is in Oklahoma and whose state of incorporation is
Delaware.
Applying the three-prong minimum contacts test, the
panel held that there is specific personal jurisdiction over
Lufthansa and LGBS in California.
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

3

The first prong was satisfied because Lufthansa
purposefully availed itself of the privilege of doing business
in California. Lufthansa contracted to carry Doe and Roe
into California, and the contract required performance in
California, the forum state. The purposeful direction test
was also satisfied because Lufthansa’s conduct extended
into California.
The second prong was satisfied because Lufthansa’s
forum-related activities arose out of and related to the claims
in this case. Both the breach of contract claim and the tort
claims arose out of and related to the defendants’ California
activities. Lufthansa signed a contract for carriage into
California, and allegedly breached that contract by
disclosing information the contract guaranteed would be
private. The contract for carriage is a but-for cause of the
tort claims.
The third prong—the reasonableness of exercising
jurisdiction—was satisfied. Weighing the seven factors
used to analyze the reasonableness of asserting personal
jurisdiction, the panel held that those factors do not add up
to a compelling case that jurisdiction would be
unreasonable.
The panel also held that the district court had subject
matter jurisdiction over this case because there is diversity
jurisdiction. Accordingly, the panel reversed the district
court’s dismissal and remanded for further proceedings.
Concurring in part and dissenting in part, Judge M.
Smith agreed with the majority’s recitation of the facts and
procedural history, and that there is subject matter
jurisdiction. He therefore joined Parts I and III of the
majority opinion. He dissented because specific personal
jurisdiction is not appropriate here. Even if Plaintiffs have

4

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

satisfied the first of the personal jurisdiction analysis, steps
two and three are not satisfied because Plaintiffs have not
shown that their claims arise out of or relate to Lufthansa’s
forum-related conduct where all the relevant activity
occurred abroad, and the exercise of specific personal
jurisdiction is unreasonable.

COUNSEL
Donald J. Putterman (argued) and Dannielle M. Campbell,
Putterman Yu Wang LLP, San Francisco, California, for
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Ivy L. Nowinski (argued), Scott D. Cunningham, and
Anthony U. Battista, Condon & Forsyth LLP, Los Angeles,
California, for Defendants-Appellees.

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

5

OPINION
S.R. THOMAS, Circuit Judge:
This appeal returns to us after a limited remand to the
district court. We previously determined that we lacked
subject matter jurisdiction because the requisite diversity of
citizenship had not been alleged. We issued a limited
remand to the district court for it to consider whether to allow
an amendment to the removal notice pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 1653.
The district court granted the amendment.
Therefore, we consider the merits of the appeal anew.
Plaintiffs John Doe and Robert Roe appeal from the
dismissal of their case for lack of personal jurisdiction. We
have appellate jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. We
review the district court’s determination that it does not have
personal jurisdiction de novo. Schwarzenegger v. Fred
Martin Motor Co., 374 F.3d 797, 800 (9th Cir. 2004). We
hold that the defendants are subject to specific personal
jurisdiction in California. We also hold that, with the
amended removal notice, we have subject matter jurisdiction
over this case. We reverse and remand.
I
A
We recite the facts as they are alleged in the complaint.
Plaintiffs John Doe and Robert Roe are a same-sex couple.
They have been in a committed relationship for over thirty
years. They were legally married in California in 2013.
Since 1989, they have spent at least part of each year living
together in Saudi Arabia. Because homosexuality is a capital
offense in Saudi Arabia, they have kept their relationship and
sexual orientation hidden this entire time.

6

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

Doe is a United States citizen who lives in California and
spends much of the year working in Saudi Arabia. Roe is a
Saudi Arabian citizen; prior to the events underlying this
lawsuit, he lived in Saudi Arabia and frequently traveled to
California.
Soon after the COVID-19 pandemic started, the United
States stopped allowing non-citizen travelers from Saudi
Arabia into the United States. In May 2021, the United
States re-opened its borders to non-citizens from Saudi
Arabia, but only if they were immediate family members of
United States citizens. Doe and Roe, who had been stuck in
Saudi Arabia for over a year wanted to return to California,
so they booked round-trip tickets to fly to San Francisco,
California.
Doe and Roe booked through defendant Deutsche
Lufthansa Aktiengesellschaft (“Lufthansa”). Lufthansa is
based in Germany, but regularly operates flights in and out
of California. Lufthansa has offices at two California
airports, Los Angeles (“LAX”) and San Francisco (“SFO”);
has dozens of employees in California; and has an agent for
service of process in California.
Doe and Roe chose Lufthansa over alternative airlines
based in the Middle East because they expected that
Lufthansa would be discreet in handling the confirmation of
their marital status for purposes of United States entry
requirements. Lufthansa did not live up to that expectation.
On May 25, 2021, when Doe and Roe arrived at the Riyadh
airport to check in, the Lufthansa check-in agent requested
that Roe identify his familial relationship with a United
States citizen. Roe asked to speak with the most senior
Lufthansa official, Deputy Station Chief Iqbal Jamshed. Roe
then explained to Jamshed, while out of earshot of anyone

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

7

else, that he and Doe were married. Jamshed became loud
and hostile. He declared, loudly enough for others in the
check-in area to hear, that he could not believe Doe and Roe
were married. Doe then approached and showed Jamshed
their marriage certificate, but Jamshed continued to publicly
demean and question Doe and Roe about their relationship.
Jamshed took Doe to Lufthansa’s primary office in the
airport terminal to send copies of Doe and Roe’s passports
and marriage certificate to Lufthansa’s headquarters. Doe
said that he worried the Saudi government might intercept
these electronic communications, but the Lufthansa
employees ignored this concern. Doe asked Jamshed to call
Lufthansa’s Riyadh station chief, but the station chief
refused to speak with Doe.
Just before the flight departed, Doe and Roe were
allowed to board. They had a layover in Frankfurt. On their
first flight, they explained what had happened to a Lufthansa
employee and the captain on board. The employee and
captain assured them that their information would be deleted
from Lufthansa’s computers, and that a Lufthansa agent
would meet them in Frankfurt. No Lufthansa agent met
them.
On their second flight, from Frankfurt to San Francisco,
they again explained what had happened to a Lufthansa
employee on board. The employee assured them that their
information had been deleted. The captain asked for a
Lufthansa agent to meet Doe and Roe at the San Francisco
airport, so they could lodge a complaint. This time, a
Lufthansa agent did meet them, and assured them that an
agent based in New York would call them within the hour.
They never received such a call.

8

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

About a month later, Doe discovered that the marital
status on his Saudi government profile was changed from
“single” to “married.” Doe and Roe allege that “there is no
conceivable way the Saudi Arabian government could have
learned about Plaintiffs’ marriage other than as a result of”
this incident.
Roe believes that the Saudi government also knows
about his marital status and sexual orientation. He has not
returned to Saudi Arabia since this flight, for fear of harsh
penalties for being homosexual, including the revocation of
his passport, imprisonment, and even execution. Instead, he
has remained in the United States—through a visa and then
a green card—since arriving in California. He has not seen
his family, who all live in Saudi Arabia and who do not know
about his sexuality, since the flight. Among other financial
losses, Roe had to quickly sell real estate he manages in
Saudi Arabia, incurring a loss of around $300,000. He has
also developed pulmonary fibrosis, a terminal illness, which
appears to be a result of the stress from the incident.
B
Doe and Roe sued Lufthansa and Lufthansa Group
Business Services New York LLC (“LGBS”), a Lufthansa
subsidiary that provides IT services to Lufthansa, in
California state court. They alleged a breach of contract
claim and several tort claims: public disclosure of private
facts, intentional infliction of emotional distress, negligent
infliction of emotional distress, and loss of consortium. The
breach of contract claim was based on Lufthansa’s contract
for carrying Doe and Roe to California, which included a
privacy policy that promises customers’ information, if
transmitted, will be transmitted securely to the intended

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

9

recipient. Each of the tort claims was based on the disclosure
of Doe and Roe’s marital status.
Lufthansa and LGBS removed to federal district court,
asserting both diversity jurisdiction and federal question
jurisdiction. Neither the district court, nor either of the
parties below, discussed subject matter jurisdiction after the
removal notice. The district court ultimately dismissed the
case for lack of personal jurisdiction. Doe and Roe appealed.
We requested supplemental briefing on subject matter
jurisdiction. Lufthansa and LGBS submitted a supplemental
brief and then a motion to supplement the record, which both
indicated that LGBS had different membership than
Lufthansa claimed in the removal notice. At that point, the
record contained conflicting information about who LGBS’s
sole member is, which is important for determining LGBS’s
citizenship for the purposes of diversity jurisdiction.
Voltage Pictures, LLC v. Gussi, S.A. de C.V., 92 F.4th 815,
822 (9th Cir. 2024) (“A limited liability company is a citizen
of every state of which its owners/members are citizens, not
the state in which it was formed or does business.” (quoting
NewGen, LLC v. Safe Cig, LLC, 840 F.3d 606, 612 (9th Cir.
2016))), cert. denied, 145 S. Ct. 158 (2024). Thus, as we
have noted, we issued a limited remand to the district court,
to resolve that question of fact.
On remand, Lufthansa and LGBS moved to amend the
removal notice, pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1653, to change the
citizenship of LGBS’s sole member. The district court
granted that request. Accordingly, for purposes of this case,
LGBS’s sole member is a corporation, whose principal place
of business is in Oklahoma and whose state of incorporation
is Delaware.

10

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

II
We conclude that there is specific personal jurisdiction
over Lufthansa and LGBS in California. “In exercising
personal jurisdiction, a federal district court is constrained
by the Fourteenth Amendment’s Due Process Clause and the
long-arm statute of the state in which it sits.” Impossible
Foods Inc. v. Impossible X LLC, 80 F.4th 1079, 1086 (9th
Cir. 2023), cert. denied, 144 S. Ct. 2561 (2024). “Because
California’s long-arm jurisdictional statute is coextensive
with federal due process requirements, the jurisdictional
analyses under state law and federal due process are the
same.” Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 800–01; Cal. Civ.
Proc. Code § 410.10. “Where a defendant moves to dismiss
a complaint for lack of personal jurisdiction, the plaintiff
bears the burden of demonstrating that jurisdiction is
appropriate.” Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 800.
“Personal jurisdiction can be either general or specific.
A court may exercise general jurisdiction ‘only when a
defendant is “essentially at home” in the State.’” Impossible
Foods, 80 F.4th at 1086 (quoting Ford Motor Co. v. Mont.
Eighth Jud. Dist. Ct., 592 U.S. 351, 358 (2021)). Doe and
Roe do not assert that Lufthansa or LGBS are “essentially at
home” in California, so this form of personal jurisdiction
does not apply.
“Specific jurisdiction is different: It covers defendants
less intimately connected with a State, but only as to a
narrower class of claims.” Ford, 592 U.S. at 359. To
determine if there is specific personal jurisdiction over a

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

11

claim against a non-resident defendant, we use the threeprong “minimum contacts” test:
(1) The non-resident defendant must
purposefully direct his activities or
consummate some transaction with the forum
or resident thereof; or perform some act by
which he purposefully avails himself of the
privilege of conducting activities in the
forum, thereby invoking the benefits and
protections of its laws;
(2) the claim must be one which arises out of
or relates to the defendant’s forum-related
activities; and
(3) the exercise of jurisdiction must comport
with fair play and substantial justice, i.e. it
must be reasonable.
Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802 (citing Lake v. Lake, 817
F.2d 1416, 1421 (9th Cir. 1987)). We conclude all three
prongs are satisfied here.
A
The first prong of the minimum contacts test is satisfied
because Lufthansa purposefully availed itself of the
privilege of doing business in California. “We often use the
phrase ‘purposeful availment,’ in shorthand fashion, to
include both purposeful availment and purposeful direction
. . . but availment and direction are, in fact, two distinct
concepts.” Id. The purposeful availment test is satisfied
“where the defendant ‘deliberately’ has engaged in
significant activities within a State, or has created
‘continuing obligations’ between himself and residents of

12

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

the forum,” because then the defendant “manifestly has
availed himself of the privilege of conducting business” in
the forum. Burger King Corp. v. Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462,
475–76 (1985) (citations omitted). “A showing that a
defendant purposefully availed himself of the privilege of
doing business in a forum state typically consists of evidence
of the defendant’s actions in the forum, such as executing or
performing a contract there.” Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at
802.
In contrast, “the purposeful direction test requires that
the defendant (1) commit an intentional act, that is
(2) expressly aimed at the forum state, and (3) which causes
harm that the defendant knows will be suffered in the forum
state.” Briskin v. Shopify, Inc., 135 F.4th 739, 751 (9th Cir.
2025) (en banc) (citing Brayton Purcell LLP v. Recordon &
Recordon, 606 F.3d 1124, 1128 (9th Cir. 2010)).
If either the purposeful availment or purposeful direction
test is met, or some combination thereof, the first prong is
satisfied. The rule for the first prong uses the disjunctive:
“The non-resident defendant must purposefully direct his
activities or consummate some transaction with the forum or
resident thereof; or perform some act by which he
purposefully avails himself of the privilege of conducting
activities in the forum.” Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802
(quoting Lake, 817 F.2d at 1421); see also Yahoo! Inc. v. La
Ligue Contre Le Racisme et L’Antisemitisme, 433 F.3d 1199,
1206 (9th Cir. 2006) (the first prong “may be satisfied by
purposeful availment of the privilege of doing business in
the forum; by purposeful direction of activities at the forum;
or by some combination thereof” (emphasis added)).
While some of our cases have said that purposeful
availment is better suited for contract cases, and purposeful

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

13

direction for tort cases, see, e.g., Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d
at 802, this is not a rigid rule. Impossible Foods, 80 F.4th at
1088–89. Rather, “[a]lthough the distinction between
purposeful availment and direction is often a useful and
appropriate doctrinal table-setting device, ‘there’s no need
to adhere to [this] iron-clad doctrinal dichotomy’ in every
case.” Id. at 1089 (quoting Davis v. Cranfield Aerospace
Sols., Ltd., 71 F.4th 1154, 1162 (9th Cir. 2023)). “At the end
of the day, the purposeful direction and availment tests
simply frame our inquiry into the defendant’s
‘purposefulness’ vis-à-vis the forum state, ensuring that
defendants are not ‘haled into a jurisdiction solely as a result
of random, fortuitous, or attenuated contacts.’” Id. (quoting
Glob. Commodities Trading Grp., Inc. v. Beneficio de Arroz
Choloma, S.A., 972 F.3d 1101, 1107 (9th Cir. 2020)); see
also Davis, 71 F.4th at 1162. Thus, the first prong is not to
be defeated when, according to this guideline, the tort claim
is using a combination of both tests.
Here, the purposeful availment test is satisfied because
Lufthansa contracted to carry Doe and Roe into California.
That contract requires performance in California, the forum
state, and thus satisfies the purposeful availment test.
Schwarzenegger, 374 F.3d at 802. Moreover, Lufthansa
“manifestly has availed [itself] of the privilege of conducting
business” in California, because Lufthansa regularly
operates flights in and out of California, has offices at LAX
and SFO, has dozens of employees in California, and has an
agent for service of process in California. Burger King, 471
U.S. at 476.
The purposeful direction test is also satisfied in this case
because Lufthansa’s conduct extended into California.
Although the tortious conduct primarily occurred in Saudi
Arabia, we “evaluate all of a defendant’s contacts with the

14

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

forum state, whether or not those contacts involve wrongful
activity by the defendant.” See Yahoo!, 433 F.3d at 1207;
see also Walden v. Fiore, 571 U.S. 277, 290 (2014) (“The
proper question is not where the plaintiff experienced a
particular injury or effect but whether the defendant’s
conduct connects him to the forum in a meaningful way.”)
And even so, Doe alleges additional injury from the lack of
mitigation, which occurred both on the flight to San
Francisco and at SFO. The purposeful direction test is
therefore also satisfied as this is not the case where
Lufthansa had only “random, fortuitous, or attenuated
contacts” with the forum. See Impossible Foods, 80 F.4th at
1089.
Because the purposeful availment test and purposeful
direction test are satisfied, the first prong of the minimum
contacts test is satisfied here.
B
The second prong of the minimum contacts test is also
satisfied, because Lufthansa’s forum-related activities arise
out of and relate to the claims in this case. The “arises out
of” test requires the defendant’s contacts with the forum to
be a but-for cause of the plaintiff’s claims. See Yamashita v.
LG Chem, Ltd., 62 F.4th 496, 506 (9th Cir. 2023); see also
Ford, 592 U.S. at 362.
The “relates to” test only requires a “‘connection’
between a plaintiff’s suit and a defendant’s activities.” Ford,
592 U.S. at 361 (quoting Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v.
Superior Ct. of Cal., San Francisco Cnty., 582 U.S. 255, 264
(2017)). For example, in Ford, the Supreme Court held that
Montana and Minnesota had specific personal jurisdiction
over Ford in plaintiffs’ products liability suit because Ford
had extensively advertised cars in those states and residents

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

15

of those states had bought Ford’s cars and then suffered
injury in those states. Ford, 592 U.S. at 364–66. Ford
argued that it was not subject to personal jurisdiction
because it sold the specific cars involved in the crashes
outside the forum states; the Supreme Court reasoned that
this fact might defeat the “arises out of” test, but not the
“relates to” test. Id. at 366–67. The plaintiffs’ claims were
still sufficiently connected to Ford’s advertisements in the
forum states to satisfy the “relates to” test. See id.
The Supreme Court distinguished Ford from BristolMyers, a products liability case where the “relates to” test
was not satisfied. Id. at 369–70 (citing Bristol-Myers, 582
U.S. 255).
In Bristol-Myers, the defendant drug
manufacturer had engaged in some contact with the forum
state, but had not manufactured the allegedly defective drug
there, and the plaintiffs had not bought or suffered injury
from the drug there. 582 U.S. at 258–59. Thus, “the forum
State, and the defendant’s activities there, lacked any
connection to the plaintiff’s claims,” so the “relates to” test
was not met. Ford, 592 U.S. at 369–70.
The breach of contract claim both arises out of and
relates to Lufthansa’s California-related activities.
Lufthansa signed a contract for carriage into California, and
allegedly breached that contract by disclosing information
the contract guaranteed would be private. The contract for
carriage into California is a forum-related activity; the
breach of that contract certainly arises out of and relates to
the contract, and thus satisfies the second prong. See Burger
King, 471 U.S. at 478–79 (holding there was specific
jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant when the “dispute
grew directly out of ‘a contract which had a substantial
connection with’” the forum state (quoting McGee v. Int’l
Life Ins. Co., 355 U.S. 220, 223 (1957))).

16

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

The tort claims also arise out of and relate to the
defendants’ California activities. The tort claims arise out of
the defendants’ California activities because the contract for
carriage into California is a but-for cause of the tort claims.
Without the contract for carriage into California, Doe and
Roe would not have needed to disclose their marital status to
Lufthansa, nor needed to interact with Lufthansa at all, and
so the tortious conduct would not have occurred. See
Briskin, 135 F.4th at 760 (holding plaintiff online shopper’s
privacy torts arose out of defendant e-commerce platform
offering service to plaintiff, because plaintiff alleged the
service is what caused the alleged privacy violations).
Although the tortious conduct started in Saudi Arabia,
when Jamshed publicly demeaned and outed Doe and Roe,
the conduct continued into California: on the flight from
Frankfurt to San Francisco, a Lufthansa agent promised Doe
that the confidential information had been deleted; once in
San Francisco, a Lufthansa agent promised Lufthansa would
call Doe and Roe about the incident, but never did. Because
the tort claims include acts and omissions that happened on
the flight into California and while in California, they relate
to activity in California. See Ford, 592 U.S. at 364–65.
In sum, the second prong is satisfied, as to both the
contract and the tort claims.
C
Finally, the third prong of the minimum contacts test, the
reasonableness of exercising jurisdiction, is also satisfied. If
a plaintiff has successfully asserted the first two prongs of
the specific personal jurisdiction test, the burden shifts to the
defendant to present a “compelling case” that jurisdiction is
unreasonable. Burger King, 471 U.S. at 477. To analyze the

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

17

reasonableness of asserting personal jurisdiction, we weigh
seven factors:
(1) the extent of the defendant’s purposeful
interjection into the forum state’s affairs;
(2) the burden on the defendant of defending
in the forum; (3) the extent of conflict with
the sovereignty of the defendant’s state;
(4) the forum state’s interest in adjudicating
the dispute; (5) the most efficient judicial
resolution of the controversy; (6) the
importance of the forum to the plaintiff’s
interest in convenient and effective relief;
and (7) the existence of an alternative forum.
Freestream Aircraft (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Aero L. Grp., 905
F.3d 597, 607 (9th Cir. 2018) (citing Paccar Int’l, Inc. v.
Com. Bank of Kuwait, S.A.K., 757F.2d 1058, 1065 (9th Cir.
1985)). Here, those factors do not add up to a “compelling
case” that jurisdiction would be unreasonable.
The first factor, “purposeful interjection,” weighs in
favor of jurisdiction, because the defendants purposefully
availed themselves of the privilege of doing business in
California. See Silk v. Bond, 65 F.4th 445, 458 (9th Cir.
2023) (holding that the “purposeful interjection” factor is
met when the purposeful availment prong is met).
The second factor, the burden on the defendants, is
neutral. Although Lufthansa is a foreign corporation, it has
an agent and office in California, and we have noted that
“modern advances in communications and transportation
have significantly reduced the burden of litigating in another
country.” Sinatra v. Nat’l Enquirer, Inc., 854 F.2d 1191,
1199 (9th Cir. 1988). Although Lufthansa may prefer to

18

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

litigate in Germany, it is no great burden for it to litigate in
California.
The third factor, the extent of conflict with the
sovereignty of the defendants’ state, likely weighs against
jurisdiction. We assume, without deciding, that this factor
may encompass concerns about the sovereignty of any
foreign nation, not just the defendant’s home nation. See
Asahi Metal Indus. Co. v. Superior Ct. of Cal., Solano Cnty.,
480 U.S. 102, 115 (1987) (“Great care and reserve should be
exercised when extending our notions of personal
jurisdiction into the international field.” (quoting United
States v. First Nat’l City Bank, 379 U.S. 378, 404 (1965) (J.
Harlan, dissenting))). If the factor encompasses only the
defendant’s home nation, then it would weigh in favor of
jurisdiction, because defendants’ home nations are Germany
and the United States, neither of which have anti-gay laws
like Saudi Arabia’s anti-gay laws. But assuming that this
factor encompasses concerns with Saudi Arabia’s
sovereignty, it weighs against jurisdiction: Doe and Roe’s
claims are predicated on harm from Saudi Arabia’s anti-gay
laws, and their claims would also require discovery into the
Saudi government’s surveillance of Lufthansa’s electronic
communications.
The fourth factor, the forum state’s interest in
adjudicating the dispute, weighs in favor of jurisdiction.
“California maintains a strong interest in providing an
effective means of redress for its residents tortiously
injured,” like Doe. Panavision Int’l, L.P. v. Toeppen, 141
F.3d 1316, 1323 (9th Cir. 1998) (citation omitted).
The fifth factor, the most efficient judicial resolution of
the controversy, weighs slightly against jurisdiction. “This
factor focuses on the location of the evidence and witnesses.

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

19

It is no longer weighed heavily given the modern advances
in communication and transportation.” Panavision, 141
F.3d at 1323. While many of the witnesses and evidence are
in Saudi Arabia, this does not weigh heavily against
jurisdiction, because those witnesses can either fly to
California or be interviewed remotely, and discovery would
in any event be largely electronic.
The sixth factor, the importance of the forum to the
plaintiffs, weighs in favor of jurisdiction. The possible
alternative fora, Germany and Saudi Arabia, are both abroad.
Roe lives in the United States and does not have an
American passport, so he would have to travel to either
alternative forum on his Saudi passport, which could be
taken from him at any time.
The seventh factor, the availability of an alternative
forum, weighs against exercising jurisdiction. Although the
defendants bear the burden of showing jurisdiction is
unreasonable, Doe and Roe still “bear[] the burden of
proving the unavailability of an alternative forum.” Roth v.
Garcia Marquez, 942 F.2d 617, 624 (9th Cir. 1991) (quoting
Fed. Deposit Ins. Corp. v. Brit.-Am. Ins. Co., 828 F.2d 1439,
1445 (9th Cir. 1987)). Doe and Roe have not shown how
Germany, Lufthansa’s state of incorporation, is unavailable
to litigate this case, so we “[c]halk this one up for” the
defendants. Id. at 625.
In sum, three factors weigh in favor of jurisdiction
(purposeful interjection, the forum state’s interest, and the
importance of the forum to the plaintiffs), three weigh
against (conflict with the sovereignty of another state,
efficient judicial resolution, and availability of an alternate
forum), and one is neutral (burden on the defendants). This
lineup does not add up to a “compelling case” against

20

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

jurisdiction where, as here, many of the factors that weigh
against jurisdiction do so only slightly. See Roth, 942 F.2d
at 625 (holding there was no “compelling case” that
jurisdiction is unreasonable where two factors favored
jurisdiction, three disfavored jurisdiction, and two were
neutral).
D
Ultimately, the personal jurisdiction analysis is rooted in
concerns about defendants’ due process rights. See, e.g.,
Bristol-Myers, 582 U.S. at 261. Given the defendants’
extensive contacts with California, and the connection of
those contacts to the suit here, we cannot say that their due
process rights would be violated by the exercise of personal
jurisdiction. See Ford, 592 U.S. at 367 (holding that the
defendant was subject to personal jurisdiction because
“allowing jurisdiction . . . treats [the defendant] fairly”).
III
Having determined that we have appellate jurisdiction
and personal jurisdiction, we must also assure ourselves of a
third form of jurisdiction: subject matter jurisdiction.
Bender v. Williamsport Area Sch. Dist., 475 U.S. 534, 541
(1986) (“[E]very federal appellate court has a special
obligation to ‘satisfy itself not only of its own jurisdiction,
but also that of the lower courts in a cause under review,’
even though the parties are prepared to concede it.” (quoting
Mitchell v. Maurer, 293 U.S. 237, 244 (1934))).
Given the district court’s allowance of an amendment to
the removal notice, we conclude that there is subject matter
jurisdiction because there is diversity jurisdiction. Diversity
jurisdiction requires (1) an amount-in-controversy over
$75,000, and (2) diversity of citizenship. See 28 U.S.C.

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

21

§ 1332(a). First, the amount-in-controversy requirement is
satisfied, because Doe and Roe allege damages over
$300,000. 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a).
Second, the diversity of citizenship requirement is
satisfied under 28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(3). “Section 1332(a)(3)
. . . confer[s] jurisdiction over suits in which aliens are on
both sides of the case, but only if there are also diverse U.S.
citizens on both sides.” Voltage Pictures, 92 F.4th at 822.
Here, there are diverse U.S. citizens on both sides of the
case: plaintiff Doe is a citizen of California. Defendant
LGBS, an LLC, is a citizen of Oklahoma and Delaware,
because—as the district court ruled on the limited remand—
its sole member is a citizen of Oklahoma and Delaware. See
id. (holding that LLCs are citizens of every state where their
members are citizens). That there are foreign nationals on
both sides of the case—Roe as a plaintiff, Lufthansa as a
defendant—does not defeat diversity under Section (a)(3),
because these foreign nationals are additional parties. See
28 U.S.C. § 1332(a)(3).
IV
In sum, we hold that Lufthansa and LGBS are subject to
personal jurisdiction in California. We also hold that federal
courts have subject matter jurisdiction over this case. We
thus reverse the district court’s dismissal, and remand for
further proceedings.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

22

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

M. SMITH, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and dissenting
in part:
I agree with the majority’s recitation of the facts and
procedural history and that we have subject matter
jurisdiction and therefore join Parts I and III of the majority
opinion. However, because I do not believe we have
personal jurisdiction over the defendants, I otherwise
respectfully dissent. The majority’s approach in this case
has wide-reaching implications. Now, at least in our circuit,
anyone who experiences any issues with a check-in process
or other airline interaction anywhere in the world can sue in
the intended destination of their flight, even if there is no
other connection to that destination. This lax view of
personal jurisdiction runs counter to the Supreme Court’s
admonition that there should be “a substantial connection
with the forum State” when exercising personal jurisdiction.
Walden v. Fiore, 571 U.S. 277, 284 (2014).
I
Our caselaw is less than clear when it comes to whether
Plaintiffs here must show that Defendants “purposefully
directed” their activities toward California or instead
“purposefully availed” themselves of the privileges of
conducting business in California. Maj. Op. 10–11. But
even if we assume that Plaintiffs have satisfied that first step
of the personal jurisdiction analysis, steps two and three are
not satisfied.
II
Specific personal jurisdiction is not appropriate here,
where the claim neither “arises out of” nor “relates to”
California and where the exercise of jurisdiction is
unreasonable. Schwarzenegger v. Fred Martin Motor Co.,

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

23

374 F.3d 797, 802 (9th Cir. 2004). “[T]here must be ‘an
affiliation between the forum and the underlying
controversy, principally, [an] activity or an occurrence that
takes place in the forum State and is therefore subject to the
State’s regulation.” Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Super. Ct.,
582 U.S. 255, 262 (2017) (quoting Goodyear Dunlop Tires
Operations, S.A. v. Brown, 564 U.S. 915, 919 (2011)).
Here, Plaintiffs have not shown that their claims arise out
of or relate to Lufthansa’s forum-related conduct. All the
relevant activity occurred abroad: Plaintiffs resided in Saudi
Arabia, purchased their tickets in Saudi Arabia, and had their
confrontation with Jamshed in Saudi Arabia. In other words,
all “suit-related conduct” is connected to Saudi Arabia, not
California. See Walden, 571 U.S. at 284. The suit-related
conduct in this case was Jamshed’s revelation of Plaintiffs’
marital status at the airport and the subsequent transmission
of their confidential information from Saudi Arabia to
Germany, not the operation of a flight to San Francisco. This
conduct does not have a “substantial connection” to
California except as the destination of Plaintiffs’ flight. That
both the conduct and the harm occurred abroad weighs
heavily against exercising jurisdiction. See Bristol-Myers,
582 U.S. at 265.
The Supreme Court’s ruling in Ford Motor Co. v.
Montana Eighth Judicial District Court, 592 U.S. 351
(2021) confirms that Plaintiffs here have not shown that the
conduct at issue sufficiently “relates to” California. In that
case, the Supreme Court held that personal jurisdiction was
appropriate over Ford in Montana and Minnesota courts for
car failures “in one of those states.” Id. at 365 (emphasis
added). Because Ford had “systematically served a market
in Montana and Minnesota for the very vehicles that the
plaintiffs allege malfunctioned and injured them in those

24

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

States,” the Court recognized that Ford’s suit-related
conduct was sufficiently “relate[d] to” the respective fora.
Id. This was unlike Bristol-Myers, where the “defendant’s
activities” in the forum state “lacked any connection to the
plaintiffs’ claims.” Id. at 369. The same holds true here.
Nor does the “arise out of” prong save Plaintiffs. We
have traditionally applied a “but for” causation test to that
prong. See Yamashita v. LG Chem, Ltd., 62 F.4th 496, 504
(9th Cir. 2023). At first glance, that might seem like a
relatively lax test. See Ford, 592 U.S. at 376 (Gorsuch, J.,
concurring in the judgment) (“As every first year law student
learns, a but-for causation test isn’t the most demanding. At
a high level of abstraction, one might say any event in the
world would not have happened ‘but for’ events far and long
removed.”). But our cases have clarified that there must be
some greater nexus “between the cause of action and the
defendant’s activities in the forum.” Shute v. Carnival
Cruise Lines, 897 F.2d 377, 385 (9th Cir. 1990), rev’d on
other grounds by Carnival Cruise Lines, Inc. v. Shute, 499
U.S. 585 (1991); see also id. at 386 (“The evidence is clear
that Carnival’s solicitation of business in Washington
attracted the Shutes (through their travel agent) to the
Carnival cruise.”) (emphasis added); Panavision Int’l, L.P.
v. Toeppen, 141 F.3d 1316, 1322 (9th Cir. 1998) (finding the
“arising out of” prong satisfied because plaintiff “would not
have been injured ‘but for’ the defendant[’s] conduct
directed towards [the plaintiff] in California”) (emphasis
added).
The majority’s assertions to the contrary are unavailing.
As to Plaintiffs’ contract claim, the majority argues that
because Lufthansa “signed a contract for carriage into
California,” the breach of that contract sufficiently “arises
out of and relates to” California. Maj. Op. 15. But the

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

25

parties formed the contract in Germany and Saudi Arabia
and the alleged breach of contract occurred in Saudi Arabia,
not California. The only connection between the contract
and California is that it was a contract for a flight to San
Francisco. That California was the destination does not
impact the nature of the contract claim at all—Plaintiffs’
claims would not differ if the flight were instead to New
York, Miami, or Chicago. Such an attenuated connection to
the forum state is insufficient under our precedent.
As to Plaintiffs’ tort claims, the majority offers two
arguments. First, the majority claims that because of the
alleged in-flight conduct by Lufthansa employees and
conduct by Lufthansa’s agent on the ground in San
Francisco, the tort claims sufficiently “relate to activity in
California.” Maj. Op. 16. But Plaintiffs’ complaint only
mentions their conversations with Lufthansa agents in and
en route to San Francisco in discussing Plaintiffs’ own
“efforts to mitigate” Lufthansa’s alleged disclosures of
sensitive information in Saudi Arabia, not as a continuation
of Lufthansa’s tortious conduct. All of the relevant tortious
conduct relates to Saudi Arabia and Germany, not
California.
Second, the majority asserts that the contract for carriage
into California is a “but-for” cause of the tort claims. Maj.
Op. 16. As discussed above, though, our cases require a
greater connection to conduct occurring in the forum to
establish but-for causation satisfying the “arising out of”
requirement. See Shute, 897 F.2d at 385. The majority cites
our en banc decision in Briskin v. Shopify, Inc., 135 F.4th
739 (9th Cir. 2025), but that decision does not support
finding jurisdiction here. In Briskin, the en banc court
highlighted the plaintiff’s “contact with” devices within the
forum state, California, and the defendant “Shopify’s

26

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

installation of software onto unsuspecting Californians’
devices and extracting personal data from them” in
concluding that the plaintiff’s claims “ar[o]se out of” and
“relate[d] to” Shopify’s contacts with California. Id. at 760.
In other words, but for Shopify’s contacts with devices
located in California, the plaintiff’s damages would not have
occurred. By contrast, no but-for conduct here occurred in
California. The contract was formed and allegedly breached
in Saudi Arabia. Such minimal ties to the proposed forum
are insufficient for specific personal jurisdiction.
Without stronger ties between Plaintiffs’ claims and
California, I would find that Plaintiffs have failed to satisfy
the second step of the specific personal jurisdiction analysis.
III
Even if Plaintiffs satisfied the second step, the exercise
of specific personal jurisdiction is unreasonable at step three.
In determining reasonableness, we consider:
(1) the extent of the defendant’s purposeful
interjection into the forum state’s affairs;
(2) the burden on the defendant of defending
in the forum; (3) the extent of conflict with
the sovereignty of the defendant’s state;
(4) the forum state’s interest in adjudicating
the dispute; (5) the most efficient judicial
resolution of the controversy; (6) the
importance of the forum to the plaintiff’s
interest in convenient and effective relief;
and (7) the existence of an alternative forum.
Freestream Aircraft (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Aero L. Grp., 905
F.3d 597, 607 (9th Cir. 2018).

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

27

Because I would assume, without holding, that Plaintiffs
have satisfied the purposeful availment step of the specific
personal jurisdiction analysis, I would similarly assume that
the “purposeful interjection” factor favors them. See Ayla,
LLC v. Alya Skin Pty. Ltd., 11 F.4th 972, 984 (9th Cir. 2021)
(“The purposeful interjection factor in the reasonableness
analysis is ‘analogous to the purposeful direction’ factor.”).
The burden on Lufthansa of defending in the forum
would be minimal given modern transportation and
electronic discovery, but I would nevertheless hold that this
factor favors Lufthansa slightly, given that most, if not all,
of its witnesses live overseas. See Ballard v. Savage, 65 F.3d
1495, 1501 (9th Cir. 1995).
The sovereignty factor also favors Lufthansa, though
much more strongly. As the Supreme Court has cautioned
and the majority recognizes, “[g]reat care and reserve should
be exercised when extending our notions of personal
jurisdiction into the international field.” Asahi Metal Indus.
Co., Ltd. v. Super. Ct., 480 U.S. 102, 115 (1987) (quoting
United States v. First Nat’l City Bank, 379 U.S. 378, 404
(1965) (Harlan, J., dissenting)). Plaintiffs’ claims require
investigation of Saudi Arabia’s purported practice of covert
monitoring and marital status tracking, which would create
a conflict with Saudi Arabia’s sovereignty. Additionally, as
the district court pointed out, applying California privacy
tort law will require the court, at least to some degree, to
determine what is considered offensive or outrageous
conduct in Saudi Arabia. See Hill v. Nat’l Collegiate
Athletic Ass’n, 7 Cal. 4th 1, 26 (1994) (explaining inquiry
required in privacy tort cases). Where such extensive
conflicts with foreign nations’ sovereignty would result, this
factor strongly counsels against jurisdiction.

28

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

By contrast, the forum state’s interest factor favors
Plaintiffs, as the majority correctly points out. Maj. Op. 18
(quoting Panavision, 141 F.3d at 1323). But unlike in
Panavision, the alleged harm here occurred outside of
California. This diminishes how strongly the factor weighs
in favor of jurisdiction.
As with the burden of defense factor, the efficiency
factor weighs slightly in favor of Lufthansa. As we have
previously explained, this factor “focuses on the location of
the evidence and witnesses.” Panavision, 141 F.3d at 1323.
Though, to be sure, “[i]t is no longer weighed heavily given
the modern advances in communication and transportation.”
Id.
The importance-of-the-forum-to-plaintiffs factor weighs
in Plaintiffs’ favor. As the majority correctly explains, Roe
does not have an American passport, meaning he would have
to travel on a Saudi Arabian passport, which could be taken
from him by Saudi Arabia. Maj. Op. 19.
Finally, the availability of an alternative forum weighs in
Lufthansa’s favor. Though Lufthansa generally bears the
burden at the third step of the specific personal jurisdiction
analysis, “[a]ppellants must carry the burden of proving the
unavailability of an alternative forum.” Olsen by Sheldon v.
Gov’t of Mexico, 729 F.2d 641, 651 (9th Cir. 1984).
Plaintiffs never explain why Germany is not an alternative,
beyond asserting that Roe cannot travel. They instead seek
to shift the burden to Lufthansa, stating that “Lufthansa does
not enlighten us (or the District Court)” how “Germany is an
adequate alternative forum.” However, it is on Plaintiffs to
show why Germany is not a viable forum, and they have
failed to do so.

DOE V. DEUTSCHE LUFTHANSA AKTIENGESELLSCHAFT

29

Ultimately, few of the factors weigh strongly either way.
The analysis comes down to whether the imposition on
foreign countries’ sovereignty, when weighed against the
importance of California to Plaintiffs, constitutes a
“compelling case” against jurisdiction. Ballard, 65 F.3d at
1502. Though I do not discount the difficulties Plaintiffs
would face in litigating this case abroad, I believe the
conflict with Saudi Arabia’s sovereignty over conduct that
occurred within Saudi Arabia is compelling enough to render
the exercise of jurisdiction unreasonable.
IV
Because the connection to California here is tenuous at
best, I respectfully dissent.

