FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ASHLEY POPA, individually and on
behalf of all others similarly situated,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
MICROSOFT CORPORATION,

No. 24-14
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00294JLR
OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
James L. Robart, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted January 16, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed August 26, 2025
Before: JOHNNIE B. RAWLINSON and MILAN D.
SMITH, JR., Circuit Judges, and JED S. RAKOFF, District
Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Jed S. Rakoff
The Honorable Jed S. Rakoff, United States District Judge for the
Southern District of New York, sitting by designation.

*

2

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

SUMMARY **
Article III Standing
The panel affirmed the district court’s order dismissing
for lack of Article III standing Ashley Popa’s diversity
putative class action against Microsoft Corporation
concerning the use of session-replay technology.
Session-replay technology allows a business to capture
and reproduce customers’ interactions with its
website. Popa encountered session-replay technology
during a visit to http://petsupplies.com. The website’s
operator employed the session-replay technology known as
“Clarity,” which is owned and operated by Microsoft.
The panel held that Popa failed to allege a “concrete”
injury sufficient to support Article III standing. In
determining whether a plaintiff’s injury is concrete,
TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U.S. 413 (2021), requires
a court to assess whether an individual plaintiff has suffered
a harm that has traditionally been actionable in our nation’s
legal system. Popa pointed to the common-law privacy torts
of intrusion upon seclusion and public disclosure of private
facts, but both analogies faltered. Popa did not explain how
the tracking of her interactions with the website caused her
to experience any kind of harm remotely similar to the highly
offensive interferences or disclosures that were actionable at
common law.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

3

COUNSEL
Connor P. Hayes (argued), Jamisen A. Etzel, and Gary F.
Lynch, Lynch Carpenter LLP, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania;
Kim D. Stephens, Tousley Brain Stephens PLLC, Seattle,
Washington; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Eric B. Wolff (argued), Nicola Menaldo, and Anna M.
Thompson, Perkins Coie LLP, Seattle, Washington; James
G. Snell, Perkins Coie LLP, Palo Alto, California; for
Defendant-Appellee.
Aileen McGrath and Zach Z. Tan, Akin Gump Strauss Hauer
& Feld LLP, San Francisco, California; Deborah R. White
and Larissa M. Whittingham, Retail Litigation Center Inc.,
Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae Retail Litigation
Center.
Jeremy J. Broggi, Megan L. Brown, and Joel S. Nolette,
Wiley Rein LLP, Washington, D.C.; Jonathan D. Urick and
Maria C. Monaghan, U.S. Chamber Litigation Center,
Washington, D.C.; Cory L. Andrews and John M. Masslon
II, Washington Legal Foundation, Washington, D.C.;
Christopher J. Marchese and Paul D. Taske, NetChoice LLC,
Washington, D.C.; Lartease M. Tiffith, Interactive
Advertising Bureau; for Amici Curiae The Chamber of
Commerce of the United States of America, Washington
Legal Foundation, NetChoice LLC, and The Interactive
Advertising Bureau.

4

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

OPINION
RAKOFF, District Judge:
This case centers on the use of so-called “session-replay
technology.” In simple terms, session-replay technology
allows a business to capture and reproduce customers’
interactions with its website. More technically, the software
“embed[s] snippets of JavaScript computer code” on a
website, “which then deploys on each website visitor’s
internet browser for the purpose [of] intercepting and
recording the website visitor’s electronic communications
with the . . . website, including their mouse movements,
clicks, keystrokes . . . , URLs of web pages visited, and/or
other electronic communications in real-time.” The sessionreplay
provider
then
“use[s]
those
[w]ebsite
[c]ommunications to recreate website visitors’ entire visit
to” the website. A business utilizing this technology can then
access useful consumer data, including “detailed heatmaps
of a website that provide information about which elements
of a website have high user engagement, how far website
users scrolled on the website, and the total clicks within a
given area on the website.” In essence, session-replay
technology helps a business to determine which parts of its
website are effective with customers and which are not.
Plaintiff Ashley Popa encountered session-replay
technology
during
a
visit
to
https://www.petsuppliesplus.com. Defendant PSP Group
LLC (“PSP”)—the website’s operator—employed on its
website the session-replay technology known as “Clarity,”
which is owned and operated by co-defendant Microsoft
Corp. (“Microsoft”). According to the amended complaint,
“Clarity organizes the information it captures into over 30

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

5

different categories including: the date a user visited the
website, the device the user accessed the website on, the type
of browser the user accessed the website on, the operating
system of the device used to access the website, the country
where the user accessed the website from, a user’s mouse
movements, a user’s screen swipes, text inputted by the user
on the website, and how far down a webpage a user scrolls.”
Popa focuses her allegations on specific pieces of
information allegedly collected by Clarity. She states that
during visits to PSP’s website, she “brow[s]ed for pet
supplies” and “communicated with PSP’s website by using
her mouse to hover and click on certain products.” She
explains that “if a website user views a certain product
offered for sale, that information is captured by Microsoft
Clarity embedded on the website.” While Popa also alleges
that a user’s mailing address is captured when entered for
delivery information, the screenshot produced in the
complaint indicates that masking software—a function that
limits what information Clarity collects—omitted the street
number and zip code. 1 She claims that “PSP and [s]ession
[r]eplay [p]roviders use those [w]ebsite [c]ommunications to
recreate
website
visitors’
entire
visit
to
https://www.petsuppliesplus.com,” in order to “create a
video replay of the user’s behavior on the website and
provide it to PSP for analysis.”
The complaint describes “three standard approaches when it comes to
masking sensitive information collected from a user’s interaction with a
website”: “strict (all text entered by a user is purportedly masked),
balanced (sensitive text entered into certain specifically pre-coded fields,
such as passwords, and credit card information, is masked), and relaxed
(no text entered by a user is masked).” Microsoft submitted a webpage—
which was cited as a link in the complaint—that indicates that Clarity’s
default setting is “balanced.”

1

6

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

In September 2022, Popa filed a complaint, on behalf of
a proposed class of visitors to PSP’s website, in the United
States District Court for the Western District of
Pennsylvania. In February 2023, Popa filed an amended
complaint. The amended complaint, which is the operative
pleading, brings two claims against both PSP and Microsoft.
Popa’s first claim arises under Pennsylvania’s Wiretapping
and Electronic Surveillance Control Act (“WESCA”), which
grants a civil cause of action to an injured party against any
person who, among other prohibited conduct, acquires “the
contents of any wire, electronic or oral communication
through the use of any electronic, mechanical or other
device.” 18 Pa. Cons. Stat. §§ 5702, 5725. Popa also brings
claims for “Invasion of Privacy – Intrusion Upon Seclusion”
against both Microsoft and PSP.
Soon after Popa amended her complaint, the district
court granted Microsoft’s motion to transfer the case to the
Western District of Washington. Several months later, in
June 2023, both defendants moved to dismiss: PSP moved
to dismiss under Rules 12(b)(1) and 12(b)(6) of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure, while Microsoft moved only under
Rule 12(b)(6).
The district court concluded that “Popa has failed to
establish that she has Article III standing to pursue her
claims in federal court.” For that reason, the court granted
PSP’s motion to dismiss for “lack of subject jurisdiction,”
dismissed the action “without prejudice and with leave to
amend,” and denied Microsoft’s Rule 12(b)(6) motion to
dismiss “as moot.”2 To support its ruling, the district court
Because Article III standing is “jurisdictional and can neither be waived
by the parties nor ignored by the court,” the district court’s dismissal
applied to Popa’s claims against both defendants despite Microsoft’s

2

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

7

cited decisions of other courts that have generally dismissed
session-replay cases “where the plaintiffs failed to allege that
the defendants’ tracking of their website interactions
resulted in a concrete harm.” The court observed that the
information allegedly collected by defendants “reveals
nothing more than the products that interested . . . Popa and
thus is not the type of private information that the law has
historically protected.”
Rather than further amend her complaint, Popa appealed
the district court’s order. The parties timely submitted their
briefs, and the Retail Litigation Center, the Chamber of
Commerce, the Washington Legal Foundation, Netchoice,
LLC, and the Interactive Advertising Bureau submitted
briefs as amici curiae in support of defendants. On December
17, 2024, after PSP submitted a notice of a bankruptcy filing,
we stayed the appeal “as to PSP Group, LLC,” but confirmed
that “[o]ral argument will remain as scheduled for the
remaining Defendant-Appellee,” Microsoft. We held oral
argument on January 16, 2025. On August 5, 2025, Popa and
PSP filed a stipulation dismissing Popa’s appeal as against
PSP and expressly providing that Popa’s appeal as against
Microsoft remains unaffected. We thereafter dismissed PSP
as appellee.
We review de novo a district court’s dismissal for lack
of standing under Rule 12(b)(1) of the Federal Rules of Civil
Procedure. Bowen v. Energizer Holdings, Inc., 118 F.4th
1134, 1142 (9th Cir. 2024). “As the party invoking federal
jurisdiction, the plaintiff[] bear[s] the burden of

failure to raise the issue in its own motion to dismiss. Yakima Valley
Mem’l Hosp. v. Wash. State Dep’t of Health, 654 F.3d 919, 932 n.17 (9th
Cir. 2011).

8

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

demonstrating that [she] ha[s] standing.” TransUnion LLC
v. Ramirez, 594 U.S. 413, 430–31 (2021).
This appeal turns on a single issue: whether Popa has
alleged a “concrete” injury sufficient to support Article III
standing. The doctrine of standing is grounded in Article III
of the Constitution, which limits the federal judicial power
to “Cases” and “Controversies.” U.S. Const. art. III, § 2.
“The doctrine developed . . . to ensure that federal courts do
not exceed their authority as it has been traditionally
understood,” by “limit[ing] the category of litigants
empowered to maintain a lawsuit in federal court to seek
redress for a legal wrong.” Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins, 578 U.S.
330, 338 (2016) (citation omitted). Thus, “[f]or there to be a
case or controversy under Article III, the plaintiff must have
a ‘personal stake’ in the case—in other words, standing.”
TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 423 (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted).
Over time, the Supreme Court has identified three
elements to ensure that a plaintiff has the required “personal
stake”: (1) the plaintiff must have suffered an “injury in fact”
that is both “concrete and particularized” and “actual or
imminent”; (2) “there must be a causal connection between
the injury and the conduct complained of” (often described
as whether the injury is “fairly traceable” to the challenged
conduct); and (3) “it must be likely, as opposed to merely
speculative, that the injury will be redressed by a favorable
decision.” Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560–61
(1992) (internal quotation marks and citations omitted).
This case concerns the first element, and particularly the
requirement that a plaintiff’s injury be “concrete.” A
“concrete” injury “must actually exist”; put differently, it

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

9

must be “real, and not abstract.” Spokeo, 578 U.S. at 340
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted).
The Supreme Court has, in recent years, made this
requirement even more definite. For example, in Spokeo, the
plaintiff sued a website under the Fair Credit Reporting Act
of 1970 (“FCRA”) for generating a profile that contained
inaccurate personal information. Id. at 335–36. In the
opinion below, our court had concluded that the plaintiff
satisfied the injury-in-fact element of standing by alleging
that “[the defendant had] violated [the plaintiff’s] statutory
rights, not just the statutory rights of other people.” Id. at 337
(internal quotation marks and citation omitted). The
Supreme Court, however, clarified that our observations
concerned whether the injury was particularized, but not
whether it was concrete. Id. at 339–40. In drawing this
distinction, the Court outlined the central characteristics of
concreteness: “A ‘concrete’ injury must be ‘de facto’; that
is, it must actually exist.” Id. at 340 (citation omitted).
Further, to determine “whether an intangible harm
constitutes injury in fact,” the Court stated, “both history and
the judgment of Congress play important roles.” Id.
(emphasis added). But the Court cautioned that “Congress’
role in identifying and elevating intangible harms does not
mean that a plaintiff automatically satisfies the injury-in-fact
requirement whenever a statute grants a person a statutory
right and purports to authorize that person to sue to vindicate
that right.” Id. at 341. In other words, “Article III standing
requires a concrete injury even in the context of a statutory
violation.” Id. The Court ultimately remanded the case so
that we could determine “whether the particular procedural
violations alleged . . . entail a degree of risk sufficient to meet
the concreteness requirement.” Id. at 342–43.

10

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

Around five years later, the Court again addressed
concreteness in TransUnion, another appeal from our court.
In that case, we had given standing to an entire class of
plaintiffs, suing under the FCRA, who alleged that defendant
TransUnion included a notice on their credit reports that
misleadingly indicated that they were a “potential match” to
a “specially designated national” (e.g., terrorists, drug
traffickers, and other serious criminals) on a list maintained
by the U.S. Treasury Department’s Office of Foreign Assets
Control (“OFAC”). TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 419–22.
However, because only a fraction of the class had their
misleading credit reports disclosed to third-party businesses
during the relevant time period, the Supreme Court reversed
our decision below, holding that only this limited group had
standing. 3 Id. at 417–18. The Court’s analysis identified
history as the touchstone for concreteness. Specifically, it
explained that the “Court’s opinion in Spokeo . . . indicated
that courts should assess whether the alleged injury to the
plaintiff has a ‘close relationship’ to a harm ‘traditionally’
recognized as providing a basis for a lawsuit in American
courts.” Id. at 424 (citation omitted). “That inquiry asks
whether plaintiffs have identified a close historical or
common-law analogue for their asserted injury.” Id. And
while the Court acknowledged that “Spokeo does not require
an exact duplicate in American history and tradition,” it
cautioned that “Spokeo is not an open-ended invitation for
federal courts to loosen Article III based on contemporary,

The Supreme Court also concluded that there was “no reason or basis
to disturb the lower courts’ conclusion on [the named plaintiff’s]
individual standing as to” two claims related to alleged formatting
defects in certain mailings sent by the defendant. TransUnion, 594 U.S.
at 439–40 & n.8.

3

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

11

evolving beliefs about what kinds of suits should be heard in
federal courts.” Id. at 424–25.
The Court in TransUnion also addressed the limits on
Congress’s power to confer standing. According to the
Court, Congress’s perspective may be “instructive,” and it
may “elevate to the status of legally cognizable injuries
concrete, de facto injuries that were previously inadequate in
law.” Id. at 425 (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). “But even though Congress may elevate harms that
exist in the real world before Congress recognized them to
actionable legal status, it may not simply enact an injury into
existence, using its lawmaking power to transform
something that is not remotely harmful into something that
is.” Id. at 426 (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). The Court thus distinguished between “(i) a
plaintiff’s statutory cause of action to sue a defendant over
the defendant’s violation of federal law, and (ii) a plaintiff’s
suffering concrete harm because of the defendant’s violation
of federal law.” Id. at 426–27. The Court summarized:
“[U]nder Article III, an injury in law is not an injury in fact.”
Id. at 427.
The Court’s analysis of the plaintiffs’ claims in
TransUnion also concentrated on the match between the
injury that they allegedly experienced and the kinds of harms
that were actionable at common law. In particular, the Court
considered whether the plaintiffs had experienced harm
similar to “the reputational harm associated with the tort of
defamation.” Id. at 432. On the one hand, the Court rejected
the defendant’s argument that the plaintiffs had not
experienced a defamation-like harm because the statement
that the plaintiffs were “potential terrorists” was only
misleading and not literally false. Id. at 433 (emphasis
added). Emphasizing that the analysis does not require “an

12

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

exact duplicate,” the Court explained that “the harm from a
misleading statement of this kind bears a sufficiently close
relationship to the harm from a false and defamatory
statement.” Id. The absence of dissemination, on the other
hand, was fatal to the claims of those plaintiffs whose
misleading credit reports had not been shared with a third
party. The Court reasoned that “there is no historical or
common-law analog where the mere existence of inaccurate
information, absent dissemination, amounts to concrete
injury.” Id. at 434 (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). In other words, “[t]he mere presence of an
inaccuracy in an internal credit file, if it is not disclosed to a
third party, causes no concrete harm.” Id.
Our sister circuits have diverged, at least in part, in their
interpretation of Spokeo and TransUnion, developing
different tests for determining whether a plaintiff’s injury is
concrete. Some circuits have considered whether a plaintiff’s
harm satisfies each element required to state a common-law
cause of action. See, e.g., Hunstein v. Preferred Collection
& Mgmt. Servs., Inc., 48 F.4th 1236, 1241, 1245–46 (11th
Cir. 2022) (en banc) (finding no concrete injury because the
plaintiff’s harm from an alleged statutory violation did not
satisfy the element of “[p]ublicity” for a public-disclosureof-private-facts claim). Others have adopted a less rigid
approach that focuses on whether the harm experienced by a
plaintiff is similar in kind to a harm protected by one of the
common-law privacy torts. See, e.g., Barclift v. Keystone
Credit Servs., LLC, 93 F.4th 136, 143–45 (3d Cir. 2024)
(distinguishing between “an element-based approach” and a
“kind of harm” test, and concluding that “when asking
whether a plaintiff’s intangible injury is ‘concrete,’ we will
examine the kind of harm at issue”); see also Baysal v.
Midvale Indem. Co., 78 F.4th 976, 979 (7th Cir. 2023)

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

13

(explaining that drivers’ license numbers did not constitute
“the sort of potentially embarrassing or intimate details”
covered by the common-law privacy torts). While the
precise formulation of the test has sparked some inter-circuit
division, 4 these approaches all share an important feature:
they look to the specific underlying harm experienced by the
plaintiff and compare it, in detail, to a specific common-law
tort. At base—and all we need to acknowledge to decide this
case—is that TransUnion requires a court to assess whether
an individual plaintiff has suffered a harm that has
traditionally been actionable in our nation’s legal system.
Recognizing that TransUnion contemplates a standing
inquiry particularized to a plaintiff’s circumstances and
benchmarked to a specific tort, we conclude that Popa has
not met her burden to demonstrate that she has standing.
Popa briefly points to the common-law privacy torts of
intrusion upon seclusion and public disclosure of private
facts. Both analogies falter for the same reason. To show
intrusion upon seclusion, a plaintiff must show “an
intentional interference with his interest in solitude or
seclusion, either as to his person or as to his private affairs
or concerns, of a kind that would be highly offensive to a
reasonable man.” Nayab v. Cap. One Bank (USA), N.A., 942
F.3d 480, 491 (9th Cir. 2019) (emphasis added) (quoting
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652B cmt. a (Am. Law Inst.
The Third Circuit has recognized that the “element-based approach”
and “kind of harm” test can overlap in practice. See Barclift v. Keystone
Credit Servs., LLC, 93 F.4th 136, 146 n.4 (3d Cir. 2024) (“We
acknowledge that there is overlap between the nature of the traditional
harm (humiliation stemming from the public disclosure of offensive
information) and an element of the traditional tort (publicity). This is
because a disclosure that remains nonpublic is unlikely to result in the
type of humiliation associated with the traditional injury.”).
4

14

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

1977)). Similarly, a claim for public disclosure of private
facts requires that a defendant “gives publicity” to a matter
that concerns “the private life of another,” that the
information is “highly offensive to a reasonable person,” and
that the information is not of legitimate public concern.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652D (emphasis added).
Popa does not explain how the tracking of her
interactions with the PSP website caused her to experience
any kind of harm that is remotely similar to the “highly
offensive” interferences or disclosures that were actionable
at common law. Of course, an “exact duplicate” is not
required, and many courts require a match only in the kind
of harm and not the degree. But Popa identifies no
embarrassing, invasive, or otherwise private information
collected by Clarity. Indeed, the monitoring of Popa’s
interactions with PSP’s website seems most similar to a store
clerk’s observing shoppers in order to identify aisles that are
particularly popular or to spot problems that disrupt potential
sales.
This is quite different from the hypotheticals set out in
the Restatement. Consider, for example, the following
scenario for intrusion upon seclusion: “A . . . rents a room in
a house adjoining B’s residence, and for two weeks looks
into the windows of B’s upstairs bedroom through a
telescope taking intimate pictures with a telescopic lens.”
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652B cmt. b, illus. 2. Or, to
take an example for public disclosure of private facts: “A
publishes, without B’s consent, a picture of B nursing her
child.” Restatement (Second) of Torts § 652D cmt. c,
illus. 10. Microsoft’s conduct in this case does not implicate
a similarly sensitive sphere. At most, Popa alleges that
Clarity gathered her pet-store preferences and her street
name. To the extent Microsoft’s tracking software could be

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

15

offensive in particular circumstances (e.g., involving
sensitive medical or financial information), Popa does not
plausibly allege the infringement of any such privacy
interest. 5
To avoid this conclusion, Popa contends that because the
Pennsylvania legislature enacted a statute protecting a
substantive privacy right, any plaintiff alleging a violation of
that statute will satisfy Article III. As an initial matter, that
analysis reverts to a pre-TransUnion (even pre-Spokeo)
approach that favors a legislative body’s views in the
aggregate over a plaintiff’s individual circumstances. And
while that position has the support of a minority of justices
on the Supreme Court and some lower-court judges, see,
e.g., TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 442–60 (Thomas, J.,
dissenting); Baysal, 78 F.4th at 980–90 (Ripple, J.,
dissenting), TransUnion clearly cautions courts not to “treat
an injury as ‘concrete’ for Article III purposes based only on
Congress’s say-so,” TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 426 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted); see also Spokeo, 578
U.S. at 341 (“Article III standing requires a concrete injury
even in the context of a statutory violation.”).
Moreover, Popa’s broad theory that the common law
protected privacy rights—pitched at a high level of
generality—does not align with the analysis adopted in
To be sure, the complaint identifies potential harms that might be
associated with session-replay technology, such as identity theft. But the
complaint includes no allegations plausibly linking these potential,
generalized harms to the operation of Clarity on PSP’s website vis-à-vis
Popa. Popa also mentions trespass as a potential common-law analog
twice in her opening brief, without any additional explanation. But she
never identifies what possessory interest Microsoft invaded. Indeed,
Clarity—at least according to the complaint—appears to operate on
PSP’s website rather than on an individual’s computer.

5

16

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

TransUnion. There, the Court considered carefully the key
elements that shape the harm proscribed by the common-law
tort of defamation (namely, falsity and publication), grouped
plaintiffs who alleged similar facts, and assessed whether the
specific plaintiffs had experienced harm of that nature. The
Court determined that some plaintiffs had standing to bring
a claim under the statute while others did not—an implicit
rejection of a one-size-fits-all approach. In addition, rather
than describe a general right to privacy, the Court in
TransUnion specifically cited “reputational harms,
disclosure of private information, and intrusion upon
seclusion” as examples of “harms traditionally recognized as
providing a basis for lawsuits in American courts.”
TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 425. Similarly, the Seventh Circuit
recently denied a generalized “invasion-of-privacy” theory,
explaining that “at common law an invasion of the right to
privacy has traditionally encompassed four distinct torts:
intrusion upon seclusion, appropriation of another person’s
name or likeness, publicity given to another person’s private
life, and publicity that places one in a false light.” Nabozny
v. Optio Sols. LLC, 84 F.4th 731, 735 (7th Cir. 2023)
(emphasis added). In short, there existed no free-roaming
privacy right at common law but rather four discrete torts
that protected specific kinds of privacy-related harms. And,
as explained supra, Popa has not identified a harm that she
experienced that is remotely similar to those protected by
these torts.
Popa next turns to caselaw in this circuit to support her
argument that a plaintiff necessarily enjoys Article III
standing when suing under a statute that protects a
substantive right to privacy. She relies on two preTransUnion cases—Eichenberger v. ESPN, Inc., 876 F.3d
979 (9th Cir. 2017), and In re Facebook, Inc. Internet

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

17

Tracking Litigation, 956 F.3d 589 (9th Cir. 2020)—that she
claims “affirm the straightforward principle at the heart of
this appeal: the violation of a statute codifying a commonlaw privacy harm is sufficient to confer Article III standing.”
In support of her position that TransUnion did not
undermine those cases, she emphasizes that Jones v. Ford
Motor Co., 85 F.4th 570 (9th Cir. 2023) (per curiam)—
decided after TransUnion—relied on Eichenberger and In re
Facebook. Based on this precedent, Popa insists that “a
violation of the WESCA is an intangible concrete harm.”
In Jones, this Court explained that “the relevant law is
settled”: “A statute that codifies a common law privacy right
‘gives rise to a concrete injury sufficient to confer
standing.’” Id. at 574 (quoting In re Facebook, 956 F.3d at
598). It added that “this court has consistently found that
‘[v]iolations of the right to privacy have long been
actionable at common law.’” Id. (alteration in original)
(quoting Eichenberger, 876 F.3d at 983). Importantly, Jones
was decided after TransUnion, and these excerpts could be
read, at least at first glance, to support Popa’s position that
broad privacy rights, enshrined in a statute, satisfy
concreteness as a matter of course.
But we decline to interpret Jones as establishing the
categorical rule that Popa would propose. First, the question
of concreteness under TransUnion was not clearly presented
in that case. Of course, we have an independent obligation
to assure ourselves of our jurisdiction, but our statements
touching on an issue that was not clearly presented are not
entitled to the same weight as carefully reasoned analysis of
the issue. Cf. Leeson v. Transamerica Disability Income
Plan, 671 F.3d 969, 979 (9th Cir. 2012) (“We have . . .
specifically noted that drive-by jurisdictional rulings lack
precedential force.”) (citations omitted).

18

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

Second, despite its generalization about privacy statutes,
Jones still implicitly evaluated, as TransUnion mandates,
whether the specific plaintiffs had suffered a concrete injury.
The complaint in Jones alleged that plaintiffs’ vehicles had
“download[ed] all text messages and call logs from
[p]laintiffs’ cellphones as soon as they [were] connected,”
and that “the infotainment system permanently store[d] the
private communications without [p]laintiffs’ knowledge or
consent.” Jones, 85 F.4th at 574. Although we did not
explicitly tie these allegations to the TransUnion framework
(and relied in part on our pre-TransUnion caselaw, described
infra), the attention to the specific circumstances of the
plaintiffs’ injuries in the course of our analysis suggests that
we considered whether the specific plaintiffs alleged a
violation of their “substantive privacy right[s].” Id.
Third, and finally, our decision in Phillips v. U.S.
Customs & Border Protection, 74 F.4th 986 (9th Cir.
2023)—issued several months before Jones—integrates the
kind of analysis contemplated by TransUnion. There,
“[p]laintiffs’ central argument [was] that the government’s
retention of illegally obtained information about them [was]
per se an injury-in-fact.” Id. at 991. We rejected this
argument, citing both Spokeo and TransUnion, and
explained that “[w]here we have held that the retention of
illegally obtained records resulted in a concrete injury, we
have always identified something beyond retention alone
that resulted in an injury of the sort recognized by the
Supreme Court, such as a material risk of future tangible
harm, a violation of the common law right to privacy, or a
cognizable constitutional violation.” Id. at 993 (emphasis
added). We then evaluated the facts of several prior
decisions to support our general conclusion. Id. at 993–95.
Phillips approves of an approach, implicit in Jones and

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

19

consistent with TransUnion, that requires a plaintiff to
demonstrate more than just a statutory violation when
evaluating whether a plaintiff has alleged a concrete injury.
Popa also relies on two pre-TransUnion cases—
Eichenberger and In re Facebook—in support of her
position. In Eichenberger, the plaintiff alleged that the
defendant disclosed information about videos that the
plaintiff had watched on its application to a third party.
Eichenberger, 876 F.3d at 981–82. When evaluating
whether the plaintiff alleged a concrete injury, we explained
that “Spokeo concerned procedural violations of the FCRA
that would not invariably injure a concrete interest.” Id. at
982. We then contrasted that statute with the “provision at
issue here, [which] codifies a context-specific extension of
the substantive right to privacy.” Id. at 983. This distinction
justified our conclusion that “every disclosure of an
individual’s ‘personally identifiable information’ and videoviewing history offends the interests that the statute
protects.” Id. In reaching this conclusion, we noted that
“[v]iolations of the right to privacy have long been
actionable at common law,” and that the right to privacy
“encompass[es] the individual’s control of information
concerning his or her person.” Id. (quoting U.S. Dep’t of
Just. v. Reps. Comm. for Freedom of the Press, 489 U.S. 749,
763 (1989)).
Several years later, In re Facebook relied on
Eichenberger’s interpretation of Spokeo. That case involved
a Facebook plug-in that “track[ed] users’ browsing histories
when they visit[ed] third-party websites, and then
compile[d] these browsing histories into personal profiles
which [were] sold to advertisers.” In re Facebook, 956 F.3d
at 596. We concluded that plaintiffs “had established
standing . . . because they adequately alleged privacy

20

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

harms.” Id. at 598. More specifically, we explained that
“[p]laintiffs have adequately alleged that Facebook’s
tracking and collection practices would cause harm or a
material risk of harm to their interest in controlling their
personal information.” Id. at 599. That conclusion followed
from our observation that “Facebook gained a cradle-tograve profile without users’ consent.” Id.
But even though our analysis in Eichenberger and In re
Facebook might have arguably offered at the time some
support for the position that Popa now advances, that
analysis finds no support in TransUnion. There, the Supreme
Court made no distinction between “procedural” and
“substantive” statutory provisions, instead holding, without
any limitation, that courts should assess whether “plaintiffs
have identified a close historical or common-law analogue
for their asserted injury.” TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 424. And,
as explained supra, the Court identified discrete privacy torts
(not a general right to privacy) and evaluated plaintiffs’
claims based on their similarity to the harm protected by the
defamation tort.
More important, we need not revisit Eichenberger and In
re Facebook in reaching our decision today. Despite the
broad statements made therein, those decisions still
accounted for the individual circumstances giving rise to the
plaintiffs’ alleged injuries rather than simply greenlighting a
per se rule for privacy statutes. See In re Facebook, 956 F.3d
at 598 (“Plaintiffs alleged that Facebook continued to collect
their data after they had logged off the social media platform,
in order to receive and compile their personally identifiable
browsing history. As alleged in the complaint, this tracking
occurred ‘no matter how sensitive’ or personal users’
browsing histories were.”) (emphasis added); see also
Phillips, 74 F.4th at 993. Moreover, both cases involved

POPA V. MICROSOFT CORPORATION

21

different statutes from the Pennsylvania statute, WESCA, at
issue in this case. For example, in Eichenberger, the plaintiff
sued under the Video Privacy Protection Act of 1988.
Eichenberger, 876 F.3d at 981–84. Perhaps we might
analyze that statute differently today, especially after the
Supreme Court’s decision in TransUnion, but we need not
reach that issue to decide whether Popa has adequately
alleged standing in this case. For the reasons stated above,
she has not. The district court’s ruling on the motions to
dismiss is AFFIRMED.

