FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
ALEXANDRE ZDENEK DAVIS,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 24-1099
D.C. No.
1:22-cr-00106DLC-1

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Montana
Dana L. Christensen, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 2, 2025
Portland, Oregon
Filed October 20, 2025
Before: Jay S. Bybee, Kenneth K. Lee, and Danielle J.
Forrest, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Lee

2

USA V. DAVIS

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed the sentence imposed on Alexandre
Zdenek Davis in a case in which he pleaded guilty to making
a false statement during a firearms transaction, making a
false statement in an application for a passport, and
aggravated identity theft.
After pleading guilty, Davis asked the district court to
order a psychological evaluation under 18 U.S.C. § 4241 to
determine his mental competency before sentencing. He
also requested that his evaluation be filed with the court, as
required under the statute. But when unfavorable
information from the evaluation ended up in his
presentencing report, Davis objected to the court considering
that information at sentencing.
On appeal, Davis contended that the district court’s use
of his psychological evaluation violated his Fifth
Amendment right against self-incrimination. The panel held
that even if an exception to the enforceability of Davis’
appellate waiver applies to this claim, the claim fails on the
merits. Davis invoked Estelle v. Smith, 451 U.S. 454 (1981),
in which the Supreme Court established that the right against
self-incrimination exists in certain circumstances during
sentencing. The panel concluded that the holding in Estelle
does not extend beyond the distinct circumstances of that
case to Davis’ psychological evaluation here. The district
court did not violate Davis’ right against self-incrimination
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. DAVIS

3

by considering the results of his voluntary examination when
determining his sentence.
The panel held that Davis’ waiver of appeal in his plea
agreement bars his challenge to an enhancement for
obstruction of justice and to two special conditions of
supervised release.

COUNSEL
Tim Tatarka (argued) and Colin M. Rubich, Assistant United
States Attorneys; Jesse A. Laslovich, United States
Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Billings, Montana; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Jason T. Holden (argued), Faure Holden Henkel Terrazas
PC, Great Falls, Montana, for Defendant-Appellant.

4

USA V. DAVIS

OPINION
LEE, Circuit Judge:
After pleading guilty to various crimes, Alexandre
Zdenek Davis asked the district court to order a
psychological evaluation under 18 U.S.C. § 4241 to
determine his mental competency before sentencing. He
also requested that his evaluation be filed with the court, as
required under the statute.
But when unfavorable
information from the evaluation ended up in his
presentencing report, Davis apparently had a change of heart
and objected to the court considering that information at
sentencing.
On appeal, Davis contends that the district court’s use of
his psychological evaluation violated his Fifth Amendment
right against self-incrimination. But the Supreme Court case
that Davis invokes to support his claim, Estelle v. Smith, 451
U.S. 454 (1981), does not extend the right against selfincrimination so far. We thus hold that the district court did
not err by considering Davis’ voluntary psychological
evaluation during sentencing. Davis also challenges two
other aspects of his sentence, but those claims are barred by
the waiver of appeal in his plea agreement.
We affirm the sentence.
BACKGROUND
In 2021, having previously been convicted of a felony,
Alexandre Zdenek Davis could not lawfully purchase a
firearm. Undeterred, Davis used another man’s identity to
buy a Ruger 9mm semi-automatic pistol from a Cabela’s
store in Billings, Montana. Davis presented the store clerk
with a Montana driver’s license that he had fraudulently

USA V. DAVIS

5

obtained under the other man’s name, and he falsely claimed
that he had no prior felony convictions. After successfully
buying the pistol, Davis then tried his luck at a U.S. passport
application office. There, he used the same fraudulent
driver’s license to obtain a passport, which he later used to
travel to Turkey and Mexico.
I. Davis pleads guilty and waives his right to appeal
his sentence.
The government indicted Davis for this conduct, and
Davis ultimately agreed to plead guilty to making a false
statement during a firearms transaction, 18 U.S.C.
§ 922(a)(6), making a false statement in an application for a
passport, 18 U.S.C. § 1542, and aggravated identity theft, 18
U.S.C. § 1028(a)(1).
The plea agreement included a waiver of appeal. It read:
Waiver of Appeal of the Sentence Conditional: The defendant understands that
the law provides a right to appeal and
collaterally attack the sentence imposed in
this case. 18 U.S.C. § 3742(a), 28 U.S.C.
§§ 2241, 2255. The prosecution has a
comparable right of appeal. 18 U.S.C.
§ 3742(b). By this agreement the defendant
waives the right to appeal or collaterally
attack any aspect of the sentence, including
conditions of probation or supervised release,
if the sentence imposed is within or below the
guideline range calculated by the Court,
regardless of whether the defendant agrees
with that range. This waiver includes
challenges to the constitutionality of any

6

USA V. DAVIS

statute of conviction and arguments that the
admitted conduct does not fall within any
statute of conviction. This waiver does not
prohibit the right to pursue a collateral
challenge alleging ineffective assistance of
counsel. The United States waives its right to
appeal any aspect of the sentence if the
sentence imposed is within or above the
guideline range calculated by the Court.
At his plea hearing, a magistrate judge went over the
waiver of appeal with Davis. During their colloquy, the
magistrate judge repeatedly confirmed with Davis that he
understood that he “waived all right to appeal” as long as the
district court judge sentenced him within or below the
calculated guideline range. Further, when the magistrate
judge asked Davis if he had discussed the waiver with his
attorney, Davis responded, “I have, in great detail.” The
district court later accepted Davis’ guilty plea.
II. Davis asks the district court to order a psychiatric
or psychological examination.
After Davis pleaded guilty—but before sentencing—
Davis asked the court to order a psychiatric or psychological
examination under 18 U.S.C. § 4241 to “aid the Court in
determining whether Mr. Davis is presently suffering from a
mental disease or defect rendering him mentally
incompetent to the extent that he is unable to understand the
nature and consequences of the proceedings against him or
to assist properly in his defense.” Section 4241(b) provides
that, before a hearing on the defendant’s competency, “the
court may order that a psychiatric or psychological
examination of the defendant be conducted[] and . . . filed
with the court[] pursuant to the provisions of section 4247(b)

USA V. DAVIS

7

and (c),” which require the examiner to file his or her report
with the court and to provide copies to the defendant and the
government’s attorney. 18 U.S.C. §§ 4241(b) (emphasis
added), 4247(c) (stating that the report “shall be filed with
the court”). Davis in his motion asked that the examiner’s
report be filed with the court.
The district court agreed to an evaluation but asked
Davis if he wished to be evaluated by a private examiner or
by a Federal Bureau of Prisons (BOP) examiner. Davis
elected for a BOP examiner. Davis again requested that the
BOP examiner’s report be provided to the district court.
Davis did not receive a warning under Miranda v.
Arizona, 384 U.S. 436 (1966), at the evaluation, but the
examiner told Davis that “any information he provided was
subject to inclusion in the evaluation report, which would be
available to the court.” Davis completed the psychological
evaluation, and the BOP examiner’s report was filed with the
court. Davis did not request a competency hearing, and his
case proceeded to sentencing.
III. The district court overrules Davis’ objections at
sentencing.
In preparing a Presentence Report (PSR) for the court
before sentencing, the probation officer incorporated some
of the BOP examiner’s findings. At sentencing, Davis
balked at the court’s consideration of the results of his
psychological examination. He contended that the use of his
examination violated Rule 12.2(c)(4) of the Federal Rules of
Criminal Procedure, which forbids the admission of a
defendant’s statements during a psychological examination
except when the defendant has properly introduced evidence
of his mental condition. The district court overruled Davis’

8

USA V. DAVIS

objection, finding that there was no Rule 12.2(c)(4)
violation.
Davis raised two other objections to the PSR that are
relevant to this appeal. First, Davis objected to the
recommended 2-level obstruction of justice enhancement for
his untruthfulness during the presentence investigation. The
court overruled that objection, explaining that it had “very
serious concerns” about Davis’ veracity on several issues.
Second, Davis objected to two special conditions of release
as overly restrictive. After overruling those objections, too,
the court imposed the special conditions.
The district court sentenced Davis within the guideline
range to fifty-one months in prison and three years of
supervised release. Davis timely appealed his sentence, and
we have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review the waiver of the statutory right to appeal de
novo. United States v. Baramdyka, 95 F.3d 840, 843 (9th
Cir. 1996). Issues raised for the first time on appeal are
reviewed for plain error. See United States v. Wells, 29 F.4th
580, 592 (9th Cir. 2022). To establish plain error, there must
be an error that is plain and affects substantial rights. See
United States v. Cotton, 535 U.S. 625, 631 (2002). But we
may only correct that error if it “seriously affect[s] the
fairness, integrity, or public reputation of judicial
proceedings.” Id. (alteration in original) (citation omitted).

USA V. DAVIS

9

DISCUSSION
I. We reject Davis’ Fifth Amendment challenge to his
sentence.
A. Despite the appeal waiver, we may address the
merits of Davis’ Fifth Amendment claim.
Before reaching the merits of Davis’ Fifth Amendment
claim, we must determine whether he waived his right to
appeal it. Under his plea agreement, Davis may not appeal
“any aspect of the sentence, including conditions of
probation or supervised release.”
When a defendant knowingly and voluntarily waives his
right to appeal his sentence, this court generally will not
review the merits of an appeal. Wells, 29 F.4th at 583–84.
But under the Bibler exception, we will hear an appeal
despite a waiver when a sentence is “illegal.” United States
v. Bibler, 495 F.3d 621, 624 (9th Cir. 2007). “A sentence is
illegal if it . . . violates the Constitution.” Id. (citation
omitted). Specifically, a defendant may escape an appeal
waiver under the Bibler exception “if (1) the defendant
raises a challenge that the sentence violates the Constitution;
(2) the constitutional claim directly challenges the sentence
itself; and (3) the constitutional challenge is not based on any
underlying constitutional right that was expressly and
specifically waived . . . .” Wells, 29 F.4th at 587.
Even if the Bibler exception to an appellate waiver
applies here, Davis’ Fifth Amendment claim ultimately fails
on the merits. 1
Recently, a three-judge panel decided that the second requirement—
that the defendant’s claim challenge the “sentence itself”—includes not
1

10

USA V. DAVIS

B. The district court did not violate Davis’ right
against self-incrimination by relying on his
voluntary psychological examination during
sentencing.
Davis argues that by considering his psychological
evaluation at sentencing, the district court forced him to
incriminate himself in violation of the Fifth Amendment.
Davis did not receive a Miranda warning before his
evaluation, although he consented to the evaluation after the
examiner reminded him that the results would be provided
to the court. Because Davis did not object to the use of the
evaluation on Fifth Amendment grounds during sentencing,
we review his claim for plain error. See Wells, 29 F.4th at
592. We conclude that the district court did not err by
considering Davis’ evaluation. 2

only substantive challenges but also procedural ones. See United States
v. Atherton, 106 F.4th 888, 894–95 (9th Cir. 2024) (extending Bibler
exception to “informational inputs to the court’s sentencing decision”),
vacated, 134 F.4th 1009 (9th Cir. 2025). But shortly after we heard
argument in this case, our court granted en banc review and vacated the
three-judge panel opinion. While Atherton remains pending before the
en banc court, it is an open question whether constitutional challenges to
the sentencing process fit under the Bibler exception. But the outcome
of Atherton will not change the outcome of Davis’ case because his claim
fails on the merits. We thus address the merits now rather than wait for
the en banc decision in Atherton. See Wells, 29 F.4th at 585 n.1 (“[A]
plea agreement’s appeal waiver does not divest our court of jurisdiction
to hear an appeal.”).
Davis’ argument that the district court also violated Rule 12.2(c)(4) is
barred by the appellate waiver because that claim is based on an alleged
violation of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure, not the
Constitution.
2

USA V. DAVIS

11

i. The
right
against
self-incrimination
articulated in Estelle v. Smith does not apply
in this context.
District courts enjoy “substantial discretion at
sentencing.” Baumann v. United States, 692 F.2d 565, 576
(9th Cir. 1982). The sentencing court “may consider any
relevant information,” regardless of its admissibility at trial,
as long as the information appears reliable. United States v.
Alvarado-Martinez, 556 F.3d 732, 735 (9th Cir. 2009). But
Davis argues that the Fifth Amendment right against selfincrimination limits the court’s discretion to consider the
results of his psychological evaluation.
Davis points to Estelle, in which the Supreme Court
established that the right against self-incrimination exists in
certain circumstances during sentencing. 451 U.S. at 466–
69. The facts in Estelle were “distinct.” Id. at 466. While
the defendant awaited his capital murder trial, the state court
sua sponte ordered that he undergo a psychiatric examination
to determine his competency to stand trial. Id. at 456–57.
The defendant was not advised before the examination of his
“right to remain silent and that any statement he made could
be used against him at a sentencing proceeding.” Id. at 461.
The examiner decided that the defendant was competent to
stand trial, and the case proceeded to trial. Id. at 457.
The defendant’s capital murder trial had two phases:
after he was found guilty of murder, a separate penalty
hearing before the same jury was held to determine whether
the defendant would receive a death sentence. Id. At the
penalty hearing, the state had to prove to the jury the
defendant’s future dangerousness beyond a reasonable
doubt. Id. at 458. To prove future dangerousness, the state
introduced testimony from the doctor who conducted the

12

USA V. DAVIS

defendant’s pretrial psychiatric examination. Id. at 458–60.
The defendant did not put his mental competency into issue
during the penalty hearing. Id. at 466. The jury returned a
death sentence. Id. at 458.
The Court in Estelle decided that the state violated the
defendant’s right against self-incrimination. Id. at 466–69.
The Court held that a “defendant, who neither initiates a
psychiatric evaluation nor attempts to introduce any
psychiatric evidence, may not be compelled to respond to a
psychiatrist if his statements can be used against him at a
capital sentencing proceeding.” Id. at 468. Under such
circumstances, we must assume that the defendant’s
statements “were not ‘given freely and voluntarily’” without
a Miranda warning. Id. at 469 (quoting Miranda, 384 U.S.
at 478).
Davis argues that we should extend the scope of Estelle
and hold that the district court’s consideration of his
psychological evaluation at sentencing was improper. Davis
contends that Estelle applies because he underwent a courtordered evaluation for one purpose (to determine his mental
competency) but that the examiner’s report was used for a
different purpose (sentencing).
But Davis’ case differs from Estelle in several important
ways. First, crucially, the trial judge in Estelle sua sponte
ordered the defendant to undergo the psychiatric
examination. Id. at 456–57. That the defendant in Estelle
did not request the examination informed the Court’s view
that his statements were not “given freely.” Id. at 469
(quoting Miranda, 384 U.S. at 478). Davis, in contrast,
voluntarily asked the court to order the evaluation. That
differentiates Davis’ case from the coercive nature of the sua
sponte examination in Estelle. Other decisions have

USA V. DAVIS

13

similarly distinguished Estelle based on whether the
defendant voluntarily requested the psychiatric evaluation.
See, e.g., Buchanan v. Kentucky, 483 U.S. 402, 422 (1987)
(refusing to extend Estelle to defendant who requested a
psychiatric examination later presented to the jury); Penry v.
Johnson, 532 U.S. 782, 795 (2001) (affirming lower court’s
decision not to apply Estelle to a capital defendant on habeas
review in part because he requested psychiatric exam);
Gibbs v. Frank, 387 F.3d 268, 274 (3d Cir. 2004) (“The Fifth
and Sixth Amendments do not necessarily attach, however,
when the defendant himself initiates the psychiatric
examination . . . .”).
Second, unlike Davis, the defendant in Estelle did not
know at the time of the examination that his statements
would be used during sentencing. 451 U.S. at 467. His
statements were “unwittingly made without an awareness
that he was assisting the State’s efforts to obtain the death
penalty.” Id. at 466. But here, Davis knew when he
requested the evaluation that the examiner would file a copy
of the report with his sentencer (the district court). In fact,
Davis voluntarily moved the court to order an examination
under 18 U.S.C. § 4241(b)—which requires a psychological
report be filed with the court. The examiner also reminded
Davis before starting the evaluation that any information he
provided could be shared with the court.
Granted, Davis requested the evaluation to determine his
mental competency rather than for consideration at
sentencing. But Davis should not have been surprised that
the district court would consider the report, given that a
sentencing court has discretion to consider a “largely
unlimited” scope of reliable information regardless of its
inadmissibility at trial. See United States v. Tucker, 404 U.S.
443, 446 (1972).

14

USA V. DAVIS

Further, the state relied on the defendant’s psychological
evaluation in Estelle in a meaningfully different way from
how the district court used Davis’ evaluation here. In
Estelle, the state used the defendant’s psychological
evaluation to prove “a critical issue at the sentencing
hearing, and one on which the State had the burden of proof
beyond a reasonable doubt.” 451 U.S. at 466. That the state
used the defendant’s evaluation to prove such a “crucial
issue” matters when translating the protections in Estelle to
noncapital sentencing. See id. at 467.
Here, the district court did not consider Davis’
evaluation to make any “crucial” factual determinations or
to satisfy the government’s burden of proof. Instead, the
court considered Davis’ report within its general
consideration of “the information concerning [Davis’]
background, character, and conduct . . . for the purpose of
imposing an appropriate sentence.” 18 U.S.C. § 3661; cf.
United States v. Kennedy, 499 F.3d 547, 551–52 (6th Cir.
2007) (holding that Mitchell did not “limit the district court’s
ability to consider” the defendant’s refusal to submit to a
psychosexual evaluation outside of determining the facts of
the offense); Lee v. Crouse, 451 F.3d 598, 605–06 (10th Cir.
2006) (similar).
We distinguished Estelle on similar grounds in
Baumann, 692 F.2d at 574–78. There, the defendant argued
that the district court violated his right against selfincrimination when it considered his presentence interview
with the probation officer during noncapital sentencing. Id.
at 574. We “read Estelle narrowly,” limiting it to its “distinct
circumstances.” Id. at 576. We held that “there is a
substantial difference between a psychiatric examination of
the defendant in a capital case which seeks to elicit evidence
from the defendant relating to the critical aggravating factor

USA V. DAVIS

15

of dangerousness, and a ‘routine’ presentence interview.”
Id. Even assuming the defendant was subject to custodial
interrogation in the interview, we held that “neither Estelle
itself, nor the general principles announced in Miranda,
require that a convicted defendant be warned of his right to
counsel and his right to remain silent prior to submitting to
a routine, authorized presentence interview.” 3 Id. And
although the presentence interview in Baumann was
compulsory like the psychological examination in Estelle,
we still held that the considerations that motivated Estelle
were not present there. So too here—especially where Davis
elected for his psychological evaluation before sentencing.
ii. Our decision aligns with the Sixth Circuit.
The Sixth Circuit rejected a claim nearly identical to
Davis’ in United States v. Graham-Wright, 715 F.3d 598
(6th Cir. 2013). There, the defendant claimed that the
district court violated his right against self-incrimination by
considering information from a psychiatric examination
That the right against self-incrimination does not attach to Davis’
evaluation is also evidenced by comparing Baumann to another case we
decided the same year. See Jones v. Caldwell, 686 F.2d 754 (9th Cir.
1982). In Jones, we held that the defendant’s privilege against selfincrimination was violated when the court increased the defendant’s
sentence after he confessed to “numerous other crimes” during a
presentence probation interview. Id. at 755. We held that the privilege
applies when “the state’s agent seeks from the convicted defendant a
confession of additional criminal activity and that confession is used to
enhance a defendant’s sentence.” Id. at 756. Meanwhile, in Baumann,
the judge relied on the probation officer’s view that the defendant’s
profession of innocence during the interview illustrated a “lack of
remorse.” 692 F.2d at 575. The facts of Baumann are more like how the
district court used Davis’ evaluation here: The court did not rely on any
confessions to other crimes to enhance Davis’ sentence, but rather
included the examiner’s report in its holistic consideration of Davis.
3

16

USA V. DAVIS

during noncapital sentencing. Id. at 601. As here, the
defendant in Graham-Wright requested an examination
under 18 U.S.C. § 4241 to determine his competency, and
the district court considered the results at sentencing. Id. at
600–01. The defendant first requested a defense-only
evaluation, but the district court denied that request and
ordered that the results be filed with the court. Id. at 603.
The Sixth Circuit held that there was no Fifth Amendment
violation and rejected the defendant’s analogy to Estelle.
Rather, the court held that Estelle was limited to its particular
facts: “a capital defendant’s right against self-incrimination”
involving “the results of an involuntary examination to prove
an aggravating factor.” Id. at 602.
Here, the facts are even worse for Davis than they were
for the defendant in Graham-Wright, who at first asked for
his examination not to be shared with the district court. That
the Sixth Circuit still declined to apply Estelle underscores
why we find no issue with the district court’s consideration
of Davis’ voluntary evaluation.
***
As in Baumann, we find that the Court’s holding in
Estelle does not extend beyond the “distinct circumstances”
of that case to Davis’ psychological evaluation here. See 451
U.S. at 466. The Estelle court made clear that its decision
did not necessarily apply to “all types of interviews and
examinations that might be ordered or relied upon to inform
a sentencing determination,” id. at 469 n.13, and we hold that
Estelle does not apply to the examination in this case. The
district court did not violate Davis’ right against selfincrimination by considering the results of his voluntary
examination when determining his sentence.

USA V. DAVIS

17

II. Davis’ appeal waiver bars his remaining claims.
Davis offers two other reasons why we should remand
this case for resentencing. Both are barred by the appeal
waiver in his plea agreement.
First, Davis challenges the two-point enhancement for
obstruction of justice under the Sentencing Guidelines. But
Davis waived his right to appeal his sentence as inconsistent
with the Guidelines. Although Davis summarily accuses the
district court of violating due process, that does not
transform his claim into a constitutional one that might have
survived his waiver under the Bibler exception. See
Waterkeeper All. v. U.S. Env’t Prot. Agency, 140 F.4th 1193,
1213 (9th Cir. 2025) (explaining that we do not consider
arguments that are not meaningfully developed in the
opening brief).
Second, Davis takes issue with two of his special
conditions of supervised release imposed under the
Guidelines. Davis again tries to invoke the Bibler exception
by claiming that the conditions violate his constitutional
rights, but he does not make any meaningful constitutional
argument. The appeal waiver bars this claim, too. 4
Perhaps aware that his claim does not survive the appeal waiver, Davis
also argues that he did not knowingly waive his right to appeal the
conditions of supervised release because the magistrate judge did not
expressly ask him whether he understood that the waiver included those
conditions. We look to the “circumstances surrounding the signing and
entry of the plea agreement to determine whether” a waiver was knowing
and voluntary. United States v. Lo, 839 F.3d 777, 783–84 (9th Cir. 2016)
(citation omitted). The circumstances here clearly show that Davis
knowingly waived his right to appeal his conditions of supervised
release. Davis’ appeal waiver expressly mentions claims about the
4

18

USA V. DAVIS

CONCLUSION
For the reasons discussed, we AFFIRM the sentence
imposed by the district court.

conditions, and the magistrate judge explained to Davis what supervised
release meant before reviewing the waiver. See United States v. Watson,
582 F.3d 974, 986–87 (9th Cir. 2009). Further, Davis repeatedly
confirmed that he understood the terms and impact of his waiver,
including that he discussed that waiver with his attorney “in great detail.”

