FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LANCE HARA, formerly known as
Vicky Vox,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 23-3768
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-03456RGK-AS

v.
NETFLIX, INC.; TITMOUSE, INC.;
LOL SEND, INC.; FREMULON,
LLC; UNIVERSAL TELEVISION
GROUP LLC; HAZY MILLS
PRODUCTIONS, INC.; 3 ARTS
ENTERTAINMENT, LLC; GABE
LIEDMAN; MICHAEL SCHUR;
SEAN HAYES; TODD MILLINER;
BEN HEINS; DAVID MINER,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
R. Gary Klausner, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 23, 2024
San Francisco, California
Filed July 28, 2025

2

HARA V. NETFLIX

Before: Richard R. Clifton, Jennifer Sung, and Gabriel P.
Sanchez, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Sanchez
SUMMARY *
Lanham Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal of an
action brought under the Lanham Act by Lance Hara,
professionally known as Vicky Vox, against Netflix, Inc.,
and others connected with the animated show Q-Force.
Vox alleged that an animated version of her likeness
appeared in a ten-second scene in the show as well as in the
official teaser and still image promoting the series. She sued
for unfair competition and false endorsement under 15
U.S.C. § 1125, alleging that the unauthorized use of her
image and likeness led viewers to believe that she endorsed
Q-Force.
The panel held that following Jack Daniel’s Properties,
Inc. v. VIP Products LLC, 599 U.S. 140 (2023), when the
challenged mark in an artistic work is used not to designate
a work’s source, but solely to perform some other expressive
function, the Rogers test applies. Under the Rogers test, the
Lanham Act does not apply to an expressive work unless the
use of the trademark or other identifying material has no
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

HARA V. NETFLIX

3

artistic relevance to the underlying work or explicitly
misleads as to the source or the content of the work.
The panel concluded that defendants’ alleged use of
Vox’s image and likeness in one episode of Q-Force and the
related teaser and still image in no way suggested or
identified Vox as a source or origin of the
show. Accordingly, the Rogers test applied. Under the
Rogers test, the use of Vox’s likeness had artistic relevance
to Q-Force, and there was no overt claim or explicit
misstatement that Vox was the source of Q-Force. Vox
therefore failed to satisfy either prong of the Rogers test.

COUNSEL
Heather L. Blaise (argued) and John H. Mattheessen,
Valkyrie Law Group PC, Chicago, Illinois, for PlaintiffAppellant.
Diana Palacios (argued), Cristina M. Salvato, and Joel
Richert, Davis Wright Tremaine LLP, Los Angeles,
California, for Defendants-Appellees.
Susan J. Kohlmann and Allison N. Douglis, Jenner & Block
LLP, New York, New York; Kara V. Brandeisky, Jenner &
Block LLP, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae the
Motion Picture Association, Inc..

4

HARA V. NETFLIX

OPINION
SANCHEZ, Circuit Judge:
This case presents a straightforward, but nonetheless
novel, question of law: In light of the Supreme Court’s
narrow decision in Jack Daniel’s Properties, Inc. v. VIP
Products LLC, 599 U.S. 140 (2023), does the Rogers test
apply to a trademark infringement claim involving an
animated television series where the allegedly infringing
mark was not used to designate the source or origin of the
show? See Rogers v. Grimaldi, 875 F.2d 994 (2d Cir. 1989).
Given the fleeting use of Vicky Vox’s (“Vox’s”) image and
likeness “solely to perform some other expressive function”
on the Netflix show, Q-Force, the answer is yes. Jack
Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at 154. We affirm the district court’s
conclusion that the Rogers test applies and forecloses Vox’s
claims under the Lanham Act.
I.
Plaintiff-Appellant Lance Hara, professionally known as
Vicky Vox, appeals the district court’s dismissal of her First
Amended Complaint (“FAC”) against DefendantsAppellees Netflix, Inc. (“Netflix”) and others connected
with the show. In 2021, Netflix released an animated series,
Q-Force, about a group of underappreciated queer spies who
must save the planet from various dangers. Vox claims that
an animated version of her likeness appears in a single tensecond scene as well as the official teaser and still image
promoting the series. Vox sued under section 43(a) of the
Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1125, alleging that the
unauthorized use of her image and likeness led viewers to
believe that she endorsed Q-Force.

HARA V. NETFLIX

5

The FAC alleges that Q-Force is “an animated series
about ‘gay James Bond.’” Specifically, Q-Force is “about a
group of LGBT spies working for the American Intelligence
Agency . . . who, despite being the best in their field, are
undervalued due to their sexualities and identities.”
Defendant-Appellee Gabe Liedman (“Liedman”), the cocreator and writer of Q-Force, “publicly admitted that every
character in Q-Force is based on someone in real life in order
to ground the Project in reality.” Q-Force is streaming on
Netflix and consists of ten thirty-minute episodes.
Vox is a “well-known Drag Queen in Hollywood.” She
regularly hosts drag events in West Hollywood and is best
known for her drag band. She has appeared in theater
productions, reality television shows, films, and music
videos. During her events and performances, “Vox
commonly uses a fan as part of her drag persona.” Vox
alleges that her image and likeness is featured in episode five
of Q-Force, the official teaser for the show, and a still image
that Netflix provided to an online LGBT publication, Them.
Episode five of Q-Force, the official teaser, and the still
image allegedly show Vox’s “voluminous red-orange hair
styled with a center part, defined, close together eyebrows,
cat-eye make-up, face shape, nose structure, full jawline,
high cheek bones, [and] full bodied figure.”

6

HARA V. NETFLIX

In the ten-second scene of episode five, one of the main
characters, a gay spy named Twink, is having cocktails in a
West Hollywood gay bar while surrounded by a group of
four unnamed drag queens who do not speak. Agent Steve
Maryweather, Q-Force’s protagonist and leader of the
LGBT spy squad, calls out to Twink from across the bar.
Twink replies, “Oh, hey, girl!” and then turns to the four drag
queens and whispers, “That’s my job daddy.” The drag
queens then turn to check out Agent Maryweather, three of
whom pull out eyewear (hot pink sunglasses, opera glasses,
and a monocle) to get a better look at this buff “gay James
Bond.” The fourth drag queen, Vox, “thworps” open an
orange folding fan with the word “Hot” emblazoned across
the fan. 1 Twink then states, “Right? Anyway, don’t let me
keep you from your hollandaise. Just having a union
meeting over here.” That is the extent to which Vox appears
in the series.
Around June 2021, Netflix posted an official teaser for
Q-Force on YouTube, 2 which stated, “[n]ever hide who you
are. Unless you’re undercover. Q-FORCE, the first queer
spy division, is coming to Netflix on September 2, [2021].”
The official teaser contains links soliciting consumers to
subscribe to Netflix’s YouTube channel and subscription
streaming service, and to make purchases on Netflix’s online
merchandise store. Liedman admitted that the official teaser
was “timed to come out during Pride.”

The official teaser for the series, which opens with a clip from this
scene, cuts away at this point to introduce the members of Q-Force.
1

The official trailer for the show is longer than the official teaser and
does not feature Vox in it.
2

HARA V. NETFLIX

7

After the teaser was released, Vox was contacted by
family, friends, fellow drag performers, and fans who
“expressed confusion and concern” regarding her
“connection with” Q-Force. Vox did not grant Netflix
permission to use her image and likeness on the show,
official teaser, or still image. Vox brings three causes of
action for unfair competition and false endorsement under
§ 43(a) of the Lanham Act. The other causes of action are
state law claims regarding Vox’s right of publicity.
The district court dismissed Vox’s federal claims with
prejudice, finding that because Q-Force and its official
teaser were expressive works entitled to heightened First
Amendment protection under Rogers, she had failed to state
a claim. The district court dismissed Vox’s state law claims
for lack of subject-matter jurisdiction. Vox timely appealed.

8

HARA V. NETFLIX

II.
Section 43(a) of the Lanham Act provides for a civil
cause of action against
[a]ny person who, on or in connection with
any goods or services, or any container for
goods, uses in commerce any word, term,
name, symbol, or device, or any combination
thereof, or any false designation of origin,
false or misleading description of fact, or
false or misleading representation of fact,
which . . . is likely to cause confusion, or to
cause mistake, or to deceive as to the
affiliation, connection, or association of such
person with another person, or as to the
origin, sponsorship, or approval of his or her
goods, services, or commercial activities by
another person[.]
15 U.S.C. § 1125(a)(1)(A). “A trademark is a word, phrase
or symbol that is used to identify a manufacturer or sponsor
of a good or the provider of a service.” Mattel, Inc. v. MCA
Recs., Inc., 296 F.3d 894, 900 (9th Cir. 2002). It serves an
“identifying purpose,” for the owner to “prevent[] others
from duping consumers into buying a product they
mistakenly believe is sponsored by the trademark owner.”
Id. Although Lanham Act claims “generally relate to the use
of trademarks or trade dress to cause consumer confusion
over affiliation or endorsement, we have held that claims can
also be brought under § 43(a) relating to the use of a public
figure’s persona, likeness, or other uniquely distinguishing
characteristic to cause such confusion.” Brown v. Elec. Arts,
Inc., 724 F.3d 1235, 1239 (9th Cir. 2013); see also Waits v.

HARA V. NETFLIX

9

Frito-Lay, Inc., 978 F.2d 1093, 1110 (9th Cir. 1992) (“A
false endorsement claim based on the unauthorized use of a
celebrity’s identity . . . alleges the misuse of a trademark,
i.e., a symbol or device such as a visual likeness . . . , which
is likely to confuse consumers as to the plaintiff’s
sponsorship or approval of the product.”); White v. Samsung
Elecs. Am., Inc., 971 F.2d 1395, 1400 (9th Cir. 1992) (“In
cases involving confusion over endorsement by a celebrity
plaintiff, ‘mark’ means the celebrity’s persona.”).
Section 43(a) claims are normally reviewed under the
likelihood-of-confusion test. See Twentieth Century Fox
Television v. Empire Distrib., Inc., 875 F.3d 1192, 1196 (9th
Cir. 2017); Brown, 724 F.3d at 1241–43. Under this test, we
inquire “whether a ‘reasonably prudent consumer’ in the
marketplace is likely to be confused as to the origin of the
good or service bearing one of the marks,” applying the eight
“Sleekcraft” factors to facilitate our inquiry. Dreamwerks
Prod. Grp. v. SKG Studio, 142 F.3d 1127, 1129 (9th Cir.
1998); see also AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341
(9th Cir. 1979), abrogated in part on other grounds by
Mattel, Inc. v. Walking Mountain Prods., 353 F.3d 792, 810
n.19 (9th Cir. 2003). When the alleged infringement
involves the title or some other aspect of an expressive work,
however, we employ the Rogers test to determine whether
the Lanham Act applies. See Twentieth Century Fox, 875
F.3d at 1196 (citing Mattel, 296 F.3d at 902).
Rogers concerned the 1986 film “Ginger and Fred.”
Rogers, 875 F.2d at 996–97. The film is a work of fiction
about two Italian cabaret performers, named Pippo and
Amelia, who developed an act imitating Ginger Rogers and
Fred Astaire. Id. Rogers sued under the Lanham Act,
alleging that the title “creat[ed] the false impression that the
film was about her or that she sponsored, endorsed, or was

10

HARA V. NETFLIX

otherwise involved in the film.” Id. at 997. Recognizing a
First Amendment interest in protecting expressive works,
the Second Circuit held that “in general the [Lanham] Act
should be construed to apply to artistic works only where the
public interest in avoiding consumer confusion outweighs
the public interest in free expression.” Id. at 999. Rogers
observed that expressive works may reference a celebrity
“without any overt indication of authorship or
endorsement,” such as the song titled “Bette Davis Eyes.”
Id. In these situations—where the celebrity is not overtly
identified as the source or sponsor of the work—Rogers
concluded there is only a “slight risk” of consumer
confusion. Id. at 999–1000. After weighing that risk against
“the danger of restricting artistic expression,” Rogers held
that the Lanham Act claim was precluded. Id. at 1000.
Our circuit does not apply § 43(a) of the Lanham Act to
expressive works “unless the [use of the trademark or other
identifying material] has no artistic relevance to the
underlying work whatsoever, or, if it has some artistic
relevance, unless the [use of trademark or other identifying
material] explicitly misleads as to the source or the content
of the work.” Brown, 724 F.3d at 1239 (quoting Rogers, 875
F.2d at 999). In Mattel, for example, the Barbie doll maker
sued the European pop band Aqua for trademark
infringement over their song “Barbie Girl,” which featured
lyrics such as “I’m a blond[e] bimbo girl, in a fantasy world”
and “Life in plastic, it’s fantastic.” 296 F.3d at 901.
Applying Rogers, we held that the song title used the Barbie
mark in an artistically relevant manner to foreshadow the
satirical message of the song poking fun at Barbie and the
values Aqua claims she represents. Id. We also concluded
that the song title “does not explicitly mislead as to the
source of the work” in that “it does not, explicitly or

HARA V. NETFLIX

11

otherwise, suggest that it was produced by Mattel.” Id. at
902. Aqua and MCA Records, Inc. were therefore not
subject to trademark liability for use of the Barbie mark in
the song title. Id.
We have applied Rogers in contexts in which the
allegedly infringing use of a trademark involved the title or
body of a creative work. 3 Vox argues that “the cases
applying the Rogers test and rejecting the likelihood of
confusion test should not be relied upon” following the
Supreme Court’s recent decision in Jack Daniel’s. Vox
misinterprets the Court’s narrow decision in Jack Daniel’s
and its applicability to her case.
As Vox concedes, Jack Daniel’s did not overrule Rogers.
In addressing a trademark infringement claim, Jack Daniel’s
declined to reach the broader merits of the Rogers test and
whether it is appropriate to apply a threshold First
Amendment inquiry to trademark infringement claims that
involve expressive works. See Jack Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at
145 (“[W]e do not decide whether the threshold [Rogers]
inquiry applied in the Court of Appeals is ever warranted.”);
id. at 155 (taking “no position” on the validity of Rogers).
Instead, the Court narrowed its holding to one situation
where the Rogers test does not apply. “Without deciding
whether Rogers has merit in other contexts, we hold that it
does not when an alleged infringer uses a trademark in the

3
See, e.g., Walking Mountain Prods., 353 F.3d at 796, 807
(photographs); E.S.S. Ent. 2000, Inc. v. Rock Star Videos, Inc., 547 F.3d
1095, 1096–99 (video game); Brown, 724 F.3d at 1239–42 (video game);
Twentieth Century Fox, 875 F.3d at 1195–97 (television show title); Dr.
Seuss Enters., L.P. v. ComicMix LLC, 983 F.3d 443, 461–62 (9th Cir.
2020) (book title).

12

HARA V. NETFLIX

way the Lanham Act most cares about: as a designation of
source for the infringer’s own goods.” Id. at 153.
In Jack Daniel’s, the respondent, VIP Products LLC,
manufactured a squeaky, chewable dog toy designed to look
like a bottle of Jack Daniel’s whiskey. Id. at 144. “On the
toy, for example, the words ‘Jack Daniel’s’ become ‘Bad
Spaniels.’ And the descriptive phrase ‘Old No. 7 Brand
Tennessee Sour Mash Whiskey’ turns into ‘The Old No.
2 On Your Tennessee Carpet.’” Id. Petitioner Jack Daniel’s,
which owns trademarks in the distinctive square Jack
Daniel’s bottle and many of the words and graphics on the
label, sued for trademark infringement and dilution. Id. at
148–51. Petitioner alleged that “Bad Spaniels” infringed the
marks by causing consumers to believe that Jack Daniel’s
had created the dog chew toy, and diluted the marks by
associating the famous whiskey company with a crass
novelty product. Id. at 144.
Despite the parodic and creative uses of the trademarks,
the Court held that the Rogers test is inapplicable “when the
accused infringer has used a trademark to designate the
source of its own goods—in other words, has used a
trademark as a trademark.” Id. at 145. The primary function
of every trademark, the Court explained, is “to identify the
origin or ownership of the article to which it is affixed.” Id.
at 146. “[W]hether the use of a mark is serving a sourcedesignation function” is crucial to the Lanham Act’s
objective of “ensur[ing] that consumers can tell where goods
come from.” Id. at 163. When VIP “use[d] its Bad Spaniels
trademark and trade dress as source identifiers of its dog
toy,” id. at 159–60, the Court held, “[t]hat kind of use falls
within the heartland of trademark law” and “does not receive
special First Amendment protection.” Id. at 145.

HARA V. NETFLIX

13

Jack Daniel’s explained that lower courts applying
Rogers have cabined it to situations in which “a trademark is
used not to designate a work’s source, but solely to perform
some other expressive function.” Id. at 154. The Court cited
our decision in Mattel as properly applying Rogers because
“the band’s use of the Barbie name was ‘not [as] a source
identifier’: The use did not ‘speak[] to [the song’s] origin.’”
Id. (quoting Mattel, 296 F.3d at 900, 902). On the other
hand, courts “routinely conduct likelihood-of-confusion
analysis, without mentioning Rogers, when trademarks are
used as trademarks—i.e., to designate source.” Id. at 155.
The Court observed that “the Rogers test has applied only to
cases involving ‘non-trademark uses’”—i.e., “cases in
which ‘the defendant has used the mark’ at issue in a ‘nonsource-identifying way.’” Id. at 155–56 (citations omitted).
That is so even when the “use of a mark has other expressive
content—i.e., because it conveys some message on top of
source.” Id. at 157. As the Court reasoned, “few cases
would even get to the likelihood-of-confusion inquiry if all
expressive content triggered the Rogers filter.” Id. at 158–
59.
More recently, we applied Jack Daniel’s in a trademark
infringement suit involving two companies that used the
word “Punchbowl” in their respective marks.
See
Punchbowl, Inc. v. AJ Press, LLC, 90 F.4th 1022 (9th Cir.
2024). We emphasized that “[t]he Court in Jack Daniel’s
was careful to note that it was not opining on the broader
validity of the Rogers test.” Id. at 1029. “[B]ecause the
Supreme Court’s decision in Jack Daniel’s was confined to
a ‘narrow’ point of law, that Rogers does not apply when a
mark is used as a mark, preexisting Ninth Circuit precedent
adopting and applying Rogers otherwise remains intact and
binding on three-judge panels.” Id. at 1031 (internal citation

14

HARA V. NETFLIX

omitted). Accordingly, we apply the guiding principle that
when the challenged mark in an artistic work is “used not to
designate a work’s source, but solely to perform some other
expressive function,” Jack Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at 154, the
Rogers test applies.
III.
A.
We first determine whether Defendants allegedly used
Vox’s trademark image and likeness on Q-Force in a sourceidentifying manner or whether the mark was instead used to
perform some other expressive function. We review the
district court’s dismissal of Vox’s complaint de novo, taking
“all well-pleaded factual allegations in the complaint as true”
and “construing them in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party.” Abcarian v. Levine, 972 F.3d 1019, 1022
(9th Cir. 2020) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). We conclude that the Rogers test applies because
the alleged ten-second use of Vox’s image and likeness in
one episode of Q-Force and the related teaser and still image
in no way suggests or identifies Vox as a source or origin of
the show.
Recall that Q-Force is a series about a group of LGBT
spies who, despite being undervalued by their bosses due to
their sexualities and identities, must use their formidable
talents to save the world. The bar scene in episode five is
incidental to the overall theme of the episode and series. The
scene depicts the show’s “gay James Bond,” Agent
Maryweather, looked over admiringly by Agent Twink and
four unnamed drag queens at a West Hollywood gay bar.
According to the FAC, the animated drag queen alleged to
resemble Vox is shown “as an unspeaking background
character whose sole role is to perform a fan ‘thworp’ as a

HARA V. NETFLIX

15

punchline to another character’s joke.” Vox complains that
the show reduced her long and accomplished career as a drag
queen performer to that of “a mere element of the setting, a
part of the furniture.”
While it is understandable that Vox would not want her
image to be reduced to a prop or background element, the
allegations fail to establish that Vox’s likeness was used by
Defendants as a mark. That is, Vox does not allege that the
use of her likeness in Q-Force, the official teaser, or the still
image indicated or even suggested that she was the source or
origin of the series. Like Mattel, Defendants’ alleged use of
Vox’s image “d[oes] not ‘speak[] to [the series’] origin.’”
Jack Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at 154 (quoting Mattel, 296 F.3d at
902); see also id. (“[A] consumer would no more think that
the [Barbie Girl] song was ‘produced by Mattel’ than would,
‘upon hearing Janis Joplin croon ‘Oh Lord, won’t you buy
me a Mercedes Benz?,’ . . . suspect that she and the
carmaker had entered into a joint venture.’” (quoting Mattel,
296 F.3d at 902)).
Rather, Vox’s image and likeness in the ten-second
scene is used “solely to perform some other expressive
function” for the series. Id. As discussed, her character
performs a fan “thworp” that sets up the punchline to a joke
about hunky Agent Maryweather, reflecting the banter and
style of humor used in the series. Vox’s likeness, along with
three other distinctive-looking drag queens, helps ground the
scene of a West Hollywood gay bar in realism. As Vox
alleges, the show’s creators “publicly admitted that every
character in Q-Force is based on someone in real life in order
to ground the Project in reality.” In this way, the alleged use
of Vox’s image in Q-Force is no different than the use of
football legend Jim Brown’s likeness in the Madden NFL
video game, Brown, 724 F.3d at 1238–40, the use of a

16

HARA V. NETFLIX

fictional hip-hop record label named “Empire Enterprises”
in a television show, Twentieth Century Fox, 875 F.3d at
1195, or the use of a virtual strip club in the video game
Grand Theft Auto, E.S.S. Ent. 2000, 547 F.3d at 1097–99.
We applied Rogers to each of these examples because the
use of a name, likeness, or trademark to imbue a setting or
expressive work with a sense of realism constituted uses of
a mark in “non-source-identifying way[s].” Jack Daniel’s,
599 U.S. at 155–56 (citation omitted).
Contrast this with the dog chew toy in Jack Daniel’s,
which used the “Bad Spaniels” trademark as a source
identifier. Id. at 159–60. By employing the similar square
shape and size of the Jack Daniel’s bottle as well as its black
and white stylized text, VIP invoked an image of the Jack
Daniel’s classic whiskey bottle. Id. at 148–49. VIP
conceded that “it both own[ed] and use[d] the Bad Spaniels
trademark and trade dress for its durable rubber squeaky
novelty dog toy.” Id. at 160 (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted). VIP “consistently argued in court that it
owns, though has never registered, the trademark and trade
dress in dog toys like ‘Jose Perro’ (cf. Jose Cuervo) and
‘HeinieSniff ’n’ (cf. Heineken).” Id. The infringing
trademark in Jack Daniel’s was therefore used to designate
the source and ownership of its own good. Such facts are
not alleged in this case, nor could they be given the fleeting
use of Vox’s likeness on the show.
Vox does not meaningfully dispute that Netflix did not
use her mark to identify her as the owner or origin of QForce. Instead, Vox asserts that the Rogers test is
nevertheless inapplicable because Netflix’s use of her
likeness “create[d] the false impression among consumers”
that she endorses Q-Force as well as the unrelated products
advertised in connection with Q-Force’s official teaser on

HARA V. NETFLIX

17

YouTube. 4 Vox contends that “the distinction between false
designation of source and false endorsement, association
and/or affiliation is immaterial, as both trigger the likelihood
of confusion analysis because the prohibition of both
infringing acts emanates from a single section of the Lanham
Act.” We disagree.
Jack Daniel’s explained that while trademarks can do
many other things, their central feature—what “the Lanham
Act most cares about”—is “as a designation of source for the
infringer’s own goods.” Id. at 153.
From its definition of “trademark” onward,
the Lanham Act views marks as source
identifiers—as things that function to
“indicate the source” of goods, and so to
“distinguish” them from ones “manufactured
or sold by others.” The cardinal sin under
[trademark] law . . . is to confuse consumers
about source—to make (some of) them think
that one producer’s products are another’s.
And that kind of confusion is most likely to
arise when someone uses another’s
trademark as a trademark—meaning, again,

Netflix’s alleged advertisement of unrelated products refers to the
banner advertising for third-party products that automatically populates
on its YouTube channel. But as Netflix points out, “the fact that the
YouTube webpage where the Official Teaser is posted automatically
populates with digital banner advertisements for third-party products,
does not somehow transform the Official Teaser into an advertisement
for Stranger Things trading cards or a ‘Yu-Gi-Oh BE@RBrick toy.’”

4

18

HARA V. NETFLIX

as a source identifier—rather than for some
other expressive function.
Id. at 156–57 (internal citations omitted).
Jack Daniel’s made clear that use of an infringing mark
for source-designation is what disallows application of the
Rogers test, not other uses such as affiliation or implied
endorsement. The Court cited Louis Vuitton Malletier S.A.
v. Warner Bros. Entertainment Inc., 868 F. Supp. 2d 172
(S.D.N.Y. 2012), as an example in which dismissal of a
complaint made sense under Rogers. Jack Daniel’s, 599
U.S. at 154–55. Louis Vuitton sued Warner Bros. because a
character in the film The Hangover: Part II described his
knock-off luggage as a “Louis Vuitton” (pronouncing it
“Lewis”). Louis Vuitton, 868 F. Supp. 2d at 175, 178. The
parties agreed that the film was not using the Louis Vuitton
mark as its “own identifying trademark.” Id. at 180 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). Nevertheless, Louis
Vuitton sued because consumers might believe it “ha[d]
sponsored and approved Warner Bros.’ use and
misrepresentation of the infringing [knock-off b]ag as a
genuine product of Louis Vuitton.” Id. at 175 (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted).
The district court dismissed the complaint under Rogers,
finding that “the Lanham Act accommodates the public’s
interest in free expression by restricting its application to
those situations that present the greatest risk of consumer
confusion: namely, when trademarks are used to ‘dupe[]
consumers into buying a product they mistakenly believe is
sponsored by the trademark owner.’” Id. at 180 (quoting

HARA V. NETFLIX

19

E.S.S. Ent. 2000, 547 F.3d at 1100). 5 As the Supreme Court
indicated in Jack Daniel’s, simply depicting a trademark in
a film does not constitute use of that mark as a source
identifier. See Jack Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at 154–55. After all,
Rogers itself involved a claim that the actress Ginger Rogers
had endorsed or was affiliated with the film, and yet the court
in Rogers applied the First Amendment screen in that
situation. See Rogers, 875 F.2d at 1001.
If a background character with no dialogue in a tensecond scene of an animated series does not trigger the
Rogers test, then it is hard to imagine when the Rogers test
would ever apply. In the context before us, where a
defendant plainly does not use a trademark as a source
identifier, we hold that Rogers and its progeny apply.
B.
Having determined that Jack Daniel’s does not foreclose
the application of Rogers to Vox’s Lanham Act claims, we
now turn to the Rogers test. The Rogers test requires the
defendant to first “make a threshold legal showing that its
allegedly infringing use is part of an expressive work
protected by the First Amendment.” Punchbowl, 90 F.4th at
1028 (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). “If the
defendant meets this burden, the Lanham Act does not apply
unless the defendant’s use of the mark (1) is not artistically
relevant to the work or (2) explicitly misleads consumers as
to the source or the content of the work.” Id. (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). “We decide this legal
The district court also found that the allegations of confusion were not
plausible, noting that no other reference to Louis Vuitton was made in
the film and the luggage appeared in the background for less than thirty
seconds in total. Id. at 182.

5

20

HARA V. NETFLIX

question de novo.” Twentieth Century Fox, 875 F.3d at 1196
(citing Brown, 724 F.3d at 1240–41).
1.
As an initial matter, the parties do not dispute that QForce is an expressive work. The series “communicate[s]
ideas—and even social messages—through many familiar
literary devices (such as characters, dialogue, plot, and
music).” Brown, 724 F.3d at 1241 (internal quotation marks
and citation omitted); see also Twentieth Century Fox, 875
F.3d at 1196 (“The Empire television show itself is clearly
an expressive work.”).
Vox argues, however, that Netflix’s use of her likeness
extends beyond the body of the show, pointing to the official
teaser and still image. We addressed a similar argument in
Twentieth Century Fox, where the “Empire” mark was used
in online advertising, live events, and the sale of consumer
goods. 875 F.3d at 1196. “Although it is true that these
promotional efforts technically fall outside the title or body
of an expressive work, it requires only a minor logical
extension of the reasoning of Rogers to hold that works
protected under its test may be advertised and marketed by
name.” Id. at 1196–97. As we noted, “[t]he balance of First
Amendment interests struck in Rogers and Mattel could be
destabilized if the titles of expressive works were protected
but could not be used to promote those works.” Id. at 1197.
We ultimately held that promotional activities, even those
that produce revenue, are auxiliary to the work itself. Id. So
too here, the scene in Q-Force, its official teaser, and the still
image are all subject to the Rogers test.

HARA V. NETFLIX

21

2.
Under the first prong of Rogers, Lanham Act claims for
misappropriating a person’s likeness in expressive works are
actionable “only if the use of the mark has ‘no artistic
relevance to the underlying work whatsoever.’” Punchbowl,
90 F.4th at 1028 (quoting E.S.S. Ent. 2000, 547 F.3d at
1099). The bar for “artistic relevance” is “set low.”
Twentieth Century Fox, 875 F.3d at 1198. Artistic relevance
“merely must be above zero.” E.S.S. Ent. 2000, 547 F.3d at
1100. The use of an animated drag queen alleged to
resemble Vox is artistically relevant to Q-Force because it is
a series “about a group of LGBT spies.” In Q-Force, Vox
“is depicted inside a bar in West Hollywood,” the city where
Vox allegedly performs and the show is partially set. The
episode in which Vox appears is titled “WeHo
Confidential.” Recreating an animated version of a West
Hollywood bar with references to drag queens and cocktails
is artistically relevant to the plot and social commentary of
Q-Force. The alleged use of Vox’s likeness is an artistic
choice that supports the show’s theme and geographic
setting, and as discussed above, grounds the scene in a sense
of realism. Indeed, Vox herself alleges that the use of her
likeness “reduc[es] her identity . . . to a mere element of the
setting, a part of the furniture.” See Twentieth Century Fox,
875 F.3d at 1199 (“A title may have artistic relevance by
linking the work to another mark, as with ‘Barbie Girl,’ or it
may have artistic relevance by supporting the themes and
geographic setting of the work, as with Empire.”). Vox’s
allegations thus fail to satisfy the first prong of Rogers.
3.
Under the second prong of Rogers, if the use of a
person’s likeness is artistically relevant to the expressive

22

HARA V. NETFLIX

work, “the creator of the expressive work can be subject to a
Lanham Act claim if the creator uses the mark or material to
‘explicitly mislead[] [consumers] as to the source or the
content of the work.’” Brown, 724 F.3d at 1245 (second and
third alterations in original) (quoting Rogers, 875 F.2d at
999). The relevant question here is whether there was “‘an
explicit indication, overt claim, or explicit misstatement’
about the source of the work.” Punchbowl, 90 F.4th at 1028
(citation omitted). “[T]he mere use of a trademark alone
cannot suffice to make such use explicitly misleading.”
E.S.S. Ent. 2000, 547 F.3d at 1100.
Here, the FAC is devoid of any allegations purporting to
show an “overt claim” or “explicit misstatement” that Vox
is the source of Q-Force. Vox alleges that Liedman
“publicly admitted that every character in Q-Force is based
on someone in real life in order to ground the Project in
reality and that in making casting decisions he wanted to hire
someone actually in the drag community.” Accepting these
allegations as true, they do not establish that Netflix made an
overt claim or expressly misled consumers into thinking that
Vox is somehow behind the series. See Brown, 724 F.3d at
1247 (“[A] statement made . . . about all of the likenesses
used in the game could not realistically be expected to
confuse consumers as to Brown’s involvement.”). The FAC
itself alleges that Defendants briefly used Vox’s likeness,
along with three other animated drag queens, as a
background character of a single scene. That is not enough
to satisfy the second prong of Rogers. See id. at 1246
(“Brown needs to prove that [Electronic Arts (“EA”)]
explicitly misled consumers about Brown’s endorsement of
the game, not that EA used Brown’s likeness in the game.”);
see also Gordon v. Drape Creative, Inc., 909 F.3d 257, 271
(9th Cir. 2018) (“[I]n the cases extending Rogers to instances

HARA V. NETFLIX

23

in which a mark was incorporated into the body of an
expressive work, we made clear that the mark served as only
one component of the larger expressive work.”).
Vox alleges that her family, friends, fellow drag
performers, and fans contacted her “express[ing] confusion
and concern about her connection with” Q-Force.
Accepting her allegations as true, these allegations are
insufficient to satisfy the second prong of Rogers. As we
explained in Brown, “[t]o be relevant, evidence must relate
to the nature of the behavior of the identifying material’s
user, not the impact of the use.” 724 F.3d at 1246. Even
when Hall of Fame running back Jim Brown was prepared
to offer a consumer survey showing that players of Madden
NFL believed he had endorsed the game, we concluded that
such evidence “would not support the claim that the use was
explicitly misleading to consumers.” Id.; see also Dr. Seuss
Enters., 983 F.3d at 462 (holding that “Seuss’s evidence of
consumer confusion in its expert survey” does not satisfy the
second prong of Rogers). Similarly, even though Vox’s
close friends, coworkers, and fans expressed confusion
about Vox’s connection to the show, the allegations fail to
demonstrate an “explicit indication,” “overt claim,” or
“explicit misstatement” by Defendants regarding Q-Force’s
relationship with Vox. See Brown, 724 F.3d at 1245
(“‘[T]he slight risk that . . . use of a celebrity’s [likeness]
might implicitly suggest endorsement or sponsorship to
some people is outweighed by the danger of restricting
artistic expression, and [in the absence of any explicitly
misleading statements] the Lanham Act is not applicable.’”
(quoting Rogers, 875 F.2d at 1000)). Vox fails to satisfy the
second prong of the Rogers test.

24

HARA V. NETFLIX

IV.
Finally, Vox argues that she was denied the opportunity
to conduct discovery concerning actual consumer confusion
and Netflix’s intent. Actual consumer confusion and intent
are only relevant under the likelihood-of-confusion test. See
Sleekcraft, 599 F.2d at 348–49. Before reaching the
Sleekcraft factors, Vox must prevail on at least one of the
prongs of the Rogers test. See Gordon, 909 F.3d at 264–65;
Jack Daniel’s, 599 U.S. at 157 (“[T]he Rogers test . . . offers
an escape from the likelihood-of-confusion inquiry and a
shortcut to dismissal.”). Vox is not entitled to discovery
because she fails to satisfy either prong of the Rogers test as
a matter of law.
Nor is it likely that further amendment of the complaint
would alter the outcome. A second amended complaint
cannot show that Defendants allegedly used Vox’s likeness
in a source-identifying way when, as Vox acknowledges, the
use of her image and likeness was limited to a single tensecond scene of the ten-episode series, and there is no
indication that she originated the show. Thus, the district
court did not abuse its discretion by dismissing the complaint
without leave to amend where further amendment would
have been futile. See Cervantes v. Countrywide Home
Loans, Inc., 656 F.3d 1034, 1041 (9th Cir. 2011).
*

*

*

This case presents a quintessential example of when the
Rogers test applies to the use of a trademark in an expressive
work following Jack Daniel’s. Here, Defendants used Vox’s
image and likeness solely in an expressive manner to lend
reality to the setting where part of the series takes place, not
to designate Vox as the source or origin of Q-Force. We

HARA V. NETFLIX

25

conclude that the district court properly dismissed Vox’s
Lanham Act claims under the Rogers test.
AFFIRMED.

