FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
KEENON GREEN,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 23-1294
D.C. No.
3:22-cr-00187CAB-1

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Southern District of California
Cathy Ann Bencivengo, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 13, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 10, 2025
Before: Ryan D. Nelson, Kenneth K. Lee, and Jennifer
Sung, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Lee

2

USA V. GREEN

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of Keenon
Green’s motion for discovery by which Green sought to
pursue a selective enforcement claim, and the sentence
imposed by the district court, in a case in which Green was
convicted of attempted sex trafficking of a minor and
attempted sexual enticement of a minor.
Before trial, Green, who is Black, unsuccessfully sought
discovery to pursue a selective enforcement claim based on
race discrimination. He argued on appeal that the district
court failed to properly apply United States v. Sellers, which
gives courts the discretion to determine whether a criminal
defendant has provided “something more than mere
speculation to be entitled to discovery” about selective
enforcement. 906 F.3d 848, 855 (9th Cir. 2018).
The panel held that the district court did not abuse its
discretion in rejecting Green’s discovery requests, given that
he relied on an unreliably small sample size of past cases to
claim selective enforcement.
Rejecting Green’s argument that the district court
ignored his unwarranted sentencing disparity claim under
18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(6), the panel concluded that the district
court did not abuse its discretion by imposing a 144-month
sentence.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. GREEN

3

COUNSEL
Mark R. Rehe (argued), Jill Streja, and Daniel E. Zipp,
Assistant United States Attorneys, Office of the United
States Attorney, United States Department of Justice, San
Diego, California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Paul A. Barr (argued), Attorney, Federal Defenders of San
Diego, Inc., San Diego, California; for Defendant-Appellant.

OPINION
LEE, Circuit Judge:
Some people use Instagram to keep in touch with friends
and family. Others like to follow their favorite celebrities or
athletes. And then there is Keenon Green: He used
Instagram to offer his services as a pimp to a person he
believed to be a 16-year-old girl from San Diego. In reality,
he was communicating with an undercover officer. As a
result of the online sting operation, Green was arrested,
charged, and convicted of attempted sex trafficking of a
minor, 18 U.S.C. § 1591(a) & (b)(2), and attempted sexual
enticement of a minor, id. § 2422(b).
Before trial, Green, who is Black, unsuccessfully sought
discovery to pursue a selective enforcement claim based on
race discrimination. On appeal, he argues that the district
court failed to properly apply United States v. Sellers, which
gives courts the discretion to determine whether a criminal
defendant has provided “something more than mere

4

USA V. GREEN

speculation to be entitled to discovery” about selective
enforcement. 906 F.3d 848, 855 (9th Cir. 2018).
We conclude that the district court did not abuse its
discretion in rejecting Green’s discovery requests, given that
he relied on an unreliably small sample size of past cases to
claim selective enforcement. We also reject his argument
that the district court abused its discretion at sentencing by
ignoring his unwarranted disparity claim under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(a)(6). We affirm.
BACKGROUND
The San Diego Human Trafficking Task Force—
consisting of federal, state, and local law enforcement
officers—sometimes uses online sting operations to ferret
out sex trafficking.
In June 2021, a deputy created a fake Instagram account
under the handle “lexxmiche.” In creating the account, the
deputy chose the name “Lexi” and included photographs,
emojis, and a hashtag intended to show a connection to
prostitution. The photos included “risqué” pictures of a
white woman, lingerie, heels, and stacks of money. The
emojis featured a diamond, rose, crown, and money bags—
all signs that the deputy testified relate to prostitution in the
online world. And the hashtags included the number “304,”
which the deputy testified means “hoe.”
In operating the lexxmiche Instagram account, the
deputy followed certain practices. She never “initiated
communication” with other Instagram users; she
“responded” to each user who “sent a message” to her; and
she “continued messaging with Instagram users unless and
until” it became clear that the user “was not seeking to
engage in sex trafficking activity in San Diego County.”

USA V. GREEN

5

Keenon Green, too, was on Instagram, using the handle
“djokovic_11.” At some point, the lexxmiche account and
the djokovic_11 account started “following” each other,
although it is unknown which account followed the other
first.
Although the djokovic_11 account did not include a
profile photo, the deputy testified that she viewed one or
more “stories” from the djokovic_11 Instagram account
before Green sent her the first direct message. As noted
during Green’s trial, an Instagram “story” is like a post but
can only be viewed by other users for 24 hours. If a user
views another user’s story, the viewer’s username is visible
to the story’s creator for up to 48 hours.
In December 2021, Green sent the first direct message to
the lexxmiche account via Instagram: “Yo, you’re from San
Diego? Just curious. I recently moved to Fashion Valley. It
really be fake dry as far as nightlife, but the city is velvet.” 1
The deputy posing as “Lexi” confirmed she was from San
Diego. Green then asked “Lexi” to meet with him, a request
the deputy did not respond to. After sending a few more
messages that went unanswered, Green stated, “I attempted
to maybe, possibly become partners in crime, but you
couldn’t even give me an opportunity. It’s good. I really did
think you was different. But thanks.” The deputy
responded, “LMAO. What? You’re whack.” The deputy
and Green then exchanged messages intermittently over the
next day.
The messages exchanged between “Lexi” and Green were introduced
as exhibits and also read into the record. To aid the reader, this opinion
uses the spelling and punctuation that appear in the court transcript rather
than the messages themselves, which contain nontraditional spelling and
punctuation.
1

6

USA V. GREEN

The next month, Green sent a message to “Lexi”
proposing that they meet up in person and “have an authentic
conversation.” The deputy responded by asking Green,
“What are your rules?” The deputy asked about rules
because she believed that Green was asking about working
with him as a prostitute and in the context of “a pimping and
prostitution relationship, there’s going to be rules that are
established by the pimp or the trafficker for the prostitute to
follow.” Such rules may include “how much money” or
“whether or not they’re required to work out of town.” The
deputy later followed up by asking whether Green required
a “choose up” fee, which is money that a prostitute pays to a
pimp to start working with him. Green indicated he did not.
The next day, the deputy sent Green an Instagram
message intended to “put into the air that [she] was
potentially underage” to “see if he was willing to prostitute
out a juvenile.” The deputy told Green that she had been
“busy with schoolwork” the day before. After the deputy
explained that she had been doing her biology homework,
Green asked her if she was in high school. The deputy said
that she was “finishing it up online.” Green then asked,
“How old are you?” to which the deputy answered, “16?”
The deputy testified that she included the question mark not
to signify a lack of knowledge about her age but to mean “is
that okay?” and “why are you asking?” Green responded by
telling “Lexi” to call him and provided his cell phone
number.
The rest of the messages between Green and the deputy
took place over text message. Green asked when he and
“Lexi” could meet in person. The deputy wrote back asking
Green how he could help her. Green explained his plan for
“Lexi” to work “the blade” (or street) for about a week until
he got a fake ID for her so that she could advertise online

USA V. GREEN

7

and charge more. Eventually Green asked “Lexi” when she
wanted to start. When the deputy suggested the next week,
Green replied, “Sound[s] perfect.”
On January 13, “Lexi” and Green made plans to meet the
next day at a park. Multiple law enforcement officers were
at the park when Green arrived. Green at first told one of the
agents that he had been in the park that day to meet “Lexi”
to help her and take her to the authorities. Eventually,
though, Green admitted to the agent that he did “the wrong
thing.” He admitted that he should not have “attempted to
lure a 16-year-old girl, into helping her, solicit herself.”
Green was arrested, charged, and ultimately convicted of
attempted sex trafficking of a minor, 18 U.S.C. § 1591(a) &
(b)(2), and attempted sexual enticement of a minor, id.
§ 2422(b). Before his trial, Green sought discovery to
pursue a selective enforcement claim based on race
discrimination, which the district court denied. On appeal,
Green argues that the district court abused its discretion in
denying the motion because it applied the wrong legal
standard. Green also appeals from his 144-month sentence.
He argues that the district court procedurally erred in issuing
his sentence because it glossed over his unwarranted
disparity claim under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a)(6).
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review for abuse of discretion the district court’s
determination that a defendant failed to make the requisite
showing that would entitle him to discovery to pursue a
selective enforcement claim. Sellers, 906 F.3d at 851, 855.
The district court “necessarily abuses its discretion when it
applies the wrong legal standard.” Id. at 852.

8

USA V. GREEN

When reviewing sentencing decisions, we “must first
ensure that the district court committed no significant
procedural error,” such as “failing to consider the § 3553(a)
factors.” Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38, 51 (2007).
“Assuming that the district court’s sentencing decision is
procedurally sound,” we then “consider the substantive
reasonableness of the sentence imposed under an abuse-ofdiscretion standard.” Id.
DISCUSSION
We affirm the district court’s denial of Green’s motion
for discovery to pursue a selective enforcement claim and
the 144-month sentence imposed by the district court.
I. The district court did not abuse its discretion in
denying discovery to pursue a selective enforcement
claim.
A. We have adopted a flexible standard for
permitting discovery into a selective enforcement
claim.
The Supreme Court has held that the U.S. Constitution
bars both “selective enforcement” of the law and “selective
prosecution” based on race. Whren v. United States, 517
U.S. 806, 813 (1996) (selective enforcement); United States
v. Armstrong, 517 U.S. 456, 464 (1996) (selective
prosecution). The latter claim concerns a prosecutor’s
choice of who to prosecute and with what specific charges;
the former involves a law enforcement agency’s decision to
investigate or arrest a person in the first place. Sellers, 906
F.3d at 851 n.5, 855–56.
The substantive elements of both types of claims are the
same. A defendant must establish both (1) a discriminatory
effect and (2) a discriminatory intent. See Lacey v.

USA V. GREEN

9

Maricopa County, 693 F.3d 896, 920, 924 (9th Cir. 2012)
(en banc). The discovery requirements for both types of
claims, however, are not the same. What a defendant must
show to be entitled to discovery differs depending on which
type of claim he or she asserts—selective enforcement or
selective prosecution. See Sellers, 906 F.3d at 855.
For a selective prosecution claim, the standard for
discovery is “nearly as rigorous as that for proving the claim
itself.” Id. at 852. As the Supreme Court held in Armstrong,
defendants must present “some evidence tending to show the
existence” of a “discriminatory effect and discriminatory
intent.” Armstrong, 517 U.S. at 468 (quotation omitted).
Furthermore, defendants must present “some evidence” that
“similarly situated defendants of other races could have been
prosecuted, but were not.” Id. at 469.
But for discovery involving a selective enforcement
claim—at issue here—the Supreme Court has not yet
spoken. Our court, however, held in Sellers that the
“rigorous” discovery standard for a selective prosecution
claim does not apply. 906 F.3d at 852–53. Instead, for a
selective enforcement claim, the test is more relaxed, vesting
broad discretion in the trial court. As Sellers put it:
Contrary to Armstrong’s requirements for
selective prosecution claims, a defendant
need not proffer evidence that similarlysituated individuals of a different race [or
other protected class] were not investigated
or arrested to receive discovery on his
selective enforcement claim in a stash house
reverse-sting operation case.
While a
defendant must have something more than
mere speculation to be entitled to discovery,

10

USA V. GREEN

what that something looks like will vary from
case to case. The district court should use its
discretion—as it does for all discovery
matters—to allow limited or broad discovery
based on the reliability and strength of the
defendant’s showing.
Id. at 855. Additionally, Sellers concluded that although a
defendant “will eventually need to show both elements” to
prevail on a selective enforcement claim—that is, a
discriminatory intent and effect—obtaining discovery for a
selective enforcement claim does not require “some
evidence” tending to show the existence of both. Id. at 856
(quotation omitted).
There are two reasons for this more relaxed approach.
First, “law enforcement officers do not enjoy the same strong
presumption that they are constitutionally enforcing the laws
that prosecutors do.” Id. at 853. Second, “[a]sking a
defendant claiming selective enforcement to prove who
could have been targeted by an informant, but was not, or
who [law enforcement] could have investigated, but did not,
is asking him to prove a negative; there is simply no
statistical record for a defendant to point to.” Id.
Conversely, in the selective prosecution context, “statistical
evidence of differential treatment is ostensibly available,”
that is, one can “compar[e] who was arrested with who was
prosecuted.” Id.
Having set forth the applicable discovery standard for
selective enforcement claims, Sellers then turned to the
evidence that the defendant submitted in support of his
motion for discovery. Sellers, who was Black, took issue
“with how he was targeted at the outset” by law enforcement
in their stash-house reverse-sting operation. Id. at 851 n.5.

USA V. GREEN

11

In support of his motion for discovery, Sellers submitted
evidence that included “data collected by an attorney in the
Central District of California showing that of 51 defendants
indicted in stash house reverse-sting operations between
2007 and 2013, at least 39 were black or Hispanic.” Id. at
851. Similarly, an agent involved in the operation that led to
Seller’s arrest testified that “more than 55 of the
approximately 60 individuals who ha[d] been indicted in his
stash house reverse-sting operations [were] people of color.”
Id.
This court ultimately did not decide, however, whether
such data met the threshold showing for obtaining discovery.
Because the district court had not applied the correct legal
standard, we “follow[ed] our normal practice of remanding
to the district court to determine in the first instance whether
Sellers ha[d] met the [correct] standard.” Id. at 855.
B. The district court applied the correct standard in
rejecting Green’s request for discovery for his
selective enforcement claim.
Green argues that the district court applied the wrong
legal standard when it denied his motion for discovery to
pursue a selective enforcement claim based on race
discrimination. Green points to three alleged errors. First,
Green argues that the district court incorrectly concluded
that there was not “a sufficient basis here to go forward with
any claim . . . that there’s discriminatory intent.” Second,
Green contends that the district court wrongly suggested that
a selective enforcement claim was not viable “given the
nature of the offense where no one solicited the defendant”
and “[h]e initiated the conduct here with the undercover
officer.” Third, Green maintains that the district court erred
in concluding that other cases identified by Green “tend to

12

USA V. GREEN

reflect more of a prosecutorial decision-making” process “as
opposed to demonstrating that the task force is selectively
targeting black men for investigation.”
One challenge in evaluating these potential errors is that
there is no written decision. The district court provided an
oral decision during a motions in limine hearing, and that
decision consists of no more than a few lines. Further, some
of the district court’s comments are somewhat ambiguous.
In denying Green’s motion for discovery, the district court
stated:
I have read the papers submitted on the
motion for the discovery. The Court is going
to deny that motion. I don’t think that the
defendant has established a sufficient basis to
get the discovery requested.
The San Diego Human Trafficking Task
Force, as pointed out by the government[,]
investigates many kinds of human trafficking
crimes. They are prosecuted both in state and
federal court, and although the defendant
identified a very small number of individuals
who are chosen to be prosecuted in federal
court for a specific charge here, I don’t think
it really reflects the universe of the work
that’s done by the law enforcement agency
that investigates human trafficking and the
exploitation of women and children.
And I don’t think there’s a sufficient basis
here to go forward with any claim here that
there’s discriminatory intent, particularly
given the nature of the offense where no one

USA V. GREEN

13

solicited the defendant. He initiated the
conduct here with the undercover officer. So
it’s difficult to even figure out how the
government would have known his race or
gender based on the initial communications
on the internet which are anonymous.
So the motion is denied and we will be
proceeding to our trial on Monday.
After counsel for both sides presented more arguments,
the district court then added:
Thank you. And I do think that the cases that
were identified by the defendant tend to
reflect more of a prosecutorial decisionmaking as to what charge will be brought and
where as opposed to demonstrating that the
task force is selectively targeting black men
for investigation in the nature of these crimes.
We, however, presume that trial judges “know the law”
and “apply it in making their decisions.” Walton v. Arizona,
497 U.S. 639, 653 (1990), overruled on other grounds by
Ring v. Arizona, 536 U.S. 584 (2002). The record here
shows that Green’s motion for discovery outlined the correct
legal standard in Sellers and that before issuing its decision,
the district court explicitly stated it had “read the papers
submitted on the motion for the discovery.” Given this
presumption, we hold that the district court applied the
correct standard and address Green’s three arguments below.
i. Discriminatory intent
Green first argues that the district court applied the
wrong legal standard when it concluded that there was not

14

USA V. GREEN

“a sufficient basis here to go forward with any claim . . . that
there’s discriminatory intent.” He notes that this court held
in Sellers that although a defendant “will eventually need to
show both elements” (i.e., discriminatory effect and intent)
to prevail on a selective enforcement claim, a defendant
seeking discovery does not have to show the existence of
both elements. See Sellers, 906 F.3d at 856.
But the district court did not require a showing of
discriminatory intent to obtain discovery. Rather, it denied
Green’s motion because the evidence he presented consisted
of only “a very small number of individuals” who were
“prosecuted in federal court for a specific charge here” and
did not “really reflect[] the universe of the work that’s done
by the law enforcement agency.” To support Green’s claim
of selective enforcement based on race, his counsel offered
only six other cases in the Southern District of California in
the past ten years “in which defendants were charged with
violating the same statutes as those at issue in [Green’s]
case.” Defense counsel “looked for cases in which the arrest
appeared to result from a social media sting operation, where
an undercover law enforcement officer posed as an underage
female.” Conversations with defense counsel from those
cases confirmed that each of those defendants was a Black
man.
The district court rejected Green’s evidence of selective
enforcement because the sample size was too small to be
reliable—a mere six other cases in the past ten years. And
the sample size may have been tiny because its parameters
were intentionally selective:
It ignored state-level
prosecutions and did not include cases involving similar sextrafficking-related offenses that may have been charged
under different statutes. Under Sellers, the district court has
discretion in analyzing whether the proffered evidence of

USA V. GREEN

15

selective enforcement merits discovery. Id. at 855 (noting a
district court “should use its discretion” to decide motions
for discovery “based on the reliability and strength of the
defendant’s showing”). The district court did not abuse its
discretion in finding that Green’s sample size of selective
enforcement was too small and threadbare to justify intrusive
discovery.
Green latches onto the district court’s off-hand comment
about “intent” to suggest it required him to show evidence of
intent. But we do not flyspeck oral comments made by a
judge as if they are words in a statute. Cf. Fed. Trade
Comm’n v. Microsoft Corp., 136 F.4th 954, 966 (9th Cir.
2025) (stating that we do not review a court’s “out-ofcontext, isolated phrases” and instead review its comments
“as a whole, and in context”). Viewing the comments in full
and in context, the district court appears to have relied
mainly on the thin reed of selective enforcement evidence
provided by Green. Indeed, the district court noted Green’s
sparse showing on discriminatory effect before saying, “And
I don’t think there’s a sufficient basis here to go forward with
any claim here that there’s discriminatory intent.” The
district court’s use of the word “and” suggests that its later,
impromptu reference to “intent” was superfluous.
ii. First contact
Next, Green argues that the district court applied the
wrong legal standard when it suggested that a selective
enforcement claim was not viable “given the nature of the
offense where no one solicited the defendant” and “[h]e
initiated the conduct here with the undercover officer.”
Green argues that we should follow the Seventh Circuit’s
decision in United States v. Davis, 793 F.3d 712 (7th Cir.
2015) (en banc), and reject the use of such distinctions when

16

USA V. GREEN

evaluating selective enforcement discovery motions. Id. at
722–23.
In Davis, the government similarly argued that race
could not have played a role in law enforcement’s
investigation and arrest because the defendant “himself
initiated matters by pestering the informant for robbery
opportunities and then chose his own comrades” for a stashhouse robbery. Id. But the Seventh Circuit rejected this
suggestion, noting that even with that factual background “it
remains possible that [law enforcement] would not have
pursued this investigation had [the defendant] been white.”
Id. at 723.
Green also argues that even if he were the first to send a
direct message, he sent that message after the deputy posing
as “Lexi” viewed some of his Instagram stories. Thus, the
deputy was not a passive individual who was contacted by
Green, according to him. And even if Green’s Instagram
account did not have a profile picture from which the deputy
could discern Green’s race, Green speculates that his
Instagram “stories” could have contained photos of him—
precisely the type of thing that additional discovery might
uncover. 2
That said, at no point did the district court state that a
selective enforcement claim was not viable because Green
made the first contact. Instead, it noted that the unique
nature of the social media sting made Green’s claim of
selective enforcement less likely or, as the district court put
We acknowledge that Green, like the deputy, could have presented a
false identity or could have intentionally concealed his race. In
evaluating Green’s selective enforcement claim, though, we must look
at what evidence of Green’s race law enforcement had and what law
enforcement believed Green’s race to be. Here, that is unclear.

2

USA V. GREEN

17

it, “difficult.” In other words, “the nature of the offense
where no one solicited the defendant” was a factor the
district court could consider in evaluating “the reliability and
strength of the defendant’s showing” of selective
enforcement, even if some inferences it drew are not entirely
convincing. See Sellers, 906 F.3d at 855. Because the
district court did not foreclose the possibility of a selective
enforcement claim based on the nature of the offense and
who initiated contact, its statements do not establish that it
applied an incorrect legal standard, even if we were to adopt
the Seventh Circuit’s approach in Davis. See Davis, 793
F.3d at 722–23 (noting that even though the defendant
“initiated matters,” it “remains possible that [law
enforcement] would not have pursued th[e] investigation had
[the defendant] been white”).
iii. Prosecutorial statistics
Finally, Green argues that the district court erred when it
concluded that the other six cases from the Southern District
of California cited by Green “tend to reflect more of a
prosecutorial decision-making” process “as opposed to
demonstrating that the task force is selectively targeting
black men for investigation.” As this Court noted in Sellers,
“[a]sking a defendant claiming selective enforcement to
prove who could have been targeted by an informant, but
was not, or who [law enforcement] could have investigated,
but did not, is asking him to prove a negative; there is simply
no statistical record for a defendant to point to.” Sellers, 906
F.3d at 853. A defendant might need to turn to prosecutorial
statistics even if the claim he wishes to prove is ultimately
selective enforcement.
Once again, the district court’s decision presents an
ambiguity from which one can draw two potential

18

USA V. GREEN

conclusions. If one reads the district court’s comment as a
categorical statement that the type of evidence Green
submitted was not probative of a selective enforcement
claim and thus did not support his motion for discovery, then
it likely abused its discretion under Sellers. If, however, one
reads the comment as an expression of doubt about how
probative Green’s evidence was, then it acted within its
discretion, as we noted earlier that the small sample size
rendered the claim of selective enforcement unreliable. We
find this latter interpretation is better supported given the
district court also expressed concern that Green’s evidence
did not include state prosecutions—an indication that the
district court agreed prosecution evidence is relevant to a
selective enforcement claim but that Green’s prosecution
evidence was weak given its limited size. Overall, it appears
that the district court denied Green’s motion because it did
not find his argument—which was based on just six federal
cases—very compelling. This was a permissible reason
under Sellers. Thus, the district court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Green’s motion for discovery.
II. The district court properly considered Green’s
unwarranted disparity claim and thus did not abuse
its discretion in sentencing Green.
“All sentencing proceedings are to begin by determining
the applicable Guidelines range.” United States v. Carty,
520 F.3d 984, 991 (9th Cir. 2008) (en banc). Next, the
parties “must be given a chance to argue for a sentence they
believe is appropriate.” Id. The district court must then
“consider the § 3553(a) factors to decide if they support the
sentence suggested by the parties.” Id. “Section 3553(a)
lists seven factors that a sentencing court must consider.”
Gall v. United States, 552 U.S. 38, 50 n.6 (2007). This

USA V. GREEN

19

includes “the need to avoid unwarranted sentence
disparities.” Id. (quoting § 3553(a)(6)).
Although the district court must consider all the factors,
it “need not tick off each of the § 3553(a) factors to show
that it has considered them,” Carty, 520 F.3d at 992, and the
weight to be given to any particular factor is at the sole
discretion of a sentencing court, United States v. GutierrezSanchez, 587 F.3d 904, 908 (9th Cir. 2009). That said,
“when a party raises a specific, nonfrivolous argument
tethered to a relevant § 3553(a) factor in support of a
requested sentence, then the judge should normally explain
why he accepts or rejects the party’s position.” Carty, 520
F.3d at 992–93.
A. The district court did not err in imposing a 144month sentence.
Green argues that the district court procedurally erred by
“refusing to consider” his unwarranted sentencing disparity
claim in sentencing him to 144 months. At sentencing,
Green faced a 188 to 235-month Guideline range given the
nature of his offense and criminal history. He also faced a
120-month statutory minimum. In Green’s sentencing
memorandum and at the sentencing hearing, Green’s counsel
asked the district court to impose the lowest sentence
allowed by law: 120 months in custody. Counsel argued that
a higher sentence “would treat [Green] in a manner disparate
from other similarly situated individuals.” In support of this
argument, Green’s counsel pointed to the sentences of 14
other defendants who were all convicted of the same or
similar conduct, all but one of whom received a sentence of
120 months or less. The district court still sentenced Green
to 144 months.

20

USA V. GREEN

In support of his argument that the district court
procedurally erred by “ignoring” his sentencing-disparity
argument, Green points to two statements the district court
judge made during his sentencing hearing. See United States
v. Bragg, 582 F.3d 965, 969 (9th Cir. 2009) (“The very broad
discretion of district judges in sentencing . . . does not extend
to ignoring sentencing factors mandated by statute.”
(emphasis added)). First, Green notes that although he
provided information about 14 other defendants, the district
court judge admitted: “I didn’t go and read each case and I
didn’t look at the facts in each case.” Second, Green notes
that the district court judge declared: “I can’t do those
comparisons. It would require that the Court spend hours
reviewing each case, each individual, all the factors that go
into it.”
The statements Green cites appear at first to show a
district court judge failing to engage with counsel’s disparity
argument simply because doing so would be hard or
cumbersome. But a review of the entire transcript paints a
different picture—one in which the district court (1) knew at
least a bit about each of the cases counsel submitted (for
example that they all involved defendants with a lower
criminal history) and (2) was more interested in calculating
a sentence that reflected Green’s particular circumstances
than assigning him a sentence based on some average of
sentences imposed in the other cases. The district court
observed:
You know, counsel, I appreciate when
counsel gives these sort of statistics, but
there’s so much more to each case and I
didn’t go and read each case and I didn’t look
at the facts in each case. They are not cases

USA V. GREEN

21

that this court handled; and the criminal
histories of those people are lower and their
backgrounds may be very different and the
nature and circumstances and whether they
plead early, and did they get some equivalent
of an appellate waiver? So it’s very difficult
to just look at the numbers and say that’s the
[arithmetic] mean and that that’s what should
apply here.
Let’s talk about this defendant rather than
other cases because I think that—frankly, I
think the letter from his parents was the most
important piece of information that I got to
help explain [Green] and why he’s here and
what he’s been doing with his life up to now
and what the future bodes for him and how
much of a risk he is to himself and society
and what’s really the appropriate punishment
beyond whether there’s anything above the
mandatory minimum.
Indeed, at the sentencing hearing, the prosecution
confirmed the district court’s understanding that the
defendants in the cases Green submitted were not similarly
situated because of differences such as the defendants’
criminal histories and decision to plead early. See United
States v. Espinoza-Baza, 647 F.3d 1182, 1195 (9th Cir.
2011) (“It does not matter for the purposes of § 3553(a) that
[the defendant] can point to other criminal defendants who
may have received lighter sentences under materially
different circumstances.” (cleaned up)).

22

USA V. GREEN

The prosecution noted:
There is no comparison between [Green] and
these other individuals. The only potential
case for comparison would be the Franklins
father-son duo who also did not accept
responsibility and also went to trial; but even
they are extremely distinct. For one of them,
it was his very first offense. For the other, he
only had a misdemeanor history. . . . So the
government submits that [Green] can’t be
fairly compared to them either.
There’s simply nobody else on this list that
[had already] received a 220-month sentence
[like Green had], served over eight years, and
then a mere three months after being released
from custody started sending rampant social
media messages in an effort to revamp their
pimping activity, and then one month after
that contacted a minor female in an attempt
to entice her into prostitution.
Although Green argues that the district court
procedurally erred by “refusing to consider” his unwarranted
sentencing disparity claim, a review of the record shows that
the district court did consider the claim. The district court
rejected the claim, however, because its initial review of the
cases counsel submitted—or its initial review of the
prosecution’s summary of those cases—revealed that the
defendants in those cases were not similarly situated to
Green. Indeed, the district court explicitly stated, “I don’t
feel like I was presented with a similarly-situated person to
consider.”

USA V. GREEN

23

Because the district court (1) gave the parties “a chance
to argue for a sentence they believe[d] [was] appropriate,”
and (2) “consider[ed] the § 3553(a) factors to decide if they
support[ed] the sentence suggested by the parties,” we find
no procedural error in the district court’s sentencing. Carty,
520 F.3d at 991. We also find that Green has failed to show
that the district court’s 144-month sentence is substantively
unreasonable. See Gall, 552 U.S. at 51. We thus affirm the
144-month sentence imposed by the district court.
CONCLUSION
We AFFIRM the district court’s denial of Green’s
motion for discovery and AFFIRM the sentence imposed by
the district court.

