FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
ERIKA MARIA PLANCARTE,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 24-327
D.C. No.
3:23-cr-01867LAB-1
ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Southern District of California
Larry A. Burns, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted February 10, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed May 8, 2025
Amended August 18, 2025
Before: Richard A. Paez, Sandra S. Ikuta, and Ryan D.
Nelson, Circuit Judges.
Order;
Opinion by Judge Ikuta;
Concurrence by Judge Paez

2

USA V. PLANCARTE

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel filed (1) an order granting a petition for panel
rehearing, amending an opinion, and denying a petition for
rehearing en banc; and (2) an amended opinion affirming an
appellate waiver in Erika Marie Plancarte’s plea agreement
and dismissing her appeal from her sentence for conspiracy
to transport an alien into the United States.
The panel held that the government did not implicitly
breach the plea agreement, in which it agreed to recommend
no more than 90 days of imprisonment, by referencing
Plancarte’s criminal history, expressing concern about
Plancarte’s conduct and recidivism, clarifying an ambiguity
in the presentence report, and declining to present mitigating
evidence.
Concurring, Judge Paez joined the majority in full, with
the understanding that in determining whether the
government has complied with “the letter and spirit of the
plea agreement,” courts can and in some cases must consider
whether the government has presented or acknowledged
mitigating evidence in its sentencing recommendation.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. PLANCARTE

3

COUNSEL
Amy B. Wang (argued) and Henry F. B. Beshar, Assistant
United States Attorneys; Daniel E. Zipp, Assistant United
States Attorney, Chief, Appellate Section; Criminal
Division; Tara K. McGrath, United States Attorney; Office
of the United States Attorney, United States Department of
Justice, San Diego, California; for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Daniel J. Yadron Jr. (argued), Appellate Attorney, Federal
Defenders of San Diego Inc., San Diego, California, for
Defendant-Appellant.

ORDER
The petition for rehearing is GRANTED. The opinion
filed on May 8, 2025, and published at 136 F.4th 975, is
amended. The amended opinion is filed concurrently with
this order, accompanied by Judge Paez’s concurrence.
With these amendments, the petition for rehearing en
banc is DENIED. No further petitions for rehearing or
rehearing en banc may be filed.

4

USA V. PLANCARTE

OPINION
IKUTA, Circuit Judge:
Erika Marie Plancarte pleaded guilty to one count of
conspiracy to transport an alien into the United States. The
plea agreement bound the government to recommend a
sentence of 90 days of imprisonment. We hold that the
government did not implicitly breach the plea agreement by
referencing Plancarte’s criminal history, expressing concern
about Plancarte’s conduct and recidivism, clarifying an
ambiguity in the presentence report, and declining to present
mitigating evidence.
I
In August 2023, at the San Ysidro, California Port of
Entry, Plancarte illegally transported four aliens, a woman
and her three children, into the United States. A fourth child
in the car was Plancarte’s daughter. The woman presented a
passport issued to a different person, and Plancarte produced
false birth certificates for the three children. After
questioning, the Border Patrol arrested Plancarte, who
admitted to smuggling the four aliens into the United States.
A month later, the government filed an eight-count
information against Plancarte. Count 1 charged Plancarte
with conspiracy to transport the woman, in violation of 8
U.S.C. § 1324(a)(1)(A)(ii) and (v)(I).
Plancarte entered into an agreement with the
government, which provided that Plancarte would plead
guilty only to Count 1, and that the government would then
dismiss the remaining counts. The parties made the plea
agreement pursuant to Rule 11(c)(1)(B) of the Federal Rules
of Criminal Procedure, which provides that the

USA V. PLANCARTE

5

government’s “recommendation or request does not bind the
court.”
As relevant here, the plea agreement also included the
following provisions. Plancarte agreed to request that the
U.S. Probation Office prepare a presentence report (“PSR”).
Nothing in the plea agreement limited “the Government’s
duty to provide complete and accurate facts to the district
court and the U.S. Probation Office.” With respect to the
United States Sentencing Guidelines (“Guidelines”), the
parties agreed to “jointly recommend” a specified Base
Offense Level, Specific Offense Characteristics,
Adjustments, and Departures. 1 Based on this agreement, the
“Government agree[d] to recommend that defendant be
sentenced to the greater of: [1] the low end of the advisory
guideline range as calculated by the Government, [2] 90
days in custody, or [3] the time served in custody at the time
of sentencing.” Therefore, unless the district court imposed
a time-served sentence, the government explicitly agreed to
recommend 90 days in custody. 2
In December 2023, the U.S. Probation Office filed
Plancarte’s PSR under seal. The PSR created ambiguity
Specifically, the parties agreed to a base offense level of 12 under
§ 2L1.1(a)(3) of the Guidelines, a potential 2- or 4-level increase for
certain prior immigration felonies under § 2L1.1(b)(3), a potential 2- or
3-level decrease for acceptance of responsibility under § 3E1.1, and a 2level downward departure for early disposition under § 5K3.1.

1

The plea agreement also contained an appellate waiver, with two
exceptions. Neither exception is applicable. But, because “a defendant
is released from his or her appeal waiver if the government breaches the
plea agreement,” United States v. Hernandez-Castro, 814 F.3d 1044,
1045 (9th Cir. 2016), we first determine whether the government
breached the plea agreement before turning to Plancarte’s appellate
waiver.
2

6

USA V. PLANCARTE

about the relationship between the woman in the front seat
and the three minors in the back seat. Paragraph 11 of the
PSR stated that Plancarte’s “cousin asked her to smuggle his
wife” along with “children of the cousin’s friend.” This
language raised the inference that the cousin’s wife and the
cousin’s friend were different individuals, and that the three
children in the back seat were not children of the cousin’s
wife. But the PSR later clarified that the minors in the back
seat were children of the front-seat passenger (the cousin’s
wife). The PSR explained that the cousin’s wife “identified
herself, her two sons (ages 10 and 6) and daughter (age 5) as
citizens of Mexico.” Later, the PSR stated that the cousin’s
wife “and her children entered [Plancarte’s] vehicle and
immediately proceeded to the border.”
Plancarte subsequently filed a sentencing summary
chart. Plancarte calculated a guideline range from 0 to 6
months and requested “a non-custodial sentence of 2 years
probation.” Later that same day, the government filed its
sentencing summary chart. The government calculated the
same 0- to 6-month guideline range as Plancarte, but
requested a sentence of 90 days custody and 2 years of
supervised release, consistent with the plea agreement. The
government concurrently filed its sentencing memorandum.
In its memorandum, the government reiterated its request for
the sentence outlined in the summary chart. It also included
a footnote correcting the PSR’s ambiguity regarding the
relationship between the front-seat passenger and the three
minors in the back seat. According to the government:
The three backseat minors are the children of
the front-seat adult. Compare PSR ¶ 11
(“[Plancarte] advised her cousin asked her to
smuggle his wife . . . and children of the

USA V. PLANCARTE

7

cousin’s friend.”) (emphasis added), with
¶ 19 (“The [adult minor] and her
children . . .”), ¶ 34 (same); see also
U.S.S.G. § 2L1.1(b)(4) (imposing a fourlevel enhancement if the smuggling offense
involves unaccompanied minors).
The cited guideline, § 2L1.1(b)(4), states: “If the defendant
smuggled, transported, or harbored a minor who was
unaccompanied by the minor’s parent or grandparent,
increase by 2 levels.” The government’s footnote clarified
that the three minors in the back seat were accompanied by
their mother in the front seat and therefore confirmed that
§ 2L1.1(b)(4) did not apply.
The memorandum then offered three reasons specific to
Plancarte for the government’s sentencing recommendation
of 90 days imprisonment and two years of supervised
release. First, the government described the “worrying”
nature and circumstances of the offense. Specifically,
Plancarte “appears to have orchestrated the fictitious
documentation and backstory, traveled eight hours to
commit th[e] felony offense, brought her 1-year-old
daughter to the [port of entry], and attempted to smuggle
four persons, including three minors.”
Second, the
government identified “two prior alien smuggling arrests
from 2022 and 2008” in Plancarte’s criminal history, as
stated in the PSR. The government also noted a number of
additional offenses reported in the PSR, Plancarte’s failures
to appear resulting in a one-year extension of her probation,
and Plancarte’s probation revocation in another state matter.
Third, the government noted that “several custodial
sentences, including as long as six months, have failed to
deter [Plancarte]’s recidivist behavior.”

8

USA V. PLANCARTE

The next day, Plancarte filed a sentencing memorandum
requesting a two-year term of probation. Plancarte argued
that the government breached the plea agreement by
including “additional commentary meant to influence the
court to impose a higher sentence,” such as the government’s
reference to Plancarte’s criminal and arrest history, prior
failures to appear, and prior probation revocations. In
addition, Plancarte noted that the government referenced an
irrelevant Guideline (referring to the footnote citing
§ 2L1.1(b)(4)).
The district court held a sentencing hearing, where
Plancarte further argued that the government breached the
plea agreement. First, Plancarte argued that the government
breached the plea agreement in referencing the four-level
enhancement
for
unaccompanied
minors
under
§ 2L1.1(b)(4). Second, Plancarte argued the government
breached the agreement by stating that harsher sentences up
to six months had not deterred Plancarte. Third, Plancarte
argued that the government breached the agreement by
highlighting Plancarte’s criminal history.
The district court rejected all three arguments. The
district court agreed with the government that its reference
to § 2L1.1(b)(4) was merely correcting an inconsistency in
the PSR, and it held that the government did not engage in
misconduct “in correcting a misstatement in the probation
report.” The district court held that the government did not
err in advocating for the agreed-to sentence in the plea
agreement. In the course of the hearing, Plancarte agreed
with the district court that the government was not required
to present mitigating information regarding the defendant.
Therefore, the district court held that the government did not
implicitly breach the plea agreement and denied Plancarte’s
request to transfer the case to a different judge for

USA V. PLANCARTE

9

sentencing. The district court sentenced Plancarte to 120
days of imprisonment and a 3-year term of supervised
release. Plancarte filed a timely notice of appeal.
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 and 18
U.S.C. § 3742(a). “Generally, we review a defendant’s
claim that the government has breached its plea agreement
de novo.” United States v. Farias-Contreras, 104 F.4th 22,
27 (9th Cir. 2024) (en banc), cert. denied, 145 S. Ct. 1316
(2025). 3
II
Criminal plea agreements “are essentially contracts
between the government and a defendant.” Id. at 28. As
such, either party can breach the agreement by violating its
terms. United States v. Myers, 32 F.3d 411, 413 (9th Cir.
1994) (per curiam). For example, the government cannot
agree “to recommend a sentence at the low end of the
applicable guideline range,” but make “no recommendation”
at all. Id. at 412, 413. Doing so violates “the terms of the
plea agreement” and requires reversal and remand for
resentencing. Id. at 413. In addition to complying with the
literal terms of the contract, Farias-Contreras, 104 F.4th at
28, the parties must also comply with the “spirit of the plea
agreement,” id. at 31. That means the parties’ arguments
“must be made in good faith and advance the objectives of
the plea agreement.” Id. We have compared this to contract
“We have not been entirely consistent in our standards for reviewing a
claim that the government breached a plea agreement.” United States v.
Alcala-Sanchez, 666 F.3d 571, 575 (9th Cir. 2012) (identifying both de
novo and clear error standards of review). However, because the
government argues that it did not implicitly breach its plea agreement
with Plancarte under even a de novo standard, we do not resolve when a
different standard of review may apply.

3

10

USA V. PLANCARTE

law, which “implies a covenant of good faith and fair dealing
in every contract.” Id. (citing Appling v. State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins. Co., 340 F.3d 769, 779 (9th Cir. 2003)). “This is
a fact-specific inquiry based on contract principles.” Id. In
conducting this inquiry, courts must consider the “totality of
circumstances.” Id.
The government may implicitly breach a plea agreement
by making arguments to the district court that undermine the
parties’ agreement. But our court, sitting en banc, expressly
disclaimed finding a “per se” implicit breach of a plea
agreement when the government “present[s] any
information already known and contained in the” PSR. Id.
The government may be able to do so when “respond[ing] to
arguments” raised by the defense. Id.
The government may undermine the plea agreement if it
introduces “information that serves no purpose but to
influence the court to give a higher sentence,” id. at 28
(quoting United States v. Whitney, 673 F.3d 965, 971 (9th
Cir. 2012) (cleaned up)), or if it “purports to make the
promised recommendation while ‘winking’ at the district
court to impliedly request a different outcome,” id. (quoting
United States v. Heredia, 768 F.3d 1220, 1231 (9th Cir.
2014)). One such example of bad faith behavior includes
making inflammatory or pejorative comments about a
defendant’s past offenses, such as analogizing drug dealers
to vampires. See id. at 28–29. Or, the government may act
in bad faith by inviting “the district court’s skepticism as to
its recommendation” by noting a difference of opinion in the
prosecutor’s office as to the correct sentence. Id. at 29. A
court may consider such conduct to weigh in favor of finding
that the government implicitly breached the plea agreement.

USA V. PLANCARTE

11

On the other hand, so long as the government’s
arguments are not precluded by the literal text of the plea
agreement, id. at 30–31, the government may make
arguments in support of its sentencing recommendation,
including by highlighting aspects of the defendant’s offense
or criminal history, see id. at 29; cf. United States v.
Minasyan, 4 F.4th 770, 780–81 (9th Cir. 2021) (holding that
the government did not implicitly breach the plea agreement
by reiterating facts from the PSR that were relevant to the
defendant’s sentencing). And when the defendant argues for
a below-Guidelines sentence, the government may oppose
the defendant’s argument and supplement the facts with
relevant information, including by repeating facts in the
PSR. Farias-Contreras, 104 F.4th at 30. However, the
“government does not have carte blanche to use
inflammatory rhetoric,” id. at 29, and the “government’s
response [to a defendant’s request for a sentence lower than
what the government recommends] must be tethered to its
obligations under the plea agreement,” id. at 31.
III
On appeal, Plancarte argues that the government
implicitly breached its agreement to recommend no more
than 90 days of imprisonment. 4 The government repeatedly
committed to its 90-day recommendation, consistently
reminding the district court that it sought a 90-day custodial
sentence.
According to Plancarte, the government
nonetheless failed to comply with the spirit of the plea
agreement in three ways. First, the government referred to
Plancarte’s criminal history and mentioned that a prior sixTo the extent Plancarte argues that the government expressly breached
the literal terms of the plea agreement, the record belies that claim, and
we reject it.

4

12

USA V. PLANCARTE

month sentence failed to deter Plancarte’s recidivist
behavior. Second, Plancarte argues that the government
engaged in pejorative editorializing, including by
referencing the unaccompanied minor Guideline in a
footnote. According to Plancarte, these comments were not
a fair response to Plancarte’s request for a non-custodial
sentence. Finally, Plancarte notes the government did not
present any mitigating evidence. We consider these
arguments in turn.
We look “first to the plain language of the plea
agreement.” Id. at 30. Nothing in the plea agreement
prohibited the government from “responding to [Plancarte’s]
request for a sentence lower than what is recommended by
the government,” id., which here was a 90-day custodial
sentence. And the government’s response did not undermine
the plea agreement. First, the government permissibly
pointed to Plancarte’s criminal history as part of its advocacy
for a 90-day custodial sentence.
As Plancarte
acknowledged, the government’s description of her criminal
history was accurate. In correctly stating that Plancarte had
served prior custodial sentences for offenses other than alien
smuggling, including a six-month custodial sentence, the
government did not suggest that such sentences were
necessarily warranted in the present case. It was likewise
permissible for the government to highlight how prior
sentences had failed to deter Plancarte from her recidivist
conduct, because the government tethered its comments to
its permissible advocacy for a 90-day custodial sentence. Id.
Second, the government did not use any pejorative
expressions to describe Plancarte. Describing Plancarte’s
recidivism as “worrying” is not as severe as comparing the
defendant to a “vampire,” id. at 29, or introducing a victim
impact statement calling the defendant “mean, ugly, scary,

USA V. PLANCARTE

13

controlling, manipulating,” United States v. Johnson, 187
F.3d 1129, 1135 (9th Cir. 1999). Such comments impugn
the defendant’s character and person, but describing
Plancarte’s offense conduct as “worrying” does not. Nor did
the “depth and tone” of the government’s response, which
was tethered to Plancarte’s request for a non-custodial
sentence, amount to the government “implicitly
recommending a higher sentence than agreed upon.”
Heredia, 768 F.3d at 1233. Moreover, the government’s
reference to § 2L1.1(b)(4), which sets out an enhancement
for smuggling an unaccompanied minor, did not violate the
spirit of the plea agreement. As explained by the
government and district court, this reference was to clarify
an ambiguity in the PSR to specify that such an enhancement
did not apply to Plancarte.
Third, Plancarte repeatedly notes that the government’s
presentation was not tempered by mitigating evidence. But
the government is not required to present mitigating
evidence to avoid implicitly breaching a plea agreement, see
Farias-Contreras, 104 F.4th at 29. Plancarte acknowledged
as much at the sentencing hearing.
The government did not implicitly breach its plea
agreement with Plancarte. Instead, the government stuck to
the letter of the agreement, and it did not make statements in
bad faith to undermine the parties’ bargain. The district
court properly reached its own conclusion as to Plancarte’s
sentence, as anticipated by the plea agreement. Therefore,
we enforce the appellate waiver in the plea agreement, and
we dismiss the appeal.
DISMISSED.

14

USA V. PLANCARTE

PAEZ, Circuit Judge, concurring:
I join the majority opinion in full. I do so with the
understanding that in determining whether the government
has complied with the “letter and spirit of the plea
agreement,” courts can and in some cases must consider
whether the government has presented or acknowledged
mitigating evidence in its sentencing recommendation.
United States v. Farias-Contreras, 104 F.4th 22, 31 (9th Cir.
2024) (en banc).
In this case, the district court judge remarked that the
government’s failure to present or acknowledge mitigating
evidence was irrelevant to the question of breach because it
is the criminal defense attorney’s job to “advocate on behalf
of the Defendant, and point out the mitigating factors,” while
the government “is supposed to hold the balance true
and . . . [point to] aggravating factors.” But the inclusion,
omission, or contestation of mitigating factors in the
government’s sentencing recommendation can be evidence
of whether the government is “inviting the court’s
skepticism as to the government’s bona fide position,” id. at
29-30, or acting “solely for the purpose of influencing the
district court to sentence [the defendant] more harshly,” id.
at 30 (alteration in original) (quoting United States v.
Whitney, 673 F.3d 965, 971 (9th Cir. 2012)). In evaluating
whether the government breached a plea agreement, courts
must consider the “totality of circumstances,” and the
presentation or acknowledgment of mitigating evidence—or
the lack thereof—can be one relevant circumstance. Id. at
31.
We have recognized the relevance of this circumstance
on multiple occasions. For example, in Farias-Contreras,
we held en banc that the government’s agreement that

USA V. PLANCARTE

15

“Farias-Contreras’s physical condition was a mitigating
factor for purposes of sentencing” was a fact that “weigh[ed]
against finding a breach.” Id. at 29. Likewise, in United
States v. Heredia, which was cited favorably in FariasContreras, id., we observed that “given the government’s
promise of leniency, it is notable that its sentencing
memorandum contained no mitigating information at all.”
United States v. Heredia, 768 F.3d 1220, 1234 (9th Cir.
2014). This was notable because absent any mention of
mitigating circumstances to balance the aggravating
circumstances the government emphasized, “the reader
[was] left to wonder why the government believed a low-end
Guidelines sentence was appropriate in the first place.” Id.
Here, the failure to present any mitigating evidence was
a relevant consideration in evaluating whether the
government’s recommendation left the district court to
“wonder why the government believed a [mid-range]
Guidelines sentence was appropriate in the first place,” as
opposed to the six-month sentence at the high end of the
Guidelines. Id. When the “government freely undert[akes]
a broad commitment . . . to avoid even the implication that a
sentence other than the stipulated one may be appropriate,”
the government is not permitted to imply “that a sentence
other than [the agreed-to recommendation] could be
advisable.” Id. Although the government’s failure to
acknowledge mitigating circumstances did not tip the scale
in favor of finding breach here, in some circumstances, it
may affect whether the government has implicitly breached
the plea agreement.

