FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
STATE OF CALIFORNIA ex rel.
Rob Bonta, in his official capacity as
Attorney General of the State of
California,,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
PHILLIP DEL ROSA, in his personal
and official capacity as Chairman of
the Alturas Indian Rancheria;
DARREN ROSE, in his personal and
official capacity as Vice-chairman of
the Alturas Indian Rancheria;
WENDY DEL ROSA, in her official
capacity as Secretary-Treasurer of the
Alturas Indian Rancheria,
Defendants - Appellants,
and
AZUMA CORPORATION,
Defendant.

No. 24-698
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00743KJM-DB
OPINION

2

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of California
Kimberly J. Mueller, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted July 30, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed November 7, 2025
Before: Milan D. Smith, Jr., Mark J. Bennett, and Anthony
D. Johnstone, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bennett
SUMMARY *
Prevent All Cigarette Trafficking Act
In an interlocutory appeal, the panel affirmed the district
court’s denial of motions to dismiss claims for injunctive
relief and for civil penalties and money damages under the
Prevent All Cigarette Trafficking Act (PACT Act) brought
by the State of California against the Azuma Corporation, a
company owned by a federally recognized Indian tribe, and
individual tribal officers.
The panel first held that defendants did not waive their
arguments concerning sovereign immunity.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

3

The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of
defendants’ motion to dismiss California’s claims for
injunctive relief against individual defendants in their
official capacities based on tribal sovereign immunity. The
panel held that relief under Ex parte Young, which normally
allows federal courts to award prospective injunctive relief
against state and tribal officials for violations of federal law,
is available under the PACT Act. The PACT Act does not
limit who may be sued and does not limit what kind of relief
a court may order. Nor does the PACT Act contain a
sufficiently detailed remedial scheme to signal Congress’s
intent to foreclose Ex parte Young relief.
The panel also affirmed the district court’s denial of
defendants’ motion to dismiss California’s claims for civil
penalties and money damages against individual defendants
in their personal capacities based on qualified
immunity. The panel held that because California sought to
enforce state tax and regulatory obligations pursuant to a
federal statute, defendants could not assert qualified
immunity.

COUNSEL
Peter F. Nascenzi (argued), David C. Goodwin, and Byron
M. Miller, Deputy Attorneys General; James V. Hart,
Supervising Deputy Attorney General; Rob Bonta,
California Attorney General; Office of the California
Attorney General, Sacramento, California; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Tim J. Hennessy (argued), John M. Peebles, and Gregory M.
Narvaez, Peebles Bergin Schulte & Robinson LLP,

4

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

Sacramento, California; Conly J. Schulte, Peebles Bergin
Schulte & Robinson LLP, Louisville, Colorado; for
Defendants-Appellants.

OPINION
BENNETT, Circuit Judge:
In 2023, seeking to enforce its cigarette laws under the
federal Prevent All Cigarette Trafficking Act of 2009 (PACT
Act), 15 U.S.C. §§ 376–376a, Plaintiff the State of
California filed suit in federal court against Defendants the
Azuma Corporation (a company owned by a federally
recognized Indian tribe), Darren Rose, Phillip Del Rosa, and
Wendy Del Rosa. The State alleged that Defendants violated
various California cigarette tax statutes and regulations.
California sought injunctive relief against the individual
Defendants (Rose, Phillip Del Rosa, and Wendy Del Rosa)
in their official capacities and against Azuma to mandate
compliance with state cigarette taxation laws and prohibit
the sale or distribution of contraband cigarettes. California
also claimed civil penalties and money damages against
Azuma and against Rose and Phillip Del Rosa in their
personal capacities.
Defendants moved to dismiss California’s claims for
injunctive relief pursuant to the PACT Act based on
sovereign immunity. While Ex parte Young, 209 U.S. 123
(1908), normally allows federal courts to award prospective
injunctive relief against state and tribal officials for
violations of federal law, Defendants argued that Congress
displaced the injunctive relief otherwise available by

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

5

including a detailed remedial scheme in the PACT Act. As
to California’s PACT Act claims for civil penalties and
money damages, Defendants asserted qualified immunity.
The district court rejected both arguments, and Defendants
appealed, invoking jurisdiction based on the collateral order
doctrine.
We must decide whether Ex parte Young relief is
available under the PACT Act. We hold that it is. The
PACT Act does not limit who may be sued and does not limit
what kind of relief a court may order. Nor does the PACT
Act contain a sufficiently detailed remedial scheme to signal
Congress’s intent to foreclose Ex parte Young relief. We
must also decide whether Defendants may assert qualified
immunity for California’s claims for civil penalties and
money damages brought pursuant to the PACT Act. We
hold that they may not. Because California seeks to enforce
state tax and regulatory obligations pursuant to a federal
statute, Defendants cannot assert qualified immunity. We
thus affirm.
BACKGROUND
Azuma Corporation is owned and operated by the
Alturas Indian Rancheria (the Tribe), a federally recognized
Indian tribe. Indian Entities Recognized by and Eligible to
Receive Services from the United States Bureau of Indian
Affairs, 89 Fed. Reg. 944 (Jan. 8, 2024). Azuma
manufactures and distributes cigarettes in California to
retailers owned by other Indian tribes. These retailers sell to
non-Indian consumers. Azuma also sells cigarettes directly
to consumers, including non-Indian consumers, through its
own retail smokeshops. The Tribe is governed by a General
Council, which in turn elects a three-person Business
Committee. The Business Committee has the authority to

6

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

promulgate all ordinances, resolutions, or other enactments
of the Tribe, to represent the Tribe in all negotiations with
local, state, and federal governments, and other tribes, and to
administer all lands and assets and manage all economic
affairs and enterprises of the Tribe.
The Business
Committee is made up of Defendants Rose, Phillip Del Rosa,
and Wendy Del Rosa. 1
The PACT Act federalizes some state cigarette taxes.
See 15 U.S.C. § 376a(a)(3)(A)–(B) (“[E]ach delivery seller
shall comply with . . . all State, local, tribal, and other laws
generally applicable to sales of cigarettes . . . including laws
imposing . . . excise taxes; . . . [and] licensing and taxstamping requirements.”). The PACT Act requires that the
Attorney General of the United States “compile a list of
delivery sellers of cigarettes” that are not in compliance with
the Act. Id. § 376a(e)(1)(A). Sellers on the list may not
distribute or have another party distribute their cigarettes.
See id. § 376(a)(e)(2)(A).
When sellers violate the PACT Act, States may bring suit
to enforce the Act. Under the statute:
A State, through its attorney general, or a
local government or Indian tribe that levies a
tax subject to section 376a(a)(3) of this title,
According to California, Rose and Phillip Del Rosa “have used their
two votes [on the Business Committee] to control the Alturas Tribe’s
tobacco business operations.” Both Rose and Phillip Del Rosa are
directors on Azuma’s governing board. Phillip Del Rosa “is also an
officer, director, and/or manager” of “several businesses” “which retail
and/or distribute cigarettes, including the Desert Rose Casino.” Both
Rose and Phillip Del Rosa are named in California’s complaint in their
official and personal capacities. Wendy Del Rosa is only named as a
defendant in her official capacity.

1

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

7

through its chief law enforcement officer,
may bring an action in a United States district
court to prevent and restrain violations of this
chapter by any person or to obtain any other
appropriate relief from any person for
violations of this chapter, including civil
penalties, money damages, and injunctive or
other equitable relief.
Id. § 378(c)(1)(A). The PACT Act defines a “person” able
to be sued under the Act, as “an individual,
corporation, . . . State government, local government, Indian
tribal government, governmental organization of such a
government, or joint stock company.” Id. § 375(11). And
the Act specifies that it does not modify the sovereign
immunity of a federally recognized tribe.
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
abrogate or constitute a waiver of any
sovereign immunity of a State or local
government or Indian tribe against any
unconsented lawsuit under this chapter, or
otherwise to restrict, expand, or modify any
sovereign immunity of a State or local
government or Indian tribe.
Id. § 378(c)(1)(B).
California “levies a tax subject to section 376a(a)(3)” of
the PACT Act. Id. § 378(c)(1)(A). Namely, California
imposes an excise tax on the distribution of cigarettes. See
Cal. Rev. & Tax. Code §§ 30001–483. Distributors
purchase stamps from the State to affix to their packaging
before the cigarette packs are distributed. Id. §§ 30161,

8

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

30163(a). To facilitate the collection of taxes, distributors
are required to obtain state licenses and must file monthly
reports with the California Department of Tax and Fee
Administration. 2 Id. §§ 30140, 30182(a), 30183(a); Cal.
Bus. & Prof. Code § 22975(a). California also collects
payments from cigarette distributors as part of the 1998
Master Settlement Agreement (MSA) between the four
major cigarette manufacturers, forty-six States, and others.
See King Mountain Tobacco Co. v. McKenna, 768 F.3d 989,
991 (9th Cir. 2014); Cal. Health & Safety Code § 104555(e).
California collects payments so that “financial burdens
imposed on the state by cigarette smoking [are] borne by
tobacco product manufacturers rather than by the state.”
Cal. Health & Safety Code § 104555(d). California requires
manufacturers who signed the MSA to remit annual
payments to California. Non-signatory manufacturers must
choose to either become participating manufacturers under
the MSA or escrow money for future collection. Id.
§ 104557(a).

California’s cigarette taxation regime recognizes that it may not tax
certain tribal cigarette distributions. “[C]igarettes sold . . . by a Native
American tribe to a member of that tribe on that tribe’s land” are “exempt
from state excise tax pursuant to federal law.” Cal. Health & Safety
Code § 104556(j); see Wagnon v. Prairie Band Potawatomi Nation, 546
U.S. 95, 101–02 (2005) (“States are categorically barred from placing
the legal incidence of an excise tax ‘on a tribe or on tribal members for
sales made inside Indian country’ without congressional authorization.”
(quoting Okla. Tax Comm’n v. Chickasaw Nation, 515 U.S. 450, 459
(1995))). But when tribal cigarettes are sold off reservation or to a nonmember of the retailer tribe, the “user or consumer” must pay the tax,
and the exempt distributor must still collect the tax and remit it to the
State. Cal. Rev. & Tax Code §§ 30008(b), 30107, 30108(a), 30184; see
also Cal. State Bd. of Equalization v. Chemehuevi Indian Tribe, 474 U.S.
9, 10–12 (1985) (per curiam).
2

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

9

To make sure manufacturers meet their obligations to
escrow or remit payments, California enacted the Directory
Statute.
Manufacturers who provide assurances to
California that they will meet their obligations are placed on
the “Tobacco Directory,” and their cigarettes may be sold to
consumers in the State. Cal. Rev. & Tax Code § 30165.1(c).
Manufacturers who do not meet their escrow deposit
requirements or do not provide assurances that they will
meet their payment obligations under the MSA are not listed
on the directory and their cigarettes are contraband. Id.
§ 30165.1(c)(2)(A), (c)(2)(C), (e)(2).
California contends that Defendants violated the PACT
Act by distributing contraband cigarettes in violation of
California tax laws. Azuma manufactures its own cigarettes
under two brands: Tracker and Tucson. Azuma does not
collect the required excise taxes or MSA payments for these
brands, and they are not listed on the California Tobacco
Directory. These cigarettes are contraband. Another
cigarette company, Seneca Manufacturing Co., also
produces cigarettes under two brands: Heron and Sands.
Neither Heron nor Sands cigarettes are listed in California’s
Tobacco Directory, which makes them contraband in the
State. To enable Seneca to import Heron and Sands
cigarettes into California, Azuma allegedly made a deal with
Seneca Manufacturing under which Seneca would affix
Azuma’s cigarette license number to the Heron and Sands
cigarettes. But these cigarettes are also contraband because
Azuma has not collected or held in escrow the relevant
California excise taxes or MSA payments.
The State further contends that Azuma engages in the
unlawful distribution of cigarettes. Azuma distributes
cigarettes to other tribal retailers outside the Alturas Indian
Rancheria reservation without Azuma or its customers

10

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

collecting California excise taxes or MSA payments. And
Azuma and its customers sell cigarettes to non-Tribe
members without collecting California excise taxes or MSA
payments.
California alleges that Azuma “supplies contraband
cigarettes directly to other retail smokeshops outside of
Alturas Indian country” and “has also supplied contraband
cigarettes to such smokeshops indirectly through unlicensed
distributors operating within the State.” Azuma also
purportedly sells contraband cigarettes at three of its own
retail smokeshops directly to consumers.
In September 2018, California issued a letter to Azuma,
warning that its distribution of cigarettes violated state law
and the PACT Act. Azuma responded stating that it did not
need to comply with California’s cigarette laws because it is
a tribal business that distributes to other tribal entities.
In December 2018, California requested that Azuma be
listed on the federal PACT Act’s non-compliant list. In
February 2019, the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco,
Firearms, and Explosives (ATF) sent Azuma a letter
explaining that it was considering placing Azuma on the
PACT Act non-compliant list. Then, in April 2019, ATF
placed Azuma on the list. 3 In October 2022, California sent
Azuma a warning letter demanding that Azuma cease its

In September 2019, Azuma claimed not to have received any notice
that it had been placed on the non-compliant list. ATF gave Azuma
opportunity to respond to being nominated to the list. In November
2019, ATF rejected Azuma’s arguments and confirmed that Azuma
belonged on the list, effective December 2019. In early 2020, Azuma
again sought removal from the non-compliant list, but ATF again
rejected its arguments.

3

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

11

unlawful activity. Azuma continued to operate without
collecting or remitting the required payments to California.
In April 2023, Azuma requested removal from the noncompliant list. ATF rejected Azuma’s request, concluding:
It is ATF’s position that Azuma continues to
violate the Contraband Cigarette Trafficking
Act (CCTA) and PACT Act by illegally
shipping unstamped, untaxed cigarettes that
are not permitted by the California directory
to unlicensed entities which cannot lawfully
possess untaxed, unstamped cigarettes,
failing to properly record these transactions
under
the
CCTA
record-keeping
requirements and failing to properly report
transactions under the PACT Act.
Azuma remains on the list to this day.
In April 2023, California filed suit in the U.S. District
Court for the Eastern District of California asserting, among
other claims, violations of the PACT Act. California alleged
that Defendants violated California laws and the PACT Act
because “Defendants do not pay or collect and remit
California excise taxes,” “Defendants sell, offer, possess for
sale in California, ship, and/or or otherwise distribute into or
within California cigarettes not found on the California
cigarette directory,” and Defendants “do not comply with the
shipping requirements, recordkeeping requirements, or tax
collection requirements of the PACT Act.” 4
California also brought claims under the Contraband Cigarette
Trafficking Act (CCTA), 18 U.S.C. §§ 2341–46, which permits States to
bring civil actions for “any person knowingly to ship, transport, receive,
4

12

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

In June 2023, California moved to enjoin Azuma from
delivering cigarettes in violation of the PACT Act. The
district court issued a preliminary injunction, and we
affirmed. We concluded that:
At the preliminary injunction stage,
California has produced enough evidence to
support that at least the Tribal Retailers who
operate smoke shops are subject to
California’s regulatory scheme. The
Defendants have not met their burden at the
preliminary injunction stage to show that any
of the Tribal Retailers are operating lawfully.
California v. Azuma Corp., No. 23-16200, 2024 WL
4131831, at *2 (9th Cir. Sept. 10, 2024). Because
Defendants did not demonstrate that they operated lawfully,
we affirmed the district court’s finding that “California ha[d]
shown a sufficient likelihood of success on the merits of its
PACT Act claim.” 5 Id. at *3.
possess, sell, distribute, or purchase contraband cigarettes,” id.
§§ 2342(a), 2346(b), and the Civil Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt
Organizations Act (Civil RICO), 18 U.S.C. § 1962(c)–(d).
Defendants apparently have not complied with the preliminary
injunction. In February 2024, following a contempt motion by
California, the district court found that California “provided evidence
showing Azuma has continued to deliver cigarettes on its own behalf”
“to the same customers previously identified in the preliminary
injunction record.” Even after California filed for contempt, but before
the district court ruled, Azuma “shipped an estimated additional 2.5
million cigarettes” in violation of the preliminary injunction. In
February 2025, California filed a notice of violation that “the distribution
of Azuma cigarettes ha[d] continued uninterrupted,” and that Azuma had
distributed over 29 million cigarettes since February 2024.
5

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

13

In July 2023, while their appeal of the district court’s
preliminary injunction was pending, Defendants moved to
dismiss the case. As relevant to this appeal, Defendants
argued that: (1) Azuma is an arm of the Tribe and has tribal
sovereign immunity from suit; (2) the individual Defendants
share the Tribe’s sovereign immunity for the officialcapacity claims against them; and (3) qualified immunity
shields the individual Defendants from the personal capacity
claims against them. 6 Applying the five factors identified in
White v. University of California, 765 F.3d 1010, 1025 (9th
Cir. 2014), the district court concluded that Azuma is “an
arm of the Alturas Tribe” and as a result is shielded by tribal
sovereign immunity. 7 The district court thus dismissed
California’s claims against Azuma.
But the district court held that the doctrine of Ex parte
Young did not bar claims for injunctive relief against the
individual Defendants in their official capacities. In
reaching that result, the district court relied on its order
granting a preliminary injunction, which reasoned that
Defendants also argued that California failed to state a claim under the
CCTA and RICO and that California failed to join Azuma’s tribal
customers, who were allegedly necessary and indispensable parties
under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 19. The district court found
“without deciding whether the CCTA bars Ex parte Young
actions . . . [that] California’s action under the CCTA is barred by
statute.” The district court reasoned that “[t]he CCTA explicitly
prohibits states from bringing a civil action ‘against an Indian tribe or an
Indian in Indian Country’” and dismissed California’s CCTA claim. The
district court also found that California failed to state a claim under civil
RICO and dismissed California’s RICO claims against Defendants.
Finally, the district court rejected Defendants’ Rule 19 argument, finding
that the tribal retailers were not necessary parties. These conclusions are
not challenged on appeal.

6

7

California does not dispute this conclusion on appeal.

14

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

unlike statutory schemes in which Congress enacted a
“detailed remedial scheme that explicitly or implicitly
displaces the judge-made equitable remedy available under
Ex parte Young,” “the relevant PACT Act provisions place
no limits on available remedies or who may be sued.” The
district court concluded that the statute “does not show
Congress intended to foreclose Ex parte Young actions” but
rather “confirms pre-existing remedies and defenses are
available.” The district court accordingly found that
California’s Ex parte Young claims under the PACT Act
could proceed against the individual defendants in their
official capacities.
The district court also concluded that qualified immunity
did not bar California’s suit against the individual
Defendants. The district court reasoned that “California is
not seeking damages for violation of its rights” but “to
enforce Federal and State laws.” The district court
determined that “Defendants have not shown they are
entitled to qualified immunity” because “Defendants d[id]
not cite, nor c[ould] the [district] court find, any authority
extending qualified immunity to tribal officers sued in their
personal capacities for violating federal and state laws.”
Defendants timely appealed, invoking our jurisdiction under
the collateral order doctrine.
The district court properly rejected Defendants’
sovereign immunity defense as to California’s claims
brought under the PACT Act. We hold that California can
seek relief under Ex parte Young for PACT Act claims
because the statute does not restrict who may be sued and
does not specify against whom a suit may be brought.
Further, while the PACT Act permits a State to refer
violations to the federal government to bring enforcement
actions, the statute does not contain a detailed remedial

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

15

scheme that would displace relief under Ex parte Young.
The district court also properly denied the individual
Defendants’ claims for qualified immunity. Because
California seeks to enforce state law, through a federal
statute, against tribal officials, qualified immunity does not
insulate the individual Defendants from California’s claims.
JURISDICTION AND STANDARD OF REVIEW
We have jurisdiction under the collateral order doctrine.
The district court’s denials of qualified immunity and “tribal
sovereign immunity [are] immediately appealable under the
collateral order doctrine.” Burlington N. & Santa Fe Ry. Co.
v. Vaughn, 509 F.3d 1085, 1091 (9th Cir. 2007) (applying
the collateral order doctrine to a suit brought against tribal
officials where sovereign immunity would have barred the
action if not for the Ex parte Young exception); Est. of
Anderson v. Marsh, 985 F.3d 726, 730 (9th Cir. 2021)
(explaining that “pretrial orders denying qualified immunity
generally fall within the collateral order doctrine” (quoting
Plumhoff v. Rickard, 572 U.S. 765, 771–72 (2014))). We
review de novo questions of tribal sovereign immunity,
Linneen v. Gila River Indian Cmty., 276 F.3d 489, 492 (9th
Cir. 2002), and qualified immunity, Ballou v. McElvain, 29
F.4th 413, 421 (9th Cir. 2022).
DISCUSSION
I. Waiver
California contends that Defendants have waived their
sovereign immunity arguments. The State argues that
because Defendants had the opportunity to raise their Ex
parte Young argument “in their prior appeal of the district
court’s preliminary injunction” and did not, they have
waived the defense. We disagree.

16

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

Tribes enjoy sovereign immunity from suit. “The
common law sovereign immunity possessed by the Tribe,”
the Supreme Court has emphasized, “is a necessary corollary
to Indian sovereignty and self-governance.” Three Affiliated
Tribes of Fort Berthold Rsrv. v. World Eng’g, 476 U.S. 877,
890 (1986). Unless Congress provides otherwise, “tribal
immunity, like all aspects of tribal sovereignty, is privileged
from diminution by the States.” Id. at 891. Accordingly, the
Court has “time and again treated the ‘doctrine of tribal
immunity [as] settled law’ and dismissed any suit against a
tribe absent congressional authorization (or a waiver).”
Michigan v. Bay Mills Indian Cmty., 572 U.S. 782, 789
(2014) (alteration in original) (quoting Kiowa Tribe of Okla.
v. Mfg. Techs., Inc., 523 U.S. 751, 756 (1998)).
State and tribal immunity, while providing similar
protection against suit, differ in how they may be waived.
The Supreme Court has recognized that a State’s sovereign
immunity is “a personal privilege which it may waive at [its]
pleasure.” Clark v. Barnard, 108 U.S. 436, 447 (1883). A
State may implicitly waive its immunity by submitting itself
to federal jurisdiction. See In re Bliemeister, 296 F.3d 858,
861 (9th Cir. 2002) (“A state generally waives its immunity
when it ‘voluntarily invokes [federal] jurisdiction
or . . . makes a “clear declaration” that it intends to submit
itself to [federal] jurisdiction.’” (alterations in original)
(quoting In re Lazar, 237 F.3d 967, 976 (9th Cir. 2001))).
For example, we have held that a State implicitly waives its
sovereign immunity by “participating in extensive pre-trial
activities and waiting until the first day of trial before
objecting to the federal court’s jurisdiction on Eleventh
Amendment grounds.” Hill v. Blind Indus. & Servs. of Md.,
179 F.3d 754, 756 (9th Cir. 1999), as amended by 201 F.3d
1186 (9th Cir. 2000).

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

17

By contrast, “waivers of tribal sovereign immunity may
not be implied.” Allen v. Gold Country Casino, 464 F.3d
1044, 1047 (9th Cir. 2006). Participation in administrative
proceedings, see Kescoli v. Babbitt, 101 F.3d 1304, 1310
(9th Cir. 1996), or removal to federal court, Bodi v. Shingle
Springs Band of Miwok Indians, 832 F.3d 1011, 1022 (9th
Cir. 2016), are not waivers of tribal sovereign immunity.
Nor does a tribe, by filing suit, waive its immunity to a
compulsory counterclaim. Id. at 1020 (citing Okla. Tax
Comm’n v. Citizen Band Potawatomi Indian Tribe of Okla.,
498 U.S. 505, 509–10 (1991)). Rather, a tribe’s immunity is
only waived through an “unequivocal expression of the
Tribe’s intent to waive its immunity.” Id. at 1022.
Defendants did not unequivocally waive, and even
explicitly asserted, their tribal sovereign immunity defense.
In their first responsive pleading, in opposition to
California’s motion for a preliminary injunction, Defendants
argued that “[t]he State’s claims are barred by tribal
sovereign immunity because the [PACT] Act precludes the
application of Ex parte Young to the Del Rosas and Rose.”
Defs.’ Opp’n to Pl.’s Mot. for Prelim. Inj. at 30, California
v. Azuma Corp., No. 23-cv-00743 (E.D. Cal. July 10, 2023),
Dkt. No. 23. It is true that in their prior interlocutory appeal
of the district court court’s grant of a preliminary injunction,
Defendants did not argue that sovereign immunity precluded
California’s suit. But while that appeal was pending,
Defendants’ motion to dismiss asserting sovereign immunity
was simultaneously pending before the district court.
Defendants therefore did not waive their sovereign
immunity arguments.

18

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

II. Tribal Sovereign Immunity and Ex parte Young
Defendants argue that tribal sovereign immunity bars
California’s claims under the PACT Act and that the Ex
parte Young exception to sovereign immunity does not
apply. Defendants contend that because the PACT Act
contains a detailed remedial scheme, Congress intended to
foreclose Ex parte Young relief in favor of statutory remedial
relief. The district court disagreed, concluding that Ex parte
Young relief was available because “the relevant PACT Act
provisions place no limits on available remedies or who may
be sued. Instead, the Act provides for a broad cause of
action.” The district court did not err in so concluding.
“Indian tribes,” the Supreme Court has explained,
“exercise inherent sovereign authority over their members
and territories.” Okla. Tax Comm’n, 498 U.S. at 509
(quoting Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 5 Pet. 1, 17 (1831)). 8
“Among the core aspects of sovereignty that tribes
possess . . . is the ‘common-law immunity from suit
traditionally enjoyed by sovereign powers.’” Bay Mills
Indian Cmty., 572 U.S. at 788 (quoting Santa Clara Pueblo,
436 U.S. at 58). Sovereign immunity shields the tribes from
suits brought by the States, see Okla. Tax Comm’n, 498 U.S.

Congress possesses the authority to define the scope of tribal sovereign
immunity. See Santa Clara Pueblo v. Martinez, 436 U.S. 49, 56 (1978)
(“Congress has plenary authority to limit, modify or eliminate the powers
of local self-government which the tribes otherwise possess.”). But “until
Congress acts, the tribes retain” their sovereign authority. United States
v. Wheeler, 435 U.S. 313, 323 (1978), superseded by statute as stated in
United States v. Lara, 541 U.S. 193, 207 (2004).

8

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

19

at 509, and, by the same token, shields the States from suits
brought by tribes, see Blatchford, 501 U.S. at 782. 9
As discussed, suits against tribes are barred by sovereign
immunity absent a clear waiver by the tribe or congressional
abrogation. See Santa Clara Pueblo, 436 U.S. at 58. A
tribe’s sovereign immunity extends to “suits arising from a
tribe’s commercial activities, even when they take place off
Indian lands.” Bay Mills Indian Cmty., 572 U.S. at 790. And
“[t]ribal sovereign immunity ‘extends to tribal officials
when acting in their official capacity and within the scope of
their authority.’” Cook v. AVI Casino Enters., Inc., 548 F.3d
718, 727 (9th Cir. 2008) (quoting Linneen, 276 F.3d at
492). 10
In Ex parte Young, however, the Supreme Court
“established an important limit on the sovereign-immunity
principle,” Va. Off. for Prot. & Advoc. v. Stewart, 563 U.S.
247, 254 (2011), “for certain suits seeking declaratory and
injunctive relief against state officers in their individual
capacities,” Idaho v. Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Idaho, 521 U.S.
The Eleventh Amendment to the United States Constitution provides:
“The Judicial power of the United States shall not be construed to extend
to any suit in law or equity, commenced or prosecuted against one of the
United States by Citizens of another State, or by Citizens or Subjects of
any Foreign State.” U.S. Const. amend. XI. In interpreting the Eleventh
Amendment, the Supreme Court has recognized that the Amendment
“stand[s] not so much for what it says, but for the presupposition of our
constitutional structure which it confirms: that the States entered the
federal system with their sovereignty intact; that the judicial authority in
Article III is limited by this sovereignty.” Blatchford v. Native Vill. of
Noatak & Circle Vill., 501 U.S. 775, 779 (1991).
9

The parties do not dispute that the individual Defendants were acting
in their official capacities and would enjoy sovereign immunity
protections if not for the Ex parte Young exception.

10

20

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

261, 269 (1997). “Because a state officer who violates
federal law acts outside the scope of her authority, she is ‘not
the State for sovereign-immunity purposes’ and is subject to
a federal court’s injunctive power.” R.W. v. Columbia Basin
Coll., 77 F.4th 1214, 1220 (9th Cir. 2023) (quoting Va. Off.,
563 U.S. at 254).
Ex parte Young did not emerge in the context of tribal
sovereign immunity. And while tribal and state sovereign
immunity are not the same, we have recognized that tribal
sovereign immunity does not bar actions brought under Ex
parte Young. See Jamul Action Comm. v. Simermeyer, 974
F.3d 984, 994 (9th Cir. 2020) (“Suits seeking prospective
injunctive relief ordinarily may proceed against tribal
officers sued in their official capacities under the doctrine of
Ex parte Young.”). For a suit to proceed under this
exception, “the plaintiff must allege . . . an ongoing
violation of federal law for which [it] seeks prospective
injunctive relief.” Columbia Basin Coll., 77 F.4th at 1221
(citing Koala v. Khosla, 931 F.3d 887, 895 (9th Cir. 2019)).
In this case, California alleges an ongoing violation of the
PACT Act and seeks prospective injunctive relief.
There are exceptions to Ex parte Young, however. As
relevant here, “where Congress has prescribed a detailed
remedial scheme for the enforcement against a State of a
statutorily created right, a court should hesitate before
casting aside those limitations and permitting an action
against a state officer based upon Ex parte Young.”
Seminole Tribe of Fla. v. Florida, 517 U.S. 44, 74 (1996). 11
This case concerned the Seminole Tribe of Florida’s suit against the
State of Florida for failing to uphold its obligations under the Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act. Id. at 51–52. Because Ex parte Young claims
are an exception to tribal sovereign immunity, we see no reason why the
11

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

21

“Where Congress has created a remedial scheme for the
enforcement of a particular federal right . . . against federal
officers,” the Supreme Court has instructed that courts
should “refuse[] to supplement that [statutory] scheme with
one created by the judiciary.” Id.
But this exception is limited to “detailed and exclusive
remedial scheme[s].” Verizon Md., Inc. v. Pub. Serv.
Comm’n of Md., 535 U.S. 635, 647 (2002). A statutory
scheme that (1) “places no restriction on the relief a court
can award” and (2) “does not even say whom the suit is to
be brought against,” the Supreme Court has explained, “does
not without more ‘impose upon the [tribe] a liability that is
significantly more limited than would be the liability
imposed upon the . . . officer under Ex Parte Young.’” Id. at
647–48 (quoting Seminole Tribe, 517 U.S. at 75–76); see
also Miranda B. v. Kitzhaber, 328 F.3d 1181, 1188–89 (9th
Cir. 2003) (per curiam).
Defendants argue that the PACT Act provides a detailed
remedial scheme such that relief under Ex parte Young is
unavailable. The district court rejected this argument,
finding that “the relevant PACT Act provisions place no
limits on available remedies or who may be sued.” The
district court concluded that “[i]f Congress intended to
change the default remedial scheme for unlawful conduct
under the PACT Act, which includes Ex parte Young
actions, it would either have said so expressly or enacted a
detailed remedial scheme,” but Congress “did neither.”
The district court correctly concluded that the PACT Act
does not displace relief under Ex parte Young. The PACT
Seminole Tribe exception to Ex parte Young does not apply with equal
force to suits brought against tribal officials.

22

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

Act “places no restriction on the relief a court can award.”
Verizon Md., 535 U.S. at 647. To the contrary, the Act
expressly contemplates preexisting remedies, including
under Ex parte Young. Section 378(c)(1)(A) provides:
A State, through its attorney general, or a
local government or Indian tribe that levies a
tax subject to section 376a(a)(3) of this title,
through its chief law enforcement officer,
may bring an action in a United States district
court to prevent and restrain violations of this
chapter by any person or to obtain any other
appropriate relief from any person for
violations of this chapter, including civil
penalties, money damages, and injunctive or
other equitable relief.
15 U.S.C. § 378(c)(1)(A). Read fairly, this statute does not
limit the scope of “appropriate relief” that qualified plaintiffs
may obtain, and “injunctive or other equitable relief” plainly
includes injunctive relief under Ex parte Young.
Moreover, as the Supreme Court remarked about another
statute, the PACT Act “does not even say whom the suit is
to be brought against.” Verizon Md., 535 U.S. at 647. Under
the PACT Act, a State may bring an action “to prevent and
restrain violations of this chapter by any person or to obtain
any other appropriate relief from any person.” 15 U.S.C.
§ 378(c)(1)(A) (emphasis added). And the Act defines a
person as “an individual, corporation, company,
association, firm, partnership, society, State government,
local government, Indian tribal government, governmental
organization of such a government, or joint stock company.”
Id. § 375(11) (emphasis added). This definition, which

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

23

explicitly includes the very categories Defendants claim are
excluded, makes clear that Congress did not intend to
displace Ex parte Young relief under the statute.
Taking a different tack, Defendants also argue that the
PACT Act’s “[p]rovision of information” subsection, 15
U.S.C. § 378(c)(2), creates a detailed and exclusive remedial
scheme that forecloses relief under Ex parte Young.
A State, through its attorney general, or a
local government or Indian tribe that levies a
tax subject to section 376a(a)(3) of this title,
through its chief law enforcement officer,
may provide evidence of a violation of this
chapter by any person not subject to State,
local, or tribal government enforcement
actions for violations of this chapter to the
Attorney General of the United States or a
United States attorney, who shall take
appropriate actions to enforce this chapter.
Id. § 378(c)(2). Defendants contend that Congress intended
this “[p]rovision of information” subsection, id., to be the
exclusive avenue for relief against tribes under the PACT
Act.
This argument is unavailing. To begin, the language of
the “[p]rovision of information” subsection is permissive,
not mandatory. Id. (“A State . . . may provide evidence of a
violation . . . to the Attorney General . . . .” (emphasis
added)). While “the mere use of ‘may’ is not necessarily
conclusive of congressional intent to provide for a
permissive or discretionary authority,” Cortez Byrd Chips,
Inc. v. Bill Harbert Const. Co., 529 U.S. 193, 198 (2000),
other sections of the PACT Act confirm that it is not an

24

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

exclusive remedy. For example, the statute notes that “[t]he
remedies available under this section . . . are in addition to
any other remedies available under Federal, State, local,
tribal, or other law” and that “[n]othing in this chapter shall
be construed to expand, restrict, or otherwise modify any
right of an authorized State official to proceed in State court,
or take other enforcement actions, on the basis of an alleged
violation of State or other law.” 15 U.S.C. § 378(c)(4)(A)–
(B).
These provisions (along with the previously cited
provisions) are already dispositive. But in enacting the
PACT Act Congress also explicitly declined to modify any
preexisting sovereign immunities, providing:
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
abrogate or constitute a waiver of any
sovereign immunity of a State or local
government or Indian tribe against any
unconsented lawsuit under this chapter, or
otherwise to restrict, expand, or modify any
sovereign immunity of a State or local
government or Indian tribe.
Id. § 378(c)(1)(B). If Defendants were correct that the
“[p]rovision of information” subsection, id. § 378(c)(2), was
an exclusive remedy, this subsection would be superfluous.
See United States v. Texas, 143 U.S. 621, 646 (1892)
(holding that States retain no sovereign immunity as against
the federal government); United States v. Yakima Tribal Ct.,
806 F.2d 853, 861 (9th Cir. 1986) (“[T]he United States may
sue Indian tribes and override tribal sovereign immunity.”);
see also Bd. of Trs. of Leland Stanford Junior Univ. v. Roche
Molecular Sys., Inc., 563 U.S. 776, 788 (2011) (expressing

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

25

a “general ‘reluctan[ce] to treat statutory terms as
surplusage.’” (alteration in original) (quoting Duncan v.
Walker, 533 U.S. 167, 174 (2001))).
The “[p]rovision of information” subsection, 15 U.S.C.
§ 378(c)(2), could also be read another way. Under a
different reading, the statute permits States to bring Ex parte
Young suits against tribal officials but bars other remedies,
such as civil penalties. If a State or a tribe wished to obtain
penalties beyond the limited relief available under Ex parte
Young, the PACT Act’s referral provision permits the United
States alone to sue for that relief. The ability to refer suits to
the federal government, though, does not mean that suits
under Ex parte Young are barred by the Act.
In any event, the PACT Act’s remedial scheme is also
not so detailed as to foreclose relief under Ex parte Young.
A comparison to Seminole Tribe, in which the Court found
the remedial scheme sufficiently detailed, is instructive. 517
U.S. 44.
The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act imposes on the
States an obligation to “negotiate with the Indian tribe in
good faith” towards the formation of a Tribal-State compact
regulating gaming activity within the State. 25 U.S.C.
§ 2710(d)(3)(A). The State’s obligation to negotiate in good
faith is “made judicially enforceable” by § 2710(d)(7),
which authorizes a tribe to bring suit against a State in
federal court to compel performance of that duty. Seminole
Tribe, 517 U.S. at 49–50.
Once a suit has been filed, the statute requires a detailed
process geared to ensure that a compact between the State
and the tribe can be reached. “If the district court concludes
that the State has failed to negotiate in good faith toward the
formation of a Tribal-State compact, then it ‘shall order the

26

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

State and Indian Tribe to conclude such a compact within a
60-day period.’” Id. at 50 (quoting 25 U.S.C.
§ 2710(d)(7)(B)(iii)). If no compact has still been reached
after 60 days, the district court then appoints a mediator. Id.
And if the State refuses to consent to the compact the
mediator selects, then the statute authorizes the Secretary of
Interior to prescribe a compact. Id. In light of this remedial
scheme, the Supreme Court reasoned that permitting an Ex
parte Young suit against a state officer to enforce compliance
with the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act would render the
Act’s “intricate procedures” superfluous because “more
immediate relief would be available under Ex parte Young.”
Id. at 74–75. The Court found that the imposition of such
detailed remedial measures reflected that “Congress chose to
impose upon the State a liability that is significantly more
limited than would be the liability imposed under the state
officer under Ex parte Young.” Id. at 75–76.
The PACT Act, by contrast, lacks any complicated or
intricate remedial measures. Under the statute, a State may
bring an action in federal court to prevent violations, 15
U.S.C. § 378(c)(1)(A), or a State may refer information to
the federal government “who shall take appropriate actions
to enforce” the Act, id. § 378(c)(2). And, again, the PACT
Act expressly does not “expand, restrict, or otherwise
modify any right of an authorized State official to proceed in
State court, or take other enforcement actions, on the basis
of an alleged violation of State or other law.” 15 U.S.C.
§ 378(c)(4)(B). Unlike the scheme created by the Indian
Gaming Regulatory Act, the PACT Act allows States and
other parties discretion in the remedies they seek, the means
to obtain those remedies, and the forum in which to do so.
Defendants, quoting Townsend v. University of Alaska,
543 F.3d 478, 487 (9th Cir. 2008), assert that “a statute

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

27

reflects a ‘detailed express remedial scheme’ akin to
Seminole Tribe where . . . the statute provides a method for
the United States to enforce the statute against States in
federal court, while other plaintiffs must pursue claims
against States in state court, if at all.” In Townsend, the
plaintiff sought to sue the University of Alaska, an arm of
the State of Alaska, under the Uniformed Services
Employment and Reemployment Rights Act of 1994
(USERRA). Id. at 481–82. The plaintiff argued that
Congress created an implied right of action against an
individual state supervisor under USERRA. Id. at 486.
Responding to that argument, we held that “Congress
manifested no intent to create a private right of action against
state supervisors” and “by designing such a detailed express
remedial scheme, Congress evinced an intent not to create
an additional individual cause of action against state
supervisors.” Id. at 487.
USERRA differs from the PACT Act because USERRA
provides that plaintiffs must sue in state court for violations
of USERRA by state employers. See 38 U.S.C. § 4323(b)(2)
(“In the case of an action against a State (as an employer) by
a person, the action may be brought in a State court of
competent jurisdiction in accordance with the laws of the
State.”); see also Townsend, 543 F.3d at 482–83. But “[i]n
the case of an action against a State (as an employer) or a
private employer commenced by the United States” or “[i]n
the case of an action against a private employer by a person,”
“the district courts of the United States shall have
jurisdiction” under USERRA. 38 U.S.C. § 4323(b)(1), (3).
In contrast, the PACT Act does not restrict the forum or the
person that can bring suit.
So Townsend supports
California’s view of the PACT Act, not Defendants’.

28

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

For all these reasons, the district court correctly
determined that Ex parte Young relief is available under the
PACT Act.
III. Qualified Immunity
That brings us to Defendants’ contention that
California’s claims for damages against Rose and Phillip Del
Rosa are barred by qualified immunity. The district court
concluded that the doctrine of qualified immunity did not
apply because “California is not seeking damages for
violation of its rights. Rather, it is seeking to enforce Federal
and State laws.” The district court determined that
“Defendants d[id] not cite, nor c[ould] the [district] court
find, any authority extending qualified immunity to tribal
officers sued in their personal capacities for violating federal
and state laws.”
We agree and hold that qualified immunity does not
apply to California’s claims under the PACT Act.
“Qualified or ‘good faith’ immunity is an affirmative
defense” that the defendant official bears the burden of
showing. Harlow v. Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 815 (1982);
see also Forrester v. White, 484 U.S. 219, 224 (1988).
Modern qualified immunity emerged as a defense to suits
brought by individuals to vindicate their rights. 12 The
doctrine shields government officials from “liability for civil
Scholars have noted that modern qualified immunity originated as a
response to the development of the ability of the public to bring civil
suits against government officials under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and Bivens v.
Six Unknown Named Agents of Federal Bureau of Narcotics, 403 U.S.
388 (1971). See Aaron L. Nielson & Christopher J. Walker, Qualified
Immunity and Federalism, 109 Geo. L. J. 229, 238–45 (2020); William
Baude, Is Qualified Immunity Unlawful?, 106 Calif. L. Rev. 45, 62–69
(2018).
12

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

29

damages insofar as their conduct [did] not violate clearly
established statutory or constitutional rights of which a
reasonable person would have known.” Harlow, 457 U.S. at
818. It is not a freestanding defense against all claims or
actions. 13
Here, California sues not to vindicate any individual’s
rights, but to exercise its law-enforcement powers as a
sovereign state. Defendants have not shown that qualified
immunity applies to a State using a federal statute to enforce
its taxation and regulatory obligations against tribal officials.
Before the district court and again on appeal, Defendants did
not identify a single case in which a court applied qualified
immunity in similar circumstances. Indeed, when asked at
oral argument for any case supporting their claim that
qualified immunity applies, Defendants offered none. Oral
Arg. at 5:01–5:20; cf. Wyatt v. Cole, 504 U.S. 158, 166, 168
(1992) (rejecting a qualified immunity defense outside civil
damages actions against government officials). California
also brings a federal cause of action to enforce its state law,
and this Court has already made clear that qualified
See Mitchell N. Berman, R. Anthony Reese & Ernest A. Young, State
Accountability for Violations of Intellectual Property Rights: How to
“Fix” Florida Prepaid (and How Not to), 79 Tex. L. Rev. 1037, 1123
(2001) (“Even though qualified immunity is plainly available as a
defense to some statutory claims, however, the courts have
acknowledged that the defense is incompatible with certain federal
statutes.”); Baude, Is Qualified Immunity Unlawful?, supra note 12, at
58–60 (discussing that common law qualified immunity defenses were
not freestanding). But see Scott A. Keller, Qualified and Absolute
Immunity at Common Law, 73 Stan. L. Rev. 1337, 1368 (2021) (“While
there may have been some ambiguity about absolute immunity for
certain executive officials around 1871, the common law definitively
accorded at least qualified immunity to all executive officers’
discretionary duties.”).
13

30

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

immunity does not shield defendants from state-law claims.
See Johnson v. Bay Area Rapid Transit Dist., 724 F.3d 1159,
1171 (9th Cir. 2013). Qualified immunity does not shield
officers from all regulatory duties or obligations, and it does
not shield Defendants from their obligations under
California law in these circumstances.
In contrast, California’s cigarette regulations and the
PACT Act do apply to Defendants. The Supreme Court has
held that a tribal cigarette distributor that sells to non-tribal
customers on the tribe’s reservation may be required to remit
taxes to the relevant State. See Cal. State Bd. of
Equalization, 474 U.S. at 12. The Court has upheld other
tax enforcement schemes under the “particularized inquiry”
of White Mountain Apache Tribe v. Bracker, 448 U.S. 136,
144–45 (1980). See also Moe v. Confederated Salish &
Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Rsrv., 425 U.S. 463, 483
(1976). And we have held that sales to other tribal
distributors, made off reservation or on another tribe’s
reservation, may be subject to state cigarette laws. See Big
Sandy Rancheria Enters. v. Bonta, 1 F.4th 710, 729–30 (9th
Cir. 2021).
Defendants have been repeatedly advised that their
conduct violated California’s cigarette regulations and the
PACT Act. California sent a warning letter about possible
violations of state tax laws and the PACT Act in August
2018. In November 2019, the ATF placed Azuma on the
non-compliant list and rejected Defendants’ arguments that
the PACT Act did not apply to them. In October 2022,
California again sent a warning letter about Azuma’s
unlawful cigarette distribution. And in April 2023, the ATF
again informed Azuma that it was violating the PACT Act
and California law.

STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. DEL ROSA

31

Qualified immunity is a personal-damages defense for
suits vindicating individual rights—not a license to ignore
the law, nor a permanent immunity to avoid rendering to
California what is California’s. Accordingly, Defendants
cannot claim qualified immunity from the State’s PACT Act
claims.
CONCLUSION
For these reasons, the district court’s denial of qualified
immunity and tribal sovereign immunity for California’s
PACT Act claims is AFFIRMED.

