FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
RODNEY BURCH,

No. 24-3646

Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.

D.C. No. 4:22-cv00366-AKB

CITY OF CHUBBUCK, a political
subdivision of the State of Idaho; and
KEVIN B. ENGLAND, in his
individual and official capacity,

OPINION

Defendants-Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Idaho
Hon. Amanda K. Brailsford, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 22, 2025
Moscow, Idaho
Filed July 25, 2025
Before: Richard C. Tallman, N. Randy Smith, and Ryan D.
Nelson, Circuit Judges
Opinion by Judge Tallman

2

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

SUMMARY *
First Amendment/Retaliation
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment for the City of Chubbuck, Idaho, and the City’s
Mayor, Kevin England, in Rodney Burch’s action, under 42
U.S.C. § 1983 and Idaho state law, alleging that defendants
took adverse employment actions against him because of his
protected speech made while he was the Public Works
Director.
Burch’s speech falls into two categories: (1) his
criticisms of England’s policies and performance as Mayor,
as well as his proposal and advocacy to create a city
administrator position as a solution to England’s alleged
deficiencies; and (2) his political yard sign supporting
England’s opponent during England’s re-election
campaign.
Applying a five-step inquiry to balance Burch’s interest
as a citizen to comment on matters of public concern and the
interest of the State as an employer, the panel held that
Burch’s First Amendment retaliation claim failed as a matter
of law. At step one, Burch’s speech addressed a matter of
public concern. At step two, Burch’s yard sign supporting
England’s mayoral opponent was protected speech, but his
criticism of England’s policies and performance and
advocacy for adding a city administrator was made pursuant
to his official duties as the Public Works Director and
therefore was unprotected. At step three, a reasonable
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

3

factfinder could find that Burch suffered at least one adverse
employment action—though not a constructive discharge—
and that Burch’s yard sign was a “substantial or motivating
factor” in at least one of the adverse employment
actions. However, at steps four and five, in which the burden
shifts to defendants, the panel held that there was no genuine
dispute that defendants had an adequate justification for their
adverse actions—including asking Burch to resign,
transferring his duties and reducing his workload—and
would have reached the same employment decisions had
Burch never erected his yard sign.
Finally, the panel held that the district court properly
granted summary judgment for defendants on Burch’s Idaho
state law claim because none of the adverse employment
actions occurred within the statute of limitations.

COUNSEL
DeAnne Casperson (argued), Amanda E. Ulrich, and Ryan
S. Dustin, Casperson Ulrich Dustin PLLC, Idaho Falls,
Idaho, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Sam L. Angell (argued) and Blake G. Hall, Hall Angell &
Associates LLP, Idaho Falls, Idaho; for DefendantsAppellees.

4

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

OPINION
TALLMAN, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiff-Appellant Rodney Burch, the former Public
Works Director for the City of Chubbuck, Idaho, appeals the
district court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of his
former employer, the City, and his former superior, Mayor
Kevin England (“Appellees”). Burch brought claims under
42 U.S.C. § 1983 for First Amendment retaliation and the
Idaho Protection of Public Employees Act, Idaho Code § 62104, based on the theory that England took adverse
employment actions against Burch as a result of Burch’s
protected speech made while he was the Public Works
Director. The speech at issue falls into two categories:
(1) Burch’s criticisms of England’s policies and
performance as Mayor, as well as Burch’s proposal and
advocacy to create a city administrator position as a solution
to England’s alleged deficiencies; 1 and (2) Burch’s political
yard sign supporting England’s opponent during England’s
re-election campaign. We hold that both claims fail as a
matter of law and we affirm the district court’s grant of
summary judgment for Appellees.

This category of speech forms the basis for Burch’s state law claim.
For purposes of that claim, Burch characterized this speech as
“communicat[ing] in good faith the existence of waste of public funds
and/or property of the City of Chubbuck.” See Idaho Code § 62104(1)(a) (“An employer may not take adverse action against an
employee because the employee . . . communicates in good faith the
existence of any waste of public funds, property or manpower . . . .”).
1

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

5

I
In 2015, Mayor England appointed Burch to be the city’s
Public Works Director, one of six appointed officers who
reported directly to England and worked under the general
direction of both the Mayor and City Council.
Burch’s role was expansive. He was responsible for
administering and managing street maintenance, water and
wastewater, sanitation, parks and recreation, engineering,
building inspections, planning and economic development,
and the city garage. Burch supervised several department
heads within the Public Works Department, who in turn
supervised 40–45 employees. He also engaged in strategic
planning and policymaking regarding existing city
ordinances, employee manuals, and processes for employee
evaluations. Burch described his work as including “City
Wide Priorities Management,” “Long Range Goals,” and
“Department Efficiencies” including “Budgeting” and “5
year planning.” According to Burch, he also took on duties
“outside of traditional public works,” including
“[e]verything from dealing with utility billing to the design
and construction of city hall.” Burch believed that his
workload equated to approximately 2.5 full-time positions.
For the first six years of Burch’s tenure, he and England
had a good working relationship. During that time, Burch
communicated his concerns regarding city management
directly to England without issue. For example, in 2018,
Burch told England that, in his view, certain accounting and
operational practices were a waste of public funds. Among
other things, Burch told England that city government
misallocated expenses across its departments and had an
inefficient system for authorizing work orders. As a result
of these and other concerns, Burch and the Public Works

6

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

Department developed a strategic plan for the city (“2018
Strategic Plan”). Burch obtained public input for the Plan,
drafted the Plan, presented it to the City Council, and
obtained City Council approval.
However, in 2021, England and Burch’s relationship
soured after Burch proposed switching the city’s
management structure from a “strong mayor” system to a
“weak mayor” system by creating a city administrator
position. By this time, Burch had grown increasingly
frustrated with England’s policies and performance as
Mayor. Burch believed that England had failed to properly
implement the 2018 Strategic Plan, that England’s approach
to budgeting and his adoption of an online utility bill-pay
credit program had decreased revenue, and that England was
ineffective in helping Public Works manage its workload.
Burch thought that a city administrator would solve these
problems by ensuring better oversight of operations,
preventing waste of funds and manpower, enabling a smooth
transition between mayors, and allowing England to be more
successful.
In early 2021, Burch began to discuss alternative city
management approaches with England and the Human
Resources (“HR”) Director, Scott Gummersall. On April 19,
2021, Burch sent a letter to England formally proposing that
Chubbuck create a city administrator position. Burch claims
that England initially supported the idea and directed him to
review the proposed organizational structure and to work
with Gummersall to create an appropriate job description.2
England disputes this and maintains that he was never in favor of the
proposal. Regardless, this is not a genuine dispute that precludes
summary judgment. As explained in Section IV(A)(3), even crediting
2

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

7

During this time, Burch also discussed the proposal with
members of the City Council, and some were in support.
On June 1, 2021, Burch sent a memorandum to England
enclosing information regarding the city administrator
proposal that Burch claims he prepared at England’s request.
One of those enclosed documents, referred to in the
memorandum as “Options is [sic] process, My operational
concerns, concerns from other staff” (“Options in Process
document”), contained Burch’s serious criticisms of
England’s policies and performance. 3 The document stated,
among other criticisms, that England “[l]ack[ed] []
commitment to follow through or monitor important
operational items”; was “[u]nable or unwilling to hold staff
accountable”; had “[n]o clear/committed vision”; “publicly
t[ook] credit” for issues that he did not handle; and had
“perception” problems including spending time on social
media instead of working and not being trusted to
Burch’s version of events as the non-moving party, no reasonable
factfinder could return a verdict for Burch. See Anderson v. Liberty
Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 248, 255 (1986).
England testified at his deposition that on or around May 27, 2021,
Burch, Gummersall, and one of Burch’s employees met with England
and presented the Options in Process document to England. According
to England, he excused himself from the meeting because he needed time
to process the document. Since it is undisputed that England received
the Options in Process document shortly afterward on June 1, 2021,
whether he first received it on May 27 is not material to Burch’s claims.
See Ochoa v. City of Mesa, 26 F.4th 1050, 1055–56 (9th Cir. 2022) (“A
material fact is one that is needed to prove (or defend against) a claim,
as determined by the applicable substantive law.” (quoting Anderson,
477 U.S. at 255)). As explained in Section IV(A)(3), even crediting
Burch’s version of events as the non-moving party, no reasonable
factfinder could return a verdict for Burch. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at
255.
3

8

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

“objectively address issues.” The document also contained
feedback that Burch purportedly gathered from other staff,
including that England “[a]ctively discourage[ed]
teamwork”; was “unaware of the actual problems”; was
subject to the City Treasurer’s “incredible influence over
him”; and was unaware of the “toxic work environment”
within city government.
After England received the memorandum and enclosed
documents, Burch and England met privately to discuss the
city administrator proposal and Burch’s ongoing concerns
with England’s policies and performance. According to
Burch, shortly thereafter, England told Burch that he no
longer supported the proposal to add a city administrator and
asked Burch to stop advocating for it. Soon afterward,
England met with the City Council to discuss the proposal
and Councilmember Melanie Evans asked England to
reconsider his opposition. However, England refused to
change his position and the proposal ultimately failed.
Burch believed that England’s attitude began to “cool”
toward him and that England began “cutting [Burch] out of
meetings and decisions.”
As a result of England’s opposition to the city
administrator proposal, Councilmember Dan Heiner
challenged England in the 2021 mayoral election. Burch
decided to support Heiner’s candidacy and placed a
campaign sign for Heiner in his front yard, but did not
otherwise campaign for Heiner or against England. At some
point between June 2021 and November 2021, one of
Burch’s neighbors informed England of Burch’s yard sign.
Burch and England never discussed Burch’s support for
Heiner or his yard sign prior to the election, and Burch did
not discuss his support for Heiner at his workplace.

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

9

On November 2, 2021, England won re-election. Shortly
thereafter, England spoke with the city’s legal counsel about
what was required to remove Burch, and the counsel
explained that England would have to show cause. England
also met with HR Director Gummersall to discuss whether
England could request Burch’s resignation and what would
constitute cause for removal. Gummersall asked why
England wanted Burch to resign, and England responded
that he no longer trusted Burch. England then reviewed and
compiled documents that he believed showed cause for
Burch’s removal, including the Options in Process
document. When England and Gummersall met again that
week, England explained that he distrusted Burch because of
Burch’s city administrator proposal and his Options in
Process document. England also expressed concern that
Burch and others were trying to remove him from office.
That same week, on November 5, 2021, England met
with Burch alone. According to Burch, England stated that
he no longer had confidence in Burch and asked Burch to
resign. 4 However, England agreed with Burch that Burch
had not done anything that necessitated his resignation.
Burch told England that he would take the weekend to think
about his options. This was the first time that the two had
had an adverse conversation regarding Burch’s continued
employment. Later that day, England asked one of Burch’s
England disputes this and maintains that he did not want Burch to resign
because he believed that they could continue working well together as
they had in the past. According to England, it was Burch who implied
that he should be removed from his position and stated that “one of us
has got to go and you just won [the] election.” But as explained in
Section IV(A)(3), even crediting Burch’s version of events as the nonmoving party, no reasonable factfinder could return a verdict for Burch.
See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
4

10

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

subordinate Public Works department heads to serve as the
Interim Public Works Director if Burch resigned.
On the following Monday, November 8, 2021, Burch
informed England that he did not want to resign. According
to Burch, the two met again that afternoon where England
asked him to reconsider and Burch refused. 5 Also according
to Burch, during this second meeting England referenced
Heiner as “[Burch’s] candidate.”
Immediately afterward, England scheduled an executive
session of the City Council on November 10, 2021, to argue
for removing Burch since the Council’s approval was
required to do so. See Idaho Code § 50-206; City Code of
Chubbuck, Idaho § 2.10.010. According to Burch, at the
session England produced documents for the Council,
including the Options in Process document, and told the
Council that he and Burch could no longer work together.
Burch claims that England also yelled at Councilmember
Evans for supporting Heiner in the election. Ultimately, the
Council declined to remove Burch and instructed England
and Burch to continue working together.
On November 15, 2021, England sent Burch an email
with the subject line “Moving forward” that asked Burch
how he viewed their working relationship and whether he
had suggestions for how the two should move forward. In
response, Burch stated, among other things, that he would
“focus on [his] role as Public Works Director,” and that he

England disputes this and maintains that he did not meet with Burch
again that day or ask him to reconsider resigning. But once again, as
explained in Section IV(A)(3), even crediting Burch’s version of events
as the non-moving party, no reasonable factfinder could return a verdict
for Burch. See Anderson, 477 U.S. at 255.
5

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

11

would “cease further private conversations with Council
[members] related to [England’s] performance.”
According to Burch, by this time, his “working
relationship with England [had] essentially ended” because
England had cut him out of certain decision-making and
duties. Burch still attended weekly officer meetings with
England, conducted weekly meetings with Public Works
department heads, and managed Public Works
administrative staff. However, Burch alleged that his role
changed in three key respects.
First, the city’s Finance Director began bypassing Burch
by bringing finance and budgeting issues to one of Burch’s
subordinate department heads rather than Burch. Burch
believed that England was to blame for this. Second, Burch
believed that England transferred “[a]ll of the planning
responsibilities” and the “policies, decisions, and functions”
to the city’s head of Economic Development and
Community Services. Finally, England transferred the
responsibility of conducting a leadership training from
Burch to Gummersall. According to Gummersall, England
stated that he did so because he believed that the training was
Burch’s attempt to remove him from office. 6
By March 2022, Burch claims that his workload was
reduced to 70–80% of a full-time position. As a result, on
March 3, 2022, Burch submitted his resignation effective
April 8, 2022. On April 7, 2022, Burch sent a letter to HR
England disputes this and maintains that he transferred responsibility
for the training from Burch to Gummersall to lessen Burch’s workload
after Burch complained that he had too many responsibilities and needed
help from England. As explained in Section IV(A)(3), Burch does not
raise material facts on this issue to preclude summary judgment. See
Ochoa, 26 F.4th at 1055–56.

6

12

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

explaining that, among other things, he was resigning
because England retaliated against him based on his
protected speech. On August 23, 2022, Burch filed the
present action in federal court for the District of Idaho.
Appellees denied the allegations and did not assert any
immunity defenses available under § 1983. Following
discovery, Appellees moved for summary judgment on both
claims. The district court granted summary judgment for
Appellees, and Burch timely appealed.
II
The district court had jurisdiction to adjudicate the action
under 28 U.S.C. §§ 1331, 1343, 1367. We have appellate
jurisdiction to hear this appeal of the district court’s final
order under 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
III
We review the district court’s grant of summary
judgment de novo. Dodge v. Evergreen Sch. Dist. #114, 56
F.4th 767, 776 (9th Cir. 2022) (citation omitted). “Summary
judgment is appropriate only when ‘there is no genuine issue
as to any material fact.’” Posey v. Lake Pend Oreille Sch.
Dist. No. 84, 546 F.3d 1121, 1126 (9th Cir. 2008) (quoting
Fed. R. Civ. P. 56(c)). Because Burch was the non-moving
party, we view the evidence in the light most favorable to
him and “all justifiable inferences are to be drawn in his
favor.” Garcetti v. Ceballos, 547 U.S. 410, 442 n.13 (2006)
(citing Anderson v. Liberty Lobby, Inc., 477 U.S. 242, 255
(1986)).

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

13

IV
A
We first examine whether the district court properly
granted summary judgment for Appellees on Burch’s First
Amendment retaliation claim. The First Amendment
protects against the government “abus[ing] its position as
employer to stifle ‘the First Amendment rights [its
employees] would otherwise enjoy as citizens to comment
on matters of public interest.’” Eng v. Cooley, 552 F.3d
1062, 1070 (9th Cir. 2009) (second alteration in original)
(quoting Pickering v. Bd. of Ed., 391 U.S. 563, 568 (1968)).
In determining whether a government employer retaliated
against a public employee in violation of the First
Amendment, the Supreme Court has instructed us to
“balance between the interests of the [public employee], as
a citizen, in commenting upon matters of public concern and
the interest of the State, as an employer, in promoting the
efficiency of the public services it performs through its
employees.” Pickering, 391 U.S. at 568. In Eng v. Cooley,
we distilled Pickering into a five-step inquiry:
(1) whether the plaintiff spoke on a matter of
public concern; (2) whether the plaintiff
spoke as a private citizen or public employee;
(3) whether the plaintiff’s protected speech
was a substantial or motivating factor in the
adverse employment action; (4) whether the
state had an adequate justification for treating
the employee differently from other members
of the general public; and (5) whether the
state would have taken the adverse

14

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

employment action even absent the protected
speech.
552 F.3d at 1070.
It is the plaintiff’s burden to demonstrate the first three
steps to make out a prima facie case of First Amendment
retaliation. Dodge, 56 F.4th at 776 (citing Howard v. City of
Coos Bay, 871 F.3d 1032, 1044 (9th Cir. 2017)). The first
two steps—whether the plaintiff spoke on a matter of public
concern, and if so, whether that speech was made as a private
citizen or as a public employee—form the lodestar question
of whether the plaintiff’s speech is protected under the First
Amendment. Id. at 777 (citing Johnson v. Poway Unified
Sch. Dist., 658 F.3d 954, 961 (9th Cir. 2011)). If the
plaintiff’s speech is not protected, our inquiry ends there.
But if the speech is protected, the plaintiff must then
demonstrate the third step: that the protected speech was “a
‘substantial or motivating’ factor” for the alleged adverse
employment action(s). Id. at 776 (quoting Howard, 871 F.3d
at 1044).
If the plaintiff makes that showing, the burden shifts to
the government to demonstrate steps four and five: that it had
“an adequate justification for treating the employee
differently from any other member of the general public,” or
alternatively, that it “would have reached the same [adverse
employment] decision even in the absence of” the protected
speech. Eng, 552 F.3d at 1071–72 (alteration in original)
(first quoting Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 418; and then quoting
Thomas v. City of Beaverton, 379 F.3d 802, 808 (9th Cir.
2004)). Only if the government fails both the fourth and fifth
steps does the plaintiff establish a First Amendment
violation. Greisen v. Hanken, 925 F.3d 1097, 1108 (9th Cir.
2019).

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

15

1
We begin with the lodestar question of whether there is
a genuine dispute as to whether either category of Burch’s
speech is protected. We answer this by assessing whether a
reasonable factfinder could find that Burch established the
first two Pickering steps: (1) that he “spoke on a matter of
public concern,” and (2) that he “spoke as a private citizen”
rather than as “a public employee.” Dodge, 56 F.4th at 777
(quoting Johnson, 658 F.3d at 961). The first step poses a
question of law. Greisen, 925 F.3d at 1109. The second
poses a mixed question of law and fact. Posey, 546 F.3d at
1126–29.
a
The first step—assessing whether Burch’s speech
addressed a matter of public concern—presents a low bar.
“Speech involves a matter of public concern when it can
fairly be considered to relate to ‘any matter of political,
social, or other concern to the community.’” Eng, 552 F.3d
at 1070 (quoting Johnson v. Multnomah County, 48 F.3d
420, 422 (9th Cir. 1995)). “It is only ‘when it is clear . . . the
information would be of no relevance to the public’s
evaluation of the performance of governmental agencies’”
that such speech does not address a matter of public concern.
Ulrich v. City & County of San Francisco, 308 F.3d 968, 978
(9th Cir. 2002) (alteration in original) (quoting Pool v.
Vanrheen, 297 F.3d 899, 907 (9th Cir. 2002)).
As a matter of law, Burch’s yard sign expressing his
political support for England’s mayoral opponent addresses
a matter of public concern. See Dodge, 56 F.4th at 773, 777
(holding that public employee wearing a “Make America
Great Again” hat to workplace training addressed a matter
of public concern because expressions regarding candidates

16

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

for office “inherently relate to the political, social, or other
concern to the community” (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted)).
Likewise, as a matter of law, Burch’s criticisms of
England’s policies and performance and Burch’s proposal
and advocacy for adding a city administrator—which,
according to Burch, was a “remedy for Mayor England’s
failure to perform basic oversight functions and ensure the
City would not waste funds and manpower”—address a
matter of public concern. See Posey, 546 F.3d at 1130
(“‘[C]ommunication on matters relating to the functioning
of government . . . [such as] misuse of public funds,
wastefulness, and inefficiency in managing and operating
government entities are matters of inherent public concern,’
regardless of the purpose for which they are made.”
(alterations in original) (quoting Multnomah County, 48 F.3d
at 425)).
b
Because both categories of Burch’s speech address
matters of public concern, the second question—whether
Burch’s speech was made as a public employee or as a
private citizen—determines whether either category of
speech is protected. This is because, even when speaking on
matters of public concern, “when public employees make
statements pursuant to their official duties, the employees
are not speaking as citizens for First Amendment purposes.”
Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 421. To determine whether Burch’s
speech was made pursuant to his duties as a city employee,
we look beyond the four corners of his formal job description
and conduct a “practical” and “fact-intensive” inquiry using
the three factors that we set forth in Dahlia v. Rodriguez:
(1) asking “whether or not the employee confined his

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

17

communications to his chain of command”; (2) examining
“the subject matter of the communication”; and (3) asking
whether the employee spoke in “direct contravention to his
supervisor’s orders.” 735 F.3d 1060, 1074–76 (9th Cir.
2013) (en banc).
i
Under the first Dahlia factor, “whether or not the
employee confined his communications to his chain of
command is a relevant, if not necessarily dispositive, factor
in determining whether he spoke pursuant to his official
duties.” Id. at 1074. “[G]enerally, when a public employee
raises complaints or concerns up the chain of command at
his workplace about his job duties, that speech is undertaken
in the course of performing his job” and is less likely to be
protected. Id. (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted).
Whereas “[w]hen a public employee
communicates with individuals or entities outside of his
chain of command, it is unlikely that he is speaking pursuant
to his duties,” making it more likely that the speech is
protected. Id. (citations omitted).
For Burch’s yard sign supporting England’s mayoral
opponent, this factor weighs in favor of that speech being
protected. Burch displayed the sign to the general public
outside of his home and did not discuss it at his workplace.
Since Burch communicated his support of Heiner well
beyond his chain of command, it is “unlikely that he [spoke]
pursuant to his duties.” Id. (citations omitted).
However, the opposite is true of Burch’s criticisms of
England’s policies and performance and Burch’s proposal
and advocacy for adding a city administrator. Burch largely
confined this speech to his chain of command, weighing
against it being protected. Id. The two primary audiences

18

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

for this speech were England and the City Council, and there
is no genuine dispute that both are in Burch’s chain of
command. Burch’s job description states that the Public
Works Director serves under the “general direction of the
Mayor and City Council.” While the employee’s formal job
description is not dispositive since it may not accurately
reflect the employee’s actual duties, Garcetti, 547 U.S. at
424–25, Burch confirmed its accuracy in an email to
England stating that, “[i]n accordance with my job
description, I serve under the ‘general direction of Mayor
and Council.’” Further, state and municipal law require that
both the Mayor and City Council approve of the Public
Works Director’s removal. See Idaho Code § 50-206; City
Code of Chubbuck, Idaho § 2.10.010. In light of all this,
Burch’s argument that the City Council is not in his chain of
command because he did not report to the Council on the
day-to-day is unpersuasive. Even though the Council did not
directly supervise Burch, the record makes clear that the
Council was in his chain of command.
While Burch also spoke to Gummersall (who is
undisputedly outside of Burch’s chain of command) about
the city administrator proposal, he did so primarily to create
a job description for the proposed city administrator to
present to England. We agree with the district court that
creating a job description with the HR Director, whose
responsibility is to do just that, does not weigh in favor of
Burch’s speech being made as a private citizen.
ii
The second Dahlia factor asks whether the public
employee’s speech is more akin to a “routine” report or
function of their position, rather than an attempt to raise
alarm bells on an issue not normally within the employee’s

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

19

purview. Dahlia, 735 F.3d at 1075. Such “routine” speech
is less likely to be protected. Id.; see Garcetti, 547 U.S. at
421–22 (explaining that “speech that owes its existence to a
public employee’s professional responsibilities” is
unprotected).
For Burch’s yard sign supporting England’s mayoral
opponent, this factor also weighs in favor of that speech
being protected. There is no genuine dispute that endorsing
a political candidate—let alone the current Mayor’s
opponent—was not akin to a routine function of the Public
Works Director. This weighs in favor of Burch’s yard sign
being protected speech. Dahlia, 735 F.3d at 1075.
However, once again, the opposite is true of Burch’s
criticisms of England’s policies and performance and
Burch’s proposal and advocacy for adding a city
administrator. Burch had a history of expressing his
criticisms to England regarding wasteful and ineffective
accounting and operational practices, misallocated expenses
across departments, and the inefficient system for
authorizing work orders. Burch also engaged in strategic
planning and policymaking, including spearheading the
2018 Strategic Plan. Much like Burch’s city administrator
proposal, this involved drafting the Plan, presenting it to the
City Council, and obtaining City Council approval. In fact,
Burch testified that his city administrator proposal was a
direct result of England’s purported failure to implement the
2018 Strategic Plan.
Burch argues that because England “never asked” him to
create the 2018 Strategic Plan nor the city administrator
proposal, those were not Burch’s official duties. But our
“practical” inquiry goes beyond the duties listed in Burch’s
formal job description and asks what duties he routinely

20

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

performed. Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 424–25; accord Barone v.
City of Springfield, 902 F.3d 1091, 1099 (9th Cir. 2018). By
Burch’s own account, his work included “City Wide
Priorities Management,” “Long Range Goals,” and
“Department Efficiencies” including “Budgeting” and “5
year planning.” Burch also testified that he routinely took
on duties “outside of traditional public works.” There is no
genuine dispute that Burch’s criticisms of England’s policies
and performance and Burch’s proposal and advocacy for
adding a city administrator were akin to a routine function of
his role as the Public Works Director. This weighs against
this speech being protected. Dahlia, 735 F.3d at 1075.
iii
The final Dahlia factor asks whether the public
employee spoke “in direct contravention to his supervisor’s
orders,” because speech that defies such orders “may often
fall outside of the speaker’s professional duties,” making it
more likely that the speech is protected. Id.
For Burch’s criticisms of England’s policies and
performance and Burch’s proposal and advocacy for adding
a city administrator, this factor also weighs against that
speech being protected. Burch admits that he stopped
advocating for adding a city administrator after England told
him to do so at their June 2021 meeting. Burch also stopped
criticizing England following the City Council executive
session where the Council instructed Burch and England to
continue working together. Shortly after the session, Burch
emailed England stating that he would “focus on [his] role
as Public Works Director,” and “cease further private
conversations with Council [members] related to
[England’s] performance.” Because Burch “appears to have
done precisely what his superiors wanted him to do . . . we

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

21

cannot say that [Burch] acted in contravention of their
orders,” which weighs against this speech being protected.
Id. at 1077.
Burch argues that an email exchange he had with
Councilmember Evans on June 9, 2021—in which he
approved of her draft email to send to England asking him to
reconsider his opposition to the city administrator
proposal—constitutes Burch contravening England’s order
to stop advocating for the proposal. But Evans’s email to
England is an expression of her opinion based on her
perspective and position as a City Councilmember. Burch
was not even included on Evans’s email to England. Burch
also testified that he had little knowledge or context behind
the exchange, that only portions of Evans’s draft email
represented his opinions, and that he did not believe that
Evans’s email was an attempt to change England’s mind.
Beyond this, Burch did not provide any evidence that he
advocated for the proposal after England told him to stop.7
There remains no genuine dispute that Burch did not
contravene England’s order to stop advocating for adding a
city administrator.
In sum, our “practical” inquiry shows that there is no
genuine dispute that this category of speech was made
pursuant to Burch’s official duties as the Public Works
Director, rather than as a private citizen. Garcetti, 547 U.S.
Burch’s argument that his yard sign for Heiner constitutes continued
advocacy for the city administrator proposal because it is “all part of the
same speech regarding Mayor England’s failure to effectively manage
the City and waste public funds” is unpersuasive. Political speech is
distinct from other types of speech. See Dodge, 56 F.4th at 783. That
Burch engaged in two separate and distinct sets of speech partly for the
same reason—his frustration with England’s policies and performance—
does not merge those two sets of speech.
7

22

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

at 424; see Brandon v. Maricopa County, 849 F.3d 837, 846
(9th Cir. 2017) (examining the Dahlia factors in totality and
concluding that, “[t]aken together, the only possible
outcome of the ‘practical inquiry’ required by Garcetti” was
that the employee’s speech was within their official duties).
Thus, this speech is unprotected. Brandon, 849 F.3d at 846.
We come to the opposite conclusion for Burch’s yard
sign supporting England’s mayoral opponent. While
England never told Burch to take down the sign and so Burch
did not contravene any order by keeping it up, “this lone
factor is not enough to transform” Burch’s private speech to
that made as an employee. Barone, 902 F.3d at 1100. When
assessing the Dahlia factors for this speech in totality, there
is no genuine dispute that Burch did not erect his yard sign
pursuant to his official duties. See Dodge, 56 F.4th at 778
(holding that the employee “had no official duty to wear the
[Make America Great Again] hat, and it was not required to
perform his job”). Thus, Burch’s yard sign is protected
speech. However, this does not mean that Burch has
established a First Amendment violation based on that
speech.
2
For Burch’s First Amendment retaliation claim to
survive, Burch’s only protected speech—his yard sign
supporting Heiner—must pass the remaining third, fourth,
and fifth Pickering steps. At the third step, “the plaintiff
bears the burden of showing the state took an adverse
employment action against the plaintiff and that the
plaintiff’s speech was a substantial or motivating factor in
the adverse action.” Greisen, 925 F.3d at 1113 (citing Eng,
552 F.3d at 1071). Thus, there are two inquiries under this
third step: (1) whether any of England’s alleged acts

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

23

constitute an adverse employment action; and (2) if so,
whether Burch’s yard sign was a substantial or motivating
factor for the adverse employment action(s).
a
A reasonable factfinder could find that Burch suffered at
least one adverse employment action.
“In a First
Amendment retaliation case, an adverse employment action
is an act that is reasonably likely to deter employees from
engaging in constitutionally protected speech.” Coszalter v.
City of Salem, 320 F.3d 968, 970 (9th Cir. 2003). An adverse
employment action “need not be severe and it need not be of
a certain kind” because “[v]arious kinds of employment
actions may have an impermissible chilling effect.” Id. at
975. However, “minor acts, such as ‘bad-mouthing,’ that
cannot reasonably be expected to deter protected speech” do
not amount to adverse employment actions. Id. at 976.
Here, Burch alleges that England took adverse
employment actions by: (1) asking Burch to resign;
(2) attempting to remove Burch from his position through
the City Council; and (3) transferring some of Burch’s duties
to other employees and reducing Burch’s involvement in
certain decision-making. Burch further alleges that he was
constructively discharged.
First, a reasonable factfinder could find that England’s
requests for Burch’s resignation and subsequent attempt to
remove him through the City Council constitute adverse
employment actions. Asking for an employee’s resignation
is arguably “an act that is reasonably likely to deter
employees from engaging in constitutionally protected
speech.” Id. at 970; Dodge, 56 F.4th at 779 (“[T]he
insinuation or threat that ‘some form of punishment or
adverse regulatory action’ may follow can [] chill a person

24

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

from speaking and violate the First Amendment.” (quoting
Greisen, 925 F.3d at 1114)). Even though England was not
successful in removing Burch, his attempt to do so—arguing
in front of the City Council that Burch should be removed
with Burch present—is also arguably “reasonably likely to
deter employees from engaging in constitutionally protected
speech.” Coszalter, 320 F.3d at 970; see Greisen, 925 F.3d
at 1114 (“[R]etaliatory speech may serve as the basis for a
First Amendment retaliation claim when it ‘intimat[es] that
some form of punishment or adverse regulatory action would
follow.’” (second alteration in original) (quoting Brodheim
v. Cry, 584 F.3d 1262, 1270 (9th Cir. 2009))).
Second, we assume without deciding that the instances
of Burch’s duties being transferred and his involvement in
certain decision-making being reduced constitute adverse
employment actions. See Coszalter, 320 F.3d at 975
(“Depending on the circumstances, even minor acts of
retaliation can infringe on an employee’s First Amendment
rights.”). However, there is no genuine dispute that
collectively these instances do not amount to constructive
discharge. 8 Constructive discharge requires that “working
conditions deteriorate, as a result of [the adverse
employment action(s)], to the point that they become
sufficiently extraordinary and egregious to overcome the
normal motivation of a competent, diligent, and reasonable
Burch argues that the elements that made up his constructive discharge
also include England’s requests for Burch’s resignation and England’s
attempt to remove Burch through the City Council. But Burch testified
that neither of those were enough for Burch to resign. Instead, the record
is clear that Burch resigned because of the instances of his duties being
transferred and his involvement in certain decision-making being
reduced. So, we consider whether those instances collectively constitute
constructive discharge.

8

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

25

employee to remain on the job to earn a livelihood and to
serve his or her employer.” Poland v. Chertoff, 494 F.3d
1174, 1184 (9th Cir. 2007) (quoting Brooks v. City of San
Mateo, 229 F.3d 917, 930 (9th Cir. 2000)). This is a “high”
bar because “federal antidiscrimination policies are better
served when the employee and employer attack
discrimination within their existing employment
relationship, rather than when the employee walks away and
then later litigates whether his employment situation was
intolerable.” Id. (citations omitted).
Here, Burch does not meet that “high” bar because his
reduction in duties and decision-making did not rise to the
level of “intolerable” working conditions. Id. First, Burch
maintained 70–80% of a full-time position, continuing to
attend weekly officer meetings with England, conduct
weekly meetings with Public Works department heads, and
manage Public Works administrative staff. While Burch
may have preferred to have maintained all of his duties,
“constructive discharge cannot be based upon the
employee’s subjective preference for one position over
another.” Id. at 1185 (citation omitted). Second, “evidence
of transfer and demotion is insufficient, as a matter of law,
to establish a constructive discharge,” id. at 1184, and Burch
admitted that he had no negative interactions with England
at this time. Thus, “[a]s a matter of law, these are not the
actions of someone who finds his working conditions so
intolerable that he felt compelled to resign,” meaning Burch
was not constructively discharged. Id. at 1185.
b
Next, a reasonable factfinder could find that Burch’s
yard sign was a “substantial or motivating factor” in at least
one of the adverse employment actions. Eng, 552 F.3d at

26

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

1070.
A public employee can establish this by
demonstrating, among other things, a “proximity in time”
between the protected speech and the adverse employment
action(s). Coszalter, 320 F.3d at 977 (citation omitted).
“Generally, a plaintiff need only offer ‘very little’ direct
evidence of motivation to survive summary judgment on this
element.” Ulrich, 308 F.3d at 980 (citations omitted).
Here, a reasonable factfinder could find that the timeline
of events supports a causal connection. No more than eight
months occurred between when England learned of Burch’s
yard sign and the occurrence of the adverse employment
actions. See Coszalter, 320 F.3d at 970 (“[W]hen adverse
employment actions are taken between three and eight
months after the plaintiffs’ protected speech, a reasonable
jury could infer that retaliation is a substantial or motivating
factor.”). England asked for Burch’s resignation days after
securing re-election.
After Burch refused, England
referenced Heiner as “[Burch’s] candidate.” Two days later
at the City Council executive session where England
attempted to remove Burch, England yelled at
Councilmember Evans for supporting Heiner in the election.
Immediately afterward, some of Burch’s duties were
transferred and Burch’s involvement in certain decisionmaking was reduced. Because all of this occurred in
“proximity in time” to when England learned of Burch’s
yard sign, there remains a genuine issue as to whether the
yard sign was a “substantial or motivating factor” in any of
the adverse employment actions. Id. at 977 (citation
omitted). However, this still does not mean that Burch has
established a First Amendment violation based on that
speech.

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

27

3
At the fourth and fifth Pickering steps, the burden shifts
back to Appellees to show that they had “an adequate
justification” for the adverse employment action(s), or
alternatively, that Appellees “would have reached the same
[adverse employment] decision[(s)] even in the absence of”
the protected speech. Eng, 552 F.3d at 1071–72 (first
alteration in original) (first quoting Garcetti, 547 U.S. at
418; and then quoting Thomas, 379 F.3d at 808).
First, there is no genuine dispute that Appellees met the
fourth and fifth steps regarding England asking Burch to
resign and subsequently attempting to remove Burch
through the City Council. England testified at his deposition
that he was motivated by the Options in Process document,
which he interpreted as “a department head who was telling
the mayor he would do what he wanted or he would be rid
of him,” and which England believed “was cause for
removal.”
Gummersall confirmed this, and Burch
acknowledged at his deposition that he believed England
was motivated to ask for his resignation by both his yard sign
and his city administrator proposal, which included the
Options in Process document. As explained above, this is
unprotected speech. There is no genuine dispute that
England was justified in removing Burch based on it. See
Eng, 552 F.3d at 1071 (“[A] government entity has broader
discretion to restrict speech when it acts in its role as
employer, but the restrictions it imposes must be directed at
speech that has some potential to affect the entity’s
operations.” (quoting Garcetti, 547 U.S. at 418)); Lane v.
Franks, 573 U.S. 228, 242 (2014) (“[G]overnment
employers often have legitimate ‘interest[s] in the effective
and efficient fulfillment of [their] responsibilities to the
public,’ including ‘promot[ing] efficiency and integrity in

28

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

the discharge of official duties,’ and ‘maintain[ing] proper
discipline in public service.’” (second through fourth
alterations in original) (quoting Connick v. Myers, 461 U.S.
138, 150–51 (1983))).
Second, even assuming without deciding that the
instances of Burch’s duties being transferred and his
involvement in certain decision-making being reduced
constitute adverse employment actions, 9 there is no genuine
dispute that Appellees met the fourth and fifth Pickering
steps regarding these actions. Burch testified that there is a
plausible explanation as to why the Finance Director had
brought budget issues to Burch’s subordinate department
head instead of Burch—Burch had been trying to get Public
Works department heads to have more influence over their
own budgets, and he believed that speaking to the Finance
Director himself would “go[] nowhere.” Burch also testified
that he had been performing the equivalent of approximately
2.5 full-time positions, which he complained about to
England in hopes that England would either take on some
duties himself or transfer them to others. England testified
that he delegated the leadership training to Gummersall for
this very reason. And Burch acknowledged that the transfer
of planning responsibilities to the head of Economic
Development and Community Services could have been the
result of Appellees attempting to reduce Burch’s workload
to one full-time position. Burch did not raise material facts
to create a genuine issue as to whether Appellees had an
“adequate justification” for these actions, nor whether
As we explained in Section IV(A)(2)(a), even assuming without
deciding that individually these constitute adverse employment actions,
there is no genuine dispute that collectively they do not amount to
constructive discharge.
9

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

29

Appellees would have taken the same actions had Burch
never erected his yard sign. Eng, 552 F.3d at 1071–72.
Because there is no genuine dispute that Appellees met
their burden under the fourth and fifth Pickering steps,
Burch’s First Amendment retaliation claim fails as a matter
of law. 10 Dahlia, 735 F.3d at 1067 n.4. The district court
did not err in granting summary judgment for Appellees on
this claim.
B
Finally, we examine whether the district court properly
granted summary judgment for Appellees on Burch’s Idaho
Protection of Public Employees Act claim. Without
reaching the merits, we hold that this claim fails as a matter
of law because none of the adverse employment actions
occurred within the statute of limitations.
The Act requires that a suit be commenced within 180
days of the alleged adverse employment action(s). Idaho
Code § 6-2105(2). Since Burch filed his complaint on
August 23, 2022, the adverse employment actions that form
the basis of his state claim must not have occurred more than
180 days beforehand—i.e., February 24, 2022. But there is
no genuine dispute that all of the alleged adverse

Appellees alternatively argue that Burch’s speech is not protected
under the “Elrod policymaker exception” to the First Amendment. See
Fazio v. City & County of San Francisco, 125 F.3d 1328, 1332 (9th Cir.
1997) (citing Elrod v. Burns, 427 U.S. 347 (1976)). Like the district
court, we do not reach this argument because Burch’s claim fails as a
matter of law regardless of whether he is a policymaker.
10

30

BURCH V. CITY OF CHUBBUCK

employment actions took place well before then. 11 So, the
only way that Burch’s claim is not time-barred is if his
March 3, 2022, notice of resignation or his April 7, 2022,
letter preserved his claim that the adverse employment
actions amount to constructive discharge. But for the
reasons explained in Section IV(A)(2)(a), there is no genuine
dispute that Burch did not meet the high bar for showing that
he was constructively discharged. Thus, Burch’s state claim
is time-barred. The district court did not err in granting
summary judgment for Appellees on this claim.
V
For the foregoing reasons, we AFFIRM the district
court’s order granting summary judgment for Appellees on
the First Amendment retaliation claim and the Idaho
Protection of Public Employees Act claim.

While Burch argues on appeal that his “duties were being reduced on
a daily basis up until his resignation,” he provided no evidence for this.
To the contrary, Burch stated that his duties were “pretty consistent”
throughout the months of January, February, and March 2022.
11

