FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
BALJIT SINGH,

No. 24-815

Petitioner,

Agency No.
A208-180-861

v.
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney
General,

OPINION

Respondent.
On Petition for Review of an Order of the
Board of Immigration Appeals
Submitted October 20, 2025 *
Pasadena, California
Filed December 1, 2025
Before: Sandra S. Ikuta, Ryan D. Nelson, and Lawrence
VanDyke, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge R. Nelson;
Concurrence by Judge VanDyke

The panel unanimously concludes this case is suitable for decision
without oral argument. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a)(2).

*

2

SINGH V. BONDI

SUMMARY **
Immigration
The panel denied Baljit Singh’s petition for review of the
Board of Immigration Appeals’ decision affirming the denial
of asylum and related relief, concluding that substantial
evidence supported the BIA’s determination that Singh’s
alleged harm did not rise to the level of past persecution and
that he could avoid future persecution by relocating within
India.
The panel held that the alleged harms Singh experienced,
including a warning to leave the Mann political party that
was unaccompanied by physical violence, two physical
assaults that necessitated only minor medical treatment, and
a one-night detention, viewed individually or cumulatively,
did not rise to the level of persecution. The panel rejected
Singh’s contention that the agency erred by ignoring factors
from related precedent involving harm to Mann political
party members in the Punjab, explaining that the BIA was
not required to use these factors as a special rule for all Mann
party Sikhs from Punjab and that there were significant
material differences between Singh’s case and those cases.
The panel also held that substantial evidence supported
the BIA’s finding that Singh could reasonably relocate to
avoid future persecution, where he previously avoided
persecution by relocating 35 to 40 kilometers away to live
with his in-laws for six months after the first assault, and a
Law Library of Congress report recognized that there did not
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

SINGH V. BONDI

3

appear to be any legal obstacles for members of the Sikh
faith to relocate to other areas of India, especially low-level
Mann party members who, like Singh, are not hard-core
militants.
Concurring, Judge VanDyke wrote separately to
highlight the growing inconsistency with which this court
has handled cases involving similar facts and issues. Judge
VanDyke wrote that the court’s derogation from the “basic
principle of justice” that “like cases should be decided
alike”—not to mention the fundamentals of immigration law
and the especially appropriate deference to executive-branch
decisions in this particular area of the law mandated by
Congress—warrants a course correction.

COUNSEL
Garish Sarin, Law Offices of Garish Sarin, Los Angeles,
California, for Petitioner.
Zachary S. Hughbanks and Andrew B. Insenga, Trial
Attorneys; Matthew B. George, Senior Litigation Counsel;
Office of Immigration Litigation; Brian M. Boynton,
Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney General; Civil
Division, United States Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; for Respondent.

4

SINGH V. BONDI

OPINION
R. NELSON, Circuit Judge:
Baljit Singh petitions for review of a Board of
Immigration Appeals (BIA) decision affirming the denial of
asylum, withholding of removal, and protection under the
Convention Against Torture. Singh alleges that he suffered
past persecution in India for his Sikh faith and membership
in the Mann party. Because substantial evidence supports
the BIA’s conclusion that Singh’s alleged harm did not rise
to the level of past persecution and that he could avoid future
persecution by relocating within India, we deny the petition.
I
A
Baljit Singh, a native citizen of Punjab, India, is a
practicing Sikh and member of a political group called the
Shiromani Akali Dal (Mann) party. After entering the
United States, Singh applied for asylum, withholding of
removal, and CAT protection. Singh said he faced danger
from two political groups, the Akali Dal Badal party and the
Bharatiya Janata party (BJP). Both oppose the Mann party.
Singh described three incidents that he argues constitute past
persecution.
First, Singh testified that he was threatened in April
2014. Several masked men confronted him after a Mann
party event and warned him to leave the Mann party,
“otherwise the consequences [would] be bad.”
Second, Singh alleged that he was attacked in June 2014
after putting up political posters. Several men approached
Singh, threatening him because he had not left the Mann

SINGH V. BONDI

5

party. The men assaulted Singh with wooden batons for one
to two minutes, rendering him unconscious. Singh received
a hot compress, an injection, and some oral medication at the
local hospital where he was treated (for three days) for
swelling and some “accumulated” blood. Singh reported the
assault to local police who “refused to take the report” and
told him that they would “lock [him] up” if he returned to
file another complaint.
After this second incident, Singh did not work for the
Mann party for six months. He instead went to stay with his
in-laws, who lived 35 to 40 kilometers from Singh’s home.
Other than an unidentified person asking his parents about
him “one or two times,” he had no problems during his stay
with his in-laws.
Third, Singh alleged that after he returned home, he was
attacked in February 2015 by six men who threatened him
for not heeding prior warnings about leaving the Mann party.
Again, he was assaulted with wooden batons for about two
minutes. He was hospitalized for swelling on his forehead
and unspecified injuries to his shoulders and knees and was
treated with a hot compress and pain medication via an IV.
Singh also reported this assault to the same police
station, but they rebuffed him again. The police detained
Singh for one night and told him to leave the Mann party,
but they did not physically harm him.
The government submitted a 2018 report from the Law
Library of Congress, stating that “[t]here appear to be no
legal obstacles for members of the Sikh faith to relocate to
other areas of India.” The report also addressed membership
in the Mann party and concluded that “internal relocation is
feasible” when the person is “not of interest to central
authorities,” and that “[o]nly hard-core militants appear to

6

SINGH V. BONDI

be of interest to central Indian authorities.” Simply holding
Mann party views “would not make someone a high-profile
militant.”
B
The immigration judge (IJ) denied Singh’s applications.
The IJ found that Singh testified credibly but concluded that
he failed to show that the three incidents rose to the level of
past persecution or that he could not internally relocate. The
IJ therefore denied Singh’s applications and ordered him
removed to India.
The Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) affirmed and
dismissed the appeal. On past persecution, the BIA agreed
with the IJ that Singh’s “past harm—threats and two very
brief beatings by a group of BJP members requiring some
medical treatment, and a single night’s detention—does not
rise to the level of persecution.” Thus, the BIA concluded
that Singh was not entitled to a rebuttable presumption of a
well-founded fear of future harm.
On internal relocation, the BIA concurred with the IJ’s
assessment that Singh could reasonably relocate within India
to avoid future persecution. The BIA noted, among other
things, that Singh successfully relocated to live with his inlaws without being pursued; that the Law Library of
Congress report flagged “no obstacles” to relocation for
Mann party members; that there is no evidence low-level
Mann party members are singled out for mistreatment; and
that it was unlikely the BJP would have the means to track
Singh throughout India. The BIA concluded that internal
relocation was reasonable.

SINGH V. BONDI

7

The BIA also affirmed the IJ’s denial of CAT protection,
concluding that Singh failed to meaningfully challenge the
IJ’s findings. 1 This petition followed.
II
Where, as here, “the BIA conducts its own review of the
evidence and law, rather than adopting the IJ’s decision, our
review is limited to the BIA’s decision, except to the extent
the IJ’s opinion is expressly adopted.” Guerra v. Barr, 974
F.3d 909, 911 (9th Cir. 2020) (cleaned up).
We review the BIA’s findings on both past persecution
and internal relocation for substantial evidence. See Sharma
v. Garland, 9 F.4th 1052, 1060 (9th Cir. 2021) (past
persecution); Mashiri v. Ashcroft, 383 F.3d 1112, 1123 (9th
Cir. 2004) (internal relocation). Under this standard, the
BIA’s findings are “conclusive unless any reasonable
adjudicator would be compelled to conclude to the
contrary.” Zehatye v. Gonzales, 453 F.3d 1182, 1185 (9th
Cir. 2006) (quoting 8 U.S.C. § 1252(b)(4)(B)). “This is a
‘highly deferential’ standard.” Garland v. Ming Dai, 593
U.S. 357, 365 (2021) (quoting Nasrallah v. Barr, 590 U.S.
573, 583 (2020)).
III
Substantial evidence supports the BIA’s finding that
Singh is ineligible for asylum or withholding of removal
because his alleged injuries do not rise to the level of past
persecution and because he could reasonably relocate within
India to avoid future persecution.
Singh forfeited any challenge to the BIA’s CAT finding by failing to
raise the issue in his brief. Martinez-Serrano v. INS, 94 F.3d 1256, 1259–
60 (9th Cir. 1996).

1

8

SINGH V. BONDI

To be eligible for asylum and withholding of removal,
Singh must show that he is a refugee—someone “who is
unable or unwilling to return to the country of origin because
of persecution or a well-founded fear of persecution on
account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a
particular social group, or political opinion.” S. Singh v.
Garland, 57 F.4th 643, 652 (9th Cir. 2023) (cleaned up);
8 U.S.C. §§ 1158(b)(1), 1101(a)(42)(A). If an individual
establishes past persecution, he is “presumed to have a
well-founded fear of [future] persecution,” but “[e]ither past
persecution or a well-founded fear of future persecution
provides eligibility for a discretionary grant of asylum.”
A. Singh v. Garland, 97 F.4th 597, 603 (9th Cir. 2024)
(quoting Ratnam v. INS, 154 F.3d 990, 994 (9th Cir. 1998)).
A
1
Substantial evidence supports the BIA’s determination
that the “cumulative effect” of Singh’s past harms does not
rise to the level of persecution. See Gormley v. Ashcroft, 364
F.3d 1172, 1176–77 (9th Cir. 2004) (cleaned up). To
establish past persecution, Singh must show that “(1) his
treatment rises to the level of persecution; (2) the
persecution was on account of one or more protected
grounds; and (3) the persecution was committed by the
government, or by forces that the government was unable or
unwilling to control.” Baghdasaryan v. Holder, 592 F.3d
1018, 1023 (9th Cir. 2010) (citing Chand v. INS, 222 F.3d
1066, 1073 (9th Cir. 2000)).
“Persecution is an extreme concept that means
something considerably more than discrimination or
harassment.” Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1060 (cleaned up).
“[S]ome circumstances that cause petitioners physical

SINGH V. BONDI

9

discomfort or loss of liberty do not qualify as persecution,
despite the fact that such conditions have caused the
petitioners some harm.” Id. (cleaned up). Simply put, “not
all negative treatment equates with persecution.” Lanza v.
Ashcroft, 389 F.3d 917, 934 (9th Cir. 2004). While Singh
may have been offended and harmed, those harms did not
constitute persecution.
Singh’s alleged harms include the April 2014 threat, the
June 2014 and February 2015 assaults, and the one-night
detention in February 2015. None of these incidents, viewed
individually or cumulatively, rises to the level of
persecution.
The April 2014 threat, unaccompanied by any physical
violence, was not persecution. The threat itself—leave the
Mann party or “otherwise the consequences will be bad”—
was not a “specific” or “menacing” statement placing Singh
in imminent fear of harm. See Duran-Rodriguez v. Barr, 918
F.3d 1025, 1028 (9th Cir. 2019) (cleaned up). Though Singh
may have been intimidated, “[m]ere threats, without more,
do not necessarily compel a finding of past persecution.”
Villegas Sanchez v. Garland, 990 F.3d 1173, 1179 (9th Cir.
2021); see also Lim v. INS, 224 F.3d 929, 936 (9th Cir. 2000)
(“Threats themselves are sometimes hollow and, while
uniformly unpleasant, often do not effect significant actual
suffering or harm.”).
Neither do the two assaults compel a past-persecution
finding. On both occasions, Singh was beaten for one to two
minutes but reported only swelling and received only minor
treatments. Cf. Salaam v. INS, 229 F.3d 1234, 1236 (9th Cir.
2000) (per curiam) (successful petitioner “was held
incommunicado for several days,” “tortured by flogging,”
and bore “scars from [the] beatings”). This minor treatment

10

SINGH V. BONDI

provides substantial evidence that Singh did not suffer
“significant physical violence” to support past persecution.
See Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1061 (cleaned up) (“serious injuries”
are a relevant consideration). Beatings without serious
injuries do not compel a finding of past persecution. See
Wakkary v. Holder, 558 F.3d 1049, 1059–60 (9th Cir. 2009).
Although these two assaults caused Singh some harm, even
viewed cumulatively, they are not so serious that “any
reasonable adjudicator would be compelled to conclude”
that they constituted persecution. See Zehatye, 453 F.3d at
1185 (cleaned up).
The one-night detention following the second assault
does not change the equation. “We have recognized that, in
some circumstances, detentions combined with physical
attacks which occur on account of a protected ground can
establish persecution.” Gu v. Gonzales, 454 F.3d 1014, 1019
(9th Cir. 2006). Singh, however, was detained for a single
night and sustained no physical injuries. See Al-Saher v.
INS, 268 F.3d 1143, 1146 (9th Cir. 2001) (no past
persecution where petitioner was detained for five or six
days and “was not beaten, tortured, or threatened”); see also
Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1062 (“We [have] similarly denied
petitions when the periods of detention, even if frequent,
were ‘short,’ or ‘brief,’ and the petitioner sustained no
injuries.” (citations omitted)). Singh’s allegations are like
those in Prasad v. I.N.S., where a “brief detention”—even
accompanied by a physical assault—did not compel a
finding of past persecution. 47 F.3d 336, 339 (9th Cir.
1995). Singh’s case does not warrant a different conclusion.

SINGH V. BONDI

11

2
Singh contends that the BIA erred by ignoring factors
from related cases. He relies mostly on A. Singh, where we
compared the facts to five factors:
(1) he was forced to flee his home after being
repeatedly assaulted; (2) one of those
incidents involved a death threat; (3) he was
between the ages of 16 and 18 when the
attacks occurred; (4) his brother also
experienced this violence; and (5) we have
already recognized that Mann Party members
have faced persistent threats in the region of
India where [the petitioner] was twice
attacked.
97 F.4th at 603–04 (quoting S. Singh, 57 F.4th at 653)
(cleaned up). While these factors may be relevant to cases
involving Mann party members, the BIA’s failure to analyze
them is not reversible error. First, the BIA was not required
to use these factors as a special rule for all Mann party Sikhs
from Punjab. See Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1061. Second,
significant material differences exist between this case and
both S. Singh and A. Singh.
First, the S. Singh factors do not make up a “special rule”
that applies to all Mann party Sikhs. Reviewing applications
for asylum is not subject to a set formula because it is a factdependent exercise that naturally varies with each
applicant’s individual circumstances. The Supreme Court
warned against “set[ting] forth a detailed description of
how” a particular legal standard should be applied. INS v.
Cardoza-Francesca, 480 U.S. 421, 448 (1987). And the
Court has rejected our per se and special rules for reviewing

12

SINGH V. BONDI

various immigration decisions. Ming Dai, 593 U.S. at 359,
365 (striking down our “special rule” that “a court must take
as true an asylum applicant’s testimony that supports a claim
for asylum” (cleaned up)); I.N.S. v. Elias-Zacarias, 502 U.S.
478, 481 (1992) (rejecting our per se rule that guerilla
conscription efforts “necessarily constitute[] persecution”
(cleaned up)).
Requiring the BIA to strictly apply the five S. Singh
factors would constitute a unique binding rule for Mann
Sikhs from Punjab, the same type of “special rule” that the
Supreme Court has rejected. But we did not create a “special
rule” out of the S. Singh factors, and we do not require the
BIA to apply them. In A. Singh, we used the factors as a
tool—not as a binding test—to “compar[e] the facts . . . with
those of similar cases” because the two cases had “strikingly
similar” circumstances. 97 F.4th at 603–04. Therefore, the
S. Singh factors do not guide our review of the BIA’s
decision. Rather, we defer to the BIA’s conclusions unless
the record would compel a reasonable adjudicator to
conclude otherwise. This record does not compel us to
reverse the BIA’s findings.
Second, this case is distinguishable from other cases
where we have found past persecution for Mann party Sikhs
from Punjab. See A. Singh, 97 F.4th at 603; S. Singh, 57
F.4th at 653. Therefore, even if the BIA had applied the
factors as a binding test, the evidence still would not compel
reversal. Unlike the “strikingly similar” circumstances in
A. Singh and S. Singh, Petitioner lived with his in-laws after
only one assault, did not receive death threats, was not a
minor when the attacks occurred, and did not allege that his
family faced any harm from BJP members. The facts that
compelled us to reverse the BIA’s decision in S. Singh are
not present here. In A. Singh, by contrast, “[f]our of those

SINGH V. BONDI

13

five factors support[ed] a finding of past persecution.” 97
F.4th at 603. Without more, we decline to pull out similar
facts in cases where we reversed the BIA and ignore similar
facts in cases where we upheld the BIA’s conclusion.
Substantial evidence supports the BIA’s conclusion.
B
Substantial evidence also supports the BIA’s conclusion
that Singh does not have a well-founded fear of future
persecution. Because Singh has not established past
persecution, he is not entitled to a presumption of a
well-founded fear of future persecution. See A. Singh, 97
F.4th at 603. Even if he had, the government could
successfully rebut the presumption by showing that Singh
can “avoid future persecution by relocating” within India
and that “it would be reasonable to expect [him] to do so.”
Id. at 606 (alteration in original) (quoting Boer-Sedano v.
Gonzales, 418 F.3d 1082, 1089 (9th Cir. 2005)).
Substantial evidence supports the BIA’s finding that
Singh could reasonably relocate. As the BIA explained,
Singh avoided persecution by relocating to live with his inlaws for six months after the first assault. So there is a
specific area within India, only 35 to 40 kilometers away,
“where he has no well-founded fear of persecution and
where it is reasonable to relocate.” See Singh v. Whitaker,
914 F.3d 654, 661 (9th Cir. 2019) (instructing the BIA to
determine whether there are “one or more general or specific
areas . . . where [the petitioner] has no well-founded fear”).
Plus, the Law Library of Congress report—also addressed in
the BIA’s decision—recognizes that “[t]here appear to be no
legal obstacles for members of the Sikh faith to relocate to
other areas of India.” That is especially true for low-level

14

SINGH V. BONDI

Mann party members who, like Singh, are not “hard-core
militants.”
Together, Singh’s successful relocation, the Law Library
of Congress report, and the lack of relevant precedent
provide substantial evidence confirming the BIA’s finding
that relocating within India would allow Singh to avoid
persecution and that it is reasonable to expect him to do so.
IV
Substantial evidence supports the BIA’s conclusion that
Singh did not suffer past persecution in India and that he
could safely relocate.
DENIED.

VANDYKE, Circuit Judge, concurring:
Applying the deferential substantial-evidence standard
that the law requires us to apply, the panel opinion correctly
denies Baljit Singh’s petition for review. I’m happy to join
that opinion in full. I write separately to highlight the
growing inconsistency with which our court has handled
cases involving similar facts and issues. Our court’s
derogation from the “basic principle of justice” that “like
cases should be decided alike”—not to mention the
fundamentals of immigration law and the especially
appropriate deference to executive-branch decisions in this
particular area of the law mandated by Congress—warrants
a course correction. Martin v. Franklin Cap. Corp., 546 U.S.
132, 139 (2005); see also Garland v. Ming Dai, 593 U.S.
357, 365 (2021) (“Nothing in the INA contemplates

SINGH V. BONDI

15

anything like the embellishment the Ninth Circuit has
adopted.”).
Start with the issue of past persecution. Right out of the
gate, a panel can find binding precedent to support applying
the substantial-evidence standard or a de novo standard of
review to the agency’s conclusion about whether a
petitioner’s harms rose to the level of past persecution.
Compare, e.g., Sharma v. Garland, 9 F.4th 1052, 1060 (9th
Cir. 2021) (applying the substantial-evidence standard) with
Kaur v. Wilkinson, 986 F.3d 1216, 1221 (9th Cir. 2021)
(applying de novo review). Sure, the Supreme Court will
rectify that inconsistency this term. See Urias-Orellana v.
Garland, 121 F.4th 327 (1st Cir. 2024), cert granted, 2025
WL 1787712 (U.S. June 30, 2025) (No. 24-777). But merely
clarifying that the substantial-evidence standard governs
won’t solve the problem on its own. “The Ninth Circuit’s
caselaw is a bit of a ‘choose-your-own-adventure’ when it
comes to what constitutes ‘persecution’ under immigration
law.” Kumar v. Garland, No. 23-308, 2025 WL 238850, at
*6 (9th Cir. Jan. 17, 2025) (Bumatay, J., dissenting). Even
considering only the decisions that have purportedly
“applied the substantial-evidence standard,” any panel of our
court that is eager to overturn the BIA’s
lack-of-past-persecution finding can usually find more than
enough recent precedent to justify its desired outcome.
Compare, e.g., Flores Molina v. Garland, 37 F.4th 626, 634
(9th Cir. 2022) (finding that the record compelled a finding
of past persecution because, among other reasons, the
petitioner “was forced to flee three separate times after being
personally targeted for his political views with violence and
threatened with death”); S. Singh v. Garland, 57 F.4th 643,
654 (9th Cir. 2023) (finding that the record compelled a
finding of past persecution where the petitioner “was the

16

SINGH V. BONDI

victim of a verbal confrontation and two physical attacks,
one of which involved a death threat”); A. Singh v. Garland,
97 F.4th 597, 604 n.2 (9th Cir. 2024) (noting that “death
threats alone can constitute persecution” (quoting
Canales-Vargas v. Gonzales, 441 F.3d 739, 743 (9th Cir.
2006))) with Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1063–64 (finding that
substantial evidence supported the agency’s determination
of a lack of past persecution where the petitioner received
“threatening phone calls over a period of years” and was
beaten, slapped, blindfolded, bound, and detained); see also
Kumar, 2025 WL 238850, at *7 (Bumatay, J., dissenting)
(collecting cases where panels of our court found that
evidence of death threats and physical harm did not compel
a finding of past persecution).
Compounding the
inconsistency (and artificially tipping the scales in favor of
not deferring to the agency) is that “decisions from our court
that properly defer to the agency are usually resolved in
unpublished dispositions with no precedential value,” while
our court seems to favor publishing opinions that reverse the
agency. Flores Molina, 37 F.4th at 648 (VanDyke, J.,
dissenting)
By faithfully applying the substantial-evidence standard,
our panel here gets it right. Whether certain incidents rise to
the level of past persecution is an “inherently imprecise and
difficult factual inquir[y].” Id. at 643. It is “anything but
self-evident and could be answered with a range of
reasonable views”—“[t]here is no one objective answer to
the question[] of whether a petitioner has suffered real past
‘persecution,’ ….” Id. It is an inherently “fact-bound
endeavor.” Sharma, 9 F.4th at 1061. And questions of fact
are to be reviewed with deference.
See 8 U.S.C.
§ 1252(b)(4)(B) (“[T]he administrative findings of fact are

SINGH V. BONDI

17

conclusive unless any reasonable adjudicator would be
compelled to conclude to the contrary.”).
Next, consider the internal-relocation issue. Our court is
no stranger to petitions for review of BIA decisions
involving Mann party members from Punjab. You’d think
that that would make our jurisprudence both coherent and
consistent, but our caselaw is anything but. In support of its
conclusion, our panel’s opinion properly points to multiple
pieces of evidence that the BIA relied on in determining that
Singh could safely and reasonably relocate, including the
Law Library of Congress Report and past evidence of
relocation. Our panel’s conclusion and analysis here thus
comport with our precedents in A. Singh v. Garland and N.
Singh v. Whitaker, both of which granted petitions for review
based on the idea that similar reports from the Law Library
of Congress were insufficient to show that internal relocation
would have been reasonable. See A. Singh, 97 F.4th at 608–
09; N. Singh v. Whitaker, 914 F.3d 654, 660–61 (9th Cir.
2019). But I continue to believe that A. Singh was wrongly
decided and that the A. Singh and N. Singh panels were more
concerned with second-guessing the agency and picking nits
than with applying the deferential substantial-evidence
standard. See A. Singh, 97 F.4th at 610–22 (VanDyke, J.,
dissenting). As I noted in my A. Singh dissent, the reports at
issue in those cases (and the one in this one) “directly
address[] the feasibility of relocation for Sikhs and Mann
party members,” and “our court has repeatedly relied on
precisely this same evidence in reviewing and affirming
agency decisions.” Id. at 619–20 (VanDyke, J., dissenting).
Once again, though, because it should be obvious that this
evidence, when properly considered, substantiates the
agency’s internal-relocation findings under the deferential
standard, most of the decisions that have reached the correct

18

SINGH V. BONDI

result have done so via unpublished decisions. See id. at 620
(collecting cases); see also Ninth Cir. R. 36-2 (describing the
criteria for publication).
Our court has let these problems exacerbate for years,
and we seem too preoccupied with other perceived crises to
fix the resulting self-imposed chaos on our own. Our mess
has rendered a great disservice to the immigration courts,
which are constantly trying to keep up with our whims (but
keep having their conclusions overturned because
supposedly “no reasonable adjudicator” could have reached
them) and, more importantly, to the parties in these cases (for
whom, let’s be honest, the outcome of a petition often hinges
solely on which judges are drawn for the panel). It’s
probably time for the Supreme Court to give us another little
course correction, as it has to do with some regularity, and
once again direct us to defer to the BIA not just in word but
also in deed.

