FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
AARON SNEED, Jr.; YAACOV
MUSRY; DAVID O'GRADY,
v.

Plaintiffs - Appellants,

TALPHERA, INC., formerly known
as: AcelRx Pharmaceuticals, Inc.;
VINCENT J. ANGOTTI; PAMELA
P. PALMER,

No. 24-3560
D.C. No.
5:21-cv-04353BLF

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Beth Labson Freeman, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 12, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed August 20, 2025
Before: Sidney R. Thomas and Kenneth K. Lee, Circuit
Judges, and Roslyn O. Silver, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Lee
The Honorable Roslyn O. Silver, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.
*

2

SNEED V. TALPHERA

SUMMARY **
Securities Fraud
Affirming the district court’s dismissal of a securities
fraud action against a pharmaceutical company and its
officers, the panel held that plaintiffs failed to adequately
plead falsity and did not show a strong inference of scienter
under Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
and Rule 10b-5.
The pharmaceutical company marketed its under-thetongue opioid with the slogan “Tongue and Done” in
advertisement displays and a speech at an investor
conference. Several shareholders sued, alleging that the
slogan misled investors because administering the drug was
more complex than just “Tongue and Done” and thus its
potential market would be more limited.
The panel held that plaintiffs did not adequately plead
falsity because a reasonable investor would not blindly
accept the slogan without considering other information that
clarified the context of “Tongue and Done.” The panel
concluded that an FDA warning letter objecting to the slogan
did not mean that the slogan was necessarily deceptive,
given that the court applies a different standard for a
reasonable investor than for a medical professional.
The panel also held that plaintiffs failed to show a strong
inference of scienter.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

SNEED V. TALPHERA

3

COUNSEL
Brian P. O'Connell (argued), Diego Martinez-Krippner, and
Joshua B. Silverman, Pomerantz LLP, Chicago, Illinois;
Jennifer Pafiti, Pomerantz LLP, Los Angeles, California;
Jeremy A. Lieberman and J. Alexander Hood II, Pomerantz
LLP, New York, New York; Robert V. Prongay and Casey
E. Sadler, Glancy Prongay & Murray LLP, Los Angeles,
California; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Patrick J. Hayden (argued), Cooley LLP, New York, New
York; Tijana Brien, Patrick E. Gibbs, Janelle M. Fernandes,
and Shannon M. Eagan, Cooley LLP, Palo Alto, California;
Allison O'Neill, Cooley LLP, San Diego, California; for
Defendants-Appellees.

OPINION
LEE, Circuit Judge:
Can a snappy slogan for a potent pharmaceutical be
deceptive and lead to liability under our securities laws? Not
in this case where the company provided additional
disclosures alongside the slogan in materials intended for
investors.
Talphera, a pharmaceutical company, marketed its
under-the-tongue opioid with the slogan “Tongue and Done”
in advertisement displays and a speech at an investor
conference. Several Talphera shareholders sued alleging
that the slogan misled investors because administering the
opioid drug is more complex than just “Tongue and Done”
and thus its potential market would be more limited.

4

SNEED V. TALPHERA

We affirm the dismissal of this securities fraud lawsuit
because the plaintiffs failed to adequately plead falsity under
Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 and
Rule 10b-5. A reasonable investor would not blindly accept
a slogan without considering other information—in the
advertising and the speech as well as in SEC disclosures—
that clarified the context of “Tongue and Done.” The
plaintiffs point to the FDA’s warning letter objecting to the
slogan, but that does not mean the slogan is necessarily
deceptive, given that we apply a different standard for a
reasonable investor than for a medical professional. We also
hold that the plaintiffs have not shown a strong inference of
scienter: The flimsy evidence of falsity necessarily
undermines the ability to show scienter.
I.

Background

A. Talphera develops an under-the-tongue opioid
painkiller.
Talphera specializes in developing drugs for acute pain
management. Previously known as AcelRx, Talphera
developed a sublingually-administered—i.e., below the
tongue—opioid tablet called DSUVIA. The new drug
contains 30 micrograms of sufentanil, a powerful opioid. To
reduce the risks of misusing such a potent painkiller, the
FDA conditioned the drug’s approval on compliance with an
agency safety plan called a Risk Evaluation and Mitigation
Strategy (REMS). REMS are generally designed to help
ensure safe use of medications with serious safety concerns.
The REMS plan for DSUVIA aimed to prevent the
unauthorized distribution of the drug outside of healthcare
settings. It thus required that patients receive this painkiller
only in medically-supervised settings such as hospitals,
surgical centers, and emergency departments.

SNEED V. TALPHERA

5

The REMS plan contained specific rules underscoring
that retail pharmacies cannot carry DSUVIA and that
patients cannot use it at home. For example, the REMS
required hospitals to “[d]esignate an authorized
representative to carry out [a] certification process” to verify
the healthcare providers’ compliance with the REMS. The
REMS also required healthcare providers to train staff in
how to administer the drug and to avoid distribution outside
the hospital. And to obtain certification to administer
DSUVIA, the healthcare provider needed a license “to carry
Schedule 2 opioids[, and to] attest to the fact that they can
manage acute opioid overdoses, [by having] either [] Narcan,
opioid reversal agents, or other ways to manage the
airways.”
Despite these risks, DSUVIA still had a major selling
point that distinguished it from many other powerful opioids:
Patients could receive the drug orally instead of through an
IV. This eliminated the need for (and the risks of) frequent
redosing. It also allowed the drug to satisfy unmet demand,
given the national shortage of IV-administered opioids.
B. Talphera uses the slogan “Tongue and Done” at
investor conferences.
Talphera adopted the slogan “Tongue and Done” to
advertise DSUVIA’s desirable sublingual mode of delivery.
The company ran all its marketing campaign material
through an internal Promotional Review Committee (PRC)
to help ensure marketing complied with FDA regulations.
That body—which included the company’s scientists,
lawyers, and executives—approved the slogan. PRC
members and co-defendants Chief Executive Officer
Vincent Angotti and Chief Medical Officer Pamala Palmer
also favored the slogan.

6

SNEED V. TALPHERA

The “Tongue and Done” slogan soon appeared on
marketing materials used at investor conferences. The
tabletop display and banner (shown below) appeared at the
DSUVIA booth during the Oppenheimer Health Care
investors conference in March 2019. The “Tongue and
Done” tabletop ad incorporated cautionary language that
warned “[p]lease see indication, Important Safety
Information, including Limitations of Use and BOXED
WARNING at this booth.” The banner ad expressly noted
that DSUVIA has a REMS plan and that only a healthcare
professional may administer the drug. The banner ad also
announced, “WARNING: ACCIDENTAL EXPOSURE
AND DSUVIA REMS PROGRAM . . .”

SNEED V. TALPHERA

7

At the Oppenheimer Healthcare Conference, Angotti,
the company’s CEO, gave an address promoting DSUVIA.
He began the speech by “level set[ting]” when he cautioned
“[i]t’s important if you take anything away [] that, you take
this away. Our interests and investments lie in acute pain,
always in a medically supervised setting. . . . You will never
find our products in a CVS, a Rite-Aid, a Walmart, or a
Walgreens.” He also disclosed that DSUVIA “has a REMS
to accompany it as well.” Later in the speech, Angotti again
cautioned “the product does have a REMS, a risk and
evaluation mitigation strategy, with the whole goal to
mitigate the risk of respiratory depression resulting from

8

SNEED V. TALPHERA

accidental exposure; accidental exposure meaning they
don’t want this outside of the hospital and neither do we as
AcelRx.”
Angotti sandwiched his discussion of how healthcare
providers administer DSUVIA between these two
disclaimers. He started that discussion by describing the
single dose applicator (SDP), a syringe-like device used to
insert the DSUVIA tablet under the patient’s tongue. Then
he explained “[y]ou would simply remove the lock[,] . . . tilt
[the patient’s] head back, lift [up] their tongue, inject it
under, and you’re done. It’s basically as simple as that.”
Angotti omitted some rather obvious additional steps in the
FDA “administration instructions,” like “[1] TEAR OPEN
the notched pouch,” “7. VISUALLY CONFIRM tablet
placement in the sublingual space,” and, lastly, “8.
DISCARD the used SDA [single dose applicator] in
biohazard waste after administration.”
C. The FDA issues a warning letter about the slogan.
Talphera ceased using the “Tongue and Done” slogan
after receiving a warning letter from the FDA dated
February 11, 2021. The warning letter alleged that Talphera
“misbrand[ed] Dsuvia within the meaning of the Federal
Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act [FDCA].” The FDA
concluded that Talphera made “false or misleading claims”
for purposes of the FDCA by not providing a balanced
description of the “risks and benefits” of the drug. 21 C.F.R.
§ 202.1(e)(5)(ii). Talphera had repeatedly warned investors
about the risk of such a letter, even though the PRC had
worked with the FDA in trying to ensure its marketing
complied with FDA regulations.

SNEED V. TALPHERA

9

D. Plaintiffs sue Talphera for securities fraud.
Several shareholders sued Talphera, Angotti, and
Palmer, seeking damages for alleged violations of “Sections
10(b) and 20(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (the
“Exchange Act”) and Rule 10b–5.” They claimed that the
following statements are false or misleading: (1) “Tongue
and Done” tabletop display, (2) “Tongue and Done” banner
advertisement, and (3) “Angotti’s statement . . . at the March
20, 2019 Oppenheimer Health Care Conference that you ‘lift
up their tongue, you inject it under and you’re done.’”
The district court dismissed the shareholders’ complaint
for a failure to adequately plead facts leading to strong
inference of scienter. It, however, did not rule on the falsity
issue, deeming it a “close call.”
On appeal, the plaintiffs repeat their argument that the
challenged statements misled investors “because they
omitted material information, including information about
dosing, administration, and limitations of use.” They also
contend that these statements omitted material information
about REMS restrictions and the size of DSUVIA’s potential
market. In other words, because DSUVIA is not a product
that can be used at home by a patient, its market potential
was much more limited. After twice granting Plaintiffs leave
to amend, the district court dismissed the complaint with
prejudice.
II.

Standard of Review

Our jurisdiction arises under 28 U.S.C. § 1291 and we
review de novo the dismissal of a complaint under Rule
12(b)(6). Zucco Partners, LLC v. Digimarc Corp., 552 F.3d
981, 989 (9th Cir. 2009). We accept the complaint’s
allegations as true and construe them in the light most

10

SNEED V. TALPHERA

favorable to the plaintiffs. Id. The Private Securities
Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (PSLRA) also requires the
complaint to (1) “specify each statement alleged to have
been misleading [and the] reasons why the statement is
misleading,” and (2) “state with particularity facts giving
rise to a strong inference that the defendant acted with the
required state of mind.” Tellabs, Inc. v. Makor Issues &
Rights, Ltd., 551 U.S. 308, 319, 321 (2007) (quoting 15
U.S.C. § 78u–(4)(b)).
III.

Discussion

Section 10(b) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
bars the use of “manipulative or deceptive device[s]” in
“connection with the purchase or sale” of registered
securities. 15 U.S.C. § 78j(b). Rule 10b-5 clarifies and
builds upon this statutory anti-fraud provision. 17 C.F.R.
§ 240.10b-5. Based on this statute and regulation, we have
held that a securities fraud plaintiff must allege: “(1) a
material misrepresentation or omission by the defendant;
(2) scienter; (3) a connection between the misrepresentation
or omission and the purchase or sale of a security;
(4) reliance upon the misrepresentation or omission;
(5) economic loss; and (6) loss causation.” Police Ret. Sys.
of St. Louis v. Intuitive Surgical, Inc., 759 F.3d 1051, 1057
(9th Cir. 2014) (quoting Halliburton Co. v. Erica P. John
Fund, Inc., 573 U.S. 258, 267 (2014)). Claims under § 20(a)
of the Exchange Act—which establishes controlling-person
liability—require pleading the same elements. Zucco, 552
F.3d at 990; 15 U.S.C. § 78t.
Here, the parties only dispute whether the plaintiffs
adequately pleaded falsity and scienter. We find the
pleadings deficient on both fronts and affirm the district
court.

SNEED V. TALPHERA

11

A. Plaintiffs failed to adequately allege that the
“Tongue and Done” slogan would mislead a
reasonable investor.
Section 10(b) and Rule 10b–5 bar false or misleading
statements and omissions. In re Alphabet, Inc. Sec. Litig., 1
F.4th 687, 699 (9th Cir. 2021). But these anti-fraud
provisions do not impose a duty to disclose all material
information. Rather, they require disclosure only when
necessary “to make . . . statements made, in light of the
circumstances under which they were made, not
misleading.” See Khoja v. Orexigen Therapeutics, Inc., 899
F.3d 988, 1009 (9th Cir. 2018) (quoting Matrixx Initiatives,
Inc. v. Siracusano, 563 U.S. 27, 44 (2011)). An omission of
information can mislead by affirmatively giving a
reasonable investor “an impression of a state of affairs that
differs in a material way from the one that actually exists.”
Intuitive Surgical, 759 F.3d at 1061 (quoting Brody v.
Transitional Hosps. Corp., 280 F.3d 997, 1006 (9th Cir.
2002)).
To decide whether a misstatement or omission can
mislead, we need to look at “the context surrounding the
statement[].” See Weston Fam. P’ship. LLLP v. Twitter,
Inc., 29 F.4th 611, 622 (9th Cir. 2022). Context matters
because we presume that a reasonable investor—who has
money on the line—acts with care and seeks out relevant
information. See Sec. Exch. Comm’n v. Monarch Fund, 608
F.2d 938, 942 (2d Cir. 1979) (“All reasonable investors seek
to obtain as much information as they can before purchasing
or selling a security.”). A reasonable investor cares about a
statement’s “surrounding text, including hedges,
disclaimers, and apparently conflicting information.”
Omnicare, Inc. v. Laborers Dist. Council Const. Indus.
Pension Fund, 575 U.S. 175, 190 (2015). For example, to

12

SNEED V. TALPHERA

determine whether a sentence in a company blog post could
mislead investors, we looked at the entire blog post in
Weston Family. 29 F.4th at 622.
Sometimes other information outside the immediate
document can form the context in which a reasonable
investor would view a particular statement. In other words,
courts sometimes look at falsity through the lens of a “total
mix” of information that forms part of the materiality
analysis. See In re Oracle Corp. Sec. Litig., 627 F.3d 376,
390 (9th Cir. 2010) (“Plaintiffs must ‘demonstrate that a
particular statement, when read in light of all the information
then available to the market, or a failure to disclose particular
information, conveyed a false or misleading impression.’”
(quoting In re Convergent Techs. Sec. Litig., 948 F.2d 507,
512 (9th Cir. 1991))). We, for example, have explained that
a reasonable investor would interpret vague and optimistic
statements by considering other information “the market
already knew” about the “difficulties facing” a company.
Intuitive Surgical, 759 F.3d at 1060.
1. A reasonable investor would not view “Tongue
and Done” in isolation.
Considered in context, the “Tongue and Done” slogan
would not mislead a reasonable investor, as plaintiffs claim,
about the need to administer DSUVIA under a REMS or
about the scale of the drug’s potential market.
To start, a reasonable investor would not blindly accept
a marketing slogan by itself when she has access to other
contextual information. Rather, a reasonable investor takes
slogans for what they are—catchy phrases designed to

SNEED V. TALPHERA

13

highlight a desirable or unique product feature. 1 Talphera
used “Tongue and Done” merely as a pithy marketing slogan
and then accompanied it with ample disclosures and caveats.
A reasonable investor would read “Tongue and Done” in the
context of a marketing campaign designed to highlight its
key selling point—that patients can receive the drug orally
without the frequent redosing required with IV-administered
painkillers. The slogan itself makes no representation about
REMS-related restrictions on who may administer the drug
or in what settings.
Indeed, even a reasonable consumer—who, unlike a
reasonable investor, is not presumed to carefully scour all
the fine print—understands that a slogan is just that. Cf.
Moore v. Trader Joe’s Co., 4 F.4th 874, 883–84 (9th Cir.
2021) (discussing reasonable consumer standard under
California law). To use an analogy, a reasonable consumer
understands that the slogan for Lay’s chips—“Betcha can’t
eat just one”—just highlights the addictive taste of its potato
chips. That slogan will not convey the number of grams of
sodium, cholesterol, or saturated fat (which is far from “just
one”)—such information is provided elsewhere in the
Nutrition Facts box. If a reasonable consumer understands
the limits of a slogan, a reasonable investor certainly knows
not to trust a slogan without investigating further.
Talphera provided copious clarifying information next to
the “Tongue and Done” slogan. For example, the tabletop
and banner ads displayed at the investor conferences
included text that disclosed the REMS plan for DSUVIA.
See, e.g., Mayukh Dass et al., A Study of the Antecedents of Slogan
Liking, 67 J. Bus. Rsch. 2504, 2505 (2014) (“The purpose of a slogan is
to deliver a clear and focused message to consumers to help articulate
the benefits provided by the brand . . . .”).
1

14

SNEED V. TALPHERA

The tabletop ad cautioned, “Please see indication, Important
Safety Information, including Limitations of Use and
BOXED WARNING at this booth.” Upon approaching the
booth, a reasonable investor would have quickly learned of
the REMS because the banner ad expressly noted DSUVIA
has a REMS. It says, “WARNING: ACCIDENTAL
EXPOSURE AND DSUVIA REMS PROGRAM . . .” Staff
at the booth could have presumably answered questions
about the REMS. The banner ad also revealed that DSUVIA
could not be used by a patient at home, noting that it is
“administered sublingually by a healthcare professional.”
That statement informs a reasonable investor that
DSUVIA’s market may be limited because of the
requirement of a supervised medical setting.
And investors who still wanted more information could
turn to Talphera’s SEC disclosures or its dedicated REMS
website to learn how the REMS may affect DSUVIA’s
potential market. In short, the “Tongue and Done” slogan
used at the investor conferences would not mislead a
reasonable investor about DSUVIA’s REMS program, given
these disclosures.
Similarly, Angotti’s statement at the Oppenheimer
Health Conference touting DSUVIA’s sublingual mode of
delivery was not misleading. He stated that a doctor could
“tilt [the ER or post-op patient’s] head back, lift up their
tongue, inject it under, and you’re done.” The plaintiffs
contend that this was misleading. Not so.
A reasonable investor would consider Angotti’s
description of how medical staff administer DSUVIA in the
context of his entire talk. See Weston Fam., 29 F.4th at 622.
That talk apprised investors of the limitations imposed by the
REMS and of DSUVIA’s limited market. For instance,

SNEED V. TALPHERA

15

Angotti began by cautioning “[o]ur interests and investments
lie in acute pain, always in a medically supervised setting.”
Angotti also disclosed that DSUVIA “does have a REMS”
and “[t]he whole goal here is controlled distribution that only
goes to hospitals that are certified to carry Schedule 2
opioids that have and can attest to the fact that they can
manage acute opioid overdoses . . . and that they will not
allow this for distribution outside the hospital.” These
statements warn reasonable investors that DSUVIA has a
limited market because only healthcare professionals can
administer the drug under a restrictive REMS. Further, a
reasonable investor would not expect minute details of the
REMS plan in Angotti’s TED-like talk and would know that
she could find such information elsewhere.
2. An FDA warning letter is not dispositive of a
falsity claim under the Securities Act.
The plaintiffs largely hitch their claim of falsity on the
FDA’s warning letter to Talphera about the “Tongue and
Done” slogan. But the FDCA is not the same legal vehicle
as the Exchange Act. The FDCA imposes different legal
requirements and targets a different audience. FDA warning
letters are thus not dispositive or even necessarily probative
of falsity claims under the Exchange Act.
For falsity claims under our securities law, we look to the
perspective of the reasonable investor. Intuitive Surgical,
759 F.3d at 1058-61. In contrast, FDA regulations focus on
the perspective of patients and “prescribers of drugs.” 21
C.F.R. § 202.1(e)(5)(ii). The disparate audiences require
different sets of information and in different formats.
This case provides an example of how FDA regulations
may require the disclosure of information to medical
personnel that a reasonable investor would not need. See

16

SNEED V. TALPHERA

Intuitive Surgical, 759 F.3d at 1061. Angotti provided
investors with a materially accurate—and thus not
misleading—picture of how a healthcare professional would
administer the 30-gram DSUVIA tablets under a patient’s
tongue using a single dose applicator. The only steps from
the “administration instructions” Angotti omitted are
obvious steps like “[1] TEAR OPEN the notched pouch,” “7.
VISUALLY CONFIRM tablet placement in the sublingual
space,” and, lastly, “8. DISCARD the used SDA [single dose
applicator] in biohazard waste after administration.”
Contrary to the plaintiffs’ argument, omitting such obvious
steps would not mislead a reasonable investor because, for
investment purposes, the steps do not materially change the
overall picture. See Intuitive Surgical, 759 F.3d at 1061. By
comparison, the FDA might find such specific information
to be relevant because it mitigates risks to patients. Just
because the FDA requires disclosure of specific instructions
to healthcare providers does not make the omission of that
information relevant for investors.
Further, the FDA regulations on misleading marketing
conflict with our expectation of how reasonable investors
behave. We expect reasonable investors to read an entire
document, including the fine print and caveats, while FDA
regulations dictate that “a brief statement[]” “in another
distinct part of an advertisement” does not correct
misleading statements made elsewhere in an ad. 21 C.F.R.
§ 202.1(e)(3)(i). FDA regulations also explain that an
“advertisement does not satisfy the requirement that it
present a ‘true statement’ of information . . . [if it] fails to
present a fair balance between . . . side effects and
contraindications and . . . benefits.”
21 C.F.R.
§ 202.1(e)(5)(ii). But we expect reasonable investors to pay

SNEED V. TALPHERA

17

attention to caveats and disclaimers even if less prominently
displayed. See Omnicare, 575 U.S. at 190.
B. Plaintiffs have not pleaded a strong inference of
scienter.
As the district court found, the plaintiffs also failed to
plead facts giving rise to a strong inference that the
defendants acted with scienter. See Tellabs, 551 U.S. at 326.
A strong inference arises “only if a reasonable person would
deem the inference of scienter cogent and at least as
compelling as any opposing inference one could draw from
the facts alleged.” Id. at 324. Showing scienter necessarily
becomes harder when the allegedly misleading statements
are not flagrantly false because in those cases an innocent
alternative explanation becomes more likely. Cf. Merck &
Co v. Reynolds, 559 U.S. 633, 649–50 (2010) (holding
certain blatantly false statements lend support for a finding
of scienter). Here, we find no strong inference of scienter
because, viewed holistically, the facts suggest that Angotti
and Palmer most likely made a good-faith determination that
the “Tongue and Done” slogan would truthfully highlight
DSUVIA’s major selling point.
Plaintiffs depend heavily on statements from
confidential witnesses, a permissible and common practice
in securities lawsuits. Zucco, 552 F.3d at 995; see also
Nguyen v. Endologix, Inc., 962 F.3d 405, 416 (9th Cir.
2020). But the confidential witness statements here do not
show scienter for two reasons. Zucco, 552 F.3d at 995. First,
few witnesses had the required personal knowledge of
Angotti’s or Palmer’s decision-making to show scienter, as
most witnesses never interacted with either executive. Id.
Second, that one employee told Angotti and Palmer that the
“Tongue and Done” slogan “oversimplified the use of a

18

SNEED V. TALPHERA

powerful opioid” speaks more to a good-faith difference of
opinion. That difference of opinion may have arisen from
Angotti and Palmer’s own knowledge of the product.
The plaintiffs also try to show scienter through a core
operations theory. The core operations doctrine allows
courts to infer “that facts critical to a business’s ‘core
operations’ or an important transaction are known to the
company’s key officers.” Webb v. Solarcity Corp., 884 F.3d
844, 854 (9th Cir. 2018) (quoting S. Ferry LP, No. 2 v.
Killinger, 542 F.3d 776, 783 (9th Cir. 2008)). Under this
theory, “reporting false information will only be indicative
of scienter where the falsity is patently obvious.” Zucco, 552
F.3d at 1001. But any knowledge imputed to Angotti and
Palmer does not yield a strong inference of scienter because,
at the time, it was a matter of speculation whether the
“Tongue and Done” slogan could mislead investors. The
plaintiffs simply fail to plausibly show the core operations
doctrine applies here because no “fact” existed that would
have led Angotti and Palmer to “know” the “Tongue and
Done” slogan conveyed “patently false” information. See
Zucco, 552 F.3d at 1001.
The facts in the pleadings do not establish a strong
inference of scienter because it is more probable that Angotti
and Palmer wanted to use the “Tongue and Done” slogan to
help market DSUVIA’s biggest selling point.
This
alternative explanation is more probable because Angotti
and Palmer likely did not intend to defraud investors by
concealing the REMS and its restrictions on DSUVIA’s use
while simultaneously disclosing that information in myriad
contexts. See Webb, 884 F.3d at 856–58 (“honest mistake”
a more probable explanation for an accounting error because
defendants publicly revealed the company had no profits, the

SNEED V. TALPHERA

19

very information any accounting fraud would seek to
conceal).
Conclusion
We affirm the district court. The plaintiffs failed to plead
facts sufficient to establish either falsity or scienter. Further,
the inability to plead a § 10(b) or Rule 10b–5 claim
precludes them from pleading a § 20(a) claim.

