FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CENTER FOR INVESTIGATIVE
REPORTING; WILL EVANS,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,

No. 24-880
D.C. No.
3:22-cv-07182WHA

v.
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT
OF LABOR,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
William Alsup, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted February 14, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed July 30, 2025
Before: N. Randy Smith and Anthony D. Johnstone, Circuit
Judges, and Dana L. Christensen, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Johnstone
The Honorable Dana L. Christensen, United States District Judge for
the District of Montana, sitting by designation.

*

2

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

SUMMARY **
Freedom of Information Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s order compelling
disclosure in a Freedom of Information Act (“FOIA”) case
brought by the Center for Investigative Reporting requesting
several years of reports filed by federal contractors with the
U.S. Department of Labor.
The reports describe the composition of the contractors’
workforces. The Center, a nonprofit investigative news
organization, hoped to use the information to report on
contractors’ racial, sexual, and ethnic diversity (or lack
thereof). The Department withheld many of the requested
reports under FOIA’s Exemption 4, claiming they included
confidential “commercial” information.
Information is “commercial” under Exemption 4 if it is
an object of commerce or has commerce as its subject. The
panel held that because the record did not show that
workforce-composition information alone revealed
contractors’ production details or resulting profits, the
reports at issue did not contain “commercial” information
subject to FOIA Exemption 4. Accordingly, the panel
affirmed the district court’s order concluding that the
Department must disclose the reports.

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

3

COUNSEL
Aaron R. Field, Therese Y. Cannata, and Zachary Colbeth,
Cannata O'Toole & Olson LLP, San Francisco, California;
D. Victoria Baranetsky, The Center for Investigative
Reporting, San Francisco, California; for PlaintiffsAppellees.
Pamela Johann, Assistant United States Attorney; Ismail J.
Ramsey, United States Attorney; Office of the United States
Attorney, United States Department of Justice, San
Francisco, California; Joshua M. Koppel and Mark B. Stern,
Attorneys, Appellate Staff; Brian M. Boynton, Principal
Deputy Assistant Attorney General; Civil Division, United
States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Emily S.
Whitten, Attorney; Seema Nanda, Solicitor of Labor, United
States Department of Labor, Washington, D.C.; for
Defendant-Appellant.
Mason A. Kurtz, Cyberlaw Clinic, Harvard Law School,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, for Amici Curiae Knowledge
Ecology International, Universities Allied for Essential
Medicines, Dr. Christopher Morten, and Dr. Reshma
Ramachandran.
Katie B. Townsend, Bruce D. Brown, Mara Gassmann,
Adam Marshall, and Mayeesha Galiba, Reporters
Committee for Freedom of the Press, Washington, D.C.; for
Amici Curiae Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press
and the First Amendment Coalition.
Larissa R. Grijalva, Angelica Salceda, and Grayce S.
Zelphin, American Civil Liberties Union Foundation of
Northern California, San Francisco, California, for Amici
Curiae American Civil Liberties Union of Northern
California, American Civil Liberties Union of Southern

4

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

California, and American Civil Liberties Union of San
Diego-Imperial Counties.

OPINION
JOHNSTONE, Circuit Judge:
Congress enacted the Freedom of Information Act
(“FOIA”), 5 U.S.C. § 552, to ensure public access to federalgovernment records and thereby increase the transparency of
the government to the governed. The statute requires federal
agencies to disclose their records to the public upon request.
If an agency denies a request, members of the public may
sue to compel disclosure. But FOIA allows agencies to
withhold government records if they fall within one of nine
statutory exemptions. These exemptions protect information
about various matters—classified national defense
materials, law-enforcement records, personnel and medical
files, and documents relating to the regulation of financial
institutions, to name a few—that may legitimately be kept
from public view.
This appeal is about FOIA Exemption 4, which allows
agencies to withhold “trade secrets” and “commercial or
financial information obtained from a person” that is
“privileged or confidential.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(4). The
exemption protects entities that are required to submit
information to the federal government against the
competitive disadvantages that could result from disclosure
of their private business information. See Food Mktg. Inst. v.
Argus Leader Media, 588 U.S. 427, 440 (2019). Most
litigation involving Exemption 4 centers on whether

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

5

information is a “trade secret[]” or otherwise “confidential.”
See, e.g., id. at 433–40; Bowen v. FDA, 925 F.2d 1225, 1227–
28 (9th Cir. 1991). Here, however, the parties dispute the
meaning of “commercial.”
Plaintiffs Will Evans and the Center for Investigative
Reporting (together, “Center”) requested several years’
worth of reports filed by federal contractors with the
Department of Labor (“Department”). The reports describe
the composition of the contractors’ workforces, including the
job categories and demographics of their employees. The
Center, a nonprofit investigative news organization, hoped
to use that information to report on contractors’ racial,
sexual, and ethnic diversity (or lack thereof). The
Department withheld many of the requested reports under
Exemption 4, claiming that they include confidential
“commercial” information. After the Center sued, the district
court determined that the reports contain no “commercial”
information and ordered the Department to disclose the
reports. The Department appealed.
Information is “commercial” under Exemption 4 if it
either is an object of commerce or has commerce as its
subject. That is, “commercial information” (1) is made to be
bought and sold or (2) describes an exchange of goods or
services for profit. The Department argues that the
information it seeks to withhold is “commercial” because it
describes the composition of contractors’ workforces, which
influences the number and quality of services that
contractors can exchange for profit. Because the record
before us does not show that workforce-composition
information alone reveals contractors’ production details or
resulting profits, we hold that the reports at issue do not
contain “commercial” information. We therefore affirm the

6

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

district court’s order compelling the Department to disclose
the reports.
I. The Department withholds federal contractors’
workforce-composition information.
Until recently, the Department required most federal
contractors with fifty or more employees to submit annual
reports detailing the composition of their workforces. See 41
C.F.R. § 60–1.7(a); Exec. Order No. 11246, 30 Fed. Reg.
12319 (Sept. 24, 1965), revoked by Exec. Order No. 14173,
90 Fed. Reg. 8633 (Jan. 21, 2025). Contractors with more
than one place of business submitted consolidated reports of
aggregated workforce-composition data across all their
locations. The reports included contractors’ number of
employees in each of ten job categories: Executive/Senior
Level Officials and Managers, First/Mid-Level Officials and
Managers, Professionals, Technicians, Sales Workers,
Administrative Support Workers, Craft Workers, Operatives,
Laborers and Helpers, and Service Workers. They also broke
down the number of employees in each job category by sex
and by race or ethnicity. The Department used the reports to
monitor
contractors’
compliance
with
federal
antidiscrimination and equal employment opportunity
requirements. See 41 C.F.R. § 60–1.7(c), revocation
proposed by Rescission of Executive Order 11246
Implementing Regulations, 90 Fed. Reg. 28472-01
(proposed July 1, 2025).
The Center submitted several FOIA requests for
consolidated reports from contractors with multiple
locations filed between 2016 and 2020 (“EEO reports”). The
Department determined that the EEO reports “may be
protected from disclosure under FOIA Exemption 4,” which
allows withholding of certain confidential “commercial or

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

7

financial information.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(4). As required by
federal regulations, the Department provided the contractors
who filed the reports with notice and an opportunity to object
to the Center’s FOIA requests. See 87 Fed. Reg. 51145 (Aug.
19, 2022). After the objection process, the Department
disclosed the EEO reports of all non-objecting contractors,
but withheld 16,755 EEO reports from 4,141 objecting
contractors based on its assessment that the reports fell under
Exemption 4. (The Department also withheld the reports of
621 objectors who it determined were not federal contractors
at the time their reports were filed and were thus outside the
Department’s jurisdiction. Those reports are not at issue in
this appeal.)
The Center sued to compel disclosure of all the requested
EEO reports under FOIA. After the pleading stage, the
district court instructed the Department “to select six
representative objecting contractors to be the subject of
bellwether cross-motions for summary judgment.” Though
FOIA generally requires an individualized analysis of each
record withheld, see Transgender L. Ctr. v. Immigr. &
Customs Enf’t, 46 F.4th 771, 781–82 (9th Cir. 2022), neither
party objected to the use of bellwethers to test the
Department’s Exemption 4 argument, and the Department
selected its six preferred contractors to show that the EEO
reports contain confidential “commercial” information. Five
bellwether objectors ultimately participated: (1) Allied
Universal, “the nation’s largest provider of security guards”;
(2) Brandenburg Industrial Service Co., a firm “specializing
in demolition and environmental remediation”; (3) DHL
Global Business Services, a provider of “logistics services”;
(4) NMR Consulting, which “provide[s] information
technology, infrastructure, and procurement services”; and

8

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

(5) NorthShore University Health System, a “communitybased healthcare system.”
On cross-motions for summary judgment based on the
bellwethers, the district court ordered the disclosure of the
EEO reports. See Ctr. for Investigative Reporting v. U.S.
Dep’t of Lab., No. 3:22-cv-07182, 2023 WL 8879244, at *8
(N.D. Cal. Dec. 22, 2023). The court construed Exemption
4’s protections for “commercial” information to cover only
“commercially valuable information” that “itself yield[s]
. . . commercial insight that is specific to the operations of
the federal contractor.” Id. at *4 (emphasis added). The court
concluded that the Department had not raised a genuine issue
as to whether the information in the EEO reports would
reveal commercially significant insights about the
bellwethers. See id. at *3–5. Finding that Exemption 4 does
not exclude the EEO reports from FOIA’s general disclosure
mandate, the district court ordered the Department to
produce the withheld reports. See id. at *8.
The Department appealed. We have jurisdiction to
review the district court’s order requiring the Department to
produce the reports under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1). See In re
Steele, 799 F.2d 461, 465 (9th Cir. 1986). We review the
court’s order de novo. Animal Legal Def. Fund v. FDA, 836
F.3d 987, 988 (9th Cir. 2016) (en banc) (per curiam). Under
that standard, we “view the evidence in the light most
favorable to the nonmoving party, determine whether there
are any genuine issues of material fact, and decide whether
the district court correctly applied the relevant substantive
law.” Id. at 989; see also Fed. R. Civ. P. 56.

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

9

II. The bellwethers’ EEO reports do not contain
“commercial” information subject to Exemption 4.
FOIA requires that “each [federal] agency, upon any
request for records . . . , shall make the records promptly
available to any person.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(3)(A). This
disclosure mandate applies both to information created by
the federal government and to records furnished to the
government by private parties, like the EEO reports. See
FCC v. AT&T, Inc., 562 U.S. 397, 400–02 (2011). Congress
enacted the statute to facilitate public access to government
records and thereby “ensure an informed citizenry” that
could hold the government “accountable to the governed.”
NLRB v. Robbins Tire & Rubber Co., 437 U.S. 214, 242
(1978). To that end, FOIA authorizes parties to sue federal
agencies that deny their requests for government records, as
the Center did here. Watkins v. U.S. Bureau of Customs &
Border Prot., 643 F.3d 1189, 1193 (9th Cir. 2011). Congress
recognized, however, that the government may legitimately
keep some information from the public. Id. at 1194. So FOIA
includes nine exemptions, under which agencies may
withhold information that they would otherwise be required
to disclose. See 5 U.S.C. § 552(b). “Mindful of FOIA’s
general command to provide ‘broad disclosure,’ we interpret
its exemptions narrowly[.]” Pomares v. Dep’t of Veterans
Affs., 113 F.4th 870, 881 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting U.S. Dep’t
of Just. v. Tax Analysts, 492 U.S. 136, 151 (1989)). The
agency seeking to withhold the requested records “has the
burden of showing that a claimed exemption applies[.]” Id.
The Department withheld more than sixteen thousand
EEO reports responsive to the Center’s requests because it
determined that the workforce-composition information in
the reports fell within Exemption 4. That exemption protects
“commercial or financial information obtained from a

10

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

person and privileged or confidential.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(4).
The Department argues only that the EEO reports contain
“commercial,” not “financial,” information. The district
court determined that none of the information in the reports
is “commercial” under Exemption 4. See Ctr. for
Investigative Reporting, 2023 WL 8879244, at *3–5. Though
our reasoning differs from the district court’s, we agree that
the Department failed to show that the reports contain any
“commercial” information. We therefore need not address
whether the other elements of Exemption 4 are satisfied.
A. Information is “commercial” under Exemption 4
if it is an object of commerce or has the subject of
commerce.
FOIA does not define “commercial,” so we give the term
its plain meaning. Pomares, 113 F.4th at 882. In Pomares,
we held that “[i]nformation is ‘commercial’ if it pertains to
‘business [or] trade,’ or is designed to be profitable.” Id.
(second alteration in original) (first quoting Commerce,
Commercial, American Heritage Dictionary of the English
Language 267 (1969); and then citing Commercial,
Webster’s Third New International Dictionary 456 (1963)).
Or as the Court of Appeals for the D.C. Circuit has put it,
information is commercial if it “serves a ‘commercial
function’ or is of a ‘commercial nature.’” Citizens for Resp.
& Ethics in Wash. v. U.S. Dep’t of Just., 58 F.4th 1255, 1265
(D.C. Cir. 2023) (quoting Nat’l Ass’n of Home Builders v.
Norton, 309 F.3d 26, 38–39 (D.C. Cir. 2002)). We thus have
contemplated two ways for information to be “commercial”
under Exemption 4: it is the object of commerce (designed
to profitable), or it has the subject of commerce (pertaining
to commerce). In both usages, commerce has its plain
meaning of “the exchange of goods or services or the making

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

11

of a profit.” Pomares, 113 F.4th at 882 (quoting Citizens for
Resp. & Ethics, 58 F.4th at 1265).
First, information is the object of commerce—serves a
commercial function—and is therefore “commercial” if it is
designed to be profitable. See id. That is, if it was made to
be bought and sold. See Brown v. Perez, 835 F.3d 1223,
1230–31 (10th Cir. 2016) (holding that information that an
entity “ultimately sells as a product” was “commercial”).
The Department does not argue that any of the information
in the EEO reports was made to be bought and sold. Cf.
Norton, 309 F.3d at 38–39 (explaining that research data was
not “commercial” because the exchange of the data did “not
constitute a commercial transaction in the ordinary sense”
and its owner was “forbidden by statute to sell the . . . data”).
Second, information has the subject of commerce—is of
a commercial nature—and is therefore “commercial” if it
pertains to business or trade. Pomares, 113 F.4th at 882. This
includes “records that . . . ‘actually reveal basic commercial
operations, such as sales statistics, profits and losses, and
inventories[.]’” Citizens for Resp. & Ethics, 58 F.4th at 1263
(quoting Pub. Citizen Health Rsch. Grp. v. Food & Drug
Admin., 704 F.2d 1280, 1290 (D.C. Cir. 1983)); see also H.R.
Rep. No. 89-1497, at 10 (1966). It also includes information
that describes the goods and services being sold, see, e.g.,
People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals v. U.S. Dep’t of
Health & Hum. Servs., 901 F.3d 343, 347, 351 (D.C. Cir.
2018) (“number and types” of animals imported by a
company); Pub. Citizen, 704 F.2d at 1290 (“documentation
of the health and safety experience of . . . products”); their
prices, see, e.g., GC Micro Corp. v. Defense Logistics
Agency, 33 F.3d 1109, 1111–12 (9th Cir. 1994) (dollar value
of subcontracts), overruled on other grounds by Animal
Legal Def. Fund, 836 F.3d at 988–89; McDonnell Douglas

12

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

Corp. v. Nat’l Aeronautics & Space Admin., 180 F.3d 303,
306 (D.C. Cir. 1999) (“line item price information”); N.H.
Right to Life v. U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs., 778 F.3d
43, 50 (1st Cir. 2015) (“fees and collections policies”);
customers’ identities, see, e.g., Inner City Press/Cmty. on the
Move v. Bd. of Governors of Fed. Rsrv. Sys., 463 F.3d 239,
242, 244 (2d Cir. 2006) (names of commercial customers);
Greenberg v. Food & Drug Admin., 803 F.2d 1213, 1216
(D.C. Cir. 1986) (“customer lists”); the terms governing the
exchange, see, e.g., Pomares, 113 F.4th at 882 (“consulting
agreements”); Utah v. Dep’t of Interior, 256 F.3d 967, 968–
71 (10th Cir. 2001) (lease terms); or other “intimate aspects
of an [entity’s] business such as supply chains and
fluctuations of demand for merchandise,” Watkins, 643 F.3d
at 1195. And “commercial” information need not describe an
existing transaction: it may instead forecast transactions and
profits. See, e.g., Baker & Hostetler LLP v. U.S. Dep’t of
Commerce, 473 F.3d 312, 319–20 (D.C. Cir. 2006) (letters
describing companies’ “commercial strengths and
weaknesses” and predicted effect of a trade dispute on future
commercial activities).
The Department argues that the information in the EEO
reports is “commercial” because it relates to commercial
subject matter. This information, the Department argues,
reflects a contractor’s headcount and organizational
structure, its resulting capacity to engage in commerce, its
performance on diversifying its workforce, and its trends on
these measures over time. So for the reports to qualify for
Exemption 4, the Department must show that these types of
information, similar to the types of information listed above,
describe an “exchange of goods or services or the making of
a profit.” Pomares, 113 F.4th at 882 (quoting Citizens for
Resp. & Ethics, 58 F.4th at 1265).

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

13

B. The information in the bellwethers’ EEO reports
is not commercial under Exemption 4.
The information in the bellwethers’ EEO reports does not
have a “commercial” subject within the meaning of
Exemption 4. The workforce-composition data in the reports
at issue do not describe “the exchange of goods or services
or the making of a profit.” Pomares, 113 F.4th at 882
(quoting Citizens for Resp. & Ethics, 58 F.4th at 1265).
Instead, the reports describe only two types of information
about federal contractors’ workforces: (1) data on the
number of employees in each of ten general job categories
and (2) demographic data on the employees’ race, sex, and
ethnicity. They do not disclose any details about the services
provided by federal contractors, the prices charged for those
services, the resulting profits, the terms of the contractors’
agreements with the government, or any similar information
that we or other courts ordinarily treat as “commercial.” So
the EEO reports do not, without more, reveal anything about
the exchange of goods or services. Cf. Van Bourg, Allen,
Weinberg & Roger v. NLRB, 728 F.2d 1270, 1272–73 (9th
Cir. 1984) (holding that information about a company’s
employees, detailing the names and home addresses of all
who are eligible to vote in certain union elections, “cannot
fairly be characterized as . . . ‘commercial’” under
Exemption 4 (quoting Getman v. NLRB, 450 F.2d 670, 673
(D.C. Cir. 1971))).
The Department argues that the job-category data in the
EEO reports is nevertheless “commercial” because it still
reveals some information related to contractors’ exchanges
of goods and services, albeit indirectly. The Department
asserts that a contractor’s overall and category-specific
number of employees describes its “ability to produce or
trade . . . goods or services[,]” and its “human-resources

14

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

strategy and decisions,” both of which affect its profitability.
Allied Universal, for example, primarily sells “guard hours,”
equivalent to one hour of security-guard time. So its “ability
to supply its product—guard hours—is a direct function of
the number of security guards it employs,” which can be
gleaned from its job-category data. Similarly, “[a]s a service
contractor, NMR’s primary offering is its workers’ skills and
expertise and how much work NMR can perform is a
function of how many workers NMR employ[s].” And
NorthShore, DHL, and Brandenburg each explained that
their ratios of managers to service-workers influences the
profitability of their services. Thus, the Department argues
that the job-category data in the EEO reports enables
inferences about each contractor’s production capacity and
profit margins. And, it contends, an annual series of EEO
reports enables inferences about trends in those measures
over time.
As the district court noted, however, the job-category
data in the EEO reports does not alone reveal information
about the contractors’ profitability, volume of products, or
other aspects of their commercial exchanges. Consider
Allied Universal. While the number of security guards it
employs influences the volume of services it can provide,
other factors like its overhead costs also play a role. And the
reports do not contain information on security guards’
schedules, wages, or work locations, which also affect the
number of guard hours that Allied Universal sells. For the
other bellwethers, too, the job-category data in the EEO
reports reveals only one of multiple factors that affect their
sales and profits. So the Department has shown only an
attenuated connection between the job-category data and the
contractors’ commercial activity. And aggregating such
indirect data over multiple years does not make the

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

15

connection any more direct. “[T]he government may not rely
on Exemption 4 where the withheld information only
tenuously or indirectly concerns the exchange of goods or
services or the making of a profit.” Citizens for Resp. &
Ethics, 58 F.4th at 1265.
The same goes for the EEO reports’ data on the racial,
sexual, and ethnic diversity of contractors’ workforces. The
Department argues that “[d]iverse firms are better able to
attract and retain talented employees and compete for
customers in certain markets.” But in the record it drew only
indirect connections between a diverse workforce and a
contractor’s exchange of goods or services. DHL, for
example, declared that “[h]aving a diverse workforce is
beneficial to [its] commercial success, as it enhances the
diversity of thought and perspectives in the organization,
helps boost innovation, and leads to the attraction,
recruitment, and retention of more diverse employees in the
future.” NMR similarly stated that “increased diversity
boosts innovation and ensures consideration of different
perspectives,” allowing the company “to be more responsive
to customers” and to recruit applicants. And the
Department’s expert highlighted studies showing that
“diversity is an organizational resource that translates into a
competitive advantage for firms through a greater capacity
for resource acquisition, market access, innovation and
strategic flexibility.” Because tracking diversity data helps
companies to realize these benefits, the Department argues,
the data is itself “commercial.” Yet the Department again
fails to explain how this data describes contractors’
exchange of goods or services or their making of a profit, so
the Department has not shown that it is “commercial.”
The district court reached the same result for a different
reason. It determined that the information in the EEO reports

16

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

was not “commercial” because it lacks commercial value, so
its disclosure would not result in competitive harm to
contractors. See Ctr. for Investigative Reporting, 2023 WL
8879244, at *4–5. But nothing in the text of Exemption 4
imposes any commercial-value or competitive-harm
requirement. Cf. Argus Leader, 588 U.S. at 439 (rejecting
argument that information is “confidential” under
Exemption 4 only if its disclosure is likely to result in
“substantial competitive harm”). Instead, whether
information is “commercial” under Exemption 4 turns only
on whether “‘in and of itself’ it serves a ‘commercial
function’ or is of a ‘commercial nature.’” Norton, 309 F.3d
at 38 (quoting Am. Airlines, Inc. v. Nat’l Mediation Bd., 588
U.S. F.2d 863, 870 (2d Cir. 1978)); see also Pomares, 113
F.4th at 882. “That disclosure might cause commercial
repercussions” is neither necessary nor “suffic[ient] to show
that information is ‘commercial’ under Exemption 4.”
Citizens for Resp. & Ethics, 58 F.4th at 1268; cf. Carlson v.
U.S. Postal Serv., 504 F.3d 1123, 1129 (9th Cir. 2007)
(rejecting argument that information is of “a commercial
nature” under the Postal Service Act merely “because it has
value”), abrogated on other grounds by Animal Legal Def.
Fund, 836 F.3d at 988–89. Nor does it matter whether the
contractor that created an EEO report is a for-profit
company. See N.H. Right to Life, 778 F.3d at 50 (“The term
‘commercial’ as used in the statute modifies ‘information’
and not the entity supplying the information.”).
III. Conclusion
The information in the bellwethers’ EEO reports is not
“commercial.” So we affirm the district court’s order
concluding that the Department must disclose the reports on
that basis alone. Because Exemption 4 does not apply to the
EEO reports, we need not address the FOIA Improvement

CTR. FOR INVESTIGATIVE REPORTING V. US DOL

17

Act, 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(8)(A)(i), see Seife v. U.S. Food &
Drug Admin., 43 F.4th 231, 235 (2d Cir. 2022), nor whether
that Act incorporates the protections of the Trade Secrets
Act, 18 U.S.C. § 1905.
AFFIRMED.

