FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF
CALIFORNIA, acting by and
through Los Angeles County Counsel
Dawyn R. Harrison,
v.

Plaintiff - Appellee,

EXPRESS SCRIPTS, INC.; ESI
MAIL PHARMACY SERVICE,
INC.; EXPRESS SCRIPTS
PHARMACY, INC.; OPTUMRX,
INC.,
and

Defendants - Appellants,

EXPRESS SCRIPTS
ADMINISTRATORS,
LLC, MEDCO HEALTH
SOLUTIONS,
INC., OPTUMINSIGHT,
INC., OPTUMINSIGHT LIFE
SCIENCES, INC.,
Defendants.

No. 24-1972
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-08570SPG-PD
OPINION

2

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Sherilyn Peace Garnett, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 4, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed September 8, 2025
Before: Mary H. Murguia, Chief Judge, and Gabriel P.
Sanchez and Holly A. Thomas, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Murguia
SUMMARY *
Federal Officer Removal
The panel affirmed the district court’s order remanding
to state court an action brought by the People of the State of
California against Express Scripts, Inc., and other pharmacy
benefit managers.
Plaintiff alleged statutory and common law public
nuisance causes of action relating to the opioid epidemic in
Los Angeles County. Defendants removed to federal court
under 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1), the federal officer removal
statute, averring that their business dealings with various
United States agencies should enable removal. Plaintiff
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

3

amended its complaint in federal court to add a
comprehensive disclaimer, explicitly narrowing the claims
to defendants’ conduct related to the non-federal market and
only seeking relief for the same. After determining that the
explicit disclaimer eliminated defendants’ ground for
removal, the district court remanded the case.
The panel concluded that the district court correctly
determined that plaintiff, as master of its complaint, validly
eliminated all bases for federal jurisdiction through its
disclaimer. As a result of the disclaimer, defendants did not
satisfy the causal nexus prong of the federal officer removal
statute because none of the conduct charged in the amended
complaint causally related to actions defendants took under
a federal officer. Under Royal Canin U. S. A., Inc. v.
Wullschleger, 604 U.S. 22 (2025), the district court properly
remanded the case to state court after determining that it
lacked subject matter jurisdiction.

COUNSEL
Louis M. Bograd (argued), Elizabeth Smith, and Linda
Singer, Motley Rice LLC, Washington, D.C.; Andrea Ross,
Principal County Counsel; Scott Kuhn, Assistant County
Counsel; Dawyn R. Harrison, County Counsel; Office of the
County Counsel, Los Angeles, California; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Christopher G. Michel (argued), Jonathan G. Cooper, and
Michael J. Lyle, Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Kiel B. Ireland, Danielle L. Gilmore, and
Sage R. Vanden Heuvel, Quinn Emanuel Urquhart &
Sullivan LLP, Los Angeles, California; Charles B. Straut II,

4

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

Quinn Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan LLP, San Francisco,
California; Omar Morquecho, Kimberly K. Chemerinsky,
and Alexander Akerman, Alston & Bird LLP, Los Angeles,
California; Brian D. Boone and Matthew P. Hooker, Alston
& Bird LLP, Charlotte, North Carolina; for DefendantsAppellants.

OPINION
MURGUIA, Chief Circuit Judge:
This litigation arises in the context of decades of lawsuits
brought nationwide by states, localities, and Indian tribes
against various opioid industry defendants. The People of
the State of California, acting by and through Los Angeles
County Counsel, Dawyn R. Harrison, (“Plaintiff” or “the
People”), originally brought suit against DefendantsAppellants Express Scripts, Inc.; ESI Mail Pharmacy
Service, Inc.; Express Scripts Pharmacy, Inc.; and
OptumRx, Inc. (“Defendants”) in California state court
alleging statutory and common law public nuisance causes
of action. Defendants removed to federal court under 28
U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1)—commonly known as the federal
officer removal statute—averring that their business
dealings with various United States agencies should enable
removal under the statute. Plaintiff amended its complaint
in federal court to add a comprehensive disclaimer,
explicitly narrowing its claims to Defendants’ conduct
related to the non-federal market and only seeking relief for
the same. Plaintiff then moved to remand. After
determining that the explicit disclaimer eliminated

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

5

Defendants’ ground for removal, the district court remanded
the case.
Defendants on appeal challenge the district court’s
remand order, arguing that no disclaimer in this instance
could validly sever Defendants’ grounds for jurisdiction
under the federal officer removal statute. We disagree. The
district court correctly determined that Plaintiff, as master of
its complaint, validly eliminated all bases for federal
jurisdiction through its disclaimer. As a result, Defendants
do not satisfy the causal nexus prong of the federal officer
removal statute because none of the conduct charged in the
amended complaint causally relates to actions Defendants
took under the direction of a federal officer.
I.
Defendants are known as pharmacy benefit managers
(“PBMs”). They administer prescription-drug benefits,
process insurance claims, and provide mail order pharmacy
services for private businesses and government agencies.
Essentially, they “serve as intermediaries between
prescription-drug plans and the pharmacies that
beneficiaries use.” Rutledge v. Pharm. Care Mgmt. Ass’n,
592 U.S. 80, 83–84 (2020). As part of their services, PBMs
offer formularies to health plans, which are lists of generic
and brand name prescription drugs covered by a health
plan’s insurance benefits. In addition to manufacturers,
distributors, and dispensers of opioids, PBMs occupy a
unique role in the pharmaceutical supply chain as “thirdparty administrators of prescription drug programs.” Trone
Health Servs., Inc. v. Express Scripts Holding Co., 974 F.3d
845, 848 (8th Cir. 2020).
Plaintiff filed a complaint in the Superior Court of
California for the County of Los Angeles against Defendants

6

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

alleging their opioid dispensing practices substantially
contributed to the public nuisance of the opioid epidemic in
Los Angeles County in violation of common law public
nuisance doctrine and the California public nuisance statute.
Cal. Civ. Code §§ 3479, 3480. Defendants removed to
federal court under the federal officer removal statute. 28
U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1). In its notice of removal, Defendant
Express Scripts cited its contracts to provide PBM services
for the United States Department of Defense’s (“DoD”)
TRICARE program and for the Office of Personnel
Management’s (“OPM”) Federal Employees Health
Benefits Program. Optum cited to its contract with the
Department of Veterans Affairs to provide PBM services to
the Veterans Health Administration.
Plaintiff amended its complaint in federal court to add a
comprehensive disclaimer, explicitly narrowing its claims to
Defendants’ conduct related to the non-federal market and
only seeking relief for the same. Plaintiff’s disclaimer stated
in relevant part:
The allegations in this Complaint do not
include and specifically exclude Defendants’
provision of PBM or mail order pharmacy
services pursuant to contracts with the
Department of Defense, the Office of
Personnel Management, the U.S. Department
of Veteran Affairs, the Veterans Health
Administration, or any other federal agency.
The Complaint does not challenge the
creation of custom formularies or
administration or management of such
formularies for or by a federal officer or
federal agency, such as for any Federal

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

7

Employees Health Benefits Act, Veterans
Health Administration, or TRICARE
governed health benefits plan, or any other
federal health benefit plan. The Complaint
does not challenge Defendants’ provision of
mail order pharmacy services pursuant to
contracts with the Department of Defense,
the Office of Personnel Management, U.S.
Department of Veterans Affairs, the Veterans
Health Administration, or any other federal
agency, and does not challenge the
Defendants’ administration or operation of
the TRICARE Home Delivery/Mail Order
Pharmacy. The Plaintiff does not seek to
recover moneys paid by the federal
government pursuant to such plans, nor does
it seek recovery of federally mandated copays that were paid by such plans’ patients.
The Plaintiff does not challenge opioid
prescriptions adjudicated or processed by
Defendants under federal contracts. The
Plaintiff does not seek declaratory relief,
injunctive relief, abatement relief, or any
other relief for the conduct of Defendants
related to the provision of any services
pursuant to contracts with the Department of
Defense, the Office of Personnel
Management, the U.S. Department of
Veteran Affairs, the Veterans Health
Administration, or any other federal agency.
Plaintiff then moved to remand, arguing it had excised all
bases for federal officer jurisdiction from its amended
complaint.

8

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

In opposition to remand, Defendants argued that
Plaintiff’s disclaimer was invalid, but that even if it was
permissible, the charged conduct in Plaintiff’s amended
complaint still at least satisfied the “relating to” element of
the federal officer removal statute. Defendants’ opposition
to remand included a declaration from Express Scripts
employee, Thomas D. Jenkins (“Jenkins Declaration”),
which averred that:
Express Scripts contracts with pharmacies to
participate in its pharmacy networks and
negotiates discounts from those contracted
pharmacies that reduce the cost to Express
Scripts’ clients of the drugs dispensed by
contracted pharmacies. Express Scripts does
not negotiate separate agreements with retail
pharmacies for each of its thousands of
clients. Rather, Express Scripts negotiates
with retail pharmacies to participate in a
multitude of Express Scripts pharmacy
networks, including networks for commercial
clients as well as TRICARE.
The Jenkins Declaration also stated that “pursuant to DoD
directives, these retail pharmacies must meet certain
credentialing standards . . . [and] are required to provide the
same quality of services they provide to commercial
beneficiaries.” 1
After determining that the explicit disclaimer eliminated
Defendants’ ground for removal, the district court remanded
Defendants’ briefing and notice of removal describe Optum’s PBM
practices as similar to this in all material respects.

1

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

9

the case. California ex rel. Harrison v. Express Scripts, Inc.,
No. 2:23-cv-08570-SPG-PD, 2024 WL 841197, at
*5 (C.D. Cal. Feb. 28, 2024). 2 Defendants appealed the
district court’s remand order. 3
II.
We have jurisdiction to review a district court’s order
remanding a case to state court when defendants removed
the case to federal court pursuant to the federal officer
The district court first held that even in the absence of the explicit
disclaimer, Defendants’ relationships with the federal government were
merely “arm’s length business arrangement[s]” and that Defendants
were merely complying with the law, which “does not amount to acting
under a federal official who is giving an order or enforcing the law.”
California ex rel. Harrison, 2024 WL 841197, at *4 (quoting Cnty. of
San Mateo v. Chevron Corp., 32 F.4th 733, 757 (9th Cir. 2022) (citation
modified)). Defendants highlight that the district court did not cite or
analyze a Fourth Circuit opinion in a similar opioid public nuisance case
against many of these same defendants where that court found the case
removable under the federal officer removal statute. Cnty. Bd. of
Arlington Cnty., Virginia v. Express Scripts Pharmacy, Inc., 996 F.3d
243, 257 (4th Cir. 2021). But the plaintiff in County Board of Arlington
did not include an explicit disclaimer limiting their complaint to the nonfederal market.

2

Accordingly, we do not address whether the People’s amended
complaint here, absent the disclaimer, could have qualified for federal
officer removal. We affirm the district court solely on the basis that the
People’s explicit disclaimer validly severed from their claims all grounds
for federal officer jurisdiction in this case.
Defendants also appealed the district court’s denial of a motion to stay
remand pending appeal and asked this Court to expeditiously issue an
automatic stay of the remand order pursuant to Coinbase, Inc. v. Bielski,
599 U.S. 736 (2023). In a separate published order issued prior to this
opinion, we affirmed the district court’s denial of the motion to stay
remand pending appeal. California ex rel. Harrison v. Express Scripts,
Inc., 139 F.4th 763, 773 (9th Cir. 2025).

3

10

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

removal statute. DeFiore v. SOC LLC, 85 F.4th 546, 552
(9th Cir. 2023) (citing 28 U.S.C. § 1447(d)). This Court
reviews de novo a district court’s decision to remand a case.
Id.
III.
The district court properly determined that the People’s
disclaimer eliminated Defendants’ basis for federal officer
removal and remanded the case. The Supreme Court’s
decision in Royal Canin U. S. A., Inc. v. Wullschleger, issued
during the pendency of this appeal, reinforces the district
court’s conclusion. 604 U.S. 22, 28 (2025). “‘If at any time
before final judgment it appears that the district court lacks
subject matter jurisdiction,’ the case must be ‘remanded’ to
state court.” Id. (quoting 28 U.S.C. § 1447(c)) (citation
modified). 4 Plaintiff, as “the master of the complaint”
excised the basis for federal jurisdiction with its disclaimer,
which made remand necessary.
Id. at 35 (quoting
Caterpillar Inc. v. Williams, 482 U.S. 386, 398–99 (1987)).
Federal courts across the country have frequently recognized
disclaimers, such as the one here, as a mechanism available
to plaintiffs who wish to limit their complaints and avoid
federal jurisdiction. See Gov’t of Puerto Rico v. Express

Defendants originally argued that the district court should have retained
jurisdiction because Plaintiff’s complaint at the time of removal (i.e.
prior to the inclusion of the disclaimer) at least satisfied the “relating to”
component of the federal officer removal statute. But Defendants
withdrew that argument after the Supreme Court decided Royal Canin
and clarified that when a plaintiff amends her complaint to delete the
only claims that enabled removal to federal court, the federal court loses
supplemental jurisdiction and the case must be remanded to state court.
604 U.S. at 25–26. Therefore, we only review arguments based on
Plaintiff’s amended complaint, which includes the disclaimer.
4

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

11

Scripts, Inc., 119 F.4th 174, 186–87 (1st Cir. 2024)
(surveying cases).
With the disclaimer, Defendants cannot satisfy the causal
nexus prong of the federal officer removal statute. In other
words, Plaintiff’s effective disclaimer prevents Defendants
from demonstrating that Plaintiff’s claims are causally
related to any actions Defendants allege were taken under
federal direction, as required by 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1).
Defendants stress that the Court must credit Defendants’
“theory of the case” when “assessing whether a causal
connection exists” for the purposes of federal officer
removal. Leite v. Crane Co., 749 F.3d 1117, 1124 (9th Cir.
2014). But the Court need not credit Defendants’ incorrect
interpretation of the elements of California public nuisance
law nor their implausible reading of Plaintiff’s amended
complaint. Defendants’ theory of the case––specifically that
the “community-wide nature of Plaintiff’s public nuisance
claim cannot be reconciled with Plaintiff’s purported
disclaimer of certain aspects of those same claims,” Defs’
Opening Br. 33––is not supported by the text of the public
nuisance statute nor the caselaw interpreting it. See Leite,
749 F.3d at 1121 (equating the standard for challenging the
existence of removal jurisdiction with the standard for
making a viable motion to dismiss under Federal Rule of
Civil Procedure 12(b)(1)).
Furthermore, Defendants’ arguments that Plaintiff’s
claims, despite the disclaimer, still satisfy the federal officer
removal statute’s “relating to” element when analyzed under
the “causal nexus” prong are unavailing. See DeFiore, 85
F.4th at 557 n.6. Defendants’ notice of removal does not
demonstrate that their opioids business activity on behalf of
non-federal clients was taken under the direction of a federal
officer, nor that any business activity allegedly directed by a

12

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

federal officer causally related to the conduct charged in
Plaintiff’s amended complaint. And unlike the conduct at
issue in the cases Defendants offer, the actions Defendants
took in relation to their federal and non-federal clients were
not inextricably intertwined. Accordingly, the district court
properly remanded this case. 5
A.
Two overarching maxims recently reaffirmed by the
Supreme Court in Royal Canin guide our approach to this
case. First, federal courts are courts of limited jurisdiction
and “[w]hen they do not have (or no longer have)
authorization to resolve a suit, they must hand it over.” 604
U.S. at 26, 28. This principle applies equally in the context
of the federal officer removal. Even though the removal
statute must be “liberally construed,” Colorado v. Symes,
286 U.S. 510, 517 (1932), its “broad language is not
limitless,” Watson v. Philip Morris Cos., 551 U.S. 142, 147
(2007). “[A] liberal construction nonetheless can find limits
in a text’s language, context, history, and purposes.” Id.
Second, a plaintiff, as master of the complaint, “gets to
determine which substantive claims to bring against which
defendants . . . [to] establish—or not—the basis for a federal
court’s subject-matter jurisdiction.” Royal Canin, 604 U.S.
Further supporting remand, the California superior court presiding over
this matter has already indicated its intent to hold the People to their
disclaimer. In a footnote to its order overruling Defendants’ demurrer,
the court stated that “[i]f Plaintiff tries to renege in the future, the Court
would be inclined to enforce the disclaimer,” through judicial estoppel.
People of the State of California v. Express Scripts, Inc., et al., No.
23STCV20886, at 18 n.5 (Cal. Super. Ct. Dec. 17, 2024). This shows
that California courts are holding Plaintiff to its word and protecting
Defendants’ rights.

5

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

13

at 35; see also Caterpillar, 482 U.S. at 392; Merrell Dow
Pharms. Inc. v. Thompson, 478 U.S. 804, 809 n.6 (1986)
(“Jurisdiction may not be sustained on a theory that the
plaintiff has not advanced.”); Great N. Ry. Co. v. Alexander,
246 U.S. 276, 282 (1918) (“[T]he plaintiff may by the
allegations of his complaint determine the status with respect
to removability of a case . . . .”). Therefore, “[w]hen a
plaintiff, after removal, cuts out all her federal-law claims,
federal-question jurisdiction dissolves. And. . .supplemental
jurisdiction over the residual state claims disappears as
well.” Royal Canin, 604 U.S. at 54–55.
We are also guided by the analytical framework of the
federal officer removal statute. Section 1442(a)(1) permits
a “person” to remove “[a] civil action . . . that is commenced
in a State court and that is against” that person if that person
is an “officer (or any person acting under that officer) of the
United States or of any agency thereof” and is sued “in an
official or individual capacity, for or relating to any act under
color of such office.” 28 U.S.C. § 1442(a)(1) (citation
modified). To satisfy this requirement, a removing private
entity bears the burden of showing that “(a) it is a ‘person’
within the meaning of the statute; (b) there is a causal nexus
between its actions, taken pursuant to a federal officer’s
directions, and plaintiff’s claims; and (c) it can assert a
‘colorable federal defense.’” Goncalves ex rel. Goncalves v.
Rady Child.’s Hosp. San Diego, 865 F.3d 1237, 1244 (9th
Cir. 2017) (quoting Durham v. Lockheed Martin Corp., 445
F.3d 1247, 1251 (9th Cir. 2006)). 6 To prove the causal
A “person” includes a corporation and a limited liability company, such
as Defendants here. Goncalves, 865 F.3d at 1244.

6

Defendants assert that they could allege colorable federal contractor
and preemption defenses, but do not explain any further in their briefing.

14

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

nexus prong, Defendants must demonstrate two subsidiary
requirements: (1) that they were acting under a federal
officer in performing some act under color of federal office,
and (2) that such action is causally connected with Plaintiff’s
claims against them. DeFiore, 85 F.4th at 554 (quoting
Cnty. of San Mateo, 32 F.4th at 755; citing Goncalves, 865
F.3d at 1244–50) (quotation marks omitted). “The purpose
of the federal officer removal statute is ‘to ensure a federal
forum in any case where a federal official is entitled to raise
a defense arising out of his duties.’” Goncalves, 865 F.3d at
1244 (quoting Arizona v. Manypenny, 451 U.S. 232, 241
(1981)).
Congress amended § 1442(a)(1) in 2011 adding the
clause, “or relating to,” to the statute so that removal is
authorized if the state court suit is one “for or relating to any
act under color of such office.” See Removal Clarification
Act of 2011, Pub. L. No. 112-51, § 2(b)(2), 125 Stat. 545,
545 (2011) (emphasis added); see also Goncalves, 865 F.3d
at 1250. Congress intended for this amendment to broaden
the application of the federal officer removal statute.
Goncalves, 865 F.3d at 1250. Courts have interpreted
“relating to” as meaning “in association with or connection
with” the charged conduct in a plaintiff’s complaint. Puerto
Rico, 119 F.4th at 186 (quoting Morales v. Trans World
Airlines, Inc., 504 U.S. 374, 383–84 (1992)). In this circuit,
the “causal nexus” analysis “incorporat[es] the ‘connected
or associated with’ standard reflected in Congress’s 2011
amendment and the Supreme Court’s decisions.” DeFiore,
85 F.4th at 557 n.6 (citing Goncalves, 865 F.3d at 1244–45).
Because Defendants have not satisfied their burden of showing a causal
nexus, we do not address whether Defendants’ alleged federal defenses
are colorable.

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

15

With this background in mind, we uphold the validity of
Plaintiff’s disclaimer and conclude that Defendants’ theory
of the case is insufficient to trigger federal officer removal.
B.
Plaintiff here mounts a facial challenge to Defendants’
notice of removal. Leite v. Crane Co. guides our evaluation
of facial challenges to removal jurisdiction in the federal
officer removal context. 749 F.3d at 1121. We explained in
Leite that courts adjudicating whether defendants have
established subject matter jurisdiction under § 1442(a)(1)
should look to the “procedurally analogous context” of
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(1). 749 F.3d at 1121.
“To remove a case from a state court to a federal court, a
defendant must file in the federal forum a notice of removal
‘containing a short and plain statement of the grounds for
removal.’” Dart Cherokee Basin Operating Co., LLC. v.
Owens, 574 U.S. 81, 83 (2014) (quoting 28 U.S.C.
§ 1446(a)). Because that “short and plain statement”
requirement of the removal statute “tracks the general
pleading requirement stated in Rule 8(a) of the Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure,” the same pleading standards applicable
to complaints under Rule 8 also apply to the jurisdictional
allegations in a notice of removal. Id. at 87. Accordingly,
the removal notice “must allege facts, not mere legal
conclusions, in compliance with the pleading standards
established by Bell Atlantic Corp. v. Twombly, 550 U.S. 544
(2007), and Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662 (2009).” Leite,
749 F.3d at 1121. Where, as here, Plaintiff’s motion to
remand facially challenges the jurisdictional validity of a
removal notice and does not rely on an evidentiary showing,
the remand motion is resolved by assessing whether the
jurisdictional allegations in the removal notice meet the

16

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

pleading standards that courts normally apply when deciding
a “motion to dismiss under Rule 12(b)(6).” 7 Id.
The analogy to the Rule 12(b)(6) context, however, has
some caveats. When a court is adjudicating a Rule 12(b)(6)
motion to dismiss, it only has the allegations in the plaintiff’s
complaint that it must take as true. See Pride v. Correa, 719
F.3d 1130, 1133 (9th Cir. 2013). When a court adjudicates
a motion to remand in the federal officer removal context,
by contrast, it has to both “credit the defendants’ theory of
the case” as laid out in the notice of removal and supporting
documentation, Leite, 749 F.3d at 1124, while also taking the
allegations in plaintiff’s complaint as true. In other words,
defendants’ theory of the case must be understood in relation
to the allegations contained in the plaintiff’s complaint. In
the process of crediting defendants’ theory of the case, a
court is not free to disregard or rewrite the allegations
plaintiff has chosen to include in its complaint. See Royal
Canin, 604 U.S. at 35 (emphasizing that a plaintiff “gets to
determine which substantive claims to bring against which
defendants” to establish or eliminate the basis for a federal
court’s subject matter jurisdiction).
Plaintiff’s disclaimer here clearly and definitively
limited its claims and the recovery it seeks to Defendants’
work on behalf of its non-federal clients. We arrive at this
conclusion after surveying cases across the country
involving permissible and impermissible disclaimers. These
While the parties did not specify whether Plaintiff mounted a facial or
factual attack on Defendants’ notice of removal, it is clear from the
briefing that Plaintiff contests the plausibility of Defendants’ theory of
the case as opposed to the accuracy of Defendants’ factual submissions.
Accordingly, we construe Plaintiff’s challenge to Defendants’ removal
as a facial attack.
7

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

17

federal court decisions have begun to articulate a disclaimer
doctrine in the federal officer removal context. Puerto Rico,
119 F.4th at 186. To prevent a defendant from removing
under the federal officer removal statute, plaintiffs may
disclaim in their complaint claims that would serve as the
basis for removal. See St. Charles Surgical Hosp., LLC v.
La. Health Serv. & Indem. Co., 990 F.3d 447, 451 (5th Cir.
2021). Disclaimer doctrine generally distinguishes between
two categories of § 1442(a)(1) disclaimers: (1) “express
disclaimers of the claims that serve as the grounds for
removal”; and (2) “artful pleading for purposes of
circumventing federal officer jurisdiction.” Puerto Rico,
119 F.4th at 187 (quoting Dougherty v. A O Smith Corp., No.
13-1972, 2014 WL 3542243, at *10 (D. Del. July 16, 2014));
see St. Charles Surgical Hosp., 990 F.3d at 451. The former
is permissible while the latter is not.
To defeat removal, an express disclaimer must explicitly
renounce claims upon which federal officer removal was
based. Puerto Rico, 119 F.4th at 187. If a plaintiff
renounces the portions of its claims that implicate actions
taken pursuant to or in relation to directions from a federal
officer, then a defendant is not entitled to “a federal forum”
in which “to raise a defense arising out of his official duties.”
Manypenny, 451 U.S. at 241. Defendants cannot assert a
defense to claims, “that simply do not exist.” Batchelor v.
Am. Optical Corp., 185 F. Supp. 3d 1358, 1364–65 (S.D.
Fla. 2016) (citation modified); see also Puerto Rico, 119
F.4th at 187. In this sense, permissible express disclaimers
can do the work of rendering a federal defense moot.
Impermissible disclaimers are those that amount to
“mere artful pleading” and come in different types. Puerto
Rico, 119 F.4th at 187 (citation modified). A “circular”
disclaimer is one that tries to broadly disclaim the question

18

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

of causal nexus at the core of the federal officer removal
inquiry. Marley v. Elliot Turbomachinery Co., 545 F. Supp.
2d 1266, 1274–75 (S.D. Fla. 2008). For example, the
circular disclaimer in Marley read:
Every claim arising under the Constitution,
treaties, or laws of the United States is
expressly disclaimed (including any claim
arising from an act or omission on a federal
enclave, or any federal office of the U.S. or
agency or person acting under him occurring
under color of such office.)
Id. at 1274. The Marley disclaimer did not meaningfully
excise any factual basis or waive any legal grounds for
federal officer removal jurisdiction. Id. Instead, it tried in a
circular manner to disclaim the very legal question central to
the federal officer removal inquiry in the case.
Another type of impermissible disclaimer can be
understood as an impossible disclaimer. This type of
disclaimer purports to disavow claims based on a
defendant’s acts or omissions that make up the entirety of
plaintiff’s case or a core component of the plaintiff’s claims.
See, e.g., Batchelor, 185 F. Supp. 3d at 1363; see Puerto
Rico, 119 F.4th at 188. For example, in In re Asbestos
Products Liability Litigation (No. VI), plaintiffs tried to
disclaim any claims “caused by the acts or omissions of
defendants committed at the specific and proven direction of
an officer of the United States government acting in his
official capacity.” 770 F. Supp. 2d 736, 740 (E.D. Pa. 2011).
But the core of the plaintiffs’ claim against the defendant
arose “from exposure on U.S. Naval ships at U.S. Naval
shipyards, for which Defendant has a ‘colorable’ federal

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

19

defense,” as described by various declarations proffered by
the defendant. Id. at 742. Therefore, the disclaimer would
have vitiated the plaintiffs’ entire claim against the
defendant, making the claim impossible.
In the case before us, Plaintiff’s disclaimer explicitly
renounces claims upon which federal officer removal was
alleged. See Batchelor, 185 F. Supp. 3d at 1363–64. The
disclaimer makes clear that Plaintiff is not challenging the
actions of Defendants taken in relation to their federal clients
by specifically excluding Defendants’ provision of PBM or
mail order pharmacy services pursuant to all federal
contracts. The disclaimer excludes any challenge to the
creation and administration of formularies for all federal
clients. And the disclaimer explicitly waives any request for
abatement relief, or any other form of relief for Defendants’
actions taken pursuant to their federal contracts. The
disclaimer is precise and comprehensive in limiting all
factual and legal bases for recovery based on Defendants’
federal client work. It is therefore a permissible disclaimer
under the disclaimer doctrine.
Defendants argue that the “community-wide nature of
Plaintiff’s public nuisance claim cannot be reconciled with
Plaintiff’s purported disclaimer of certain aspects of those
same claims.” Defs’ Opening Br. 33. But Defendants
misread the text of the public nuisance statute, misinterpret
the public nuisance caselaw, and advance an implausible
reading of Plaintiff’s amended complaint. We discuss these
points below.
Defendants argue that the California Supreme Court has
described a public nuisance as a violation of a “public right”
that is “collective in nature,” People ex rel. Gallo v. Acuna,
929 P.2d 596, 604 (Cal. 1997), and therefore must affect an

20

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

entire community. Defendants next argue, without citing
caselaw, that as “a matter of law and common sense, a claim
that requires that all members of a community be affected
cannot be narrowed by excluding some members of that
community.” Defs’ Opening Br. 33 (emphasis in original).
Under this interpretation of public nuisance, Plaintiff’s
disclaimer limiting its claims only to the non-federal market
would be a type of impossible disclaimer. But Defendants
misunderstand the elements required to prove a public
nuisance claim in California and advance an implausible
reading of Plaintiff’s amended complaint.
California Civil Code section 3479 defines a nuisance as
“[a]nything which is injurious to health, including, but not
limited to, the illegal sale of controlled substances, . . . so as
to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or
property.” Cal. Civ. Code § 3479. Section 3480, in turn,
states that a “public nuisance is one which affects at the same
time an entire community or neighborhood, or any
considerable number of persons . . . .” Cal. Civ. Code
§ 3480. The statute does not define what constitutes “an
entire community,” but includes within its definition “any
considerable number of persons.” Id. California courts
require that a public nuisance cause of action be “established
by proof that a defendant knowingly created or assisted in
the creation of a substantial and unreasonable interference
with a public right.” People v. ConAgra Grocery Prods. Co.,
227 Cal. Rptr. 3d 499, 525 (Cal. Ct. App. 2017).
Defendants argue that the public nuisance statute
requires a “community-wide” analysis, which somehow
necessitates including all of Defendants’ actions for both
private and federal entities. This novel interpretation of
California public nuisance law is not supported by the text
of the statute nor caselaw. Cal. Civil Code § 3480 makes

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

21

explicit that a public nuisance need not affect all members of
a community; it is sufficient if it affects “any considerable
number of persons.” Cal. Civil Code § 3480. Plaintiff can
therefore allege public nuisance claims solely against
Defendants’ non-federal business activity and still plausibly
plead the required elements of the public nuisance statute.
California’s public nuisance statute does not require that
a plaintiff challenge the entire business practice of a
corporation that has allegedly contributed to a public
nuisance. Instead, a plaintiff need only proffer substantial
evidence to sustain a finding of an unreasonable interference
with a public right. See ConAgra Grocery Prods., 227 Cal.
Rptr. 3d at 526. Many players can contribute to a public
nuisance and a plaintiff is not required by law to sue them
all. Tellingly, Defendants cite neither statutory text nor
caselaw to support their interpretation.
By contrast, caselaw interpreting the California public
nuisance statute supports the People’s theory of the case as
pled in the amended complaint. The People have alleged
facts that Defendants’ non-federal business activity alone
was “a substantial factor in bringing about” the public
nuisance of the opioid epidemic in Los Angeles County. See
id. at 543. “The substantial factor standard is a relatively
broad one, requiring only that the contribution of the
individual cause be more than negligible or theoretical.”
Rutherford v. Owens-Illinois, Inc., 941 P.2d 1203, 1220
(Cal. 1997). “[A] force which plays only an infinitesimal or
theoretical part in bringing about injury, damage, or loss is
not a substantial factor, but a very minor force that does
cause harm is a substantial factor.” Bockrath v. Aldrich
Chem. Co., Inc., 980 P.2d 398, 403–04 (Cal. 1999) (internal
quotation marks and citation omitted). “[C]ircumstantial
evidence of sufficient substantiality from which reasonable

22

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

inferences can be drawn will support a finding of causation
in fact.” City of Modesto v. Dow Chem. Co., 227 Cal. Rptr.
3d 764, 781 (Cal. Ct. App. 2018) (internal quotation marks
and citation omitted).
Defendants try to equate Plaintiff’s disclaimer to the type
of artful pleading decried by courts in other cases. See, e.g.,
St. Charles, 990 F.3d at 451; Siders v. 20th Cent. Glove
Corp. of Tex., 2016 WL 1733473, at *4 (S.D. W. Va. Apr.
29, 2016). The Fifth Circuit in St. Charles warned that the
plaintiff’s disclaimer could be understood as circular. St.
Charles, 990 F.3d at 451. The plaintiff there waived “relief
governed by or available pursuant to . . . any claims
involving a federal officer.” Id. (alteration in original).
Though the Fifth Circuit remanded the case to the district
court to determine whether the disclaimer was valid in the
first instance, the plaintiffs’ disclaimer might have amounted
to an attempt to disclaim the very legal question central to
the federal officer removal inquiry in the case. It was not
clear that the plaintiff had expressly and permissibly
disclaimed the factual and legal bases for its claims against
the defendant and therefore eliminated federal officer
removal jurisdiction. Id. Plaintiff’s disclaimer here, by
contrast, expressly disclaims all factual and legal bases for
claims against Defendants’ related to their federal work, and
therefore does not suffer from circularity in its construction.
Defendants also cite Baker v. Atlantic Richfield Co., 962
F.3d 937, 939–40, 945 n.3 (7th Cir. 2020), which dealt with
an impossible disclaimer. There, plaintiffs suing various
manufacturers for lead and arsenic contamination tried to
disclaim any challenges to the production of Freon-12,
which the manufacturers allegedly produced under the
direction of the government. Id. But the defendants
proffered evidence that Freon-12 production created waste

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

23

streams that contained lead and arsenic. Id. Therefore, the
plaintiffs’ attempt to disclaim challenges to Freon-12
production would have made their claims relating to lead and
arsenic contamination impossible. Plaintiff here did not try
to artfully plead its way out of federal jurisdiction in a
manner that made its claims impossible. Plaintiff explicitly
released Defendants from all liability that might have
stemmed from work for federal agencies. As described
above, Plaintiff’s lawsuit can still proceed against
Defendants for their non-federal work.
In sum, if, and only if, Plaintiff can proffer sufficient
evidence that Defendants’ non-federal business activities
substantially contributed to the opioid epidemic in Los
Angeles County could a court find Defendants liable. See
City & Cnty. of San Francisco v. Purdue Pharma L.P., 620
F. Supp. 3d 936, 1004 (N.D. Cal. 2022). Even with the
disclaimer in its amended complaint, Plaintiff could still
theoretically prove that Defendants’ business impacts from
its non-federal clients have substantially contributed to the
opioid epidemic across all of Los Angeles County. Success
on this claim will be a question of volume and sufficiency of
the evidence. Only if Plaintiff succeeds in proving that
Defendants are liable for creating a public nuisance can the
state court adjudicate the arguments and evidence
concerning abatement—i.e. to what extent Defendants must
abate any public nuisance caused by their non-federal
business activities alone.
C.
Defendants next argue that even if Plaintiff’s disclaimer
is valid, Defendants’ work for federal agencies is still
“related to” their work on behalf of their non-federal clients
such that federal officer removal subject matter jurisdiction

24

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

should attach. As discussed above, the “relating to” element
of the federal officer removal statute is analyzed under the
causal nexus prong. DeFiore, 85 F.4th at 557 n.6;
Goncalves, 865 F.3d at 1244–45. To establish such a causal
nexus, Defendants must demonstrate two subsidiary
requirements: (1) that they were acting under a federal
officer in performing some act under color of federal office,
and (2) that such action is causally connected with Plaintiff’s
claims against them. DeFiore, 85 F.4th at 554 (quoting Cnty
of San Mateo, 32 F.4th at 755; citing Goncalves, 865 F.3d at
1244–50) (quotation marks omitted).
To support their claim of relatedness, Defendants
advance a variety of theories. They argue that they provide
“indistinguishable services” to their federal and non-federal
clients. Defendants also cite to their retail pharmacy
agreements, which are negotiated without distinction
between federal and non-federal commercial clients. See
Jenkins Decl. Defendants argue that they develop their
formularies for the benefit of all clients and Plaintiff’s
challenge to Defendants’ opioid formulary placement for
non-federal clients therefore relates to activity Defendants
took at the direction of federal clients. Lastly, Defendants
argue that the harms alleged in Plaintiff’s amended
complaint are impossible to disentangle as between their
federal and non-federal work, and that the possibility of a
state court having to apportion those harms should trigger
the federal officer removal statute. Defendants’ arguments
fail to satisfy the causal nexus prong, even when analyzed
under the more relaxed “relating to” standard.
1.
To begin, Defendants’ theory of the case does not satisfy
the “acting under” subsidiary requirement of the causal

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

25

nexus prong because Defendants do not allege that the
federal government directed their combined retail pharmacy
negotiations or formulary placement for non-federal clients.
DeFiore, 85 F.4th at 554. Defendants have not shown how
they took actions on behalf of their non-federal client base
under the “subjection, guidance, or control” of a federal
officer to help “fulfill . . . basic governmental tasks.”
Goncalves, 865 F.3d at 1245 (quoting Watson, 551 U.S. at
151–53) (internal quotation marks omitted); DeFiore, 85
F.4th at 554.
Defendants stress that their contracts with the federal
government required them to “maintain a nationwide retail
pharmacy network” and administer formulary services for
the federal agencies. See Jenkins Decl. But nothing in
Defendants’ notice of removal, briefing, or Jenkins
Declaration specifies how or if a federal officer directed
Defendants to negotiate their retail pharmacy agreements in
any relevant way that affected Defendants’ conduct in the
non-federal market challenged in Plaintiff’s amended
complaint. Goncalves, 865 F.3d at 1244–45. Nor do
Defendants argue that a federal officer directed them to
administer formularies for non-federal clients in a manner
causally connected to Plaintiff’s charged conduct. “Thus,
the ‘central issue’ in the causal nexus analysis—whether a
federal officer directed the defendant to take the action
challenged—is unmet.” Lake v. Ohana Mil. Cmtys., LLC,
14 F.4th 993, 1005 (9th Cir. 2021) (quoting Riggs v. Airbus
Helicopters, Inc., 939 F.3d 981, 987 (9th Cir. 2019)).
Even if Defendants could satisfy the “acting under”
subsidiary requirement of the causal nexus analysis, their
theory also fails the “causal connection” subsidiary
requirement. See DeFiore, 85 F.4th at 554. Defendants
stress that they administer the same type of formularies and

26

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

provide indistinguishable retail pharmacy services for the
benefit of all their clients. But Defendants’ theory of the
case does not plausibly demonstrate how the retail pharmacy
network and formulary services provided for the benefit of
all clients is causally related to Plaintiff’s charged conduct
limited to the non-federal market. Just because Defendants
engaged in the same type of work for federal and non-federal
clients does not mean that Defendants’ work for federal
clients is causally related to the Plaintiff’s charged conduct
in the non-federal market. Nor is federal and non-federal
work indivisible. In other words, Defendants do not
plausibly allege how, absent the contracts with the federal
government, Defendants would have negotiated the retail
pharmacy agreements or administered formularies for their
non-federal clients in any materially different way.
In sum, Defendants have not shown that their challenged
conduct in the non-federal market “occurred because of what
they were asked to do by the Government.” Goncalves, 865
F.3d at 1245 (internal citation and quotation marks omitted)
(emphasis in original). Nor do Defendants show that their
actions in the non-federal market “which gave rise to
[Plaintiff’s] claims resulted from their work for [the federal
government].” DeFiore, 85 F.4th at 557 (citing Jefferson
Cnty. v. Acker, 527 U.S. 423, 433 (1999)). Accordingly,
Defendants have not shown that their work for their nonfederal clients satisfied the causal nexus prong of the federal
officer removal statute.
2.
Defendants’ reliance on caselaw from other circuits does
not support their position. First, the insulin-pricing cases
Defendants cite differ both factually and legally from
Plaintiff’s public nuisance claims here. Plaintiff’s public

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

27

nuisance claims do not challenge the single negotiated price
of a drug via deceptive business practices and unfair
competition law claims such as the plaintiffs in the insulin
pricing cases.
Second, neither Defendants’ business
practices nor the alleged harms flowing from those business
practices are inextricably intertwined or impossible to
disentangle as Defendants allege. In support of their
arguments on this point, Defendants highlighted after oral
argument an opinion from the Fourth Circuit, Maryland v.
3M Company, 130 F.4th 380 (4th Cir. 2025). We conclude
that 3M is distinguishable from this case and unpersuasive.
We discuss these points in more depth below.
a.
The primary insulin pricing case Defendants rely on in
support of their position is Puerto Rico, 119 F.4th 174.
Assuming without deciding that the reasoning in Puerto Rico
is correct and taking the factual allegations as described in
the opinion as true, we conclude the case is analytically
distinct from the one here and therefore inapplicable.
In Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico sued
PBM defendants for allegedly scheming “to unlawfully
inflate insulin prices through rebate negotiations and price
setting.” Id. at 179. This, Puerto Rico alleged, violated the
Puerto Rican Fair Competition Act. Id. at 181. Puerto Rico
included a disclaimer in its complaint that specified it was
“not seeking relief relating to any federal program . . . or any
contract related to a federal program.” Id. The defendants
removed to federal court pursuant to the federal officer
removal statute and the plaintiff moved to remand. Id. at
183–84.
The defendants in the case premised removal on the
theory that their PBM services for federal clients were

28

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

inextricably intertwined with its PBM services for private
entities. Id. at 189. Puerto Rico’s consumer protection and
deceptive business practices claims challenged the price of
insulin that was allegedly decided through a negotiation that
included all of the defendants’ federal and non-federal
clients combined. Id. at 191. Specifically, defendants’
theory of the case was that they negotiated the price of
insulin for federal and non-federal plans “in one fell swoop.”
Id. at 191. And Puerto Rico sought damages against the
defendants for the allegedly inflated price of insulin that was
set during this “one negotiation.” Id. at 192 (emphasis in
original). The defendants averred that they “performed the
challenged conduct jointly for private parties and the federal
government,” which was “indivisible conduct under a
federal officer’s authority.” Id. Therefore, the First Circuit
determined that the defendants satisfied the federal officer
removal statute and that the plaintiffs’ disclaimer was
essentially impossible because the challenged price of
insulin was borne out of a single negotiation that inextricably
intertwined the defendants’ federal and non-federal books of
business. Id. at 180.
Here, Plaintiff’s public nuisance claim and disclaimer
make this case factually and legally distinct. Plaintiff is
bringing a public nuisance claim that does not challenge the
price of opioid drugs, but the impact of Defendants’ nonfederal opioid business practices on Los Angeles County.
Plaintiff’s challenged conduct is not the result of a single
negotiation, but Defendants’ business practices taken on
behalf of non-federal clients that allegedly contributed to the
public nuisance of the opioid epidemic across Los Angeles
County. While Plaintiff’s amended complaint alleges that
Defendants’ placement of opioids on the formularies formed
part of the business practices that substantially contributed

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

29

to the opioid epidemic, Defendants do not plausibly allege
that formulary placement for federal and non-federal clients
was inextricably intertwined. On the contrary, Defendants’
federal and non-federal work is divisible and can be
analyzed independently. 8
Moreover, Defendants’ declarations and submissions in
support of their notice of removal do not allege that
formulary negotiations done on behalf of all their nonfederal clients were done “under a federal officer’s
authority.” See id. Defendants simply allege that they
provide formulary services for the benefit of all their clients.
Defendants also cited Hawai’i ex rel. Lopez v. CaremarkPCS Health,
LLC, which was another insulin pricing case where the district court
initially credited one of the defendants’ theory of the case that insulin
rebate negotiations for federal and non-federal clients were inextricably
intertwined. No. CV 23-464 LEK-RT, 2024 WL 1907396, at *5-12 (D.
Haw. May 1, 2024). The district court initially rejected the plaintiff’s
disclaimer that attempted to limit the complaint to the non-federal market
as essentially impossible. Id. at *12. After oral argument in this case
before us, however, the CaremarkPCS district court issued an order
granting the plaintiff’s renewed motion to remand after the parties had
conducted jurisdictional discovery.
Hawai'i ex rel. Lopez v.
CaremarkPCS Health, L.L.C., No. CV 23-464 LEK-RT, 2025 WL
1218598, at *3 (D. Haw. Apr. 28, 2025). One of the defendants in
CaremarkPCS admitted that “no federal officer or federal agency has
directed that Rebate Negotiations applicable to Federal Health Benefits
Programs must be conducted simultaneously with Rebate Negotiations
applicable to Non-Federal Health Benefit Programs.” Id. The defendant
also testified that “no federal officer or federal agency has directed that
Rebate Negotiations applicable to Federal Health Benefit Programs must
be applied to Non-Federal Health Benefit Programs.” Id. Accordingly,
the CaremarkPCS district court determined that the defendants no longer
satisfied the causal nexus prong of the federal officer removal statute,
found the plaintiff’s amended disclaimer valid, and remanded the case.
Id. at *3, *11. Defendants here, therefore, can no longer rely on this case
for support.
8

30

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

See Jenkins Decl. Defendants’ theory of the case boils down
to the argument that they provided the same type of services
for federal and non-federal clients. But that is not enough to
demonstrate that Defendants’ actions for non-federal clients
were causally related to their work done under a federal
officer’s authority as required by the causal nexus prong of
the federal officer removal statute. 9
The impact of Defendants’ alleged contributions to the
Los Angeles opioid epidemic through their opioid
prescription dispensing practices on behalf of only nonfederal clients can, in theory, be proven and calculated at a
population level. California courts have repeatedly held that
public nuisance causation “may be predicated on reasonable
inferences drawn from circumstantial evidence.” City of
Modesto, 227 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 781 (quoting Smith v.
Lockheed Propulsion Co., 56 Cal. Rptr. 128, 134 (Cal. Ct.
App. 1967)). Further, “[d]irect proof of each link in a chain
of causation is not required.” Id. The insulin prices, by
contrast, were borne out of a single negotiation involving the
defendants’ inextricably intertwined federal and non-federal
books of business. 10
Counsel for Defendants at oral argument argued that Defendants
conduct rebate negotiations indivisibly between their federal and nonfederal clients, but neither Defendants’ notice of removal, briefing, or
the Jenkins Declaration references combined rebate negotiations nor
how they fit into Defendants’ theory of the case. Therefore, we deem
any arguments about rebates for the purposes of our federal officer
removal analysis waived.
9

The Puerto Rico opinion largely tracked the reasoning advanced by
Judge Ikuta in her concurrence in California v. CaremarkPCS Health
LLC, Nos. 23-55597, 23-55599, 2024 WL 3770326, at *1 (9th Cir. Aug.
13, 2024) (mem.), which involved a nearly identical lawsuit brought by
the State of California against many of the same defendants challenging

10

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

31

A description of how courts have evaluated public
nuisance claims in this context is instructive. The only
federal court in California to have ruled on public nuisance
claims against an opioid dispenser held that the “evidence
presented at trial support[ed] a reasonable inference that
Walgreens dispensed large volumes of illegitimate opioid
prescriptions and that it made the opioid epidemic in San
the price of insulin. The majority in Caremark held that Plaintiff’s
disclaimer there did not “explicitly release claims or possible recovery
from” key aspects of the defendants’ work for federal agencies.
Caremark, 2024 WL 3770326, at *1. Accordingly, the connection
between the defendants’ federal work and the plaintiff’s claims arguably
remained intact sufficient to satisfy the causal nexus element of the
federal officer removal statute. Id. The disclaimer in this case is much
more explicit, declaring that “Plaintiff does not seek declaratory relief,
injunctive relief, abatement relief, or any other relief for the conduct of
Defendants related to the provision of any services pursuant to contracts
with” any federal agency. Accordingly, Plaintiff here has avoided the
Caremark majority’s concerns by severing any causal nexus between
Defendants’ work for federal agencies and Plaintiff’s claims and
explicitly releasing claims and possible recovery from Defendants’ work
for federal agencies.
Judge Ikuta’s separate concurrence in Caremark concluded the
defendant’s federal and private sector books of business were
inextricably intertwined during negotiations over the price of insulin,
which is what Plaintiff’s claims challenged. “[I]f Caremark were liable
for negotiating rebates on behalf of private clients, it would necessarily
also be liable for negotiating rebates on behalf of the federal
government—because it is the same negotiation.” Id. at *2 (Ikuta, J.,
concurring). But for the federal entity book of business being included
in the negotiations, Judge Ikuta reasoned, the defendants would not have
been able to negotiate the price of insulin that they did. Accordingly, in
Judge Ikuta’s perspective, “no disclaimer, however worded, can help
California avoid a causal nexus between Caremark’s conduct on behalf
of the federal government and California’s claims.” Id. But as explained
in this section, this reasoning does not apply to the case before us.

32

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

Francisco worse than it otherwise would have been.”
Purdue Pharma L.P., 620 F. Supp. 3d at 1004. If Plaintiff
here can similarly proffer sufficient evidence of Defendants’
actions taken solely on behalf of their non-federal clients,
they could prove a similar public nuisance claim. This
defeats Defendants’ attempt to characterize its federal and
private businesses as inextricably intertwined for the
purposes of the public nuisance analysis.
It is true that, should this case reach the abatement phase,
there may be competing statistical analyses and calculations
proposed by opposing experts for the amount Defendants’
non-federal business practices allegedly contributed to the
opioid epidemic. But that is the type of dispute courts are
competent to preside over in any number of other mass tort
and public nuisance cases. The possibility of such analyses,
however, does not make this case akin to Puerto Rico, where
the First Circuit concluded that the defendant “conduct[ed]
one negotiation . . . simultaneously for private clients and
the federal government.” 119 F.4th at 192 (emphasis in
original). Therefore, the First Circuit determined that no
disclaimer could eliminate the basis for federal officer
removal jurisdiction. Id. This key factual distinction
between the two cases explains why a disclaimer here is
valid and why the Puerto Rico court concluded that the
disclaimer before it was invalid.
b.
Finally, contrary to Defendants’ arguments echoed in the
Fourth Circuit’s interpretation of the federal officer removal
statute in 3M, we conclude that Defendants’ work for federal
and non-federal business entities is not inextricably
intertwined nor “impossible to bifurcate.” 130 F.4th at 391.
We also determine that a state court calculating abatement

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

33

harms in this case would not trigger the federal officer
removal statute. Id. In sum, we reject Defendants’
arguments as an attempt to improperly expand the scope of
the federal officer removal statute.
Defendants argue that it is not possible to “disentangle”
Defendants’ work for federal officers from their work
relating to non-federal officers. Defendants also argue that,
upon remand, a state court would have to “disentangle” how
much of Defendants’ work is done on behalf of private
versus federal clients, which would function as adjudicating
the federal right. These arguments appear to mirror the
Fourth Circuit’s holding in 3M. But we conclude that neither
these arguments nor the reasoning in 3M are persuasive.
3M involved public nuisance claims brought by the
States of Maryland and South Carolina (“States”) against 3M
and other defendants originally in state court alleging that
firefighting foam 3M produced for both federal and nonfederal clients contaminated various waterways. 130 F.4th
at 385. The States also filed related lawsuits alleging that
3M’s non-foam products, which were not manufactured for
federal clients, similarly contaminated the same waterways.
Id. at 385‒86. The defendants removed both sets of cases.
The States included an express disclaimer in the non-foam
cases to try and limit the scope of their public nuisance
claims solely to contamination originating from non-foam
products. Id. at 386–87. This disclaimer resembled the one
Plaintiff here included in its amended complaint against
Defendants. The Fourth Circuit panel majority rejected
Maryland’s disclaimer because the defendants “plausibly
alleged” that the contamination from 3M’s foam and nonfoam products “intermingled to the point that it is impossible
to identify their source.” Id. at 391. Accordingly, the Fourth

34

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

Circuit held that the federal officer removal statute applied.
Id. at 392.
The 3M panel majority’s reasoning is not persuasive nor
applicable in the case before us. We conclude it is not
“impossible” to separate out the volume of public nuisance
harms originating from federal and non-federal sources in
both 3M and our case. See id. at 395–96 (Floyd, J.,
dissenting). Looking to other cases, it could be possible to
produce statistical models that can accurately calculate
proportions of tortious harms attributable to federal versus
non-federal sources via linear regression analyses. See, e.g.,
Olean Wholesale Grocery Coop., Inc. v. Bumble Bee Foods
LLC, 31 F.4th 651, 671 (9th Cir. 2022) (en banc). An
abatement model could use linear regression analysis of the
type used in Bumble Bee Foods to determine the populationlevel impact of Defendants’ alleged harms caused by their
work in the non-federal market only, which courts using
existing adversarial rules of procedure are competent to
adjudicate.
See id.
Moreover, comparative fault
calculations are of the type that courts regularly adjudicate
in the tort context. Though perhaps difficult, courts
frequently preside over complex damages calculations in the
mass tort context with the guidance of expert reports that
must undergo scrutiny through the Daubert and crossexamination processes.
Even if 3M were correct on its unique facts, the facts
before us are different. Unlike pollution discharged into a
waterway in which the source of the contaminant might be
difficult to identify, controlled substances such as opioids
are highly regulated by the Controlled Substances Act and
Drug Enforcement Administration which require a “closed
system of distribution” for controlled substances. Purdue
Pharma L.P., 620 F. Supp. 3d at 950–51. Therefore, it

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

35

appears highly plausible that opioid prescriptions dispensed
are readily traceable back to each entity as pharmacies must
retain extensive records of all prescriptions they dispense by
law. See id. Courts might use such a method to determine
the origins of the alleged public nuisance harm derived from
work for non-federal clients and then calculate how much
abatement liability each defendant would have to contribute
as a result.
Defendants’ next argument about state court’s
apportionment of the abatement harms triggering the federal
officer removal statute relies on claims that do not exist.
Plaintiff here, like the States in 3M, expressly disclaimed any
reliance on claims related to work for federal officers.
Therefore, Plaintiff has unilaterally narrowed its amended
complaint to excise all charged conduct related to work for
federal officers and any relief that could flow from that.
Defendants, accordingly, cannot assert a defense to claims
“that simply do not exist.” Batchelor, 185 F. Supp. 3d at
1364–65; see also Puerto Rico, 119 F.4th at 187. And just
because a state court might have to calculate abatement for
a public nuisance that might have some contribution from
separate actions not charged in the complaint taken at the
behest of federal officials, that is not enough to trigger the
federal officer removal statute.
Defendants’ theory would also create analytical
incongruities for claims where different entities create the
same type of harms that intermingle in the world. For
example, say Company A produces a product at the direction
of the federal government, whereas Company B produces
that same product pursuant to a contract with a private entity
with no relation to the federal government. Company A’s
and Company B’s products both intermingle in a river and
pollute it. A plaintiff only wishes to sue Company B in state

36

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

court on state law causes of action. Company B would have
no grounds to remove the case to federal court pursuant to
the federal officer removal statute because there would be no
causal nexus between its actions and any federal officer, nor
could Company B allege any colorable federal defense.
Therefore, if the plaintiff prevailed against Company B, the
state court would have to adjudicate how much pollution is
attributable to Company B, despite the presence of the same
type of pollution from Company A’s identical federal
product intermingled in the river. Nevertheless, it is not
“impossible” for the state court to competently engage in this
type of calculation, nor is there a basis for Company B to
invoke the federal officer removal statute.
An analogous situation arises here. Plaintiff has only
sued Defendants for the part of their business dealing with
non-federal entities. Defendants’ theory of the case has not
demonstrated that the Defendants’ actions taken pursuant to
contracts with the federal government satisfy the causal
nexus prong of the federal officer removal statute, even
under the “relating to” standard. Therefore, the mere fact
that Defendants’ alleged public nuisance harms stem from
the same type of federal and non-federal work and
intermingled in the world is insufficient to enable federal
officer removal. To argue that it is “impossible” for a state
court to apportion those harms without infringing federal
rights does not apply in the scenario before us any more than
it would apply in the hypothetical scenario described above.
*

*

*

In light of Plaintiff’s disclaimer, Defendants have not
alleged enough to benefit from the federal officer removal
statute. California public nuisance law does not require that
Plaintiff include claims against Defendants for their federal

PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CALIFORNIA V. EXPRESS SCRIPTS

37

agency work. Plaintiff, as “master of the claim” may avoid
federal jurisdiction by limiting its claims to avoid triggering
federal officer removal jurisdiction. See Caterpillar, 482
U.S. at 392. Moreover, Defendants’ theory of the case does
not plausibly satisfy the causal nexus prong’s “relating to”
element in the federal officer removal statute. Actions
Defendants took on behalf of their non-federal clients were
not done at the direction of or in relation to orders from
federal officials. Finally, Defendants’ federal and nonfederal work is divisible and can be analyzed independently
such that any intermingling of the alleged public nuisance
harms does not implicate the federal officer removal statute.
We therefore hold that remand in this case was appropriate.
AFFIRMED.

