FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
MARK COX; ESTATE OF SUSAN
A COX, by and through Personal
Representative Mark Cox; SUSAN
A. COX,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER;
PATRICIA N. MARCIANO,
MD; TODD BLEDSOE, PA-C,

No. 24-1947
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00031MKD
ORDER AND
AMENDED
OPINION

Defendants - Appellees,
and
UNKNOWN PARTIES, named
“Others TBD”,
Defendant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Eastern District of Washington
Mary K. Dimke, District Judge, Presiding

2

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

Argued and Submitted April 3, 2025
Portland, Oregon
Filed February 11, 2026
Amended March 16, 2026
Before: Jay S. Bybee and Danielle J. Forrest, Circuit
Judges, and Xavier Rodriguez, District Judge. *
Order;
Opinion by Judge Forrest
SUMMARY **
Personal Jurisdiction
The panel reversed the district court’s dismissal for lack
of personal jurisdiction of a wrongful-death and survivor
action brought by the Estate of Susan Cox and Susan’s
husband Mark Cox (Plaintiffs) against Gritman Medical
Center and Patricia Marciano, Susan’s primary care doctor
(Defendants).
Susan
and
Mark
Cox
lived
in
Albion,
Washington. Susan died from an overdose allegedly related
to Dr. Marciano’s over-prescription of pharmaceutical
drugs. Plaintiffs filed this action in the Eastern District of
The Honorable Xavier Rodriguez, United States District Judge for the
Western District of Texas, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

3

Washington. Defendants are Idaho residents, and the
medical treatments they provided to Susan occurred in
Idaho.
The panel held that the district court’s exercise of
personal
jurisdiction
over
Defendants
satisfied
Washington’s long-arm statute and the Due Process Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment because Defendants were
located on the Idaho/Washington border, specifically
cultivated treatment relationships with Washington
residents, and routinely transmitted Susan’s prescriptions to
Washington pharmacies at her request.
The panel did not reach the issue of whether the district
court properly denied jurisdictional discovery related to
whether Gritman is subject to general personal jurisdiction
in Washington. Defendants are subject to specific personal
jurisdiction in Washington, and therefore Plaintiffs were not
prejudiced by the denial of jurisdictional discovery as to
general jurisdiction.
The panel also held that venue was proper in the Eastern
District of Washington because the record establishes that a
substantial part of the events giving rise to Plaintiffs’ claims
occurred in the Eastern District of Washington.

COUNSEL
Mary E. Schultz (argued), Mary Schultz Law PS, Spangle,
Washington, for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Anne Schroeder (argued) and William J. Schroeder, KSB
Litigation PS, Spokane, Washington; Amanda K. Thorsvig
(argued) and Michele Atkins, Fain Anderson VanDerhoef

4

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

Rosendahl O'Halloran Spillane PLLC, Seattle, Washington;
Markus W. Louvier and Sean M. King, Evans Craven &
Lackie PS, Spokane, Washington; for DefendantsAppellees.

ORDER
The slip opinion filed on February 11, 2026, is amended
as follows:
Page 11, line
18

Insert <, but not exclusively,> between
<We typically> and <use the
“purposeful availment” framing for tort
claims>.
Page 11, line
Insert <; Briskin, 135 F.4th at 751 n.10>
20
after <Herbal Brands, 72 F.4th at
1090>.
Page 12, line 1 Insert <“> before <contacts with the
forum>.
Page 12, lines Delete <and that the analysis should be
1–3
on the contacts with the state, not “with
persons who reside there”> and insert
<State itself” and not merely “contacts
[the defendant] makes by interacting
with other persons affiliated with the
State”>.
Page 14, lines Delete <But we must look at Dr.
7–9
Marciano’s “contacts with the forum
. . . itself, not [her] contacts with
persons who reside there.”> and insert
<But Dr. Marciano treated Susan in
Idaho, not in Washington, and we must

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

Page 14, line
11
Page 14, line
11

5

look at Dr. Marciano’s “contacts with
the forum . . . itself” because “a
defendant’s relationship wit ha plaintiff
or third party [who is a resident of the
forum], standing alone, is an
insufficient basis for jurisdiction.”>.
Delete <relationship> and insert
<contacts>.
Delete <was> and insert <in Idaho
were>.

An amended version of the opinion, reflecting these
changes, accompanies this order.
OPINION
FORREST, Circuit Judge:
This is a personal-jurisdiction case. Susan Cox allegedly
died of a fatal overdose of medications prescribed by her
primary care doctor, Defendant Patricia Marciano. Susan’s
husband, Mark Cox, and her estate (Plaintiffs) sued Dr.
Marciano and Gritman Medical Center (Defendants) in the
Eastern District of Washington, where the Coxes lived. The
Defendants are Idaho residents, and the medical treatment
they provided to Susan occurred in Idaho. The district court
denied jurisdictional discovery related to Gritman and
dismissed this action for lack of personal jurisdiction over
Defendants. Plaintiffs appeal both decisions. If personal
jurisdiction exists, the parties also dispute whether venue
properly lies in Idaho. We reverse and remand.

6

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

Given that Defendants are located on the
Idaho/Washington border, that they specifically cultivated
treatment relationships with Washington residents, and that
they routinely transmitted Susan’s prescriptions to
Washington pharmacies at her request, the district court’s
exercise of personal jurisdiction over Defendants satisfies
Washington’s long-arm statute and the Due Process Clause
of the Fourteenth Amendment. For that reason, we do not
reach whether the district court properly denied
jurisdictional discovery. We conclude, moreover, that venue
was proper in the Eastern District of Washington.
BACKGROUND
The relevant events occurred in an area of Eastern
Washington and Northern Idaho where there is significant
cross-border activity. Gritman owns and operates numerous
facilities in Moscow, Idaho—a town located immediately
adjacent to the border. Gritman is incorporated under Idaho
law and headquartered in Idaho. It previously had a clinic in
Pullman, Washington, which neighbors Moscow. But for the
last 25 years it has operated only in Idaho. Gritman
advertises via billboards, newspapers, radio, television, and
social media throughout the Lewis and Clark Valley region,
which encompasses parts of both Idaho and Washington, “to
make people aware of Gritman and the services Gritman can
provide at its facilities in Idaho.” Gritman also accepts, and
advertises that it accepts, Washington Medicaid.
Susan and Mark Cox lived in Albion, Washington, which
is a small town less than 20 miles from Moscow. In
2016, Dr. Marciano began treating Susan for spinal
pain. Dr. Marciano lives and practices medicine exclusively
in Idaho. In 2018, Gritman purchased several
clinics from the entity that previously employed

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

7

Dr. Marciano, and Dr. Marciano continued to work at these
facilities. 1 Dr. Marciano prescribed Susan a variety of
pharmaceuticals, in varying doses and combinations,
including the opioids hydrocodone-acetaminophen and
oxycodone-acetaminophen.
Susan could request refills of her prescriptions without
an appointment, either over the phone or through Gritman’s
electronic “Patient Portal.” Gritman’s policy was to honor a
patients’ pharmacy choice, “even if the pharmacy is located
outside of Idaho.” At Susan’s request, Gritman sent her
prescriptions to pharmacies in Pullman. In 2022, Susan died
from an overdose allegedly related to Dr. Marciano’s overprescription of pharmaceutical drugs.
Plaintiffs filed this wrongful-death and survivor action
against Defendants in the Eastern District of Washington.
Plaintiffs’ claims are based on Washington law. Defendants
moved to dismiss for lack of personal jurisdiction and,
alternatively, to transfer venue to the District of Idaho. The
district court denied Plaintiffs’ request for jurisdictional
discovery related to whether Gritman is subject to general
personal jurisdiction in Washington and granted
Defendants’ motion to dismiss. It held that Washington’s
long-arm statute did not reach Defendants and that due
process did not permit exercising specific jurisdiction over
these parties because they did not purposefully avail
themselves of the forum or purposefully direct their caserelated activities to Washington. Plaintiffs timely appealed.
Gritman insists that Dr. Marciano is an independent contractor, but it
does not argue that Dr. Marciano’s purported contractor status is relevant
to the personal-jurisdiction analysis. Thus, we do not address this issue.
See Maldonado v. Morales, 556 F.3d 1037, 1048 n.4 (9th Cir. 2009)
(“Arguments made in passing and inadequately briefed are [forfeited].”).

1

8

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

DISCUSSION
A. Personal Jurisdiction
We review the district court’s dismissal for lack of
personal jurisdiction de novo. Boschetto v. Hansing, 539
F.3d 1011, 1015 (9th Cir. 2008). Where the district court
grants dismissal without an evidentiary hearing, as here, the
plaintiff “need only make a prima facie showing of the
jurisdictional facts” based on the pleadings and affidavits.
Id. (citation omitted). We must accept as true all
uncontroverted allegations in the complaint and resolve
disputes in the parties’ affidavits in the plaintiff’s favor, but
disputed allegations in the complaint not supported by
evidence or affidavits need not be accepted as true. Id.
“Personal jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant is
proper where permitted by a long-arm statute and where the
exercise of jurisdiction does not violate federal due process.”
AMA Multimedia, LLC v. Wanat, 970 F.3d 1201, 1207 (9th
Cir. 2020). We address each requirement.
1. Washington’s Long-Arm Statute
Where no applicable federal statute authorizes service of
process on an out-of-state defendant, as here, federal courts
look to the law of the state in which the district court sits.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 4(k)(1)(A); Herbal Brands, Inc. v.
Photoplaza, Inc., 72 F.4th 1085, 1089 (9th Cir. 2023). “In
interpreting state law, federal courts are bound by the
pronouncements of the state’s highest court. If the particular
issue has not been decided, federal courts must predict how
the state’s highest court would resolve it.” Hemmings v.
Tidyman’s Inc., 285 F.3d 1174, 1203 (9th Cir. 2002)
(citation omitted).

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

9

Washington’s long-arm statute authorizes personal
jurisdiction over defendants “who in person or through an
agent” do various acts, including, as relevant here,
“transact[ing] . . . any business within [Washington]” or
“commi[tting] . . . a tortious act within [Washington].”
Wash. Rev. Code § 4.28.185(1)(a), (b). Because we
conclude that the transaction-of-business standard laid out in
§ 4.28.185(1)(a) has been satisfied, we need not address
whether a tort has been committed in Washington under
§ 4.28.185(1)(b). 2
Section 4.28.185 of Washington’s long-arm statute was
enacted in 1959. See 1959 Wash. Sess. Laws 669, 669–70.
The Washington Supreme Court recognized early on that
this statute, “except as may be limited by its terms,” was
intended to “assert jurisdiction over nonresident defendants
to the extent permitted by the [Fourteenth Amendment] dueprocess clause.” Tyee Constr. Co v. Dulien Steel Prods., Inc.,
381 P.2d 245, 247 (Wash. 1963) (emphasis added) (citation
omitted); see also Deutsch v. W. Coast Mach. Co., 497 P.2d
1311, 1314 (Wash. 1972) (same). Thus, the Washington
Supreme Court initially held that the personal-jurisdiction
inquiry was twofold: (1) whether “the statutory language
purport[s] to extend jurisdiction” and (2) whether “imposing
Though this analysis may seem counterintuitive given that this dispute
arises under tort law, the Washington Supreme Court has favorably cited
the view that the transaction-of-business standard “is not limited to
actions in contract; it applies as well to actions in tort when supported by
a sufficient showing of facts.” Callahan v. Keystone Fireworks Mfg. Co.,
435 P.2d 626, 637 (Wash. 1967) (quoting Longines-Wittnauer Watch Co.
v. Barnes & Reinecke, Inc., 209 N.E.2d 68, 81 (N.Y. 1965)). We
conclude that the transaction-of-business standard is readily met here,
and so we do not opine on whether the commission-of-a-tort analysis
would support the same result.
2

10

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

jurisdiction [would] violate constitutional principles.”
Grange Ins. Ass’n v. State, 757 P.2d 933, 935 (Wash. 1988).
As an initial matter, Dr. Marciano contends that
§ 4.28.185(1)(a) does not apply because she did not transact
business in Washington. We disagree. Section
4.28.185(1)(a) imposes a minimal threshold: “[t]he
transaction of any business within [Washington].”
(Emphasis added.) Multiple jurisdictions have interpreted
similar statutory language to encompass all business
transactions other than the most isolated or irrelevant. See,
e.g., Paterno v. Laser Spine Inst., 23 N.E.3d 988, 992–93
(N.Y. 2014); Cannonball Fund, Ltd. v. Dutchess Cap.
Mgmt., LLC, 993 N.E.2d 350, 369 (Mass. App. Ct. 2013). In
other words, the transaction-of-business provision is
triggered by all transactions but the kind of “‘random,’
‘fortuitous,’ or ‘attenuated’” ones that would independently
raise due-process concerns. Burger King Corp. v.
Rudzewicz, 471 U.S. 462, 475 (1985) (citation omitted); see
also Antonin Scalia & Bryan A. Garner, Reading Law: The
Interpretation of Legal Texts 247 (2012) (“A statute should
be interpreted in a way that avoids placing its
constitutionality in doubt.”). We predict the Washington
Supreme Court would adopt this same interpretation. See
Orkin v. Taylor, 487 F.3d 734, 741 (9th Cir. 2007)
(explaining that, in applying state law, this court “must
predict how the state’s highest court would decide the
question”). Because this case relates to Dr. Marciano’s
repeated transmission of prescriptions to Washington
pharmacies, as discussed further below, the long-arm statute

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

11

does not constitute an independent bar to the district court’s
exercise of personal jurisdiction. 3
We further note that the distinction between the statutory
analysis under Washington’s long-arm statute and the
due-process inquiry has eroded over the years. A little over
a decade ago, the Washington Supreme Court observed that,
as relates to the long-arm statute’s transaction-of-business
provision, “Washington courts are authorized to assert
personal jurisdiction over nonresident defendants to the
extent permitted by the federal due process clause.” Failla v.
FixtureOne Corp., 336 P.3d 1112, 1116 (Wash. 2014) (en
banc). We are not aware that the Washington Supreme Court
has deviated from this pronouncement in the years since.
Therefore, whether personal jurisdiction is authorized under
the transaction-of-business provision rises or falls with the
due-process analysis. See, e.g., Yamashita v. LG Chem., Ltd.,
48 F.4th 993, 996–97 (9th Cir. 2022) (observing that, where
a state’s long-arm statute is coextensive with federal dueprocess requirements, “the answer to the federal law
question may dictate the answer to the state law question”).
2. Due Process
Because we conclude that the transaction-of-business
provision in Washington’s long-arm statute poses no
independent bar to personal jurisdiction, we now consider
whether exercising jurisdiction over Defendants comports
with due process. The Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment imposes three requirements for exercising
specific jurisdiction over an out-of-state defendant: (1) the
Gritman did not discuss Washington’s long-arm statute other than to
note that it is coextensive with due process. Thus, as relates to Gritman,
we address only the due-process analysis. See Maldonado, 556 F.3d at
1048 n.4.

3

12

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

defendant must have minimum contacts with the forum;
(2) the claim must “arise[] out of or relate[] to the
defendant’s forum-related activities”; and (3) “the exercise
of jurisdiction must comport with fair play and substantial
justice, i.e. it must be reasonable.” Briskin v. Shopify, 135
F.4th 739, 750–51 (9th Cir. 2025) (en banc) (citation
omitted); see Walden v. Fiore, 571 U.S. 277, 283 (2014).
The plaintiff bears the burden on the first two elements; if
they are satisfied, the defendant bears the burden to show
that the final element is not satisfied. Briskin, 135 F.4th at
751.
a. Minimum Contacts
A defendant has minimum contacts with the forum when
that defendant has either purposefully availed itself of the
privilege of conducting business in the forum or
purposefully directed its activities at the forum. See Hanson
v. Denckla, 357 U.S. 235, 253 (1958); Briskin, 135 F.4th at
750–51. We typically, but not exclusively, use the
“purposeful availment” framing for tort claims like those
asserted in this case. Herbal Brands, 72 F.4th at 1090;
Briskin, 135 F.4th at 751 n.10.
“Purposeful availment” occurs when “the defendant has
taken deliberate action within the forum state or has created
continuing obligations to forum residents.” Impossible
Foods Inc. v. Impossible X LLC, 80 F.4th 1079, 1088 (9th
Cir. 2023) (citation modified); accord Burger King, 471 U.S.
at 475–76. At bottom, we must “ask whether defendants
have voluntarily derived some benefit from their interstate
activities such that they will not be haled into a jurisdiction
solely as a result of random, fortuitous, or attenuated
contacts.” Herbal Brands, 72 F.4th at 1090 (citation
modified); see also Walden, 571 U.S. at 284–85

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

13

(emphasizing that “minimum contacts” requires that the
defendant create “contacts with the forum State itself” and
not merely “contacts [the defendant] makes by interacting
with other persons affiliated with the State”). While
“physical presence in the forum is not a prerequisite to
jurisdiction, physical entry into the State—either by the
defendant in person or through an agent, goods, mail, or
some other means—is certainly a relevant contact.” Walden,
571 U.S. at 285 (citation omitted). Mere foreseeability that
an action will cause an injury in the forum is insufficient to
find minimum contacts. Burger King, 471 U.S. at 474.
We have examined the due-process requirements for
personal jurisdiction in two medical-malpractice cases. First,
in Wright v. Yackley, we held that a South Dakota doctor
who prescribed medication to a patient who later moved to
Idaho was not subject to personal jurisdiction in Idaho. 459
F.2d 287, 289–91 (9th Cir. 1972). The patient had lived in
South Dakota and “was taking drugs acquired by
prescriptions permitting unlimited refills.” Id. at 288. After
moving to Idaho, the patient sought to refill her prescriptions
at an Idaho pharmacy, and, at the patient’s request, the
doctor “furnished copies of the original prescriptions” to the
pharmacy. Id. The patient sued the doctor in Idaho after
suffering injuries allegedly caused by the medication. Id.
We held that the South Dakota doctor did not
purposefully avail himself of the privilege of doing business
in Idaho because his only contact with Idaho was a “chance
occurrence” resulting from the patient’s unilateral choice to
relocate. Id. at 290. The doctor made “no systematic or
continuing effort . . . to provide services which [were] to be
felt in [Idaho].” Id. That effects from the prescription filled
in Idaho foreseeably would be felt in Idaho was insufficient
to satisfy due process. See id. at 289–90, 289 n.4. Indeed, we

14

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

emphasized that for “personal services [the] focus must be
on the place where the services are rendered,” otherwise
“rendition of such services” would become “a portable tort”
with personal jurisdiction lying anywhere a patient “may
choose to go.” Id. at 289–90.
On the other hand, in Cubbage v. Merchant we held that
an Arizona hospital and Arizona doctors were subject to
personal jurisdiction in California where they made
“continuing efforts to provide services in California, and
ha[d] not shown any efforts . . . to discourage California
patients.” 744 F.2d 665, 669 (9th Cir. 1984). In that case,
similar to this one, the hospital and doctors were located in
a rural area near the Arizona-California border and were
licensed only in Arizona. Id. at 667. Over one-fourth of the
hospital’s patients were California residents, the hospital and
doctors advertised in telephone listings distributed in
California, and the doctors participated in California’s
Medicare program and received reimbursement from
California for services rendered to its residents. Id. On those
facts, we “decline[d] to apply Wright’s broad language,” and
instead concluded that the defendants’ business and
marketing activities were sufficient to satisfy the purposefulavailment standard. See id. at 668–70.
Applying these principles to the facts of this case, we
conclude that both Dr. Marciano and Gritman have
purposefully availed themselves of the privilege of
conducting activities in Washington such that Plaintiffs have
shown sufficient minimum contacts to satisfy the first dueprocess requirement.
i. Dr. Marciano
Dr. Marciano’s contacts with Washington are
undoubtedly more significant than the South Dakota

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

15

doctor’s contacts with Idaho in Wright. Dr. Marciano knew
that Susan was a Washington resident during their extended
treatment relationship. Although the record is silent
regarding whether Dr. Marciano had other Washington
patients, her six-year relationship with Susan is significant.
See Burger King, 471 U.S. at 482 (noting that a “20-year
interdependent relationship” with actors in the forum
supported personal jurisdiction). But Dr. Marciano treated
Susan in Idaho, not in Washington, and we must look at Dr.
Marciano’s “contacts with the forum . . . itself” because “a
defendant’s relationship with a plaintiff or third party [who
is a resident of the forum], standing alone, is an insufficient
basis for jurisdiction.” Walden, 571 U.S. at 285–86.
Here, Dr. Marciano’s contacts with Susan in Idaho were
“intertwined with” her relevant contacts with Washington.
Id. at 286. At Susan’s request, Dr. Marciano sent Susan’s
prescriptions to Washington pharmacies. This act is
regulated under Washington law, with which Dr. Marciano
complied. Specifically, state law requires prescriptions sent
to Washington to be directed to the patient’s pharmacy of
choice. See Wash. Rev. Code § 69.50.312(1). Washington
also imposes state-specific requirements governing both the
form of prescription and refill orders and electronicprescription systems. See, e.g., Wash. Rev. Code
§ 69.50.312(1), (6). A prescriber who transmits electronic
prescriptions in Washington without complying with that
state’s requirements is subject to civil penalties. Id.
§ 69.50.312(5). Thus, it is fair to conclude that by agreeing
to send Susan’s prescriptions to Washington, Dr. Marciano
sought the privilege of conducting business in that state,
which was a benefit that could come only from compliance
with Washington law. See Hanson, 357 U.S. at 253 (“[I]t is
essential in each case that there be some act by which the

16

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

defendant purposefully avails itself of the privilege of
conducting activities within the forum State, thus invoking
the benefits and protections of its laws.”); Burger King, 471
U.S. at 476 (explaining that where a defendant takes action
to “engage[] in significant activities within a State, . . . [it]
manifestly has availed [it]self of the privilege of conducting
business [in the forum], and because [its] activities are
shielded by ‘the benefits and protections’ of the forum’s
laws it is presumptively not unreasonable to require [it] to
submit to the burdens of litigation in that forum as well”).
Dr. Marciano contends that her contacts with
Washington were random, fortuitous, and isolated because
she “directed the prescriptions to Susan, not Washington.”
This argument ignores the realities of the case. While we
have focused on where the medical services are provided,
rather than where the effects of such treatment were
experienced, to avoid subjecting medical professionals to
liability for “portable tort[s] . . . deemed to have been
committed wherever the consequences foreseeably were
felt,” we have also noted that “the due process test must be a
flexible one that will consider the various circumstances of
a particular case.” Wright, 459 F.2d at 290 & n.7. And our
reasoning in Wright that the “nature of the average doctor’s
localized practice” generally does not result in a “systematic
or continuing effort on the part of the doctor to provide
services which are to be felt [outside the jurisdiction in
which the doctor is located]” does not apply here. Id. at 290.
Dr. Marciano practiced medicine in an Idaho town
immediately adjacent to the Idaho/Washington border. She
worked for a medical practice that contracted to provide
physician services to Gritman clinics. Gritman’s business
model includes serving patients throughout a rural region
encompassing an area that spans Idaho and Washington.

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

17

And Dr. Marciano had been treating Susan since 2016 and
always knew that she was a Washington resident.
Dr. Marciano did not have “substantial or continuous and
systematic contacts with [Washington]” such that she is
subject to general jurisdiction. Cubbage, 744 F.2d at 667
(citation modified). But on the record presented, it would be
inaccurate to conclude that the nature of her practice is
localized only in Idaho for purposes of assessing whether the
exercise of jurisdiction over her in Washington “offend[s]
traditional notions of fair play and substantial justice,”
International Shoe Co. v. Washington, 326 U.S. 310, 316
(1945) (citation omitted), because she knowingly and
intentionally
“created
continuing
obligations
to
[Washington] residents,” Impossible Foods, 80 F.4th at 1088
(citation omitted). She did not transmit merely a single
prescription to a state that she could not anticipate her patient
being in, as in Wright, or provide a singular or discrete
instance of care, as in Lewis. Rather, similar to Cubbage, she
was Susan’s primary care doctor, she engaged in “continuing
efforts” to provide prescriptions to Washington pharmacies
for Susan’s convenience consistent with Washington law,
she “ha[s] not shown any efforts . . . to discourage
[Washington] patients,” and there is no evidence in the
record that subjecting Dr. Marciano to jurisdiction in
Washington will chill Defendants from treating Washington
patients. 744 F.2d at 669–70.
Dr. Marciano also suggests that her conduct cannot
constitute purposeful availment because she derived no
benefit from sending prescriptions to Washington. We
rejected a similar argument in Cubbage where the Arizona
defendants asserted that they did not profit monetarily from
participating in California’s Medicare program because their
participation afforded them protections provided by

18

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

California law. Id. at 668. Likewise, by complying with
Washington law in transmitting prescriptions to
Washington, Dr. Marciano received the benefits of such
compliance. And it is reasonable to infer that her willingness
to comply with patient requests to send prescriptions to
Washington pharmacies made it more likely that she would
retain Washington patients, like Susan. In sum,
Dr. Marciano did have contacts with Washington, which
were not “an isolated occurrence” such that she should not
“reasonably anticipate being haled into court there.” WorldWide Volkswagen Corp. v. Woodson, 444 U.S. 286, 297
(1980).
ii. Gritman
Given our analysis regarding Dr. Marciano, the writing
is on the wall for Gritman. Like the hospital in Cubbage,
Gritman owns clinics that operate adjacent to the
Idaho/Washington border. Like the hospital in Cubbage,
Gritman actively works to serve Washington patients by,
among other things, advertising in Washington and
participating in Washington’s Medicare program. See 744
F.2d at 668–69. And like the hospital in Cubbage, Gritman
does in fact serve Washington patients. See id. at 670.
Therefore, Gritman’s contacts with Washington are at least
as significant as the Arizona hospital’s contacts with
California addressed in Cubbage.
Of additional relevance here, Gritman also has chosen to
avail itself of Washington law by electronically transmitting
prescriptions to Washington on request. See Wash. Rev.
Code § 69.50.312. Gritman admitted that its doctors must
comply with Washington law when transmitting
prescriptions to a Washington pharmacy and that it could
refuse to transmit prescriptions out of state. Relatedly,

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

19

Plaintiffs allege that Susan’s husband Mark repeatedly
contacted Defendants “to express his concerns” about
Susan’s prescriptions, and Defendants refused to discuss the
issue “because of Washington’s law regarding health care
information protection.” Gritman’s intentional compliance
with Washington law evidences its intent to gain the
“benefits and protections” of that law, which supports a
finding of purposeful availment. See Burger King, 471 U.S.
at 482.
Like Dr. Marciano, Gritman argues that Gritman’s
acquiescence to a patient’s choice for where prescriptions
are sent is not purposeful availment of another state’s market
and laws. That is true in cases like Wright where the out-ofstate transmission is a singular or isolated occurrence. 459
F.2d at 290. But for the reasons already discussed, we reject
this argument where the out-of-state transmission is a
“systematic or continuing effort.” Id.; see also Herbal
Brands, 72 F.4th at 1093. Gritman also reiterates that its
activities are localized only in Idaho because its operations
are only in Idaho. That argument is foreclosed by Cubbage,
in which the medical care occurred solely in Arizona over a
short period of time, did not involve a lengthy cross-border
relationship, and still gave rise to personal jurisdiction over
the hospital in California. See 744 F.2d at 667, 672.
b. Relatedness
The second due-process requirement is that the suit must
“‘arise out of or relate to the defendant’s contacts’ with the
forum.” Ford Motor Co. v. Mont. Eighth Jud. Dist. Ct., 592
U.S. 351, 359 (quoting Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. v. Super.
Ct. of Cal., 582 U.S. 255, 262 (2017)). “The first half of that
standard asks about causation; but the back
half . . . contemplates that some relationships will support

20

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

jurisdiction without a causal showing.” Id. at 362. At bottom,
“there must be ‘an affiliation between the forum and the
underlying controversy, principally, [an] activity or an
occurrence that takes place in the forum State and is
therefore subject to the State’s regulation.’” Bristol-Myers
Squibb, 582 U.S. at 262 (alteration in original) (citation
omitted).
Relatedness is easily resolved here. Dr. Marciano’s
contacts with Washington—transmitting prescriptions to
Washington pharmacies as part of her years-long treatment
relationship with Susan—are at the heart of this medicalmalpractice controversy. Plaintiffs allege that Susan
overdosed and died from the medications that Dr. Marciano
prescribed. Mark Cox contends that Susan was on “9 or 10
prescriptions” when she died, including oxycodone, Zoloft,
gabapentin, and diazepam, and that despite knowing Susan
had been falling, was confused, “kept repeating herself,” and
“appeared dazed,” Dr. Marciano increased Susan’s
prescriptions just two weeks before her death.
Both Dr. Marciano and Gritman argue that Plaintiffs’
allegations are based on “allegedly negligent
decisions . . . made in Idaho” and therefore do not relate to
their contacts with Washington. Defendants are incorrect
because a “strict causal relationship” is not required to
establish that a claim is “relate[d] to the defendant’s
contacts with the forum.” Ford Motor Co., 592 U.S. at 362
(citation modified). Again, Cubbage is instructive. We held
there that the plaintiff’s medical-malpractice claims were
related to the Arizona hospital and doctors’ advertising in
California and participation in California’s Medicare
program because those activities enabled them “to attract a
substantial number of patients from California.” 744 F.2d at
670.

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

21

While the current record in this case indicates that
Dr. Marciano determined which prescriptions to issue in
Idaho, she facilitated delivery of the prescriptions, including
refills, at Washington pharmacies located closer to Susan’s
home. She also adjusted the timing of refills from what she
prescribed through electronic transmission to the
Washington pharmacies. These contacts with Washington
were conducted in compliance with Washington law and
relate to Plaintiffs’ allegations that Dr. Marciano
overprescribed opioids and other pharmaceuticals. Id. And
as previously discussed, it is reasonable to infer that this
cross-border facilitation aided Dr. Marciano in attracting
and retaining Washington patients.
There is also no basis for distinguishing Cubbage as to
Gritman. Gritman’s relevant Washington contacts were
clearly intended to attract Washington patients to seek care
at its Idaho clinics. Id. It attempts to distinguish Cubbage on
the basis that Susan was Dr. Marciano’s patient before
Gritman acquired the clinic where Susan was treated. But it
does not cite any authority requiring that a plaintiff allege
they saw or acted upon a defendant’s advertising to
demonstrate that the advertising relates to the lawsuit.
Indeed, relevant authority suggests the opposite.
Ford Motor Co. involved two negligence and productliability actions stemming from accidents involving Ford
cars. See 592 U.S. at 356. The Supreme Court rejected
Ford’s argument that the suit did not arise from Ford’s
contacts with the forums because the cars were not sold or
manufactured in those states. See id. at 361–67. The Court
emphasized that a strict causal relationship between the
forum contacts and the suit is not required and that Ford’s
contacts—extensive advertising of its vehicles—was
sufficient. See id. After observing that Ford’s advertising

22

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

contacts were related to the suit, in part because they “might
turn any resident [of the forum] into a Ford owner,” the
Court clarified that the plaintiffs had not established a causal
connection between the forum contacts and the lawsuits but
that causation was not required. Id. at 367. Gritman does not
grapple with Ford Motor Co.4 And if a product-liability suit
relates to a manufacturer’s advertising contacts, even when
the product was purchased elsewhere, we see no reason why
Plaintiffs’ claims here would not clear that same hurdle.
c. Reasonableness
Having concluded that both Defendants had minimum
contacts with Washington and that Plaintiffs’ claims are
related to those contacts, we next turn to whether Defendants
have made a “compelling case” that the exercise of
jurisdiction in Washington would be unreasonable because
it would not comport with “fair play and substantial justice.”
Burger King, 471 U.S. at 477–78 (citation omitted). On this
point, we consider the following factors:
(1) the extent of the defendant’s purposeful
interjection into the forum state’s affairs;
(2) the burden on the defendant of defending
in the forum; (3) the extent of conflict with
the sovereignty of the defendant’s state;
(4) the forum state’s interest in adjudicating
the dispute; (5) the most efficient judicial
Gritman appears to suggest that a defendant’s forum contacts must be
the but-for cause of the alleged harm. While some of our caselaw can be
read to suggest that causation is required to satisfy the second dueprocess requirement, see, e.g., Mattell, Inc. v. Greiner & Hausser GmbH,
354 F.3d 857, 864 (9th Cir. 2003), the Supreme Court made clear in Ford
Motor Co. that “an exclusively causal test of connection” is incorrect.
592 U.S. at 366.
4

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

23

resolution of the controversy; (6) the
importance of the forum to the plaintiff’s
interest in convenient and effective relief;
and (7) the existence of an alternative forum.
Freestream Aircraft (Bermuda) Ltd. v. Aero L. Grp., 905
F.3d 597, 607 (9th Cir. 2018); accord Burger King, 471 U.S.
at 477. Neither Defendant has made a sufficiently
compelling showing.
i. Dr. Marciano
As we have explained, Dr. Marciano did purposefully
interject herself into Washington affairs, but only in a limited
way. Dr. Marciano does not identify any specific burden she
would suffer by having to defend this action in Washington,
but she does argue more generally that subjecting her to
personal jurisdiction in Washington will “erect[] barriers to
health care” that “courts have long sought to avoid.” In a
similar vein, she contends that subjecting her to suit in
Washington would render malpractice a “portable tort” and
doctors will “be liable anywhere they ever sent a prescription
at a patient’s request, or even wherever the patient chose to
bring a written prescription to fill it and consume the
medication.”
This is hyperbole; our decision does not reach nearly as
far as Dr. Marciano suggests. Wright remains good law:
discrete prescription transactions do not create the necessary
minimum contacts where the doctor does not engage in the
type of “systematic or continuing” cross-border activities at
issue here. See 459 F.2d at 290. To reiterate from our prior
analysis, the significant facts underlying our decision here
are that (1) the circumstances of Dr. Marciano’s practice
made it specifically advantageous for her to develop

24

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

treatment relationships with residents of the forum, (2) she
knowingly developed a lengthy treatment relationship with
a forum resident, and (3) she repeatedly sent prescriptions
for that patient to pharmacies located in that forum in
compliance with that forum’s law.
Relying on Wright, Dr. Marciano suggests that
Washington lacks any interest in this dispute because its
“dominant interest on behalf of its citizens . . . is not that
they should be free from injury by out-of-state doctors, but
rather that they should be able to secure adequate medical
services to meet their needs wherever they may go.” 459
F.2d at 291. Even if this factor tends to favor Dr. Marciano,
she has not made a compelling showing. The record suggests
that the realities of the region in southeast Washington and
northwest Idaho encourage cross-border transaction of
services. Defendants intentionally located their services in
Idaho, but they did so with the expectation that they would
also serve Washington patients.
Dr. Marciano also suggests that subjecting her to
personal jurisdiction in Washington for transmitting
prescriptions to this jurisdiction would mean patients
“unilaterally control personal jurisdiction over their
physicians” because Washington law requires doctors “to fill
patients’ prescriptions at their requested locations.” This
argument misapprehends Washington law. Washington does
not require that out-of-state doctors send prescriptions to the
pharmacy of the patient’s choice; it requires that
prescriptions sent to Washington pharmacies be sent to the
pharmacy that the patient chooses. See Wash. Rev. Code
§ 69.50.312(1), (2)(d) (exempting “[p]rescriptions issued
that are intended for prescription fulfillment and dispensing
outside Washington state”). If Defendants want to avoid
personal jurisdiction in Washington for claims based on

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

25

prescription activity, like those presented here, there is an
easy solution: require patients to fill their prescriptions in
Idaho. Washington law does not prohibit this choice, and
nothing about our decision gives patients unilateral control
over where their medical providers may be sued.
Finally, Dr. Marciano implies that subjecting her to
personal jurisdiction in Washington is unfair because
Washington law is less protective of doctors than Idaho law. 5
But exercise of personal jurisdiction is not the same as
choice of law; regardless of where this litigation occurs,
Idaho’s substantive law may well govern the merits of this
case. See Burger King, 471 U.S. at 477. Washington applies
the Restatement (Second) of Conflict of Laws’ “most
significant relationship” test to determine the appropriate
substantive law governing tort claims. Erickson v.
Pharmacia LLC, 578 P.3d 306, 316 (Wash. 2025).
Application of that test, not the location of the forum, will
determine the applicable law governing the merits of this
case.
Dr. Marciano does not address the remaining factors, but
for the reasons discussed below as to Gritman, none of the
relevant factors, either alone or considered in combination,
compellingly show that subjecting her to personal
jurisdiction in Washington would violate principles of “fair
play and substantial justice.” Burger King, 471 U.S. at 476–
77 (citation omitted).

No doubt this contributed to Defendants’ choice to establish operations
only on the Idaho side of the border despite intending to serve patients
from both Idaho and Washington.

5

26

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

ii. Gritman
Gritman also makes several arguments for why
subjecting it to personal jurisdiction in Washington would
be unreasonable, only some of which relate to the fairness
factors referenced above. First, it suggests that even though
Plaintiffs’ complaint relies on Washington law,
Washington’s medical-malpractice statute applies only to instate providers. If true, this does suggest that Washington’s
interest in adjudicating this case is lessened, but it does not
itself dictate the personal-jurisdiction analysis, which
focuses on “the defendant’s relationship to the forum.”
Bristol-Myers Squibb, 582 U.S. at 262.
Gritman also suggests that Swank v. Valley Christian
School, 398 P.3d 1108 (Wash. 2017), establishes that
exercising personal jurisdiction over Gritman in Washington
is unfair. This is not compelling because Swank analyzed
Washington’s long-arm statute, not whether jurisdiction
would comport with fair play and substantial justice under
the Due Process Clause. See 398 P.3d at 1121–23. And even
if Swank had addressed due process, we are not bound by a
state court’s interpretation of federal law. See Congoleum
Corp. v. DLW Aktiengesellschaft, 729 F.2d 1240, 1242 (9th
Cir. 1984) (“[T]he state court’s interpretation of federal law
does not bind our decision, though it may persuade us to
reach a similar result.”).
Turning more specifically to the fairness factors,
Gritman asserts that it has not injected itself into Washington
and that Washington has no interest in adjudicating this
dispute. For the reasons previously explained, Gritman has
“reached out beyond its home” in Idaho by intentionally
seeking Washington patients and allowing its medical
providers to fill prescriptions in Washington consistent with

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

27

Washington law. Ford Motor Co., 592 U.S. at 359 (citation
modified). Further, states have a special interest in
preventing torts committed within their borders or that cause
harm to their residents. See Keeton v. Hustler Magazine,
Inc., 465 U.S. 770, 776 (1984). While Dr. Marciano is
correct that in the medical-malpractice context these
interests must be weighed against Washington’s interest in
its residents having access to medical care, the protection
interest still exists. See Wright, 459 F.2d at 291.
Gritman further contends that Washington is not the
most efficient forum and that Idaho is an adequate
alternative. The efficiency factor “depends ‘primarily [on]
where the witnesses and the evidence are likely to be
located.’” Freestream Aircraft, 905 F.3d at 609 (alteration in
original) (citation omitted). Here, the witnesses and evidence
span Washington and Idaho, meaning Washington is one of
two forums where resolution may be efficient. Gritman
cannot even argue that litigating the dispute in Washington
would be inconvenient for its legal counsel, as all parties’
counsel operate out of offices in Washington. Such a flimsy
argument fares especially poorly in a system like ours, where
efficiency “is no longer weighed heavily given the modern
advances in communication and transportation.” Id. (citation
omitted).
In sum, while no factor overwhelmingly favors Plaintiffs
and some factors are either neutral or slightly favor
Defendants, taken together, Defendants have not made a
compelling showing that requiring them to defend this action
in Washington would violate principles of fair play and
substantial justice. Accordingly, we conclude that the district
court erred in dismissing this case for lack of personal

28

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

jurisdiction as to both Dr. Marciano and Gritman. 6
Defendants are subject to personal jurisdiction under
§ 4.28.185(1)(a), related to the transaction of business in
Washington, because that provision is coextensive with the
Due Process Clause and exercising personal jurisdiction
over Defendants in Washington comports with due process
in this case. See Failla, 336 P.3d at 1116.
B. Jurisdictional Discovery
Plaintiffs also appeal the district court’s denial of
jurisdictional discovery related to whether Gritman is
subject to general personal jurisdiction in Washington. “An
appellate court will not interfere with the trial court’s refusal
to grant discovery except upon the clearest showing that the
dismissal resulted in actual and substantial prejudice to the
litigant.” Wells Fargo & Co. v. Wells Fargo Exp. Co., 556
F.2d 406, 430 n.24 (9th Cir. 1977). Because we conclude
that Defendants are subject to specific personal jurisdiction
in Washington, Plaintiffs were not prejudiced by the denial
of jurisdictional discovery as to general jurisdiction.
C. Venue
In the alternative to its jurisdictional challenge,
Defendants argue that dismissal for improper venue is
warranted. We review de novo a motion to dismiss for
improper venue under Rule 12(b)(3). Myers v. Bennett L.
Offs., 238 F.3d 1068, 1071 (9th Cir. 2001). Although the
district court did not reach this issue, we exercise our
discretion to address it in the first instance as the question at
this stage is purely legal. See Planned Parenthood of Greater
Plaintiffs conceded at oral argument that another Defendant, Todd
Bledsoe, was properly dismissed from this case. Accordingly, we affirm
the district court’s dismissal as to Bledsoe only.
6

COX V. GRITMAN MEDICAL CENTER

29

Wash. & N. Idaho v. U.S. Dep’t of Health & Hum. Servs.,
946 F.3d 1100, 1110–11 (9th Cir. 2020).
Venue is proper in “a judicial district in which a
substantial part of the events or omissions giving rise to the
claim occurred.” 28 U.S.C. § 1391(b)(2). The “locus of the
injury” is sufficient to establish proper venue. Myers, 238
F.3d at 1076; see also 14D Charles Alan Wright & Arthur R.
Miller, Federal Practice and Procedure § 3806 (4th ed.
2024) (“In tort cases, courts tend to focus on where the
allegedly tortious actions took place and where the
[noneconomic] harms were felt.”). Because Plaintiffs allege
that Susan ingested her prescriptions, overdosed, and died
near her home in Albion, Washington, the record establishes
that a substantial part of the events giving rise to Plaintiffs’
claims occurred in the Eastern District of Washington and
that venue therein is proper.
AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, and
REMANDED for further proceedings. 7

7

Defendants shall bear the costs on appeal. See Fed. R. App. P. 39(a)(4).

