FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
ANTHONY VALENTINO
SOTO,
Defendant - Appellant.
UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 23-4072
D.C. No.
5:22-cr-00021RGK-1
ORDER
CERTIFYING
QUESTION TO
THE SUPREME
COURT OF
CALIFORNIA
No. 24-3903
D.C. No.
2:23-cr-00391JAK-1

v.
STEPHEN REID,
Defendant - Appellant.
Filed January 8, 2026
Before: Marsha S. Berzon, Mark J. Bennett, and Jennifer
Sung, Circuit Judges.

2

USA V. SOTO

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
In two cases involving whether a defendant is subject to
the career-offender sentencing enhancement under U.S.S.G.
§ 4B1.1 because of a prior conviction under California
Health & Safety Code § 11378, the panel certified to the
Supreme Court of California the following question:
When a defendant is charged with possession
of a listed controlled substance under
California Health & Safety Code § 11378,
must the state prove, and must the jury
unanimously agree, that the defendant
possessed the actual listed controlled
substance, and not an analog of that
substance as defined under California Health
& Safety Code § 11401? Or may the jury
convict if it finds the state has proven the
defendant possessed either the actual
controlled substance or an analog of that
substance, without unanimous agreement as
to which?

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. SOTO

3

ORDER
The issue in this case is whether defendants Anthony
Soto (“Soto”) and Stephen Reid (“Reid”; collectively,
“Defendants”) are subject to the career-offender sentencing
enhancement, U.S.S.G. § 4B1.1, because of their prior
convictions under California Health & Safety Code § 11378.
That issue turns on a question of California law.
Accordingly, we respectfully ask the California Supreme
Court to answer the certified question of California law
presented below:
When a defendant is charged with possession
of a listed controlled substance under
California Health & Safety Code § 11378,
must the state prove, and must the jury
unanimously agree, that the defendant
possessed the actual listed controlled
substance, and not an analog of that
substance as defined under California Health
& Safety Code § 11401? Or may the jury
convict if it finds the state has proven the
defendant possessed either the actual
controlled substance or an analog of that
substance, without unanimous agreement as
to which?
If the state must prove that a defendant possessed the actual
listed controlled substance charged, and not an analog of that
substance, then Defendants would be subject to the careeroffender enhancement due to their prior § 11378
convictions. But if a controlled substance analog is an
alternative means of proving that a defendant possessed the

4

USA V. SOTO

listed controlled substance charged, then Defendants would
not be subject to the career-offender enhancement.
We have concluded that resolution of this question will
“determine the outcome of a matter pending in [this] court”
and that “[t]here is no controlling precedent.” Cal. R. Ct.
8.548.
I. FACTUAL
AND
BACKGROUND 1

PROCEDURAL

A. The Career-Offender Enhancement
Defendants Soto and Reid both pled guilty to federal
drug trafficking charges. At sentencing, they were each
subjected to the career-offender enhancement, U.S.S.G.
§ 4B1.1, based on their past convictions under California
Health & Safety Code § 11378 for distribution of
amphetamine or methamphetamine.
The federal career-offender enhancement substantially
increases a defendant’s Sentencing Guidelines range. See
U.S.S.G. § 4B1.1(b). A defendant qualifies for the career
offender sentencing enhancement if:
(1) the defendant was at least eighteen years
old at the time the defendant committed the
instant offense of conviction;
(2) the instant offense of conviction is a
felony that is either a crime of violence or a
controlled substance offense; and

To the extent that this Certification Order reveals information under
seal, we unseal such information for purposes of this Order only.
1

USA V. SOTO

5

(3) the defendant has at least two prior felony
convictions of either a crime of violence or a
controlled substance offense.
U.S.S.G. § 4B1.1(a). U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2 defines “controlled
substance offense” as:
an offense under federal or state law,
punishable by imprisonment for a term
exceeding one year, that—
(1) prohibits the manufacture, import, export,
distribution, or dispensing of a controlled
substance (or a counterfeit substance) or the
possession of a controlled substance (or a
counterfeit substance) with intent to
manufacture, import, export, distribute, or
dispense; or
(2) is an offense described in 46 U.S.C.
§ 70503(a) or § 70506(b).
U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2. We have held that the term “‘controlled
substance’ in § 4B1.2(b) refers to a ‘controlled substance’ as
defined in the [federal Controlled Substances Act].” United
States v. Bautista, 989 F.3d 698, 702 (9th Cir. 2021).
B. Anthony Soto
Defendant Anthony Valentino Soto was charged in an
indictment filed in January 2022 with a single count of
possessing more than 50 grams of methamphetamine with
intent to distribute, in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1),
(b)(1)(A)(viii), which carries a 10-year mandatory minimum
sentence. 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(A)(viii). In August 2023,
he pled guilty without a plea agreement.

6

USA V. SOTO

Soto had previously been convicted of three controlled
substance felonies in 2017: (1) possession for sale of
methamphetamine, in violation of California Health &
Safety Code § 11378 (“Section 11378” or “§ 11378”);
(2) transportation for sale of methamphetamine, in violation
of California Health & Safety Code § 11379(a); and (3)
possession for sale of amphetamine, in violation of § 11378.
The two methamphetamine-related convictions stem from
the same conduct and were both charged in the same
charging instrument.
In the Pre-Sentence Report (“PSR”), the United States
Probation Office (“Probation”) determined Soto’s base
offense level to be 32 based on drug weight, consistent with
U.S.S.G. § 2D1.1(c) (150–500 grams of actual
methamphetamine). The PSR applied a 2-point reduction
for safety-valve eligibility under U.S.S.G. § 2D1.1(b)(18),
for an adjusted offense level of 30. Importantly, it then
applied the career-offender enhancement under U.S.S.G.
§ 4B1.1. Probation cited Soto’s two § 11378 convictions
from 2017, one for possession of methamphetamine and the
other for possession of amphetamine, as the two qualifying
predicate offenses for the enhancement. The career-offender
enhancement raised Soto’s offense level to 37, from which
Probation subtracted 3 points for acceptance of
responsibility, resulting in a total offense level of 34. At
offense level 34 and criminal history category VI, Soto’s
Guidelines range was 262–327 months.
Soto objected to the career-offender designation and
argued that his two § 11378 convictions were not qualifying
controlled substances offenses under U.S.S.G. § 4B1.1–2.
But the district court adopted the PSR’s calculations and
applied the career-offender enhancement. The district court

USA V. SOTO

7

varied downward and sentenced Soto to 180 months in
prison followed by 5 years of supervised release.
C. Stephen Reid
Defendant Stephen Reid was indicted in August 2023 on
six charges: one count of conspiracy to distribute fentanyl in
violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846; two counts of distribution of
fentanyl in violation of §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(C); one count of
distribution of fentanyl in violation of §§ 841(a)(1),
(b)(1)(B); one count of possession of fentanyl with intent to
distribute in violation of §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(A) (which
carries a 10-year mandatory minimum sentence); and one
count of possession of methamphetamine with intent to
distribute in violation of §§ 841(a)(1), (b)(1)(A) (which also
carries a 10-year mandatory minimum sentence). In January
2024, Reid pled guilty to all six charges in the indictment
pursuant to a conditional plea agreement which provided that
he would be sentenced only on counts one (conspiracy to
distribute
fentanyl)
and
six
(possession
of
methamphetamine), and under which he reserved his right to
appeal application of the career offender and obstruction of
justice enhancements to his sentence.
Relevant here, Reid had twice been convicted of
possession for sale of methamphetamine in violation of
California Health & Safety Code § 11378—once in 2009,
and once in 2014. In his PSR, Probation calculated Reid’s
Guidelines range as follows. Pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 2D1.1,
it determined his base offense level to be 32 based on the
“converted drug weight’' of the fentanyl and
methamphetamine together. Probation then applied the
career offender enhancement, § 4B1.1, which recast his
offense level to 37. Probation cited Reid’s two prior § 11378
convictions as the two qualifying predicate offenses for the

8

USA V. SOTO

enhancement. Probation then subtracted 3 points for
acceptance of responsibility, see U.S.S.G. § 3E1.1, resulting
in a total offense level of 34. His resulting Guidelines range
was 262–327 months.
The sentencing hearing took place in June 2024.
Counsel for Reid objected to the career-offender
enhancement and argued that the two § 11378 convictions
are not “controlled substance offenses” that qualify him for
the enhancement. The district court adopted the PSR’s
calculations and applied the career-offender enhancement.
The district court varied downward from the 262–327
months guideline range and sentenced at 188 months in
prison followed by five years of supervised release.
II. GOVERNING FEDERAL LAW
Soto and Reid appeal the district courts’ application of
the career-offender enhancement based on their § 11378
convictions for possession of methamphetamine or
amphetamine. The parties dispute whether a conviction
under § 11378 for a specified listed controlled substance
(e.g., methamphetamine) qualifies as a “controlled substance
offense” under U.S.S.G. § 4B1.2. That issue turns on a
question of California state law: when a defendant is charged
with possession of a specified substance under § 11378,
whether the state must prove, and a jury must unanimously
agree, that the defendant possessed the actual substance
charged rather than an analog of that substance. For
example, if a defendant is charged with possession of
methamphetamine under § 11378, must the state prove, and
the jury unanimously agree, that the substance the defendant
possessed was actual methamphetamine and not an analog
of methamphetamine? Or may the state alternatively prove
the charge by showing that the defendant possessed an

USA V. SOTO

9

analog of methamphetamine consistent with California’s
definition of controlled substance analogs, California Health
& Safety Code § 11401?
To illustrate why application of a federal sentencing
guideline turns on a question of California law, we briefly
explain the relevant inquiry under federal law. To determine
whether a prior conviction under state law meets the
definition of “controlled substance offense” under federal
law, we follow the “categorical approach” set forth in Taylor
v. United States, 495 U.S. 575 (1990). There are three
possible steps. First, we “compare the elements of the
statutory definition of the crime of conviction with a federal
definition of the crime to determine whether conduct
proscribed by the statute is broader than the generic federal
definition.” United States v. Lee, 704 F.3d 785, 788 (9th Cir.
2012). “If a state law ‘proscribes the same amount of or less
conduct than’ that qualifying as a federal drug trafficking
offense, then the two offenses are a categorical match,” and
that “end[s] our analysis.” United States v. Martinez-Lopez,
864 F.3d 1034, 1038 (9th Cir. 2017) (en banc) (quoting
United States v. Hernandez, 769 F.3d 1059, 1062 (9th Cir.
2014) (per curiam)). But “[i]f the statute criminalizes
conduct beyond that covered by the Guidelines—regardless
of the defendant’s actual conduct,” we proceed to step two.
United States v. Tagatac, 36 F.4th 1000, 1004 (9th Cir.
2022).
At step two, we ask if the overbroad state statute is
“divisible.” Martinez-Lopez, 864 F.3d at 1038. Our
certified question arises at this step. “A statute is divisible
only when it ‘list[s] elements in the alternative, and thereby
define[s] multiple crimes.’” Id. (alterations in original)
(quoting Mathis v. United States, 579 U.S. 500, 504–05
(2016)). By contrast, a statute is indivisible if it merely

10

USA V. SOTO

“describes different ways to prove a single set of elements.”
Tagatac, 36 F.4th at 1004.
Elements are “those
circumstances on which the jury must unanimously agree,”
while means are “those circumstances on which the jury may
disagree yet still convict.” Rendon v. Holder, 764 F.3d 1077,
1086 (9th Cir. 2014). “[I]f a statute is both overbroad and
indivisible, a prior conviction under that statute will never
qualify as a predicate . . . offense under the federal
sentencing guidelines,” and our analysis ends. MartinezLopez, 864 F.3d at 1039. If the statute is divisible, we
proceed to step three to apply the “modified categorical
approach.” Id.
At step three, “we examine judicially noticeable
documents of conviction ‘to determine which statutory
phrase was the basis for the conviction.’” Id. (quoting
Descamps v. United States, 570 U.S. 254, 263 (2013)).
“[T]he prior state conviction may serve as a predicate
offense under the sentencing guidelines” only if “the
defendant pled or was found guilty of the elements
constituting a federal drug trafficking offense.” MartinezLopez, 864 F.3d at 1039.
III. PARTIES’ ARGUMENTS
The parties dispute several legal issues, in addition to the
issue that is the subject of this certification order. We will
explain our resolution of these issues as necessary when we
issue our final disposition. Because we resolve the relevant
predicate legal issues in favor of Defendants, 2 the outcome
These issues include: (1) whether United States v. Rodriguez-Gamboa,
972 F.3d 1148 (9th Cir. 2020), and similar cases conclusively hold that
California’s definition of methamphetamine is not broader than the
federal definition and therefore control the outcome of these appeals; and

2

USA V. SOTO

11

of this appeal turns on the issue we certify here, which arises
at step two of the categorical analysis.
At step two, we must determine whether § 11378 is
divisible. The parties agree that under California precedent
“each specifically-listed category of controlled substance”—
e.g., methamphetamine, cocaine, and heroin—“is an
alternative element” for purposes of a conviction under
§ 11378.
“[P]ossession of narcotics under different
classifications of the [California] Health and Safety Code
may be charged and punished as separate crimes.” People v.
Schroeder, 70 Cal. Rptr. 491, 499 (Ct. App. 1968); see In re
Adams, 536 P.2d 473, 477 (Cal. 1975) (“simultaneous
possession of different types of drugs properly may be
multiply punished” (citation modified)). The parties also
agree that variations of a given listed substance—e.g.,
“methamphetamine, its salts, isomers, and salts of its
isomers,” Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11055(d)(2)—are
different “means of committing” the same offense. United
States v. Furaha, 992 F.3d 871, 875 (9th Cir. 2021); see
Adams, 536 P.2d at 477 (“[T]his rule does not apply if the
drugs possessed are all of one kind, such as various
derivatives of the drug opium.” (emphasis added)). Thus, a
person who simultaneously possesses methamphetamine
and heroin may be charged with two separate crimes,
(1) possession of methamphetamine and (2) possession of
heroin. But a person who simultaneously possesses two
isomers of methamphetamine—e.g., D-methamphetamine
and L-methamphetamine 3 —may be charged only for one
(2) whether § 11378 is overbroad compared to the federal definition at
step one of the categorical analysis.
There are two main isomers of methamphetamine, Dmethamphetamine and L-methamphetamine. See The Low-Down on

3

12

USA V. SOTO

crime, possession of methamphetamine, and the jury need
not agree on which particular isomers the defendant
possessed to convict.
The parties dispute whether possession of a controlled
substance analog is an alternative means of proving
possession of the controlled substance of which it is an
analog, or whether possession of a controlled substance
analog is an alternative element defining a separate crime.
Resolution of this issue is dispositive. If the California
Supreme Court concludes that the state may prove a § 11378
charge for possession of a specified listed controlled
substance (e.g., methamphetamine) by showing the
defendant possessed either the actual specified listed
substance or an analog of that substance, then Defendants
would prevail. We would conclude that § 11378 is “both
overbroad and indivisible” at step two, and “a prior
conviction under that statute will never qualify as a predicate
. . . offense under the federal sentencing guidelines.”
Martinez-Lopez, 864 F.3d at 1039. But if the California
Supreme Court concludes that the state must prove a § 11378
charge for possession of a specified listed controlled
substance by showing the defendant possessed that actual
substance and not an analog of that substance, then we will
affirm the sentences. We would proceed to step three to
apply the “modified categorical approach,” id., and we
would conclude that the Government prevails at that step.

Methamphetamine Isomers: Prevalence and Pharmacology in Humans,
U.
Wisc.
Sch.
Pharmacy:
Barkholtz
Rsch.
Grp.,
https://pharmacy.wisc.edu/faculty/barkholtz-researchgroup/research/the-low-down-on-methamphetamine-isomersprevalence-and-pharmacology-in-humans/ (last visited Dec. 30, 2025).

USA V. SOTO

13

We see no clear answer under existing California
precedent. We summarize the parties’ arguments below.
A. Defendants’ Arguments
Soto and Reid argue that California precedent shows that
possession of a controlled substance analog is an alternative
means of proving possession of the controlled substance to
which it is an analog—i.e., a jury may convict without
unanimously agreeing that the defendant possessed the
actual listed substance or an analog. Defendants cite both
the statutory language and California case law. First,
Defendants note that California Health & Safety Code
§ 11401(a) states that “[a] controlled substance analog shall
. . . be treated the same as the controlled substance classified
in Section 11054 or 11055 . . . of which it is an analog.”
They argue that an analog of a controlled substance should
therefore be treated as a variety of that substance (like salts
and isomers of methamphetamine), rather than as separate
substances.
Second, Defendants cite People v. Becker, 107 Cal. Rptr.
3d 856 (Ct. App. 2010). In Becker, the defendant was
charged with possession of “ecstasy.” 107 Cal. Rptr. 3d at
858. At the time, ecstasy (or MDMA) was not listed in the
California Health and Safety Code as a distinct controlled
substance, id. at 859, and the state’s position on “whether
Ecstasy or [MDMA] was a controlled substance . . . or . . .
an analog of another controlled substance” was unclear, id.
at 861. The defendant had argued that “his due process
rights were violated because . . . the [charging instrument]
alleged only that Ecstasy was a controlled substance, not a

14

USA V. SOTO

controlled substance analog.” Id. at 860. The California
Court of Appeal held:
[F]or due process purposes there was no need
to allege that Ecstasy was an analog of a
controlled substance as opposed to a
controlled substance, for purposes of section
11378 . . . . The references in count 5 of the
information to “Ecstasy,” “controlled
substance” and section 11378 fully apprised
defendant that the prosecution was alleging
and would seek to prove that Ecstasy was a
controlled substance for purposes of section
11378 . . . .
Id. at 860–61.
Soto and Reid argue that because
constitutional due process requires that the elements of a
charged crime be stated in a charging instrument, see
Hamling v. United States, 418 U.S. 87, 117 (1974) (U.S.
Constitution requires an indictment to “contain[] the
elements of the offense charged”), “the fact that the
California court considered it inconsequential that the
[charging instrument] alleged only a street name, without
alleging whether the substance was a methamphetamine
analog[] or whether it actually contained methamphetamine,
indicates the court did not consider these to be separate
‘elements,’ but rather mere ‘means.’”
The defendant in Becker had also argued that “evidence
failed to show that Ecstasy is either a controlled substance or
an analog of a controlled substance.” 107 Cal. Rptr. 3d at

USA V. SOTO

15

859. The California Court of Appeal rejected that argument
and explained:
Based on the investigator’s testimony, the
jury could have reasonably concluded that
Ecstasy or [MDMA] was (1) a controlled
substance itself or (2) a controlled substance
analog of methamphetamine.
Thus,
substantial evidence supports defendant’s
conviction . . . whether Ecstasy is a
controlled substance itself or a controlled
substance analog of methamphetamine.
Id. at 860 (emphasis added). Soto and Reid argue that, in so
holding, the California Court of Appeal made clear that
“methamphetamine and its analog[s] are interchangeable
means of committing a California controlled substance
offense, as opposed to separate elements that must be
separately charged and proven.”
Soto and Reid also cite People v. Davis, 303 P.3d 1179
(Cal. 2013), a California Supreme Court case which
approvingly cited Becker and stated: “Proof that MDMA
qualifies as a controlled substance or analog is an element
of the crimes set out in sections 11377 and 11379.” Davis,
303 P.3d at 1182 (emphasis added).
Finally, Soto and Reid point to the relevant California
jury instruction. The Defendants explain:
The relevant jury instruction for § 11378,
CALCRIM No. 2302, begins with the phrase
“[t]he defendant is charged [in Count ___]
with possession for sale of _____ <insert type
of controlled substance>,” and then goes on

16

USA V. SOTO

to permit the prosecution to prove that charge
by showing that the defendant possessed “an
analog of _____ <insert type of controlled
substance>[.]” See CALCRIM No. 2302.
They argue that the jury instruction “on its face . . . invites
the prosecution to charge a ‘type of controlled substance’
like
methamphetamine,
but
then
prove
that
methamphetamine charge with evidence that the defendant
possessed ‘an analog[] of’ that same ‘type of controlled
substance.’”
They argue, “That is treating a
methamphetamine analog[] as a means of committing a
methamphetamine offense, not as a distinct controlled
substance offense.”
B. Government’s Arguments
The Government argues that a specific listed controlled
substance and an analog of that substance are alternative
elements defining separate crimes under § 11378—i.e., the
state must prove, and the jury must unanimously agree, that
the defendant possessed either the actual listed controlled
substance or an analog of that substance.
The Government first notes that “California state law
treats the type of controlled substance as a separate element
in prosecuting relevant drug offenses” and that the California
jury instruction for a charge under § 11378 “requires the jury
to fill in the blank where the controlled substance is to be
identified.” Padilla-Martinez v. Holder, 770 F.3d 825, 831
n.3 (9th Cir. 2014). The Government argues that this means,
“If the substance at issue . . . is a controlled substance
analog[], ‘the judge must require the jury to name the
specific type of controlled substance and to find whether it
is an analog[] of a listed controlled substance,’” which shows

USA V. SOTO

17

that “the jury must unanimously agree that a particular
controlled substance analog[] is the basis of the defendant’s
conviction.” Marinelarena v. Garland, 6 F.4th 975, 977 (9th
Cir. 2021).
Next, the Government argues that although California
law provides that a controlled substance analog shall “be
treated the same as the controlled substance . . . of which it
is an analog,” Cal. Health & Safety Code § 11401(a), this is
only so “for purposes of . . . penalties and punishment,” id.
§ 11400; it “does not eliminate or modify the requirement
that a jury must unanimously agree about the substance that
was possessed.” Therefore, the fact that that California’s
definition of methamphetamine, Cal. Health & Safety Code
§ 11055(d)(2), “does not mention analog[s], . . . indicates
they are not treated the same as ‘salts,’ ‘isomers,’ or
‘derivates.’”
Finally, the Government argues for a different reading of
Becker. As explained, Becker held that “the jury could have
reasonably concluded that Ecstasy or [MDMA] was (1) a
controlled substance itself or (2) a controlled substance
analog of methamphetamine.” 107 Cal. Rptr. 3d at 860. The
Government argues even though the Becker jury did not
need to “agree on the legal ‘theory’ underlying [the
defendant’s] guilt, the indictment alleged and the jury
unanimously found—as a factual matter—that the drug
Becker possessed was Ecstasy,” not methamphetamine or a
methamphetamine analog. That fact is significant, the
Government argues, because “[u]nder California law, jurors
must agree on . . . what drug did the defendant possess,” and
not “the legal theory—whether that drug is a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog[].”

18

USA V. SOTO

*

*

*

In our view, both sides make sensible arguments. We
see no clear resolution to this dispositive question under
existing California precedent. We therefore respectfully ask
for guidance from the California Supreme Court.
IV. CERTIFIED QUESTION
Accordingly, we certify the following question to the
California Supreme Court:
When a defendant is charged with possession
of a listed controlled substance under
California Health & Safety Code § 11378,
must the state prove, and must the jury
unanimously agree, that the defendant
possessed the actual listed controlled
substance, and not an analog of that
substance as defined under California Health
& Safety Code § 11401? Or may the jury
convict if it finds the state has proven the
defendant possessed either the actual
controlled substance or an analog of that
substance, without unanimous agreement as
to which?
We will accept the decision of the California Supreme
Court as controlling. Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(b)(2). We do not
intend our framing of this question to restrict the California
Supreme Court’s consideration of any issues that it
determines are relevant. See Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(f)(5). Should
the California Supreme Court decide to consider the certified
question, it may, in its discretion, reformulate the question.

USA V. SOTO

19

See Broad v. Mannesmann Anlagenbau AG, 196 F.3d 1075,
1076 (9th Cir. 1999).
V. COUNSEL INFORMATION
The names and addresses of counsel or the parties, as
required by Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(b)(1), are as follows:
Counsel for Defendant Anthony Valentino Soto:
Sonam A. H. Henderson
Office of the Federal Public Defender
321 E 2nd Street
Los Angeles, CA 90012
Counsel for Defendant Stephen Reid:
Holt Ortiz Alden
Office of the Federal Public Defender
321 E 2nd Street
Los Angeles, CA 90012
Counsel for the United States:
Rajesh Ram Srinivasan
Office of the U.S. Attorney
312 N Spring Street, Suite 1200
Los Angeles, CA 90012
VI. CONCLUSION
The Clerk is directed to forward an original and ten
certified copies of this certification order, under official seal,
to the California Supreme Court. See Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(d).
The Clerk is also directed to transmit copies of all relevant
briefs, as well as any additional record materials requested
by the California Supreme Court. See Cal. R. Ct. 8.548(c).

20

USA V. SOTO

Submission of this appeal for decision is vacated and
deferred pending the California Supreme Court’s final
response to this certification order. The Clerk is directed to
administratively close this docket, pending further order.
The parties shall notify the Clerk of this court within
fourteen days of the California Supreme Court’s acceptance
or rejection of certification, and again, if certification is
accepted, within fourteen days of the California Supreme
Court’s issuance of a decision.
QUESTION
STAYED.

CERTIFIED;

PROCEEDINGS

