FOR PUBLICATION
UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS

FILED
MAR 10 2026
MOLLY C. DWYER, CLERK

FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
MARICRUZ MARISOL ROJASESPINOZA; ROBERT DAVID
SALVADOR-GOMEZ; DAVID ANGEL
SALVADOR-ROJAS; KORINA
SALVADOR-ROJAS,
Petitioners,

U.S. COURT OF APPEALS

No. 24-7536
Agency Nos.
A246-606-483
A246-606-482
A246-606-484
A246-606-485
ORDER

v.
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney General,
Respondent.

Before: Mary H. Murguia, Chief Judge, and Kim McLane Wardlaw, Ronald M.
Gould, Johnnie B. Rawlinson, Morgan B. Christen, Michelle T. Friedland, Eric D.
Miller, Bridget S. Bade, Kenneth K. Lee, Holly A. Thomas, and Eric C. Tung,
Circuit Judges.
Concurrence by Chief Judge Murguia
Statement by Judge Tung
Petitioners’ opposed motion to stay removal (Dkt. No. 3) is DENIED. See
Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 434 (2009); Leiva-Perez v. Holder, 640 F.3d 962,
964-65 (9th Cir. 2011). The temporary stay of removal entered pursuant to
General Order 6.4(c) is lifted, effective immediately.

FILED
MAR 10 2026

Rojas-Espinoza v. Bondi, No. 24-7536

MOLLY C. DWYER, CLERK
U.S. COURT OF APPEALS

MURGUIA, Chief Judge, concurring in the order denying petitioners’ motion to stay
removal:

I agree with the denial of petitioners’ motion to stay removal. I write
separately to respond to Judge Tung’s statement.
Judge Tung’s statement omits a crucial point: the lawfulness of the court’s stay
practice—carried out under a full-court-approved General Order that has been
publicly in place since 2002—is not an issue the parties raised to the three-judge
panel and is not an issue before this en banc court. Instead, the panel identified and
resolved an issue that neither the petitioners nor the government presented. In doing
so, the panel risked undermining the adversarial process and circumvented our longstanding procedures for raising such concerns.
The issue the panel raised—whether the court’s method of handling stay
motions in immigration cases is lawful—is one the court can and will address
through its established internal procedures governing its administrative and
policymaking responsibilities.
At any time, members of the court are free to take concerns regarding court
procedures to the Court Executive Committee. This ensures that institutional
policies reflect a deliberative process that accounts for all relevant procedural and
legal considerations. Consistent with that practice, a review has already been
initiated to reexamine the most efficient way to manage the court’s enormous

immigration docket, including the court’s stay-of-removal procedures.

Any

proposed changes to the court’s procedures will be reviewed and decided by the full
court.
The panel’s order unilaterally disrupted the court’s internal governance and
policymaking structure by purporting to announce a change in long-standing internal
procedure that was adopted and refined over time by the full court. The full court
corrected this error by vacating the panel’s order. 1 The en banc court is now properly
focused on the matters actually before it: (1) the motion to stay removal and (2) the
petition for review. Today’s order addresses the first of those matters by denying the
stay.
I do not address here the regrettable factual, procedural, and legal inaccuracies
in Judge Tung’s statement. The en banc court will resolve the issues before it, and

Judge Tung relies on Mississippi Publishing Corp. v. Murphree, 326 U.S. 438, 443–
44 (1946), to support the assertion that the panel properly considered the lawfulness
of the court’s procedure. Statement respecting the denial of motion to stay removal
at 5 (Tung, J.). In Murphree, the Court acknowledged that procedural rules are not
immune from judicial scrutiny. 326 U.S. at 444. However, the Supreme Court’s
consideration of a procedural rule was appropriate in Murphree because, unlike the
parties here, the defendant in that case directly challenged the rule in question. See
id. at 443. By contrast, neither party so much as mentioned our internal procedures
prior to the panel’s sua sponte declaration that they are unlawful. And, contrary to
Judge Tung’s suggestion, the Government did not initially raise our procedures to
the three-judge panel. The Government briefed the issue only after the panel
published its order and in response to the court’s request for supplemental briefing
as part of en banc proceedings.
1

the full court will examine its internal procedures as part of its long-standing
administrative and policymaking responsibilities.

FILED
MAR 10 2026
MOLLY C. DWYER, CLERK
Rojas-Espinoza v. Bondi, No. 24-7536
U.S. COURT OF APPEALS
TUNG, Circuit Judge, statement respecting the denial of motion to stay removal:

This case reflects the assertion of raw power by a majority of this court rather
than the reasoned decisionmaking in accordance with law that the parties expect of
us and that our judicial role demands.
A majority of this court granted en banc, resulting in the vacatur of a threejudge panel decision that had denied the petitioners’ motion for stay and identified
the unlawfulness of this court’s practice of automatically granting stays of removal
opposed by the government—stays that would last for the entirety of the appeal
before the merits of the stay are ever considered (periods of time that could last
months or years). Rojas-Espinoza v. Bondi, 160 F.4th 991, 1000–01 (9th Cir. 2025)
(Nelson, Collins, and VanDyke, JJ.), reh’g en banc granted, opinion vacated, No.
24-7536, 2026 WL 483470 (9th Cir. Feb. 20, 2026); see also Rojas-Espinoza v.
Bondi, No. 24-7536, 2026 WL 483470, at *2 (9th Cir. Feb. 20, 2026) (VanDyke, J.,
dissenting from the grant of rehearing en banc). The en banc panel today denies the
petitioners’ motion to stay removal, validating part of the three-judge panel’s
decision. But with respect to the unlawfulness of this court’s practice of granting
automatic stays, which the panel called out, the en banc panel is deafeningly silent.
On a matter so consequential, and as judges whose job is to say what the law is, the
en banc panel should have offered some explanation. Instead, we hear nothing.
*

*
1

*

In this case, the petitioners had filed a motion for a stay of removal on
December 13, 2024, that should have been denied soon after its filing. The motion,
barebones in its presentation, was patently frivolous: it made no effort to explain the
grounds for relief (merely stating that substantive issues of law required a stay); and
it invoked an outdated statutory provision (authorizing automatic stays) that had long
been repealed. See Petition for Review with Motion for Issuance of Order Staying
Removal Pending Resolution of the Petition (Dkt. 3.1) at 2–3. The government
opposed the motion. Instead of sending the motion to the next available motions
panel for disposition, this court (through the Clerk’s Office and without any
involvement of an Article III judge) granted an automatic stay, without assessing the
merits, and waited until after the merits briefing had been completed before sending
the motion to the merits panel for disposition. Thus, the stay lasted until today—
well over a year after petitioners filed their stay motion.
The court’s practice of granting such prolonged automatic stays of removal,
the panel explained, was “manifestly unlawful.” Rojas-Espinoza v. Bondi, 160 F.4th
at 1002. The Supreme Court has long admonished that stays of removal are “not a
matter of right” (Nken v. Holder, 556 U.S. 418, 433 (2009) (citation omitted));
instructed that a court must not “reflexively hold[] a final order in abeyance pending
review” (id. at 427); placed the burden on the applicant to show that a stay is
warranted (id. at 433–34); and required that a court must apply the “traditional stay
2

factors” in each case (including asking “whether the applicant has made a strong
showing that he is likely to succeed on the merits” and weighing the “public interest”
among other factors). Id. at 426; see also id. at 438 (Kennedy, J., concurring)
(“[C]ourts should not grant stays of removal on a routine basis.”).
Nevertheless, our court has disregarded (and continues to disregard) these
instructions in its implementation of an automatic-stay policy.

In this court,

prolonged stays of removal are issued virtually as a matter of right; the court
reflexively grants stays pending the appeals process; it places the burden not on the
applicant to show why a stay is warranted, but on the government to oppose the stay
and to seek a more expedient resolution; and it does not assess any of the traditional
stay factors, including the merits or the public interest, before granting the automatic
stay. Our practice, simply put, lacks any legal justification.
The panel pointed all this out and ordered an end to the unlawful practice. In
particular, the panel, in considering the “public interest” factor, quoted Nken and
stated that “‘[public] interest in prompt removal may be heightened by the
circumstances as well,’ including if the alien ‘has substantially prolonged his stay by
abusing the process provided to him.’” Rojas-Espinoza, 160 F.4th at 1000 (emphasis
in original) (quoting Nken, 556 U.S. at 436). The panel considered whether the
heightened need for prompt removal was mitigated by the fact that the court’s own

3

“process” caused the “substantially prolonged” stay, and answered that the need was
not mitigated, because the process itself was unlawful. Id. at 1001.
The panel held that, once the opposed stay motion was fully briefed, the
motion and opposition should have been presented by the Clerk’s Office to the next
available motions panel. Id. at 1002. The panel ordered that, going forward, this
court had to follow that practice (consistent with Nken)—instead of following its
current practice (inconsistent with Nken) of granting a stay and presenting the stay
motion to a merits panel until after the merits briefing has been completed,
effectively prolonging the stay until after the merits have been decided. Id.
This court has now vacated the panel’s decision. The en banc panel appears
to have validated the three-judge panel’s reasoning by swiftly issuing a terse order
denying the petitioners’ motion to stay removal. But the en banc panel says
absolutely nothing about whether the court’s practice of granting prolonged
automatic stays is lawful. The three-judge panel carefully explained that this court’s
practice defies Supreme Court precedent. Yet not a single member of this en banc
panel has tried in its order to rebut that conclusion. Meanwhile, the majority has
successfully erased it as precedent. Under cover of darkness, the en banc court
buried the body, and there is not much hope of a resurrection.
The Chief Judge’s concurrence only makes matters worse. First, to avoid
addressing the unlawfulness of this court’s automatic-stay practice, the concurrence
4

asserts that the parties did not raise the issue. But that assertion is not accurate. In
its opposition brief, the government argued that this court “must make an
‘individualized judgment’” (Dkt. 12.1 at 5 (quoting Nken, 556 U.S. at 419)), and in
a supplemental brief, it argued that “extended delay in adjudication” caused by the
court’s practice “‘squarely violates’ the Supreme Court instruction in Nken that
courts may not ‘reflexively’ hold cases pending review” (Dkt. 35.1 at 5).
Next, the concurrence says that the panel committed “error” when it
“unilaterally disrupted the court’s internal governance and policymaking structure
by purporting to announce a change in long-standing internal procedure[.]” Conc.
Op. 2. But to call out the procedure’s unlawfulness and to order compliance is not
“error”—unless the procedure is lawful, a claim the concurrence refuses to defend.
In the concurrence’s view, it is the job of a “committee” (and not a court) to examine
the procedure’s validity. But that view is baseless. See, e.g., Mississippi Pub. Corp.
v. Murphree, 326 U.S. 438, 444 (1946) (“The fact that this Court promulgated the
rules as formulated and recommended by the Advisory Committee does not
foreclose consideration of their validity, meaning or consistency.”). Relegating this
issue for “review” by a “committee” is to ensure its death. Perhaps that is the point.
Finally, the Chief Judge claims that my statement is rife with “regrettable
factual, procedural, and legal inaccuracies[.]” Conc. Op. 2. I would be grateful to
learn what they are. She concededly does not identify any.
5

*

*

*

The en banc panel’s total failure to engage with the panel’s reasoning might
be understandable. To do so might underscore the lawlessness of this court’s practice
governing stays of removal. But reasoned disagreement, explained in our decisions,
is a hallmark of our system. We are not party functionaries of a politburo in which
raw political power is asserted in backrooms and without reason. We are members
of a court. We exercise judgment, not will, and we are bound by law. “[R]eason,”
as Lord Coke reminds us, “is the soul of law.” Milborn’s Case, 7 Co. Rep. 6b, 7a
(1587). In acting without reason here, we risk losing our character as a court.

6

