FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
In re: MEHRI AKHLAGHPOUR
Debtor.
____________________________
MEHRI AKHLAGHPOUR,

No. 24-2625
BAP No.
23-1059

OPINION

Appellant.
v.
GIOVANNI ORANTES; LUIS
SOLORZANO; ORANTES LAW
FIRM,
Appellees.
Appeal from the Ninth Circuit
Bankruptcy Appellate Panel
William J. Lafferty, III, Gary A. Spraker, and Scott H. Gan,
Bankruptcy Judges, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 19, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed January 20, 2026

2

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

Before: Kim McLane Wardlaw and Anthony D. Johnstone,
Circuit Judges, and Scott H. Rash, District Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Rash
SUMMARY**
Bankruptcy
The panel: (1) reversed the Bankruptcy Appellate
Panel’s decision reversing the bankruptcy court’s order
granting a debtor’s motion for leave to continue prosecuting
an ongoing state court legal malpractice suit against her
former bankruptcy counsel; (2) vacated the bankruptcy
court’s order in part; and (3) remanded with instructions to
the bankruptcy court.
Under the Barton doctrine, a person who sues a lawyer
appointed by the bankruptcy court for acts done in the
lawyer’s official capacity in a forum other than bankruptcy
court must seek leave of the bankruptcy court to do
so. Under the Rooker-Feldman doctrine, federal district
courts generally lack jurisdiction over cases brought by
state-court losers complaining of injuries caused by statecourt judgments rendered before the district court
proceedings commenced and inviting district court review
*

The Honorable Scott H. Rash, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

3

and rejection of those judgments. The panel held that a
bankruptcy court’s order granting leave to sue under the
Barton doctrine does not amount to a modification of state
court decisions arising from an improperly filed state court
action. Accordingly, the Rooker-Feldman doctrine did not
bar the debtor’s Barton motion.
The panel held that although the bankruptcy court did not
abuse its discretion in granting leave pursuant to Barton, it
did abuse its discretion to the extent that its approval was
inconsistent with a decision of the California Court of
Appeal. The panel held that if claims subject to Barton are
asserted in another forum without prior approval, and the
bankruptcy court later grants leave to proceed on those
claims after the other forum has already issued a decision,
then the bankruptcy court’s order should be narrowly
tailored to the jurisdictional issue and avoid implying that its
approval grants any other relief. The bankruptcy court also
abused its discretion by granting Barton approval for posttrustee-appointment claims not subject to the doctrine. The
panel remanded to the bankruptcy court with instructions to
enter an order granting Barton approval to file claims in state
court that are consistent with the California Court of
Appeal’s decision.
COUNSEL
Farrah A. Mirabel (argued), Law Office of Farrah Mirabel,
Los Angeles, California, for Appellant.
Corinne C. Bertsche (argued), Lewis Brisbois Bisgaard &
Smith LLP, San Diego, California; David Samani, Lewis
Brisbois Bisgaard & Smith LLP, Los Angeles, California;
for Appellees.

4

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

OPINION
RASH, District Judge:
Under Barton and its bankruptcy-tailored progeny, a
person who sues a lawyer appointed by the bankruptcy court
for acts done in the lawyer’s official capacity in a forum
other than bankruptcy court must seek leave of the
bankruptcy court to do so. See generally Barton v. Barbour,
104 U.S. 126 (1881). In this case, we consider the extent to
which the Barton doctrine intersects with the RookerFeldman doctrine. In other words, we must decide whether
a bankruptcy court’s order granting leave to sue amounted to
a modification of state court decisions arising from an
improperly filed state court action. We hold it does not, and,
therefore, reverse the Bankruptcy Appellate Panel’s
decision. However, because the bankruptcy court otherwise
abused its discretion, we vacate the bankruptcy court’s order
in part and remand to the bankruptcy court with instructions
under our clarified standards detailed below.
I.

Background

This appeal arose following Debtor Mehri
Akhlaghpour’s success in obtaining leave of the bankruptcy
court to continue, rather than begin, an ongoing legal
malpractice suit in state court against her former bankruptcy
attorney, Giovanni Orantes, and his firm (collectively,
“Orantes” or “Appellees”).
a. Underlying Bankruptcy & Related Events
In late 2017, Akhlaghpour met with Orantes to discuss
the possibility of filing a bankruptcy petition. During the
meeting, Orantes recommended a Chapter 11 petition and
Akhlaghpour agreed to filing it. On October 11, 2017,

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

5

Akhlaghpour filed a voluntary Chapter 11 petition through
Orantes as her counsel. The bankruptcy court approved
Orantes as counsel for the estate effective as of the petition’s
filing.
Due to suspicions regarding the timing of liens recorded
against Akhlaghpour’s properties, on February 4, 2018, the
bankruptcy court appointed a trustee who immediately
sought to liquidate Akhlaghpour’s properties. Two months
later, after some properties had been sold by the trustee,
Orantes moved to dismiss the petition. The bankruptcy court
denied the motion on May 15, 2018, in part due to the
expense already incurred to liquidate the properties.
b. Related State Court Decisions
On December 27, 2019, Akhlaghpour sued Orantes in
the Los Angeles County Superior Court (“superior court”)
for legal malpractice related to her bankruptcy. She later
filed a First Amended Complaint. Orantes moved to dismiss
the complaint on three grounds: the Barton doctrine, res
judicata based on approval of the fee application, and
Akhlaghpour’s lack of standing because the claims belonged
to the bankruptcy estate. The superior court granted the
motion without leave to amend and dismissed the action
“solely based upon the Barton doctrine.”
The California Court of Appeal for the Second District
of California reversed in part and affirmed in part.
Akhlaghpour v. Orantes, 86 Cal. App. 5th 232 (2022).
Specifically, the Court of Appeal held the Barton doctrine
applied to Akhlaghpour’s claims against Orantes for actions

6

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

taken as debtor-in-possession1 counsel but did not apply to
claims for actions taken as debtor-out-of-possession
counsel—i.e., after the trustee was appointed on February 4,
2018—finding Orantes had concluded his court-approved
representation on February 6, 2018. Id. at 248–49.
Specifically, the court noted that “rather than depending on
timing, application of the Barton doctrine here depends on
whether the suit involves actions taken by a court-approved
officer in his or her official capacity to administer the estate
or protect its assets (it did) and whether the claims were part
of the estate (they were).” Id. at 248. In a footnote, the
appeals court stated it expressed “no opinion regarding the
extent to which allegations of malpractice occurring after a
trustee appointment could—similar to prepetition conduct—
‘cross the divide’ and implicate the Barton doctrine. That
issue may depend, in part, on the nature of the allegations
Akhlaghpour chooses to make in any amended complaint.”
Id. at 249 n.8.2 When discussing the propriety of leave to
amend, the court emphasized that “the Barton doctrine and
Orantes’s fee application order do not bar the limited subset
of Akhlaghpour’s potential claims based on Orantes’s
actions as her counsel as a debtor out of possession beyond
February 6, 2018, after the trustee appointment,” so long as
any amended complaint were to establish standing. Id. at
254.

1

When a trustee is appointed in a Chapter 11 case, the debtor previously
“in-possession” becomes a debtor “out of possession,” and at that point,
or sometime soon after, his or her lawyer no longer serves as the lawyer
for the estate.
2

Unfortunately, the amended complaint Akhlaghpour presumably filed
in state court does not appear in the record for this bankruptcy appeal.

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

7

c. Proceedings Below
On February 2, 2023, the bankruptcy court reopened
Akhlaghpour’s case upon her motion. Soon thereafter, she
filed a motion under Barton seeking authorization “to
continue her prosecution of the pending” superior court
action. After the motion was fully briefed, the court held a
hearing. At some point before the hearing, the bankruptcy
court issued a tentative ruling:
Grant with respect to the period of time from
and including October 5, 2017 to October 10,
2017. As noted by the State of California
Court of Appeal, this period of time is not
subject to the doctrine of res judicata.
With respect to movant’s claims, neither the
Barton doctrine nor res judicata apply for the
period of time following February 6, 2018.
Consequently, for that period of time as well,
the movant may pursue any claims against
the defendants in the state court litigation.
During the hearing, the bankruptcy court heard from the
parties and found there was a prima facie case sufficient to
support its Barton approval.3 Accordingly, the bankruptcy
court granted in part and denied in part the Barton motion,
consistent with its tentative ruling on the appropriate
timeframes. Orantes appealed to the Bankruptcy Appellate
Panel (“BAP”).

3

Throughout this opinion, we will refer to the bankruptcy court’s
decision as either “granting leave pursuant to Barton” or “Barton
approval.” We use these terms interchangeably.

8

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

In a split decision, the BAP vacated the bankruptcy
court’s order and remanded with instructions for the
bankruptcy court to dismiss the Barton motion for lack of
jurisdiction. The BAP majority concluded “the bankruptcy
court authorized the continued litigation of claims that had
previously been dismissed.” Specifically, the majority
reasoned the bankruptcy court’s order violated the RookerFeldman doctrine because it “reverse[d], modif[ied], or at
least, ignore[d]” the Court of Appeal and superior court
rulings.
The BAP dissent concluded that granting leave under
Barton can never violate the Rooker-Feldman doctrine. The
dissenting judge reasoned “[t]he order does not allow
Akhlaghpour to amend her complaint to assert the
prepetition claims; it merely authorizes her to proceed in the
case unfettered by the Barton doctrine’s jurisdictional bar.”
Moreover, the dissent concluded “Akhlaghpour may
‘continue’ with her pending case, but she remains bound by
procedural and substantive law of the state court, including
the Court of Appeal’s decision denying leave to amend the
complaint to allege claims barred by the Barton doctrine.”
According to the dissent, “[n]othing in the bankruptcy
court’s order purports to change this,” and, therefore, the
dissenting judge “would affirm the bankruptcy court’s
decision to grant Barton leave for prepetition claims and
modify the order to clarify that nothing in the bankruptcy
court’s order affects state procedural or substantive law in
the case.”
After the BAP denied Akhlaghpour’s motion for
rehearing, Akhlaghpour timely appealed to this Court.

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

II.

9

Discussion

We review de novo the BAP’s conclusions of law and
independently review the bankruptcy court’s decision
appealed to the BAP. In re Cool Fuel, Inc., 210 F.3d 999,
1001–02 (9th Cir. 2000). We review for abuse of discretion
the bankruptcy court’s decision to grant leave to sue in
another forum pursuant to Barton. See In re Yellowstone
Mountain Club, LLC, 841 F.3d 1090, 1094 (9th Cir. 2016);
see also In re Kashani, 190 B.R. 875, 885–86 (9th Cir. BAP
1995).
a. Application of the Barton Doctrine
In Barton v. Barbour, the Supreme Court held suits
against receivers4 in courts other than the court charged with
administration of the estate were barred by common law.
104 U.S. at 127. In the bankruptcy context, this doctrine
generally requires a debtor to obtain leave of the bankruptcy
court before filing suit in another forum against an “officer
appointed by the bankruptcy court for acts done in the
officer’s official capacity.” In re Crown Vantage, Inc., 421
F.3d 963, 970 (9th Cir. 2005); see also id. at 976 (“The
essence of the Barton doctrine is that parties may not
commence or maintain unauthorized litigation.”).
Our prior decisions indicate subsequent bankruptcy
court approval can cure a jurisdictional issue arising from a
suit filed without Barton approval. See In re Harris, 590
F.3d 730 (9th Cir. 2009). In Harris, the plaintiff sought to
4

A receiver is a “disinterested person appointed by a court, or by a
corporation or other person, for the protection or collection of property
that is the subject of diverse claims (for example, because it belongs to a
bankrupt or is otherwise being litigated).” Receiver, Black’s Law
Dictionary (12th ed. 2024).

10

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

sue the bankruptcy trustee along with several other
individuals in California state court, and the case was
removed to the bankruptcy court by the trustee. Id. at 736.
Relevant here, the bankruptcy court dismissed the complaint
under the Barton doctrine because the plaintiff had not
sought leave of the bankruptcy court before suing in state
court. Id. We held this dismissal was erroneous, explaining
Barton only precluded litigation in another forum without
the bankruptcy court’s leave, and once the case was removed
to the bankruptcy court, the jurisdictional defect was cured.
Id. at 741–42. We now clarify how this rule operates when
Barton leave is granted after state courts have issued
decisions in the case.
Although the instant case arose in a slightly different
context—a plaintiff seeking permission after filing in state
court as opposed to a defendant seeking removal to the
bankruptcy court—the rationale remains the same.
Appellees’ arguments to the contrary subvert the rationale of
Harris, require us to extrapolate quotes from prior decisions
to their most extreme degree, and ignore the purpose of the
Barton doctrine altogether. Therefore, we hold a bankruptcy
court may provide Barton permission after a case in another
forum has been initiated. See id. at 742 (“[A]bsent leave of
the appointing court, the Barton doctrine denies subject
matter jurisdiction to all forums except the appointing
court.”). We address Appellees’ three main arguments
offered for departing from our prior decisions in turn.
First, Appellees assert the bankruptcy court can do no
more than “order cessation of the improper action,” as this is
the “only appropriate remedy” for failing to obtain leave
under Barton in the first instance. See Crown Vantage, 421
F.3d at 976. This statement cannot be read as broadly as
Appellees suggest, however, because it was nestled within a

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

11

discussion about the standards the bankruptcy court should
apply when deciding whether to enjoin a suit filed in the
absence of Barton approval pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 105. Id.
That opinion, especially its section discussing the
bankruptcy code’s unique statutory requirements governing
injunctions, does not speak to the standards a bankruptcy
court should apply when contemplating other actions, such
as granting approval to proceed on certain claims in another
forum in an ongoing case. It would be illogical to apply this
language in circumstances such as these, where the
bankruptcy court acted pursuant to a common-law rule in
granting leave to sue, rather than in response to a party’s
motion to enjoin proceedings.5 Accordingly, the statement
about “the only appropriate remedy” being cessation of the
action, put in its proper context, does not support Appellees’
proffered rule, which would require an action filed without
Barton approval to be functionally enjoined as a matter of
course.
Appellees highlight other language from Crown Vantage
as supportive of their position—“a party must first obtain
leave of the bankruptcy court before it initiates an action in
another forum against a bankruptcy trustee or other officer
appointed by the bankruptcy court for acts done in the
officer’s official capacity.” Id. at 970 (emphasis added). Yet
this language still does not explain what happens in a case
where some claims may relate to official duties and some do
not, as is the case here. Therefore, these generic statements
in Crown Vantage do not mandate, or even support, ruling
in favor of Appellees’ extreme rule.
5

We note Appellees could have moved to reopen the bankruptcy case
and to enjoin the state court proceedings pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 105,
but they did not do so.

12

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

Second, we are not persuaded by Appellees’ assertion
that a suit filed without Barton approval is void ab initio and,
by extension, the bankruptcy court can do nothing to cure the
failure to seek leave in the first instance.6 This proposed rule
fails to account for the fact that some claims within a
complaint may require Barton approval while others will
not. It follows that failure to get Barton approval for one
claim cannot render the entire suit null from the beginning.
And, even so, this problem would be for the state court (or
other forum of a plaintiff’s choosing) to sort out, not for the
bankruptcy court evaluating a parallel Barton motion to take
into consideration. Lastly, and critically, the void ab initio
rule fails to comport with Harris. See Harris, 590 F.3d at
741–42.
Third, the bankruptcy court’s order was not nunc pro
tunc. Such orders are generally understood as “[h]aving
retroactive legal effect through a court’s inherent power.”
Nunc pro tunc, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024). To
support their nunc pro tunc characterization, Appellees cite
a district court case, In re Sedgwick, 560 B.R. 786 (Bankr.
C.D. Cal. 2016), and note “Barton permission could not be
obtained retroactively and . . . even if such permission was
sought by nunc pro tunc order, ‘exceptional circumstances’
must be shown to excuse the failure to seek Barton approval
prior to the commencement of the state court proceedings.”
Sedgwick is of no moment because Akhlaghpour sought
neither retroactive approval nor nunc pro tunc relief. Barton
approval following an unauthorized suit can only operate to
remove a jurisdictional bar to future actions in another forum
and does not have retroactive legal effect through the
6

Void ab initio means “[n]ull from the beginning.” Void ab initio,
Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed. 2024).

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

13

bankruptcy court’s inherent power.7 Therefore, it cannot be
characterized as nunc pro tunc.
Appellees seem to ask us to adopt a one-strike rule
requiring dismissal of the suit filed without Barton approval
while recognizing a plaintiff may refile anew in another
forum once Barton approval is obtained. As detailed above,
Appellees provide no mandatory authority for such a rule nor
any compelling justification. Moreover, as a practical
matter, this rule is unworkable. For example, the Barton
authorization requirement serves an important function
where there is ambiguity as to the capacity in which an actor
was operating, such as counsel for a client who later
becomes a debtor, counsel for a prospective debtor, courtapproved counsel for a debtor-in-possession, and later
counsel for a debtor-out-of-possession or the estate. Were
we to adopt a rule requiring dismissal of the suit in the other
forum before the bankruptcy court could grant leave under
Barton, even though the plaintiff would likely refile the same
action anew, that rule would needlessly fragment related
matters based on counsel’s shifting capacities. Appellees
have not demonstrated how such a rule would advance the
purpose underlying the Barton doctrine
Allowing the bankruptcy court to grant Barton approval
after an unapproved lawsuit is filed in another forum
supports, rather than hampers, the purpose of the Barton
doctrine. As recognized in Crown Vantage, the Barton
7

As an example to illustrate this point, Akhlaghpour’s success in seeking
leave from the bankruptcy court to sue in California state court does not
retroactively revive those claims that were dismissed without leave to
amend by the state court. This is the case even though we view the Court
of Appeal’s leave to amend analysis as based upon a flawed holding that
Akhlaghpour could not amend her complaint to state she had obtained
leave to sue pursuant to Barton.

14

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

doctrine was extended to the bankruptcy context because one
appointed by the bankruptcy court is “a statutory successor
to the equity receiver” and works “in effect for the court that
appointed or approved him, administering property that has
come under the court’s control by virtue of the Bankruptcy
Code.” 421 F.3d at 971 (quoting In re Linton, 136 F.3d 544,
545 (7th Cir. 1998)). Indeed, the Seventh Circuit in Linton
spelled out a scenario in which a plaintiff could cure its
failure to first seek Barton approval: “the trustee could move
the state court to dismiss the suit, or to stay it until the
necessary leave was obtained . . . .” 136 F.3d at 546
(emphasis added). Allowing a bankruptcy court to have a
say at some point after a plaintiff initiates litigation in a nonbankruptcy forum does not disturb the purposes of the
Barton rule.
We emphasize the gold standard is to file a Barton
motion before filing a suit that in any way could touch upon
acts performed in an official bankruptcy capacity. However,
in the event it becomes clear such approval is required at
some point after the litigation has begun and such approval
was not previously sought, we clarify the best practice for a
plaintiff would be to request to stay proceedings in the other
forum as soon as a potential Barton issue arises and
immediately seek Barton approval. This procedure achieves
the same ends as the standard Barton procedure—allowing
the bankruptcy court to decide the proper forum for the
claims before that issue is decided in another forum. And,
more importantly, this procedure avoids the problems that

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

15

arose here by allowing the bankruptcy court to decide the
Barton motion at a much earlier stage.8
b. Interplay of
Doctrines

Barton

and

Rooker-Feldman

Under the Rooker-Feldman doctrine, federal district
courts generally lack jurisdiction over “cases brought by
state-court losers complaining of injuries caused by statecourt judgments rendered before the district court
proceedings commenced and inviting district court review
and rejection of those judgments.” Exxon Mobil Corp. v.
Saudi Basic Indus. Corp., 544 U.S. 280, 284 (2005); accord
Brown v. Duringer L. Grp. PLC, 86 F.4th 1251, 1253–54
(9th Cir. 2023). However, the Rooker-Feldman doctrine
applies only in “limited circumstances.” Exxon Mobil Corp.,
544 U.S. at 291; see also Lance v. Dennis, 546 U.S. 459, 464
(2006). For example, in the bankruptcy context, we have
noted the Rooker-Feldman doctrine does not curtail federal
courts’ authority to enforce the automatic stay. In re Gruntz,
202 F.3d 1074, 1084 (9th Cir. 2000).
We hold the bankruptcy court’s order granting
Akhlaghpour’s motion for leave pursuant to Barton did not
violate the Rooker-Feldman doctrine.
Akhlaghpour’s
motion sought leave under Barton, which, if granted, would
only remove a jurisdictional bar to subsequent proceedings
on a limited subset of claims against Orantes in California
state court. While Akhlaghpour is a “state-court loser” in the
8

Although it ultimately did not affect the outcome of this appeal, we are
troubled by how long Akhlaghpour waited to seek leave pursuant to
Barton. We are also troubled that Appellees seem ignorant of the tools
available to them to seek earlier bankruptcy court intervention, if desired,
either by trying to remove to bankruptcy court or by filing a motion to
enjoin the state court proceedings in bankruptcy court.

16

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

sense that she lost on the Barton issue in state court, it is not
clear that she is seeking review or rejection of the California
Court of Appeal’s judgment. Instead, Akhlaghpour returns
to the bankruptcy court to remove the jurisdictional
impediment imposed by the Barton doctrine and to continue
her lawsuit in the California courts, purportedly, in a manner
consistent with the Court of Appeal’s opinion. The essence
of this motion is markedly different than the attempts the
Rooker-Feldman doctrine prohibits.
Moreover, the appeals court opinion not only allowed
Akhlaghpour narrow leave to amend to replead certain
claims but also alluded to the fact that she may need to obtain
Barton approval. The court noted whether Barton approval
is necessary depends on the nature of the allegations
regarding the post-trustee-appointment conduct and whether
they “cross the divide.” Akhlaghpour, 86 Cal. App. 5th at
249 n.8. Rather than “inviting [bankruptcy] court review
and rejection of those judgments,” Exxon Mobil Corp., 544
U.S. at 284, the Barton order attempted, albeit in a flawed
fashion, to follow the guidance set out in the Court of
Appeal’s decision insofar as it held Barton would apply to
claims that may “cross the divide,” as explained in the
court’s footnote.
Even if the motion for leave under Barton attempted to
subvert a state court judgment on its face, we would still not
conclude a bankruptcy court’s order granting leave
necessarily violates Rooker-Feldman. Leave to sue under
Barton can never do more than remove a jurisdictional bar
to proceeding in a particular forum. To be sure, there is some
tension between the bankruptcy court’s order and the Court
of Appeal’s opinion. As written, the bankruptcy court’s
order could be read to conflict with the limited remand the
appeals court granted. But, as we detail below, rather than

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

17

posing a Rooker-Feldman problem, this conflict relates to
whether the bankruptcy court abused its discretion in
granting leave to sue. We would be hard pressed to
analogize the bankruptcy court’s imprecisely crafted order
to those limited circumstances in which the Supreme Court
has recognized Rooker-Feldman deprives a court of
jurisdiction.
In fact, if we were to hold otherwise, we would
undermine the exclusive nature of a bankruptcy court’s
authority to consider whether an officer it appointed to help
administer a bankruptcy estate can be sued for his or her
official acts in another forum—the very essence of the
Barton doctrine. Such a holding would require us to not only
extend the Rooker-Feldman doctrine far beyond its intended
reach but would also extinguish the Barton doctrine in cases
where underlying state court judgments may exist. We are
unwilling to contort both doctrines to such a degree.
c. The Bankruptcy Court’s Error
Most of our cases address the bankruptcy court’s
discretion to deny leave under Barton. We have never held
a bankruptcy court’s grant of Barton approval after a state
court had already issued a decision was an abuse of
discretion. This is because we presume the factual
circumstances underlying this appeal rarely occur, meaning
a party rarely attempts to file a complaint against courtapproved counsel for the bankruptcy estate without first
obtaining Barton approval. Nevertheless, we hold the
bankruptcy court abused its discretion here and clarify the
standards that apply in this situation.
Although the bankruptcy court did not abuse its
discretion in granting leave pursuant to Barton, it abused its
discretion to the extent its approval was inconsistent with the

18

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

Court of Appeal’s decision.
Its order authorizing
Akhlaghpour to “continue her prosecution . . . for the period
of October 5, 2017 to October 10, 2017,” could be read to
conflict with the Court of Appeal’s ruling that dismissed
those pre-petition claims with prejudice. See Akhlaghpour,
86 Cal. App. 5th at 246–47, 257. It did not convey the true
import of Barton approval, which serves merely to remove a
jurisdictional bar. When, as here, an underlying state court
ruling exists, the bankruptcy court does not write on a blank
slate when evaluating a Barton motion.
Therefore, we hold that if claims subject to Barton are
asserted in another forum without prior approval, and the
bankruptcy court later grants leave to proceed on those
claims after the other forum has already issued a decision,
then the bankruptcy court’s order should be narrowly
tailored to the jurisdictional issue and avoid implying its
approval grants any other relief.
Moreover, we conclude the bankruptcy court abused its
discretion by granting Barton approval for post-trusteeappointment claims the court acknowledged were not
subject to Barton in the first instance. The bankruptcy court
stated because the Barton doctrine and res judicata did not
apply for the period of time following February 6, 2018, “the
movant may pursue any claims against the defendants in the
state court litigation” for that timeframe. However, if the
Barton doctrine does not apply, as the bankruptcy court
stated, then Barton approval for those claims is not required.
Therefore, the bankruptcy court abused its discretion by not
limiting the Barton approval for post-trustee-appointment
claims to claims the state court held may “cross the divide,”
as noted in the appellate decision’s footnote.
See
Akhlaghpour, 86 Cal. App. 5th at 249 n.8.

AKHLAGHPOUR V. ORANTES

III.

19

Conclusion

We reverse the BAP’s order vacating the bankruptcy
court’s order granting leave pursuant to Barton because the
bankruptcy court’s order does not violate the RookerFeldman doctrine. Additionally, we vacate the bankruptcy
court’s order because the bankruptcy court abused its
discretion by granting Barton approval for the pre-petition
claims in a manner that went beyond addressing the removal
of the jurisdictional bar, and by granting Barton approval for
post-trustee-appointment claims not subject to the doctrine.
Accordingly, we remand to the bankruptcy court with
instructions to enter an order granting Barton approval to file
claims in state court that are consistent with the California
Court of Appeal’s decision. See Akhlaghpour, 86 Cal. App.
5th at 249 n.8.
REVERSED, VACATED, and REMANDED.

