FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
GABY GISSELLE GUEVARASERRANO; M. G. GUEVARASERRANO,
Petitioners,

No. 23-4420
Agency Nos.
A220-205-134
A220-205-135

v.
OPINION
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney
General,
Respondent.
On Petition for Review of an Order of the
Board of Immigration Appeals
Argued and Submitted November 20, 2025
San Jose, California
Filed January 20, 2026
Before: Mary M. Schroeder and Michelle T. Friedland,
Circuit Judges, and Karen E. Schreier, District Judge.*
Opinion by Judge Schroeder;
Concurrence by Judge Friedland
*

The Honorable Karen E. Schreier, United States District Judge for the
District of South Dakota, sitting by designation.

2

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

SUMMARY**
Immigration
The panel granted in part and denied in part a petition for
review of the Board of Immigration Appeals’ decision
affirming the denial of asylum, withholding of removal, and
protection under the Convention Against Torture, and
remanded for further proceedings.
Petitioner credibly testified that she suffered repeated
beatings at the hands of her partner who was a gang
member. During a particularly intense beating when her
partner was intoxicated, he stabbed Petitioner in the
stomach. The abuse frequently occurred when Petitioner
attempted to attend her church. The BIA ruled that because
Petitioner did not report the beatings to the authorities, she
had failed to establish that the government of Honduras was
unable or unwilling to protect her. The panel concluded that
the evidence in the record compelled the conclusion that
Petitioner’s reporting of her beatings to the government
would have been futile. The panel therefore granted the
petition for review as to asylum and withholding and
remanded for further proceedings.
The panel did not address Petitioners’ CAT claim
because it was unexhausted.
Concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,
Judge Friedland agreed with the majority that the record
compelled the conclusion that the Honduran government
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

3

was unable or unwilling to protect Petitioner from her
partner’s abuse. She disagreed, however, with the
majority’s reading of the BIA decision as to the issue of
nexus, understanding the BIA to have also adopted the IJ’s
conclusion that Petitioner failed to satisfy the nexus element
of her claims. In Judge Friedland’s view, the IJ’s
withholding analysis cited the correct “a reason” nexus
standard for the withholding claim, but did not properly
apply that standard. She would hold that the nexus element
of the withholding claim must be considered satisfied on
remand.

COUNSEL
Kelsey Salas (argued) and Ulises Solis (argued), Certified
Law Students; Evangeline G. Abriel, Supervising Attorney;
Santa Clara University School of Law, Santa Clara,
California; for Portioners.
Kathryn McKinney (argued), Attorney; Stephen J. Flynn,
Assistant Director; Office of Immigration Litigation;
Yaakov M. Roth, Acting Assistant Attorney General; Civil
Division, United States Department of Justice, Washington,
D.C.; for Respondent.

4

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

OPINION
SCHROEDER, Circuit Judge:
Gaby Gisselle Guevara-Serrano and her minor
daughter—natives and citizens of Honduras—petition for
review of the decision of the Board of Immigration Appeals
(“BIA”) affirming the denial by an immigration judge (“IJ”)
of their applications for asylum, withholding of removal, and
relief under the Convention Against Torture (“CAT”). We
grant in part and deny in part the petition for review, and we
remand for further proceedings.
Petitioner credibly testified that she suffered repeated
beatings at the hands of her partner, Oscar, who was a gang
member. During a particularly intense beating when Oscar
was intoxicated, he stabbed Petitioner in the stomach. The
abuse frequently occurred when she attempted to attend her
church.
The IJ denied relief, and the BIA dismissed her appeal.
The BIA ruled that because Petitioner did not report the
beatings to the authorities, she had failed to establish that the
government of Honduras was unable or unwilling to protect
her.
In her petition to this court, Petitioner contends that, by
ignoring her explanation as to why she did not report, the
BIA imposed a per se reporting requirement, which is an
error of law. Petitioner further contends that the record
compels the conclusion that the government of Honduras
was unable or unwilling to protect her. Because we agree
that the evidence in the record compels the conclusion that
reporting her beatings to the government would have been
futile, we grant the petition for review as to asylum and

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

5

withholding. We do not address Petitioners’ CAT claim
because it is unexhausted.
A. Asylum and Withholding of Removal
The parties agree that the BIA’s decision denying the
application for asylum and withholding rested on its
conclusion that Petitioner had not demonstrated the
Honduran authorities were unable or unwilling to protect her
and her daughter. The government has briefed no other basis
for the agency’s conclusion.
The relevant decision of the BIA is confined to a single
paragraph. It first states that it is adopting and affirming the
IJ’s decision on the issue, then points only to the IJ’s
observation that Petitioner had not reported the abuse to the
police or shown that reporting would be futile, noting a lack
of any persuasive challenge on appeal regarding her failure
to report. The BIA concludes “[a]s such, we affirm the [IJ’s]
determination . . . .” The full paragraph reads as follows:
We adopt and affirm the Immigration Judge’s
decision to deny asylum and withholding of
removal under the INA based on her
conclusion that the respondents have not
demonstrated that the Honduran authorities
were or would be unable or unwilling to
protect them (IJ at 8-10). Matter of Burbano,
20 I&N Dec. 872, 874 (BIA 1994). As the
Immigration Judge observed, the respondent
did not seek the authorities’ protection from
her former partner and did not report her
former partner to the police, and she did not
demonstrate that reporting him to the police
would be futile (IJ at 8). The respondents

6

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

have not persuasively challenged this
determination on appeal. As such, we affirm
the Immigration Judge’s determination that
the respondents have not demonstrated that
the authorities were or would be unable to
protect them. Matter of C-G-T-, 28 I&N Dec.
740, 743 (BIA 2023) (holding that a
determination whether the government is
unable or unwilling to protect is a factspecific inquiry that is reviewed for clear
error, and the authorities’ timely response to
a report of harm may be indicative of ability
or willingness to protect); Matter of V-T-S-,
21 I&N Dec. 792, 799 (BIA 1997) (holding
that the evidence did not demonstrate that the
government was unable or unwilling to
protect respondent).
Petitioner thus contends that the BIA has in effect
applied a reporting requirement that our court has
consistently rejected. She points to a long line of cases
recognizing that a victim need not report in order to establish
the government’s inability or unwillingness to protect her.
See e.g., Bringas-Rodriguez v. Sessions, 850 F.3d 1051,
1069 (9th Cir. 2017) (en banc); Ornelas-Chavez v. Gonzales,
458 F.3d 1052, 1057-58 (9th Cir. 2006); Reyes-Reyes v.
Ashcroft, 384 F.3d 782, 789 n.3 (9th Cir. 2004); see also
Korablina v. INS, 158 F.3d 1038, 1044-45 (9th Cir. 1998).
The government does not meaningfully address these
authorities, focusing instead on the nature of the asylum
applicant’s burden.
Our Circuit law, however, is clear as well as
longstanding. We collected and discussed the seminal

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

7

authorities in our en banc decision in Bringas-Rodriguez.
See 850 F.3d at 1064-70. In a later case, we explained that,
even when a report is filed, some initial responsiveness by
local authorities may be relevant, but it does not
“automatically equate” to governmental ability and
willingness. J.R. v. Barr, 975 F.3d 778, 782 (9th Cir. 2020).
More recently, we reiterated that the filing of a police report
in and of itself is insufficient to establish police ability and
willingness to protect. See Diaz v. Bondi, 129 F.4th 546,
555-56 (9th Cir. 2025). This was because, “[e]ven if an
applicant’s ability to file a police report suggests that the
police were willing to protect [her], that says little if anything
about whether they were able to do so.” Id. (alterations in
original) (quoting J.R., 975 F.3d at 782). Accordingly, the
relevant inquiry is “whether the government both ‘could and
would provide protection.’” J.R., 975 F.3d at 782 (alteration
in original) (quoting Rahimzadeh v. Holder, 613 F.3d 916,
923 (9th Cir. 2010)).
In J.R., we considered a situation in which the
government had promised future action but took none. Id. at
782-83. We concluded that the government was either
unable or unwilling to provide protection from private
persecutors. Id. In Davila, the government took no action
after a first report of persecution, and we held that the BIA
erred in disregarding the applicant’s explanation for not
reporting subsequent abuse. Davila v. Barr, 968 F.3d 1136,
1142-43 (9th Cir. 2020). We explained that such disregard
of the reasons for not reporting abuse was “tantamount” to a
reporting requirement for private persecution. Id. at 1143
(quoting Bringas-Rodriguez, 850 F.3d at 1065). We
repeated what we said in Bringas-Rodriguez: “our rule [is]
that reporting is not required.” Id. (quoting BringasRodriguez, 850 F.3d at 1066 n.9).

8

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

The significance of the government’s ability and
willingness to protect Petitioner can be traced to the statutory
requirements for asylum. The Attorney General may grant
asylum to any person who qualifies as a “refugee.” 8 U.S.C.
§ 1158(b)(1). The Immigration and Nationality Act defines
a “refugee” in terms of the ability to find protection from
persecution. The definition is as follows:
any person who is outside any country of
such person’s nationality or, in the case of a
person having no nationality, is outside any
country in which such person last habitually
resided, and who is unable or unwilling to
return to, and is unable or unwilling to avail
himself or herself of the protection of, that
country because of persecution or a wellfounded fear of persecution on account of
race, religion, nationality, membership in a
particular social group, or political opinion
....
8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(42)(A).
The applicable regulation summarizes the asylum
applicant’s burden. See 8 C.F.R. § 1208.13(b). It states that
a person may qualify as a “refugee” by either showing past
persecution or a well-founded fear of future persecution. Id.
In our en banc decision in Bringas-Rodriguez, we
enumerated the elements. 850 F.3d at 1062. To establish
past persecution, an applicant bears the burden of showing
that (1) his or her treatment rises to the level of persecution;
(2) the persecution was on account of one or more protected
grounds; and (3) the persecution was committed by the

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

9

government or by forces that the government was unable or
unwilling to control. Id.
In this case, the key issue is whether Petitioner satisfied
her burden to show the Honduran government’s inability or
unwillingness to control Oscar’s abuse. Ultimately, we need
not decide whether the BIA erred as a matter of law by
failing to consider all of the relevant evidence in the record,
because the record compels the conclusions that reporting
would have put Petitioner in danger and that the government
of Honduras was unable or unwilling to protect her.
The BIA pointed to the absence of a report and
concluded that Petitioner had not demonstrated reporting
would have been futile. Yet, there was considerable
evidence in the record relating to Petitioner’s harm by Oscar
and the government’s inaction with respect to him.
Petitioner credibly testified that Oscar was a gang member
who abused her, as well as drugs and alcohol. She testified
that Oscar stabbed her, wanted to keep her from going to
church, and threatened to kill her if she tried to file a police
report. Petitioner testified further that “nobody wanted to
report him out of fear of being killed by him.” She described
the one instance in which the police arrested Oscar, but it
was after assaulting a man, and the police released Oscar the
following day. The BIA cited none of this evidence.
The failure to report is of course a factor that may be
considered in determining whether Petitioner has established
the government’s inability or unwillingness to protect her or
to show reporting would be futile. See id. at 1069. As
support for an argument that the BIA did consider evidence
not mentioned in its own decision, the government points to
the BIA’s citation to Burbano as indicating that the BIA may
have taken into account evidence relied upon by the IJ to

10

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

support the denial of relief. In Burbano, the BIA explained
its practice of adopting and relying upon the decision and
reasoning of the IJ. Matter of Burbano, 20 I. & N. Dec. 872,
873-74 (BIA 1994).
The IJ did make at least glancing references to the
evidence of Oscar’s abuse and threats and the Honduran
government’s actions towards him. But, the BIA made no
mention of such evidence. Even if we were to assume that
the agency considered all of the relevant evidence in the
record, that evidence, far from supporting the administrative
decision, tends to refute it. Petitioner testified that the police
had arrested Oscar once after he beat a man but almost
immediately released him. The IJ observed that did not
necessarily suggest the police would do the same if they
arrested Oscar after beating Petitioner. Yet the record in this
case strongly suggests that if the government took no
meaningful action in that instance, when Oscar’s victim was
a man, it was even less likely to take meaningful action when
the victim was a woman. The conclusion compelled by
Petitioner’s testimony concerning the danger she faced from
Oscar, his violent outbursts when she sought refuge at
church, and his death threats deterring her from reporting
him, as well as by the country conditions report documenting
uncontrollable violence against women in Honduras, is that
an attempt to report would not only have been futile, it would
also have been likely to result in further harm to Petitioner.
Because the record compels the conclusion that the
government of Honduras would be either unable or
unwilling to protect Petitioner, this element of the asylum
and withholding inquiries is satisfied.

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

11

B. CAT
In their appeal to the BIA, Petitioners did not challenge
the IJ’s denial of their CAT claim, so the BIA appropriately
deemed it waived. Accordingly, we do not address
Petitioners’ CAT claim because it is unexhausted. See
Magana-Magana v. Bondi, 129 F.4th 557, 573-74 (9th Cir.
2025).
C. Conclusion
Petitioners’ applications for asylum and withholding
should not have been dismissed because the record compels
the conclusion that the Honduran government was unwilling
or unable to protect them. We therefore grant the petition
only with respect to asylum and withholding of removal, and
remand to the agency for further consideration of the other
elements of the asylum and withholding inquiries. The
petition is otherwise denied. The temporary stay of removal
will remain in place until the mandate issues. Each party
shall bear its own costs. See Fed. R. App. P. 39(a)(4).
Petition GRANTED in part; DENIED in part; and
REMANDED.
FRIEDLAND, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and
concurring in the judgment:
I agree with the majority that the record compels the
conclusion that the Honduran government was unable or
unwilling to protect Guevara-Serrano from Oscar’s abuse. I
disagree, however, with the majority’s reading of the BIA
decision as to the issue of nexus, in that I understand the BIA
to have also adopted the IJ’s conclusion that GuevaraSerrano failed to satisfy the nexus element of her claims.

12

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

“An applicant alleging past persecution has the burden
of establishing that (1) [her] treatment rises to the level of
persecution; (2) the persecution was on account of one or
more protected grounds; and (3) the persecution was
committed by the government, or by forces that the
government was unable or unwilling to control.” BringasRodriguez v. Sessions, 850 F.3d 1051, 1062 (9th Cir. 2017)
(en banc) (citation modified). The second element—
whether the persecution was “on account of” a protected
ground—is commonly referred to as “nexus.” To satisfy the
nexus element for asylum, a petitioner must show that a
protected ground was “one central reason” for the
persecution she suffered. Barajas-Romero v. Lynch, 846
F.3d 351, 358 (9th Cir. 2017).
Petitioners seeking
withholding from removal must show that a protected
ground was “‘a’ reason” for the persecution. Id. “‘[A]
reason’ is a less demanding standard than ‘one central
reason.’” Id. at 360.
Here, the IJ concluded that Guevara-Serrano’s religion
was neither “one central reason” nor “a reason” for Oscar’s
persecution of her.
I interpret the BIA as having
incorporated those conclusions into its decision. When it
affirmed the IJ’s decision, the BIA cited Matter of Burbano,
20 I&N Dec. 872 (BIA 1994). “Where the BIA cites its
decision in Burbano and does not express disagreement with
any part of the IJ’s decision, the BIA adopts the IJ’s decision
in its entirety,” and “when the BIA adopts the decision of the
IJ, we review the IJ’s decision as if it were that of the BIA.”
Abebe v. Gonzales, 432 F.3d 1037, 1039-40 (9th Cir. 2005)
(en banc) (citation modified). “If the BIA intends to
constrict the scope of its opinion to apply to only one ground
upon which the IJ’s decision rested, the BIA can and should
specifically state that it is so limiting its opinion.” Id. at

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

13

1040. One way to do so is by noting that some issues are
waived. Id. at 1040 n.4. Here, the BIA noted that GuevaraSerrano’s CAT, political opinion, and particular social group
arguments were waived, so the BIA’s decision did not
incorporate or affirm those parts of the IJ’s analysis. The
BIA’s decision did not suggest that the nexus issue was
waived, however, nor could it have, considering that
Guevara-Serrano raised nexus in her brief before the BIA.
The majority suggests that the BIA further constricted
the scope of what it adopted from the IJ’s decision by
“adopting and affirming the IJ’s decision on the issue,”
“point[ing] only to the IJ’s observation that Petitioner had
not reported the abuse to the police or shown that reporting
would be futile” and stating that “[a]s such,” it affirmed. See
Maj. Op., at 5. If the passage the majority quotes stood
alone, I might agree that the BIA only adopted the IJ’s
“unable or unwilling” analysis. But it does not stand alone.
The paragraph of the BIA decision that follows it reads:
Accordingly, we affirm the Immigration
Judge’s determination that the respondents
did not establish eligibility for asylum under
section 208(a) of the INA, or for withholding
of removal under section 241(b)(3) of the
INA. Parussimova v. Mukasey, 555 F.3d
734, 740-41 (9th Cir. 2009); Barajas Romero
v. Lynch, 846 F.3d 351, 358-60 (9th Cir.
2017) (holding that a ground protected under
the INA must be “a reason” for the
persecution in order to establish a nexus for
purposes of withholding of removal under
section 241(b)(3) of the INA).

14

GUEVARA-SERRANO V. BONDI

The two cases cited in that paragraph are about nexus. The
cited pages of Parussimova discuss the “one central reason”
test for showing nexus in the context of asylum claims, and
the Barajas-Romero citation references the “a reason” test
for nexus in the context of withholding claims. It is unclear
why the BIA would have included those citations if it were
not adopting the IJ’s nexus analysis as an additional reason
to deny Guevara-Serrano’s application.
In her briefing to our court, Guevara-Serrano argues that
the IJ erred in its analysis of nexus for both asylum and
withholding. I believe Guevara-Serrano is correct at least as
to withholding. The IJ’s withholding analysis cited the
correct “a reason” nexus standard for the withholding claim,
but the IJ did not properly apply that standard. The IJ found
Guevara-Serrano’s testimony credible, and she testified that
Oscar began to abuse her “because [she] was going to church
. . . [a]nd he said [she] shouldn’t be doing that because that’s
of the devil, so he started beating [her]” and “telling [her]
not to go.” Nothing in the record contradicts that account,
and it compels the conclusion that religion was at least “a
reason” for his abuse.
In addition to agreeing with the majority’s reasoning, I
would hold that the nexus element of the withholding claim
must be considered satisfied on remand.

