FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
L.B., By and Through his Guardian
Ad Litem ROBIN MORRISEY,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 24-5543
D.C. No.
3:23-cv-00528AJB-DDL

v.
SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Southern District of California
Anthony J. Battaglia, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 8, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed February 27, 2026
Before: Kim McLane Wardlaw, Ronald M. Gould, and
Lucy H. Koh, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Wardlaw

2

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

SUMMARY *
Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
The panel reversed the district court’s affirmance of an
administrative law judge’s determination that student L.B.
was not entitled to reimbursement under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act from the San Diego Unified
School District (“SDUSD”) for special education expenses
he incurred while attending two private residential treatment
centers in middle school.
L.B.’s parents claimed that SDUSD failed to offer L.B.
a free appropriate public education during the time he was
enrolled in the residential treatment centers after struggling
with significant challenges while enrolled in SDUSD during
the COVID-19 pandemic. The district court held that
SDUSD had no duty to offer L.B. a free appropriate public
education during this period because his parents did not
request an individualized education program (“IEP”)
document for L.B., but only an IEP meeting.
Distinguishing Capistrano Unified School District v.
S.W., 21 F.4th 1125 (9th Cir. 2021), the panel held that the
very purpose of an IEP meeting under federal and California
state law is for the student’s IEP team, consisting of his
parents and specified teachers and school officials, to
develop and offer an IEP that will provide a free appropriate
public education. Whether L.B.’s parents requested an IEP
using the words “IEP meeting” or “IEP document” therefore
was irrelevant. The panel remanded to the district court for
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

3

further proceedings regarding whether the IEP program that
SDUSD offered L.B. during his private placement met the
requirements of a free appropriate public education and, if
not, whether L.B. was entitled to reimbursement or other
remedies for his consequent private placement.
COUNSEL
Meagan Nunez (argued), Law Office of Meagan Nunez, San
Diego, California, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Jonathan P. Read (argued) and Shiva E. Stein, Fagen
Friedman Fulfrost LLP, Carlsbad, California, for DefendantAppellee.
Selene A. Almazan-Altobelli, Council of Parent Attorneys
and Advocates, Towson, Maryland; Ellen M. Saideman,
Law Office of Ellen Saideman, Barrington, Rhode Island;
Alexis Casillas, Law Offices of Alexis Casillas PLC, San
Marino, California; for Amicus Curiae Council of Parent
Attorneys and Advocates.

4

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

OPINION
WARDLAW, Circuit Judge:
L.B., by and through his Guardian Ad Litem, Robin
Morrisey, appeals the district court’s affirmance of an
Administrative Law Judge’s determination that he was not
entitled to reimbursement from the San Diego Unified
School District (“SDUSD”) under the Individuals with
Disabilities Education Act, 20 U.S.C. § 1400, et seq., for
special education expenses he incurred while attending two
private residential treatment centers in middle school. L.B.’s
parents (“Parents”) first met with SDUSD officials in 2019
to create an “Individualized Education Program” (“IEP”) 1
for L.B.’s mental health needs. Parents accepted the IEP for
L.B., but found, a few weeks into the 2020–21 school year,
that it was not meeting L.B.’s educational, emotional, and
mental health needs. L.B. struggled with significant
challenges while enrolled in SDUSD during the COVID-19
pandemic, in which SDUSD offered only virtual learning.
Parents thus enrolled L.B. in two successive out-of-state
residential treatment centers that allowed for in-person
education and mental health services.
While L.B. was enrolled in the residential treatment
centers, Parents attended several meetings with L.B.’s IEP
Team at SDUSD, which consisted of Parents and statutorily
specified SDUSD officials.
Parents later sought
reimbursement from SDUSD for the costs of enrollment in
the residential treatment centers, claiming that SDUSD had
An “IEP” is “a written statement for each child with a disability that is
developed, reviewed, and revised” by an “IEP Team,” consisting of the
parents and statutorily specified members of the school and school
district. 20 U.S.C. § 1414(d)(1)(A)(i), (B).
1

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

5

failed to offer L.B. a free appropriate public education
(“FAPE”) during that time. But the district court did not
determine whether SDUSD’s IEP constituted an appropriate
public education program during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Instead, the district court held that SDUSD had no duty to
offer L.B. a free appropriate public education during this
period because Parents did not request an IEP document for
L.B., but only an IEP meeting.
We reverse and remand. We explain that the very
purpose of an IEP meeting under federal and California state
law is for the IEP Team to develop and offer an IEP that will
provide a free appropriate public education. The question is
whether Parents requested that SDUSD provide an IEP that
offered L.B. a free appropriate education, as required by
federal and state law. Whether Parents requested an IEP
using the words “IEP meeting” or “IEP document” is
irrelevant. Thus, the district court’s inquiry into the intent of
each meeting was misplaced, as was its analysis of how
Parents requested each meeting. We remand to the district
court for further proceedings regarding whether the IEP
program SDUSD offered L.B. during his private placement
met the requirements of a free appropriate public education
and, if not, whether L.B. is entitled to reimbursement or
other remedies for his consequent private placement.
I. STATUTORY BACKGROUND
The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act
(“IDEA”) offers federal funds to states conditioned upon the
provision of a “free appropriate public education” to children
with disabilities residing in the state.
20 U.S.C.
§ 1412(a)(1)(A). “The core of the [IDEA] . . . is the
cooperative process that it establishes between parents and
schools.” Schaffer ex rel. Schaffer v. Weast, 546 U.S. 49, 53

6

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

(2005) (citation omitted). The “primary vehicle” for this
collaboration is the “Individualized Education Program,”
which is “a personalized plan to meet all of the child’s
educational needs.” Fry v. Napoleon Cmty. Schs., 580 U.S.
154, 158 (2017) (citation and internal quotation marks
omitted).
An IEP is developed by a child’s “IEP Team,” consisting
of the child’s parents and specified teachers and school
officials. 20 U.S.C. § 1414(d)(1)(B). The IEP spells out a
child’s “levels of academic achievement,” identifies
“measurable annual goals,” and lists “special education and
related services” that the school plans to provide each school
year. Id. § 1414(d)(1)(A)(i). Parents play a key role in the
IEP process. They are made members of IEP Teams by
statute and must be informed about and consent to
evaluations of their child, id. § 1414(c)(3); they must be
provided with written prior notice of any changes in an IEP,
id. § 1415(b)(3); and must be notified in writing of the
procedural safeguards available to them under the IDEA, id.
§ 1415(d)(1)(A). See Amanda J. ex rel. Annette J. v. Clarke
Cnty. Sch. Dist., 267 F.3d 877, 882 (9th Cir. 2001) (“Parents
not only represent the best interests of their child in the IEP
development process, they also provide information about
the child critical to developing a comprehensive IEP and
which only they are in a position to know.”).
Parents who believe the public school has failed to offer
their child a FAPE may place their child in an “appropriate”
private school and seek reimbursement from the public
school for the associated costs. 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(10)(C).
“[T]he IDEA establishes formal procedures for resolving
disputes” between parents and schools. Fry, 580 U.S. at 159.
If parents believe that a school has denied their child a
FAPE, they may present a complaint to the local or state

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

7

educational agency. 20 U.S.C. § 1415(b)(6). This pleading
triggers a preliminary meeting between the parents and the
IEP team to resolve the issues in the complaint. Id.
§ 1415(e), (f)(1)(B)(i). If the complaint is not resolved to the
parents’ satisfaction, the parents have a right to a “due
process hearing” before an administrative law judge. Id.
§1415(f)(1)(A). A parent may then seek judicial review of
the administrative process by filing a civil action in federal
court. Id. § 1415(i)(2)(A). 2
II. FACTUAL BACKGROUND
In 2019, L.B. was a middle school student with a history
of serious mental health diagnoses, including suicidal
ideation, that required several hospitalizations. At the
beginning of the 2019–20 school year, L.B., then a seventhgrade student, was enrolled in the SDUSD. L.B. stopped
attending SDUSD in October 2019, however, due to his
mental health challenges, and L.B.’s parents placed him at a
local private residential treatment center in November 2019.
In December 2019, after Parents met with SDUSD
officials, SDUSD prepared its first IEP for L.B. This IEP
offered L.B. specialized academic instruction, mental health
services, and behavioral intervention services. SDUSD also
offered L.B. placement at Riley Alternative School
(“Riley”), a San Diego public school that provides intensive
mental health services for students with severe social or
emotional difficulties. Parents met with their SDUSD IEP
Team two additional times that winter, but Parents and
The IDEA is a “model of cooperative federalism,” and “leaves to the
states the primary responsibility for developing and executing
educational programs for handicapped children, but imposes significant
requirements to be followed in the discharge of that responsibility.”
Schaffer, 546 U.S. at 52 (citation and internal alterations omitted).

2

8

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

SDUSD could not agree to an IEP that both believed would
be appropriate for L.B.
In February 2020, Parents filed a request for a due
process hearing with the Office of Administrative Hearings
(“OAH”). Two months later, Parents and SDUSD entered
into a settlement agreement that stipulated, among other
requirements, that Parents would agree to the IEP that
SDUSD had proposed, and L.B. would attend Riley for the
2020–21 academic year.
L.B. began his eighth-grade school year in fall 2020 at
Riley, as planned. However, due to the COVID-19
pandemic, SDUSD schools were physically closed. All
instruction and services were provided virtually. L.B.
struggled in this environment both with online learning and
with the “asynchronous” learning packets students were
assigned to do on their own. L.B. missed classes and became
agitated and aggressive toward his family members and
himself during school hours. L.B. threatened his mother and
younger brother with physical violence and articulated a plan
to stab himself with a knife. Parents concluded that the
existing IEP was not working to meet L.B.’s educational
needs.
On September 29, 2020, less than one month into the
school year, L.B.’s father emailed the district to alert it that
L.B. would be attending Trails Carolina (“Trails”), a
residential wilderness therapy program in North Carolina,
starting the next day. Parents selected Trails in part because
it offered in-person services at a time when schools in
California were physically closed due to the COVID-19
pandemic. On October 1, 2020, SDUSD officials responded
to this email by stating that the district would not fund the
placement, as it believed it had offered L.B. an IEP that

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

9

satisfied the requirements of a “free appropriate public
education.”
On October 1, the educational specialist in charge of
L.B.’s case, Jordan Means, emailed Parents asking if they
would like to hold a “formal [IEP] meeting.” Means emailed
L.B.’s IEP Team the following day, informing them that he
had had a conversation with Parents. He stated that “[w]e
need to discuss further how to better support [L.B.],”
including by “[d]iscuss[ing] what worked and what did not
work in his experience at Riley (virtual learning).” Parents
met with the IEP Team later that week, and discussed L.B.’s
placement, behavioral concerns, and FAPE.
Parents
consented to the General Education team member’s absence,
as is required under the IDEA, 20 U.S.C. § 1414(d)(1)(c)(i).
The district also “disenrolled” L.B. from Riley at that time
and offered him an IEP to attend Riley, to be revised when
he returned.
On October 22, Sue Salorio, a lead teacher at Riley,
emailed Parents asking them if they consented to the IEP the
school had prepared. L.B.’s mother responded, stating that
while she agreed that Parents “unilaterally placed [L.B.] at
the wilderness . . . program,” she wanted it “noted
somewhere” that “the impetus for doing so [was] . . . his
inability to successfully participate in school,” given that he
“did not receive many of the components necessary to
support his IEP,” including “group therapy” and “the
opportunity to obtain support in moments of behavioral
decompensation.”
A week later, on October 28, Salorio emailed Parents
asking if they would “like [her] to schedule another IEP to
discuss your concerns from [the] last IEP.” Salorio indicated
that L.B. was still enrolled in SDUSD and being marked as

10

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

absent from school and that he was at risk of receiving failing
grades because of his absence. L.B.’s mother wrote back,
“Sue I am not sure I understand all of this [w]ith his grades.
Please can we schedule an IEP meeting this week ASAP?”
Parents met with the IEP Team on November 5, 2020. At
that meeting, Parents confirmed that L.B. would be
disenrolled from SDUSD. Parents again met with the IEP
Team to follow up on the “progress toward IEP goals and
clarification of services offered during COVID-19” on
November 13. A week after the November 13 meeting,
Salorio sent Parents “a final copy of the IEP,” stating she
would take “the next steps of dis-enrolling him as of 9/30/20
and reverting his grades back to the same date.”
L.B. attended Trails for three months, until December
2020. Then, Parents enrolled L.B. in Whetstone Academy
(“Whetstone”), a second residential treatment center, located
in South Carolina.
On March 6, 2021, Parents emailed the SDUSD IEP
team to request that the district “reconsider[] its
determination not to fund the placement” at a residential
treatment center. The email attached an Independent
Educational Evaluation (“IEE”) of L.B. conducted by Dr.
Jennifer Zeisz, an educational expert. On March 19, 2021,
Salorio sent Parents a release of information for Trails so that
SDUSD could “use that info along with our data to complete
an annual [IEP].” On March 23, 2021, Parents notified
Salorio that L.B. had been discharged from Trails on
December 31, 2020, and sent Salorio the discharge
summary. On April 13, SDUSD scheduled another IEP
Team meeting with Parents for April 27, 2021. On April 27,
2021, Parents notified SDUSD that L.B. had been enrolled
in Whetstone by emailing Salorio a letter from Whetstone
stating that L.B. had been enrolled there since December 30,

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

11

2020 and summarizing his progress. Dr. Zeisz presented her
findings at the April IEP “annual” meeting, held pursuant to
20 U.S.C. § 1414(d)(4)(A)(i), which requires the local
education agency to review each child’s IEP annually. Dr.
Zeisz opined that L.B.’s severe mental health and emotional
issues caused him to “struggle[] severely with transitions”
between home and school. She specifically recommended a
“therapeutic boarding environment” because the child does
not need to be moved back and forth and can be in therapy
as needed, not as an outpatient. At the end of the meeting,
Salorio said that the Team needed more information, and
needed Parents’ consent to assess L.B. at Whetstone.
Parents consented to SDUSD’s assessment of L.B. at
Whetstone.
During summer and fall 2021, SDUSD sent officials to
South Carolina to assess L.B. at Whetstone. 3 In October
2021, the IEP Team and Parents met again. Parents
continued to ask SDUSD to fund a residential placement for
L.B., but the district stated that its assessment of L.B.
remained ongoing. On November 28, 2021, SDUSD
completed its evaluation, in which L.B.’s classification
changed from “Emotionally Disturbed” to “Specific
Learning Disability.” The updated IEP offered L.B.
placement at another school for students with disabilities,
Marcy-Adolescent Day Treatment (“Marcy Day”). Parents
consented to the new proposed IEP, and L.B. returned to
SDUSD to attend Marcy Day.

While the ALJ found that Parents refused requests from SDUSD to
evaluate L.B. in California, the district court found “no evidence” that
Parents refused such requests.
3

12

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

III. PROCEDURAL BACKGROUND
On August 31, 2022, L.B. filed a due process complaint
with the California Office of Administrative Hearings
(“OAH”), seeking full reimbursement from SDUSD for
tuition and other costs associated with his residential
placement at Trails and Whetstone. Forest Grove Sch. Dist.
v. T.A., 557 U.S. 230, 242 n.9 (2009) (“[C]ourts may grant
reimbursement . . . only when a school district fails to
provide a FAPE and the private-school placement is
appropriate.”) (emphasis in original). An Administrative
Law Judge (“ALJ”) heard the matter by videoconference
over nine days and denied L.B.’s claims for relief.
The ALJ did not reach the question of whether SDUSD
failed to offer L.B. a FAPE while he was privately placed
because the ALJ held that SDUSD had “no duty” to offer
L.B. a FAPE, reasoning that Parents had not “expressly
requested an IEP” during this period. The ALJ reasoned that
Parents’ meetings and communications with SDUSD were
for purposes other than requesting an IEP, such as
disenrolling L.B. from SDUSD so that he would not receive
failing grades. The district court affirmed. The district court
reasoned that Parents had requested IEP “meetings” but not
an IEP “document,” and thus SDUSD had no obligation to
prepare an IEP for L.B. L.B. timely appealed.
IV. STANDARD OF REVIEW
Under the IDEA, “federal courts accord considerably
less deference to state administrative proceedings than they
do in most instances of judicial review of agency actions, in
which courts generally are confined to the administrative
record and are held to a highly deferential standard of
review.” Anchorage Sch. Dist. v. M.P., 689 F.3d 1047, 1053
(9th Cir. 2012) (citation and internal omission omitted). The

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

13

IDEA empowers federal courts to “receive the records of the
administrative proceedings,” “hear additional evidence at
the request of a party,” and “grant such relief as the court
determines is appropriate.” 20 U.S.C. § 1415(i)(2)(C). Still,
federal courts defer to states’ “specialized knowledge and
experience” in education by giving “due weight” to the
states’ administrative bodies. Amanda J., 267 F.3d at 887–
888 (quoting Bd. of Educ. of Hendrick Hudson Cent. Sch.
Dist., Westchester Cnty. v. Rowley, 458 U.S. 176, 206–08
(1982)). Courts give particular deference when the hearing
officer’s rulings are “thorough and careful.” R.B. ex rel. F.B.
v. Napa Valley Unified Sch. Dist., 496 F.3d 932, 937 (9th
Cir. 2007) (citation and quotation marks omitted).
We review a district court’s factual findings for clear
error, even when they are based on the administrative record.
Amanda J., 267 F.3d at 887. We review questions of law de
novo. Gregory K. v. Longview Sch. Dist., 811 F.2d 1307,
1310 (9th Cir. 1987). We review mixed questions of law and
fact de novo “unless the mixed question is primarily
factual.” Amanda J., 267 F.3d at 887.
We address one issue on appeal: Did the district court
and the ALJ err in holding that SDUSD was not required to
offer a FAPE to L.B. because Parents did not properly
request an IEP document? We review this issue de novo.
Gregory K., 811 F.2d at 1310. Parents and SDUSD do not
disagree over whether any of the relevant events occurred,
and defining the legal parameters for when a school has a
duty to offer a FAPE is a question of law.

14

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

V. DISCUSSION
A. Statutory Framework
“A State covered by the IDEA must provide a disabled
child with such special education and related services ‘in
conformity with the [child’s] individualized educational
program,’ or IEP.” Endrew F. ex rel. Joseph F v. Douglas
Cnty. Sch. Dist. RE-1, 580 U.S. 386, 390–91 (2017)
(alterations in original) (quoting 20 U.S.C. § 1401(9)(D)).
“The IEP is the centerpiece of the statute’s education
delivery system for disabled children.” Id. at 391 (citation
and quotation marks omitted). Each child’s IEP is “prepared
by a child’s ‘IEP Team,’ . . . which includes teachers, school
officials, and the child’s parents.” Id. (citing 20 U.S.C.
§ 1414(d)(1)(B)). “Among other requirements, each child’s
IEP must include a statement of goals, how the child’s
progress will be measured, and the nature of the special
education and related services to be provided.” Loffman v.
Cal. Dep’t of Educ., 119 F.4th 1147, 1155 (9th Cir. 2024);
see also 20 U.S.C. § 1414(d)(1)(A)(i).
“To meet its substantive obligation under the IDEA, a
school must offer an IEP reasonably calculated to enable a
child to make progress appropriate in light of the child’s
circumstances.” Endrew F., 580 U.S. at 399. This is the
covered states’ freestanding obligation with respect to every
child “residing in the state,” including the homeless, wards
of the state, “and children with disabilities attending private
schools.” 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(3)(A) (the “Child Find”
provision).
The IDEA “provides several different ways in which
children with disabilities may receive publicly funded
services.” Loffman, 119 F.4th at 1155. These include
“placements by a public agency, either in a public school

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

15

with an IEP under 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(1) or in a private
school with an IEP under 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(10)(B).” Id.
In addition, and salient here, parents of a child with a
disability, who previously received special education and
related services under the authority of a public agency, may
unilaterally enroll their child in a private school and obtain
reimbursement from the agency if the “agency had not made
a free appropriate public education available to the child in
a timely manner prior to that enrollment.” 20 U.S.C.
§ 1412(a)(10)(C)(ii). Thus, where parents do not agree to
the offered IEP because they do not believe that program is
appropriate for their child’s needs, as here, “Congress meant
to include retroactive reimbursement to parents as an
available remedy” for the agency’s failure to satisfy the
FAPE criteria. 4 Sch. Comm. of Town of Burlington, Mass.
v. Dep’t of Educ. of Mass., 471 U.S. 359, 369–70 (1985)
(“Burlington”).
California has implemented its own guidelines that
mirror and provide more detail to the requirements in the
IDEA. 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a); see Cal. Educ. Code §§ 56000–
56865. Among other requirements, California law defines
the purpose of IEP meetings, Cal. Educ. Code § 56340;
specifies the circumstances that trigger IEP meetings, id.
§ 56343; defines the required members of IEP teams, id.
§ 56341(b); and provides a “continuum of program options”
To satisfy the criteria of FAPE, the IEP offer must provide “special
education and related services that--(A) have been provided at public
expense, under public supervision and direction, and without charge;
(B) meet the standards of the State educational agency; (C) include an
appropriate preschool, elementary school, or secondary school education
in the State involved; and (D) are provided in conformity with the
individualized education program required under section 1414(d) of this
title.” 20 U.S.C. § 1401(9).
4

16

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

for students with disabilities, which include “nonpublic,
nonsectarian schools,” id. § 56361, 56365, but see Loffman,
119 F.4th at 1153 (holding that parents plausibly alleged that
the “nonsectarian” requirement violates their rights under
the Free Exercise Clause because it excludes religious
schools).
B. Application
SDUSD appears to have satisfied the federal and state
procedures and provided an IEP for L.B., which was
placement at Riley for virtual learning. The problem,
however, was that, in Parents’ view, the plan was not
meeting L.B.’s educational and mental health needs during
COVID-19 amid California’s complete shutdown of public
schools. Parents faced a choice: “go along with the IEP to
the detriment of their child if it turns out to be inappropriate
or pay for what they consider to be the appropriate
placement” and seek “retroactive reimbursement . . . at their
own financial risk.” Burlington, 471 U.S. at 370, 374. Here,
Parents chose the latter approach: they enrolled L.B. in a
residential wilderness treatment center with in-person
services. During this time, Parents attended six “IEP
Meetings” with the IEP Team, 5 in which Parents expressed
to the district that L.B.’s IEP had not worked during virtual
learning and asked the district to reimburse their chosen
program or fund L.B.’s placement at another residential
treatment center.

The IEP Team referred to the meetings as “IEP meetings” in their
communications, and SDUSD appeared to comply with the IDEA’s
procedural requirements for IEP meetings, such as asking for Parents’
consent to the General Education team member’s absence at the October
9, 2020, IEP meeting, as is required under 20 U.S.C. § 1414(d)(1)(C)(i).

5

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

17

The district court erred in holding that SDUSD had no
duty to offer L.B. a FAPE during this period. Contrary to
the district court’s holding, SDUSD was obligated to offer
L.B. a “free appropriate public educational program” during
the entire time at issue. 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(1)(A). As the
IDEA and California state law explain in detail, the very
purpose of “IEP meetings” is to develop or revise an IEP that
offers a student a FAPE. The IDEA specifies the “IEP
Team” members who must attend IEP meetings, id.
§ 1414(d)(1)(B), and explains that the IEP Team must
“revise[] the IEP as appropriate to address” a range of
factors, including “any lack of expected progress toward the
annual goals,” “information about the child provided to, or
by, the parents,” or “the child’s anticipated needs,” id.
§ 1414(d)(4)(A).
Similarly, California law requires
local educational agencies to “initiate and conduct meetings
for the purposes of developing, reviewing, and revising the
individualized education program of each individual with
exceptional needs,” and provides a list of factors similar to
that of the IDEA regarding when an IEP team must meet to
revise the IEP. 6 Cal. Educ. Code § 56340 (emphasis added).
These statutes articulate the very purpose of IEP meetings:
to “review” and “revise” the IEP as needed to ensure that the
IEP offers a “free appropriate public education.”
§ 1412(a)(1)(A), § 1414(d)(4).
The requirement of an IEP offer also helps to safeguard
parental rights, given that “a formal, written offer creates a
Under California law, “An [IEP] team shall meet whenever any of the
following occurs”: (a) “A pupil has received [a] . . . formal assessment”;
(b) “The pupil demonstrates a lack of anticipated progress”; (c) “The
parent or teacher requests a meeting to develop, review, or revise the
individualized education program”; or (d) “At least annually, to review
the pupil’s progress.” Cal. Educ. Code § 56343.

6

18

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

clear record that will do much to eliminate troublesome
factual disputes,” and “greatly assist[s] parents in presenting
complaints with respect to any matter relating to the
educational placement of the child.” Union Sch. Dist. v.
Smith, 15 F.3d 1519, 1526 (9th Cir. 1994) (internal
alterations and quotation marks omitted); see also
Burlington, 471 U.S. at 368 (noting that school districts have
a “natural advantage” over parents in the “cooperative” IEP
process).
Because the purpose of an IEP meeting under federal and
state law is to develop and offer an IEP that will provide a
FAPE, Parents’ participation in IEP meetings created a
continuous obligation during the period at issue for SDUSD
to offer L.B. a FAPE. The record demonstrates that SDUSD
officials understood this obligation and, in fact, offered L.B.
an IEP during the time at issue. At the Fall 2020 meetings,
SDUSD continued to offer the same plan, enrollment at
Riley, as L.B.’s February 27, 2020, annual IEP. SDUSD
recognized as much at the time. The October 9, 2020, IEP
document, for example, states that “[w]hen the program
[Trails] is over L.B. will be re-enrolled back at Riley since
that is the offer of FAPE.” At the April 27, 2021, IEP
meeting, Ms. Busch, the principal of Riley, referenced the
school’s assessment of L.B. and how it might change “what
our offer of FAPE is for offering the IEP.” Parents and
SDUSD faced the same situation as in “all Burlington
reimbursement cases”: the school district offered an IEP, and
the parents rejected it and “put their child in private school.”
Florence Cnty. Sch. Dist. Four v. Carter, 510 U.S. 7, 13
(1993). Thus, the district court should have proceeded to the
reimbursement analysis and analyzed, on the merits, whether
“the public placement violated [the] IDEA and . . . the

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

19

private school placement was proper under the [IDEA].” Id.
at 15.
The district court’s error, in holding that SDUSD had no
duty to offer L.B. a FAPE, rested upon a misreading of
Capistrano Unified School District v. S.W, 21 F.4th 1125
(9th Cir. 2021), which was published shortly after the
relevant circumstances in this case occurred. However,
Capistrano involved an “unusual series of events.” Id. at
1138. There, the parents of B.W., a first-grade student,
withdrew B.W. from the public school district and told the
public school that B.W. would be attending private school
for the next two years. Id. at 1131. B.W.’s parents failed to
respond at all to the public school’s request for an IEP
meeting to develop a plan and later sought reimbursement
from the public school. Id. The public school and B.W.’s
parents stipulated that a public school must develop an IEP
when “parents have enrolled the student in private school
and there is a claim for reimbursement.” Id. at 1137.
However, we held that the school was not obligated to offer
B.W. an IEP under the circumstances, given that “[t]here is
no freestanding requirement that IEPs be conducted when
there is a claim for reimbursement,” and “when a child has
been enrolled in private school by her parents, the district
only needs to prepare an IEP if the parents ask for one,”
which B.W.’s parents had not done. Id. at 1138.
The district court reasoned that “Capistrano holds that
the district need not prepare an IEP document until requested
by parents, and speaks nothing of IEP meetings,” and thus
L.B. was not entitled to an offer of FAPE because Parents
did not request an IEP “document.” But the district court’s
distinction between an IEP “document” and IEP “meeting”

20

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

finds no basis in Capistrano, 7 and disregards the federal and
state statutory scheme which requires states to offer
educational resources to disabled children that conform to
the IEP. Moreover, the regulations demonstrate that the
purpose of IEP meetings is to develop and offer an IEP
constituting a FAPE to children with disabilities. Here,
Parents participated in the IEP process, and SDUSD together
with Parents created an IEP that purported to offer a free
appropriate public education plan. Therefore, we conclude
without difficulty that this case does not remotely resemble
the “unusual series of events” set forth in Capistrano. 21
F.4th at 1138. Under the IDEA and state law, SDUSD had
an ongoing duty to offer a FAPE to L.B., and the only
questions to be answered are whether the IEP offered to L.B.
constituted a FAPE and whether the private placements were
appropriate for L.B.
C. Whether the IEP Offered L.B. Constituted a FAPE
Given that the district court found that SDUSD was not
“obligated to offer or provide L.B. with a FAPE” when he
was privately placed, the district court did not consider, on
the merits, whether SDUSD’s IEP plan offered L.B. a FAPE
while L.B. was privately placed. SDUSD argues, however,
that even though it “had no duty to offer a FAPE” while L.B.
was privately placed, SDUSD nonetheless held out L.B.’s
IEP as “always available,” and the IEP was an offer of
FAPE, though Parents found it inadequate. Thus, given our
holding that SDUSD was obligated to, and did, offer L.B. an
Indeed, Capistrano’s reference to “IEPs” in its statement that “[t]here
is no freestanding requirement that IEPs be conducted when there is a
claim for reimbursement,” 21 F.4th at 1138 (emphasis added), conveys
the fact that there is no relevant distinction between an IEP document
and IEP meeting.
7

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

21

IEP during the time period and circumstances at issue, we
remand to the district court for further proceedings regarding
whether the IEP that SDUSD offered actually provided L.B.
with a FAPE during the 2020–21 school year while L.B. was
privately placed. 8
D. Reimbursement or Other Remedies
The IDEA grants a federal court “broad discretion” to
“‘grant such relief as [it] determines is appropriate’ . . . in
light of the purpose of the [IDEA].” Burlington, 471 U.S. at
369 (quoting 20 U.S.C. § 1415(i)). “Even if a parent prevails
on an IDEA claim, however, reimbursement is not
automatic.” Anchorage, 689 F.3d at 1058. Rather, a parent
is “entitled to reimbursement only if a federal court
concludes both [1] that the public placement violated [the]
IDEA [by failing to provide a FAPE] and [2] that the private
school placement was proper under the [IDEA].” Carter,
510 U.S. at 15; 20 U.S.C. § 1412(a)(10)(C)(ii); Cal. Educ.
Code § 56174, 56175. In determining whether placement at
a residential school is “proper,” we focus on whether the
placement is “necessary for educational purposes,” or
whether “the placement is a response to medical, social, or
emotional problems . . . quite apart from the learning
process.” Ashland Sch. Dist. v. Parents of Student R.J., 588
F.3d 1004, 1010 (9th Cir. 2009) (quoting Clovis Unified Sch.
Dist. v. Cal. Office of Admin. Hearings, 903 F.2d 635, 643
(9th Cir. 1990)).
SDUSD argues that L.B. waived the argument that SDUSD denied him
a FAPE during his private placement, but this issue permeates L.B.’s
Opening Brief. Because this issue was argued before the ALJ and the
district court, and raised before us, it is not waived. See E.M. ex rel. E.M.
v. Pajaro Valley Unified Sch. Dist., 652 F.3d 999, 1006–07 (9th Cir.
2011).

8

22

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

Here, because the ALJ “concluded the District prevailed
as to all issues, he did not reach the issue” of whether L.B.’s
residential placements at Trails and Whetstone were
appropriate. The district court, however, considered this
issue in the alternative, and held, in a brief, two-paragraph
ruling, that “Plaintiff fails to provide evidence as to the
sufficiency of the residential treatment programs in which
L.B. was placed.” Thus, the district court held that “even if
[L.B.] prevail[s] on the merits, he fails as to the damages he
seeks.”
Because the district court failed to determine whether the
IEP the school district offered L.B. was appropriate, if it
should find upon remand that it was not, it must consider, in
that light, the appropriateness of Parents’ private placement
of L.B. Carter’s two-step test for reimbursement considers
the appropriateness of the private placement only after the
“federal court concludes . . . that the public placement
violated [the] IDEA.” 510 U.S. 7, 15 (1993). Given that “in
all Burlington reimbursement cases, the parents’ rejection of
the school district’s proposed IEP is the very reason for the
parents’ decision to put their child in a private school,” the
school’s IDEA violation (step one) contextualizes the
appropriateness of the private placement (step two). Carter,
510 U.S. at 13; see Burlington, 471 U.S. at 369
(reimbursement is appropriate “if the court ultimately
determines that such placement, rather than a proposed IEP,
is proper under the [IDEA]”) (emphasis added). Here,
however, because the district court did not reach the question
of whether SDUSD failed to offer L.B. a FAPE, we do not
know what deficiencies, if any, existed in the IEP that
SDUSD offered to L.B. that the private placements
provided.

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

23

If the district court determines that SDUSD did not offer
L.B. a FAPE and that the private placements were
appropriate, “the district court then must exercise its ‘broad
discretion’ and weigh ‘equitable considerations’ to
determine whether, and how much, reimbursement is
appropriate.” C.B. ex rel. Baquerizo v. Garden Grove
Unified Sch. Dist., 635 F.3d 1155, 1159 (9th Cir. 2011)
(quoting Carter, 510 U.S. at 15–16). “In making this
determination, the district court may consider all relevant
equitable factors, including, inter alia, notice to the school
district before initiating the alternative placement; the
existence of other, more suitable placements; the parents’
efforts in securing the alternative placement; and the level of
cooperation by the school district.” Anchorage, 689 F.3d at
1059 (citing Forest Grove, 523 F.3d at 1088–89). Thus, on
remand, if the district court finds that SDUSD violated the
IDEA, it may hold further proceedings regarding L.B.’s right
to reimbursement. 9
VI. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we reverse the decision of the
district court and remand. On remand, the district court is
instructed to consider whether SDUSD offered L.B. a FAPE
from October 9, 2020 to December 2, 2021, and, if not,
whether
tuition
reimbursement,
attorneys’
fees,
While, as SDUSD emphasizes, Parents’ failure to provide 10-day
notice to SDUSD of their placement of L.B. in Trails may lead any
reimbursement
to
be reduced
or denied,
20
U.S.C.
§ 1412(a)(10)(C)(iii)(bb), the determination of whether to reduce or
deny reimbursement based on this or other equitable factors
and whether L.B. may qualify for the “physical harm” or “emotional
harm”
exceptions
to
the
10-day
notice
requirement,
§ 1412(a)(10)(C)(iv)(I)(cc), (II)(bb), are issues for the district court to
resolve in the first instance.
9

24

L.B. V. SAN DIEGO UNIFIED SCHOOL DIST.

compensatory education, or other remedies may be
appropriate. 10 The district court may “hear additional
evidence at the request of a party,” 20 U.S.C.
§ 1415(i)(2)(C)(ii), and also “may remand [the issues] to the
state hearing officer to decide in the first instance,” Doug C.
v. Hawaii Dept. of Educ., 720 F.3d 1038, 1048 (9th Cir.
2013).
REVERSED and REMANDED.

L.B. challenges only the district court’s determinations that SDUSD
did not fail to offer him a FAPE during his private placement and L.B.’s
private placements were not appropriate. Thus, the other issues that L.B.
raised before the district court are forfeited.
10

