FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CITY OF CULVER CITY,
Petitioner,
v.
FEDERAL AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION; UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION; PETE
BUTTIGIEG; MICHAEL G.
WHITAKER,

No. 24-2477
Agency No.
Federal Aviation
Administration
OPINION

Respondents.
CITY OF MALIBU,
Petitioner,
v.
FEDERAL AVIATION
ADMINISTRATION; MICHAEL G.
WHITAKER, in his official capacity
as Administrator, Federal Aviation
Administration, U.S.; UNITED

No. 24-2503
Agency No.
Federal Aviation
Administration

2

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

STATES DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION; PETE
BUTTIGIEG, in his official capacity
as Secretary,
Respondents.
On Petition for Review of an Order of the
Federal Aviation Administration
Argued and Submitted December 10, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed March 2, 2026
Before: MILAN D. SMITH, JR., MORGAN B.
CHRISTEN, AND DANIELLE J. FORREST, Circuit
Judges.
Opinion by Judge Milan D. Smith, Jr.

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

3

SUMMARY *
Standing
The panel dismissed for lack of standing the Cities of
Malibu and Culver City, California’s petitions for review of
the Federal Aviation Administration’s publication of its
Categorical Exclusion/Record of Decision (CATEX/ROD)
related to the implementation of the FAA’s Next Generation
Air Transportation System (NextGen) initiative in the
Southern California Metroplex.
In 2016, the FAA’s NextGen initiative introduced new
and revised air traffic procedures, including the flight
procedures challenged here. In 2018, the FAA amended the
challenged flight procedures.
The panel held that only the Cities’ challenges to the
2018 Amendments were timely and dismissed as untimely
any challenge related to the original 2016 flight procedures.
The Cities alleged that they suffered a procedural injury
caused by the FAA’s failure to comply with the National
Environmental Policy Act by issuing the CATEX/ROD
without articulating an adequate or plausible rationale. The
panel held that the Cities failed to meet their burden of
demonstrating standing because they failed to show that
there was a “reasonable probability” that the 2018
Amendments, not the original 2016 Flight Procedures,
threatened their natural resource interests. Malibu’s
declaration established standing to challenge only the 2016
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

4

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

Flight Procedures, and Culver City failed to submit an
affidavit or other evidence showing that it suffered an injury.
Accordingly, the panel dismissed the petitions for lack of
standing.

COUNSEL
Steven M. Taber (argued) and Esther J. Choe, Leech
Tishman Nelson Hardiman Inc., Pasadena, California;
Barbara E. Lichman (argued) and Marshall L. Olney,
Buchalter APC, Irvine, California; Heather S. Baker, City
Attorney, City of Culver City, Culver City, California; for
Petitioners.
Justin D. Heminger (argued) and Robert P. Stockman,
Attorneys, Environment & Natural Resources Division;
Adam R.F. Gustafson, Acting Assistant Attorney General;
United States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Paul
Geier, Assistant General for Litigation and Enforcement,
Office of the General Counsel, United States Department of
Transportation, Washington, D.C.; Nicholas A. Steinheimer,
Attorney; Brett D. Weingold, Manager, Appellate Practice;
Office of the Chief Counsel, Federal Aviation
Administration, Washington, D.C.; Courtney Adolph,
Senior Attorney, Federal Aviation Administration, El
Segundo, California; for Respondents.

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

5

OPINION
M. SMITH, Circuit Judge:
The Cities of Malibu and Culver City, California,
petition for review of the Federal Aviation Administration’s
(FAA) publication of its Categorical Exclusion/Record of
Decision (CATEX/ROD) related to the implementation of
the FAA’s Next Generation Air Transportation System
(NextGen) initiative in the Southern California Metroplex
(Metroplex). The Cities argue that the FAA’s use of a
CATEX/ROD in lieu of more fulsome environmental review
violated the APA. Because the Cities lack standing, we
dismiss their petitions.
FACTUAL BACKGROUND AND PROCEDURAL
HISTORY
In 2016, the FAA’s NextGen initiative introduced new
and revised air traffic procedures at various airports,
including Los Angeles International Airport, relying on
satellites instead of ground-based radio signals. At issue in
this petition are three flight procedures: HUULL, IRNMN,
and RYDRR (the Challenged Flight Procedures).
To comply with its obligations under the National
Environmental Policy Act (NEPA), 42 U.S.C. § 4321 et seq.,
the FAA prepared an environmental review in 2016
analyzing all flight procedures related to the Metroplex,
including the Challenged Flight Procedures. That analysis
found there would be no significant noise impacts, and the
FAA made an official “Finding of No Significant Impact”
for the Metroplex. Culver City and other parties petitioned
for review of the FAA’s 2016 approval of the Metroplex in
the D.C. Circuit, challenging the noise analysis as well as the

6

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

evaluation of air emissions and climate change effects. The
D.C. Circuit denied those petitions. See Vaughn v. FAA, 756
F. App’x 8, 11, 16 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (per curiam).
In May 2018, the FAA amended the Challenged Flight
Procedures, altering some altitude and speed restrictions at
various waypoints along the routes. 1 Three of these changes
occurred at waypoint over land rather than ocean:
•

At the IRNMN waypoint on the amended
IRNMN flight procedure (IRNMN
TWO), the FAA adjusted the altitude
restriction from 16,000 feet from mean
sea level to between 12,000 to 16,000
feet.

•

At the SYMON waypoint on IRNMN
TWO, the FAA raised the altitude
restriction from between 11,000 and
13,000 feet to between 12,000 and 13,000
feet.

•

The FAA added new waypoint named
BRUKY on the amended HUULL flight
procedure (HUULL TWO), with an
altitude restriction of about 25,000 feet.

Of these three waypoints, none overfly Culver City and only
the SYMON waypoint overflies Malibu. There were no
changes to the flight paths, the number of flights, or the types
of planes flying the Challenged Procedures.

Waypoints are “fixed geographical position[s] along the flight route
where pilots are given instructions as to direction, speed, and altitude.”

1

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

7

The City of Los Angeles challenged the amended flight
procedures (the 2018 Amendments) with Culver City as
intervenor. We previously held that the FAA had violated
NEPA, the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA), and
Section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation (DOT) Act
when it issued the amended flight procedures but remanded
for the FAA to undertake the NEPA analysis and NHPA and
DOT Act consultation without vacating the procedures in the
meantime. See City of Los Angeles v. Dickson, No. 1971581, 2021 WL 2850586, at *3 (9th Cir. July 8, 2021).
NEPA “is a purely procedural statute that . . . simply
requires an agency to prepare an [environmental impact
statement]—in essence, a report.”
Seven Cnty.
Infrastructure Coal. v. Eagle Cnty., 605 U.S. 168, 173
(2025). Its goal is to “inform agency decisionmaking” by
exploring the potential environmental consequences of
agency action, without imposing any “substantive
environmental obligations or restrictions.” See id. at 172–
73. “NEPA’s implementing regulations permit agencies to
establish ‘categorical exclusions’ covering actions that
‘normally do not require either an environmental impact
statement or an environmental assessment and do not have a
significant effect on the human environment.’” Save Our
Skies LA v. FAA, 50 F.4th 854, 859–60 (9th Cir. 2022)
(quoting 40 C.F.R. § 1507.3(e)(2)(ii)). FAA’s NEPA
regulations permit the use of categorical exclusions for FAA
actions “[e]stablish[ing] new or revised air traffic control
procedures conducted at 3,000 feet or more above ground
level” that do not “have a significant environmental impact”
such that “extraordinary circumstances” exist. FAA Order
1050.1F §§ 5-2, 5-6.5(i).
Two years following that initial decision, we granted
mandamus relief to the city “to provide some judicial

8

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

oversight of the FAA’s timely compliance with our
decision.” Order 1-2, Dickson, No. 19-71581 (9th Cir. Mar.
9, 2023). The FAA eventually conducted the required
NEPA review and statutory consultation. This included
consulting with Culver City, Malibu, Los Angeles, and tribal
groups. In conducting the NEPA review, the FAA employed
a noise threshold known as the “Schultz Curve,” which
marks a Day-Night Average Sound Level of 65 decibels as
the threshold for adverse community impacts. FAA’s
environmental review resulted in a Record of Decision
concluding that the 2018 Amendments “qualified for a
categorical exclusion that applies to the establishment of
revised flight procedures conducted at or above 3,000 feet
above ground level.” The FAA determined there were no
“extraordinary circumstances” warranting additional
environmental review.
ANALYSIS
I.

Only the Cities’ challenges
Amendments are timely.

to

the

2018

“Congress has limited our jurisdiction over petitions for
review of FAA orders to those petitions that are ‘filed not
later than 60 days after the order is issued’ or for which
‘reasonable grounds’ excuse the delay in filing.” Save Our
Skies LA, 50 F.4th at 859 (quoting 49 U.S.C. § 46110(a)).
The Cities did not challenge the original 2016 Flight
Procedures within 60 days of the relevant FAA order, as
required by statute absent “reasonable grounds for not filing
by the 60th day.” 49 U.S.C. § 46110(a). The 60-day period
during which the Cities may have challenged the 2016 Flight
Procedures expired in 2016. Indeed, Culver City did
successfully petition within that period, and the D.C. Circuit
upheld the FAA’s decision. See Vaughn, 756 App’x 8 at 13–

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

9

16 (holding that the FAA had rationally analyzed noise and
other environmental impacts from the 2016 Flight
Procedures).
Save Our Skies is directly on point. In that case, the
petitioner challenged a different set of flight procedures
arising out of the same Metroplex project as the Challenged
Flight Procedures here. Save Our Skies LA, 50 F.4th at 857.
The FAA subsequently made certain changes to the
procedures, and the petitioners challenged both the original
flight procedures and those amended procedures. Id. at 859.
While the court analyzed the petitioner’s claims as to the
amended procedures as timely filed, id. at 859–61, it held
that review of the original flight procedures was precluded
by Section 46110’s 60-day limitation. Id. at 861 (“Our
jurisdiction extends only to the orders directly and timely
challenged by a petitioner.”). The “reasonable grounds”
exception, the court explained, did not extend to
“petitioner’s own mistake,” “filing in the wrong court,” or “a
delay of the petitioner’s own making.” Id. at 862. The court
further rejected the idea that the APA’s more general 6-year
limitations period could supersede the more specific 60-day
period in Section 46110. Id. at 865. Ultimately, the court
addressed (and denied) only the petitioner’s claims filed
within the 60-day period, dismissing as untimely those
claims directed at earlier-promulgated versions of the flight
procedures. Id.
The reasoning of Save Our Skies controls. We
accordingly address only the 2018 Amendments and dismiss
as untimely any challenge related to the original 2016 Flight
Procedures.

10

II.

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

The Cities lack standing to challenge the 2018
Amendments.

Article III requires plaintiffs to establish standing for
each claim they raise by showing (1) an “injury in fact” that
is both “concrete and particularized” and “actual or
imminent”; (2) a “causal connection between the injury and
the conduct complained of”; and (3) that a favorable
decision will redress their injury. Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife,
504 U.S. 555, 560 (1992) (citation modified). “The party
invoking federal jurisdiction bears the burden of establishing
these elements.” Id. at 561.
The Cities assert that they have suffered a procedural
injury caused by the FAA’s failure to comply with NEPA by
issuing the CATEX/ROD without “articulating [an]
adequate or plausible rationale between the facts FAA found
and its decision.” In their view, a favorable decision would
redress their injuries because vacatur would prevent further
“degradation” of natural resources and a full environment
analysis would more appropriately balance the FAA’s goals
with the Cities needs as cities.
Where petitioners assert a procedural injury, as here, for
standing purposes they must allege that (1) the agency
committed a procedural violation, (2) the procedures in
question “protect a plaintiff’s concrete interests,” and (3) “it
is reasonably probable that the challenged action will
threaten their concrete interests.” San Luis & DeltaMendota Water Auth. v. Haugrud, 848 F.3d 1216, 1232 (9th
Cir. 2017), as corrected (Mar. 23, 2017) (citation modified);
City of Sausalito v. O’Neill, 386 F.3d 1186, 1197 (9th Cir.
2004) (standing for claimed failure to abide by NEPA only
when “the plaintiff also alleges a ‘concrete’ interest—such
as an aesthetic or recreational interest—that is threatened by

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

11

the proposed action” (emphasis added)). “A free-floating
assertion of a procedural violation, without a concrete link
to the interest protected by the procedural rules, does not
constitute an injury in fact.” Ashley Creek Phosphate Co. v.
Norton, 420 F.3d 934, 938 (9th Cir. 2005)
There is no question that NEPA is designed to protect the
natural resource interests the Cities describe, see Douglas
Cnty. v. Babbitt, 48 F.3d 1495, 1499 (9th Cir. 1995), so we
consider only whether the Cities have satisfied the second
step of the procedural injury analysis. Namely, whether they
have shown that there is a “reasonable probability” that the
2018 Amendments, not the original 2016 Flight Procedures,
threaten their natural resource interests. The Cities must
meet this burden by submitting “affidavits or other evidence
showing, through specific facts” that they suffered an injury.
Lujan, 504 U.S. at 561, 563 (explaining that at the summary
judgment stage a plaintiff may no longer rest on “mere
allegations” but must adduce specific evidence of injury);
Nat’l Fam. Farm Coal. v. E.P.A, 966 F.3d 893, 908 (9th Cir.
2020) (holding that petitioners are subject to the same
standing burden as a plaintiff at summary judgment).
The Cities have not met their burden here. Malibu
submitted a declaration from its City Manager stating that
there has been an “increase[] [in] flights along with an
increase in aircraft noise over noise-sensitive areas” owned
by the city and that the “New Flight Paths” made it difficult
to preserve the environmental, aesthetic, and recreational
qualities of its properties. But those flight paths and the
increase in flights (along with any resulting increase in
noise) stem from the original 2016 Flight Procedures, which
increased the number of flights over specific areas, and not
from the 2018 Amendments, which did not. Therefore,
Malibu’s declaration establishes standing to challenge only

12

CITY OF CULVER CITY V. FED. AVIATION ADMIN.

the 2016 Flight Procedures, which, as discussed above, is
untimely.
Culver City, by contrast, failed to submit any affidavit or
“other evidence showing, through specific facts,” that it
suffered an injury. Lujan, 504 U.S. at 563. Accordingly, the
Cities have failed to establish standing to challenge the 2018
Amendments. See Wittman v. Personhuballah, 578 U.S.
539, 545 (2016) (holding that a party cannot satisfy standing
by “simply alleg[ing] a nonobvious harm, without more”);
see also Sierra Club v. E.P.A., 292 F.3d 895, 899–900 (D.C.
Cir. 2002) (explaining that where a complainant is the object
of the agency action, injury is typically apparent, but where
injury is not self-evident, the petitioner must supplement the
record as necessary to demonstrate standing).
PETITION DISMISSED for lack of standing.

