FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JAMES HEALY,

No. 24-3327

Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
MILLIMAN, INC.,
Defendant - Appellee.

D.C. No.
2:20-cv-01473JCC

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Western District of Washington
John C. Coughenour, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 19, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed January 9, 2026
Before: Sidney R. Thomas, Daniel A. Bress, and Salvador
Mendoza, Jr., Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Sidney R. Thomas

2

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

SUMMARY *
Class Actions / Standing
Reversing the district court’s partial grant of summary
judgment in favor of defendant Milliman, Inc., and
remanding in an action under the Fair Credit Reporting Act,
the panel held that, following class certification, both named
and unnamed class members in a money damages suit must
present evidence of standing at summary judgment, but the
usual summary judgment standards apply.
Named plaintiff James Healy alleged that Milliman’s
inaccurate consumer reports violated 15 U.S.C.
§ 1681e(b). The district court certified an “inaccuracy
class.” Milliman sought partial summary judgment, arguing
that Healy needed to demonstrate class-wide standing for the
inaccuracy class. The district court granted Milliman’s
motion, holding that, under TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez,
594 U.S. 413 (2021), Healy had to present at least some
direct evidence of concrete injury on a class-wide basis but
failed to do so. Healy filed an interlocutory appeal pursuant
to 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b).
Agreeing with the district court, the panel concluded that
the logic of TransUnion requires both named and unnamed
members of a certified class for money damages to
demonstrate standing at summary judgment. The panel
held, however, that plaintiffs could use either direct evidence
or circumstantial evidence and did not need to show that a
jury necessarily would find in their favor. The panel
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

3

remanded for the district court to consider whether Healy
had presented enough circumstantial evidence that a rational
trier of fact could reasonably infer that there was class-wide
standing.

COUNSEL
Matthew W.H. Wessler (argued) and Gabriel Chess, Gupta
Wessler LLP, Washington, D.C.; Jessica Garland, Gupta
Wessler LLP, San Francisco, California; Blythe H.
Chandler, Beth E. Terrell, Jennifer R. Murray, and Adrienne
D. McEntee, Terrell Marshall Law Group PLLC, Seattle,
Washington; James A. Francis, Lauren K.W. Brennan, and
John Soumilas, Francis Mailman Soumilas PC, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Nathaniel Garrett (argued) and Eric A. Nicholson, Jones
Day, San Francisco, California; Adam W. Wiers, Jones Day,
Chicago, Illinois; Daniel A. Brown, Jeffery M. Wells, and
Rodney L. Umberger, Williams Kastner, Seattle,
Washington; for Defendant-Appellee.
Erik R. Zimmerman and Zachary A. Johnson, Robinson
Bradshaw and Hinson PA, Chapel Hill, North Carolina;
Jennifer B. Dickey and Jonathan D. Urick, U.S. Chamber
Litigation Canter, Washington, D.C.; for Amici Curiae the
Chamber of Commerce of the United States of America and
the Consumer Data Industry Association.

4

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

OPINION
S.R. THOMAS, Circuit Judge:
This appeal presents the question of whether, following
class certification, both named and unnamed class members
in a money damages suit must present evidence of standing
at summary judgment. We conclude that they must do so.
However, we further hold that the usual summary judgment
standards apply. We remand for the district court to reexamine the unnamed class members’ standing using the
usual standards applicable for deciding summary judgment
motions.
I
A
Milliman, Inc. is an independent risk management,
benefits, and technology firm based in Seattle. One of its
services is “Intelliscript,” which compiles reports containing
a consumer’s medical history and sells those reports to thirdparty insurers such as life insurance companies. When an
individual applies for insurance, the insurance company
submits an inquiry to Milliman for information on the
applicant’s medical history, prescription history, or both.
The insurance company sends Milliman the applicant’s first
and last name, date of birth, gender, social security number,
and zip code so that Milliman can obtain the applicant’s
health records from sources such as pharmacy benefit
managers, pharmacies, and health insurance companies.
Approximately 87% of information that Milliman
matches to applicants is based on the applicant’s social
security number. The remaining 13% of information that
Milliman matches to applicants is based on the name, date

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

5

of birth, zip code, and gender that the applicant provided to
the insurance company. Sometimes, Milliman obtains data
that exactly matches these identifiers.
Other times, Milliman uses “fuzzy matching” to pull in
records that have personal identifying information that is
similar to, but not exactly the same as, the applicant’s. For
example, Milliman will look at records with names that are
nearly identical and contain the same consonants, instances
where the first and last name are reversed, the use of
nicknames for first names, and variations in the use of
suffixes or hyphens. When Milliman identifies health
records using “fuzzy matching,” the company includes them
on an applicant’s report even if the records are associated
with a social security number that is different than the
applicant’s.
Beyond compiling an applicant’s medical data,
Milliman’s reports also analyze this data and give
underwriting recommendations to the requesting insurance
company. To do so, Milliman applies the insurance
company’s “decision criteria” and, based on those criteria,
tells the company whether each piece of medical data on the
report is a high, medium, or low risk indicator. Milliman’s
reports communicate their recommendations to the insurer
by using red, yellow, and green flags. A report that contains
a red flag assigns the applicant the highest risk indicator and
means that applicant is not eligible to receive the insurance
policy for which they applied. In Milliman’s words, this
means that an insurance company has “[n]o need [to]
review” the application and should decline it outright. A
yellow flag instructs insurers to exercise caution prior to
extending insurance to an applicant because the applicant is
higher risk. A green flag indicates the lowest level of risk.

6

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

B
James Healy, the named plaintiff in this case, applied for
life insurance with Americo Financial Life and Annuity
Insurance Company in April 2020. Americo requested a
report of Healy’s medical and prescription history from
Milliman. But the report Milliman supplied Americo
contained another individual’s medical records and social
security number. As a result, Milliman wrongly attributed
serious medical conditions to Healy that it tagged with a red
flag, such as liver disease, osteoarthritis, diabetes, chest
pains, and sleep apnea. Healy, however, had a clean bill of
health.
Americo denied Healy’s life insurance application
because of the erroneous red flags in Milliman’s report.
After his application was denied, Healy repeatedly contacted
Milliman to fix his report. Milliman failed to timely
investigate or correct the errors.
C
On October 5, 2020, Healy filed this class action lawsuit
against Milliman. Relevant to this appeal, Healy argued that
Milliman’s inaccurate consumer reports violated the Fair
Credit Reporting Act’s requirement at 15 U.S.C. § 1681e(b)
that consumer reporting agencies adopt reasonable
procedures that ensure the maximum possible accuracy of
reported information.
At first, the district court certified an “inaccuracy class”
on this basis. Healy alleges that Milliman sold a report about
consumers in the inaccuracy class to a third party containing
information which did not pertain to the individual who was
the subject of the report. To identify members of this class,
Healy pointed to 311,226 reports that Milliman sent to

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

7

insurance companies that (1) had a conflict between the
applicant’s social security number and the social security
number on the data source and (2) contained at least one
prescription or medical record that had a yellow or red risk
indicator flag.
After class certification but before trial, Milliman filed a
motion for partial summary judgment, arguing that Healy
needed to demonstrate class-wide standing for the
inaccuracy class. In Milliman’s view, Healy was unable to
do so. Although Healy had identified reports with
mismatched social security numbers, Milliman argued that
there was no way to determine on a class-wide basis whether
a report was actually a “mixed file,” i.e., a report which
contains mismatched health information.
Milliman
contended that a report with a mismatched social security
number may not be a “mixed file” at all because the record
could, for example, include the primary insured’s social
security number but still feature the applicant’s health
information.
In response, Healy argued that evidence of class-wide
standing was not necessary at summary judgment. Rather,
Healy merely needed to produce evidence that the named
class member—but not unnamed class members—could
satisfy the standing requirements. And, even if evidence of
class-wide standing was necessary at summary judgment,
Healy argued that it was reasonable to infer that medical
records associated with a different social security number
than an applicant’s contain inaccurate medical information.
The district court granted Milliman’s motion for partial
summary judgment and dismissed the inaccuracy class. The
district court held that, under the Supreme Court’s decision
in TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U.S. 413 (2021), Healy

8

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

had to present “at least some direct evidence of concrete
injury on a class-wide basis” at summary judgment in a suit
for money damages.. The district court concluded that Healy
failed to do so here. Though mismatched social security
numbers in unnamed class members’ reports were
“indicative of a misattributed or erroneous health record,”
they were not “direct evidence of injury” because
“mismatched identifiers do not necessarily demonstrate
misattributed health records.” For instance, the district court
noted that a mismatched social security number could
merely be the result of a “simple transposition” error.
Healy moved for reconsideration, or, in the alternative,
asked the district court to certify its order for interlocutory
appeal.
The district court denied the motion for
reconsideration but certified its order for interlocutory
appeal under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(b).
II
The district court had jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1331 because Healy’s claim arises under the Federal
Credit Reporting Act. We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1292(b) because on April 9, 2024, the district court
certified its order granting partial summary judgment to
Milliman for interlocutory appeal. Healy timely filed a
petition for permission to appeal in this Court on April 19,
2024, which we granted on May 24, 2024.
We review the district court’s grant of summary
judgment de novo, “including legal determinations
regarding standing.” Ochoa v. Pub. Consulting Grp., Inc.,
48 F.4th 1102, 1106 (9th Cir. 2022) (quoting Alaska Right to
Life PAC v. Feldman, 504 F.3d 840, 848 (9th Cir. 2007)). In
doing so, we must determine “whether the district court
correctly applied the relevant substantive law.” Stewart v.

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

9

Thorpe Holding Co. Profit Sharing Plan, 207 F.3d 1143,
1148 (9th Cir. 2000) (quoting Robi v. Reed, 173 F.3d 736,
739 (9th Cir. 1999)).
III
Healy and Milliman dispute when unnamed members of
a certified class for money damages must demonstrate
Article III standing. We conclude that the logic of
TransUnion LLC v. Ramirez, 594 U.S. 413 (2021) requires
unnamed members of a certified class for money damages to
demonstrate standing at summary judgment.
At the start of the life cycle of a class action before a
class is certified, the parties agree that only named class
members—but not unnamed class members—must
demonstrate evidence of standing. To this end, we have
consistently held that Article III’s requirements are satisfied
before a class is certified as long as at least one named
plaintiff has standing. See In re Zappos.com, Inc., 888 F.3d
1020, 1028 n.11 (9th Cir. 2018); Melendres v. Arpaio, 784
F.3d 1254, 1262 (9th Cir. 2015). We have held that this is
the case whether the class action seeks money damages or
equitable relief. See Casey v. Lewis, 4 F.3d 1516, 1519 (9th
Cir. 1993) (assessing whether at least one named plaintiff
satisfies the standing requirements in a suit for injunctive
relief); In re Zappos.com, 888 F.3d at 1028 n.11 (same for
class action seeking damages). The Supreme Court did not
disturb this approach in TransUnion given that it expressly
refused to address “whether every class member must
demonstrate standing before a court certifies a class.”
TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 431 n.4.
The parties also agree that, at the end of the life cycle of
a class action for money damages in particular, both named
and unnamed class members must demonstrate standing no

10

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

later than when they seek to recover individual damages.
This conclusion follows inescapably from the Supreme
Court’s instruction in TransUnion that “[e]very class
member must have Article III standing in order to recover
individual damages.” Id. at 431. Neither party argues that
TransUnion overturned the Supreme Court’s prior direction
that only one named plaintiff needs to demonstrate standing
in a class action seeking equitable relief, even at the final
stage of a case when relief is awarded. See Baggett v. Bullitt,
377 U.S. 360, 366 n.5 (1964); cf. Bates v. United Parcel
Serv., Inc., 511 F.3d 974, 985 (9th Cir. 2007) (en banc)
(assessing “only whether at least one named plaintiff
satisfies the standing requirements for injunctive relief”). To
this end, the Court in TransUnion repeatedly emphasized
that the standing requirements for damages and equitable
relief are not necessarily the same. See TransUnion, 594
U.S. at 436 (“[A] plaintiff’s standing to seek injunctive relief
does not necessarily mean that the plaintiff has standing to
seek retrospective damages.”); id. at 431 (“[S]tanding is not
dispensed in gross; rather, plaintiffs must demonstrate
standing for each claim that they press and for each form of
relief that they seek (for example, injunctive relief and
damages).”).
The disagreement at summary judgment in this case is a
narrow one: in a class action for damages, do unnamed class
members need to demonstrate evidence of standing after
class certification but before individual damages are
awarded? Healy argues that unnamed class members only
need to demonstrate standing at the time that individual
money damages are awarded. Milliman instead argues that
unnamed class members must demonstrate standing
earlier—after class certification at summary judgment. We
agree with the district court that TransUnion requires

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

11

unnamed class members to demonstrate evidence of
standing after class certification at summary judgment.
To understand why, a brief recap of TransUnion is
helpful. There, a class of 8,185 individuals sued a credit
reporting agency, TransUnion, under the Federal Credit
Reporting Act (the “Act”). TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 417.
The class argued that TransUnion violated the Act in two
ways. First, similar to the situation in this case, the class
alleged that TransUnion violated § 1681e(b) of the Act when
it failed “to use reasonable procedures to ensure the accuracy
of their credit files.” Id. at 417-18. Within the class,
TransUnion “provided misleading credit reports to thirdparty businesses” for 1,853 of the class members. Id. at 417.
But “[t]he internal credit files of the other 6,332 class
members were not provided to third-party businesses during
the relevant time period.” Id. Second, the class alleged that
certain TransUnion mailings had formatting defects which
violated the Act. Id. at 418. On appeal, we determined that
all 8,185 class members had standing for both sets of their
claims and approved a class damages award of about $40
million. Id.
The Supreme Court reversed. First, under the § 1681e(b)
reasonable procedures claim, the Court held that only the
1,853 class members whose reports were sent to third-party
businesses “demonstrated concrete reputational harm and
thus have Article III standing.” Id. at 417. Second, under
the class’s procedural defects claims, the Court determined
that only the named plaintiff, Ramirez, had standing because
he was the only class member who “demonstrated that
[TransUnion’s] alleged formatting errors caused [him] any
concrete harm.” Id. at 418.

12

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

TransUnion articulated several principles underlying
this holding which likewise guide our decision here. For
one, the Court made clear that named and unnamed class
members must demonstrate standing at trial. As the Court
wrote, “in a case . . . that proceeds to trial, the specific facts
set forth by the plaintiff to support standing ‘must be
supported adequately by the evidence adduced at trial.’” Id.
at 431 (quoting Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 561
(1992)). Healy suggests this language only applies to the
named plaintiff in a class action rather than unnamed class
members, but the Court’s standing analysis in TransUnion
indicates otherwise.
In the context of the TransUnion class’s § 1681e(b)
challenge, the Court determined that “[t]he plaintiffs had the
burden to prove at trial that their reports were actually sent
to third-party businesses.” Id. at 439 (emphasis added). The
Court, therefore, examined the trial record for evidence of
injury to not just the named plaintiff, but also unnamed class
members. The Court determined that “the 1,853 class
members (including the named plaintiff Ramirez) whose
reports were disseminated to third-party businesses” had
“suffered a concrete harm” that sufficed for standing. Id. at
432. But the Court also examined the trial record to
determine whether the 6,332 class members whose reports
were not disseminated to third-party businesses—all
unnamed plaintiffs—had standing. On this point, the Court
wrote that “the plaintiffs did not present any evidence
that . . . 6,332 [of the unnamed] class members even knew
that there” was inaccurate information in their credit files.
Id. at 438 (emphasis omitted). In fact, “[i]f those plaintiffs
prevailed in this case, many of them would first learn that
they were ‘injured’ when they received a check
compensating them for their supposed ‘injury.’” Id.

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

13

So too with the class’s procedural claims. Although the
Court acknowledged that the named class member, Ramirez,
had presented evidence at trial demonstrating that the format
of TransUnion’s mailings caused him harm, the Court
concluded that this was not the case for any of the unnamed
class members. Id. at 440. Indeed, “[t]he plaintiffs
presented no evidence that, other than Ramirez, a single
other class member so much as opened the dual mailings,
nor that they were confused, distressed, or relied on the
information in any way.” Id. (citation modified). Thus, the
Court concluded that only the named class member,
Ramirez, had standing for the class’s procedural claims. Id.
Healy contends that the standing inquiry for unnamed
class members must wait until the final stage of a damages
action. But there is no suggestion that the Supreme Court
referred to any information uncovered during an
individualized claims process in concluding that unnamed
class members lacked standing for either claim. Rather, the
Court concluded that named and unnamed class members
alike had a burden to demonstrate standing at trial.
We conclude that TransUnion also compels unnamed
class members to demonstrate evidence of standing here—
after class certification but prior to trial at summary
judgment.
This follows directly from TransUnion’s
instruction that plaintiffs “must demonstrate standing ‘with
the manner and degree of evidence required at the successive
stages of the litigation.’” Id. at 431 (quoting Lujan, 504 U.S.
at 561). Drawing from our typical summary judgment
standard, though unnamed class members “need not
establish that they in fact have standing,” they would at least
have to demonstrate “that there is a genuine question of
material fact as to the standing elements.” Cent. Delta Water
Agency v. United States, 306 F.3d 938, 947 (9th Cir. 2002).

14

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

This approach is consistent with TransUnion’s express
clarification that its holding did not “address the distinct
question whether every class member must demonstrate
standing before a court certifies a class,” in contrast to the
post-certification summary judgment stage at issue here.
594 U.S. at 431 n.4.
Healy raises essentially two arguments in response, one
focused on TransUnion and one focused on our own
caselaw. First, Healy argues that TransUnion only requires
unnamed class members to demonstrate standing at the final
stage of a damages action because the case only reached the
Supreme Court after the district court had ordered the
defendant to pay unnamed class members individual
damages. On this point, Healy similarly points to the Court’s
statement that “[e]very class member must have Article III
standing in order to recover individual damages.”
TransUnion, 594 U.S. at 431. But it does not follow that the
Court therefore meant that unnamed class members only
need to demonstrate standing at the time that they recover
individual damages. Instead, TransUnion made clear that
“in a case like this that proceeds to trial, the specific facts set
forth by the plaintiff to support standing ‘must be supported
adequately by the evidence adduced at trial.’” Id. (quoting
Lujan, 504 U.S. at 561).
Second, Healy argues that requiring unnamed class
members to demonstrate evidence of standing at summary
judgment in a suit for money damages would run afoul of
our own class action caselaw. We disagree. For one, nearly
all of the cases Healy cites predate TransUnion and therefore
have since been abrogated to the extent they would have
permitted unnamed class members to go without
demonstrating standing at trial or in any later claims process.
See, e.g., Ramirez v. TransUnion, LLC, 951 F.3d 1008,

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

15

1022-23 (9th Cir. 2020); Bates, 511 F.3d at 985; Casey, 4
F.3d at 1519; Stearns v. Ticketmaster Corp., 655 F.3d 1013,
1021 (9th Cir. 2011); In re Zappos.com, Inc., 888 F.3d at
1028 n.11; Magadia v. Wal-Mart Assocs., Inc., 999 F.3d
668, 680 (9th Cir. 2021); Ruiz Torres v. Mercer Canyons
Inc., 835 F.3d 1125, 1137 n.6 (9th Cir. 2016); Gutierrez v.
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 704 F.3d 712, 728 (9th Cir. 2012);
Briseno v. ConAgra Foods, Inc., 844 F.3d 1121, 1131-32
(9th Cir. 2017). The one case Healy cites that postdates
TransUnion, DZ Reserve v. Meta Platforms, Inc., concerned
in relevant part whether a class had “Article III standing to
seek injunctive relief,” not the damages sought by the class
at issue here. 96 F.4th 1223, 1239 (9th Cir. 2024). Likewise,
DZ Reserve addressed the standing inquiry at the time of
class certification, not afterwards at summary judgment. Id.
at 1231.
Contrary to Healy’s contention, our holding comports
with this circuit’s limited discussion of TransUnion to date.
As we wrote in In re Apple Inc. Device Performance
Litigation, “[h]ad the parties brought the case to trial, as in
TransUnion, plaintiffs’ allegation of classwide injury would
have been either proven or disproven.” 50 F.4th 769, 782
(9th Cir. 2022) (citation modified). But because the case
settled “prior to class certification or summary judgment,”
mere allegations of classwide injury were sufficient without
individualized proof. Id. (emphasis added).
In light of TransUnion, therefore, we conclude that the
district court correctly determined that both named and
unnamed members of Healy’s inaccuracy class had to
produce evidence of standing at summary judgment.

16

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

IV
We part ways from the district court, however, in its
application of the summary judgment standard to this case.
As noted above, “at the summary judgment stage the
plaintiffs need not establish that they in fact have standing,
but only that there is a genuine question of material fact as
to the standing elements.” Cent. Delta Water Agency, 306
F.3d at 947. To survive a motion for summary judgment,
therefore, a plaintiff only must show that a rational trier of
fact “could” find for them at trial. See Matsushita Elec.
Indus. Co., Ltd. v. Zenith Radio Corp., 475 U.S. 574, 587
(1986). In the context of Healy’s § 1681e(b) claim in
particular, this Court has held that a consumer at summary
judgment must “present evidence tending to show that a
credit reporting agency prepared a report containing
inaccurate information.” Guimond v. Trans Union Credit
Info. Co., 45 F.3d 1329, 1333 (9th Cir. 1995).
In doing so, plaintiffs can use either direct evidence or
circumstantial evidence. See, e.g., Keyser v. Sacramento
City Unified Sch. Dist., 265 F.3d 741, 751-52 (9th Cir. 2001)
(recognizing cases where “circumstantial evidence created a
genuine issue of material fact” at summary judgment);
Desert Palace, Inc. v. Costa, 539 U.S. 90, 99 (2003)
(describing “conventional rule of civil litigation” that
plaintiffs may “us[e] direct or circumstantial evidence” to
prove their case).
Direct evidence “proves [a]
fact . . . without inference or presumption.” Coghlan v. Am.
Seafoods Co. LLC, 413 F.3d 1090, 1095 (9th Cir. 2005)
(citation modified). Circumstantial evidence “tend[s] to
show” a fact by way of “infer[ences].” Treasure Val. Potato
Bargaining Ass’n v. Ore-Ida Foods, Inc., 497 F.2d 203, 208
(9th Cir. 1974).

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

17

The district court contravened this settled law of
summary judgment in two ways. First, the district court
concluded that Healy had the burden to present “direct
evidence of concrete injury on a class-wide basis” at
summary judgment. But this is incorrect as a matter of law
given that either direct or circumstantial evidence may
suffice at summary judgment. See Keyser, 265 F.3d at 75152. At summary judgment, Healy identified 311,226 of
Milliman’s consumer reports issued to insurance companies
that included (1) a social security number not belonging to
the applicant and (2) a medium or high risk indicator within
that report. Although the district court acknowledged that
this evidence was “indicative of a misattributed or erroneous
health record,” the court concluded that this was not enough
at summary judgment because it was not “direct evidence of
injury.”
But evidence which is “indicative” of a
misattributed or erroneous health record is the sort of
circumstantial evidence which has long been permissible at
summary judgment. See, e.g., Guimond, 45 F.3d at 1333
(requiring “evidence tending to show that a credit reporting
agency prepared a report containing inaccurate information”
on summary judgment in a § 1681e(b) case (emphasis
added)).
Second, and relatedly, the district court imposed an
unduly high burden on Healy at summary judgment. In the
district court’s view, the key problem was that mismatched
social security numbers “do not necessarily demonstrate
misattributed health records.” (Emphasis added). However,
this observation overstates the burden placed on a party
opposing summary judgment. Healy did not need to show
that a jury “necessarily” would find that mismatched social
security numbers demonstrate misattributed health records.
Rather, Healy merely needed to produce enough evidence at

18

HEALY V. MILLIMAN, INC.

summary judgment that a rational trier of fact “could”
reasonably infer that this was the case. Matsushita, 475 U.S.
at 587. The district court therefore erred in applying an
improperly narrow standard at summary judgment.
V
In sum, we hold that TransUnion requires named and
unnamed members of a certified class for money damages to
demonstrate that there is a genuine dispute of material fact
over standing at summary judgment. We also hold that the
district court misapplied the law of summary judgment in
assessing whether the class here had done so. We therefore
reverse the district court’s partial grant of summary
judgment and remand for the court to consider whether
Healy has presented enough circumstantial evidence that a
rational trier of fact could reasonably infer that there was
class-wide standing. We express no view on whether the
circumstantial evidence does create a genuine dispute of
material fact in this regard.
REVERSED AND REMANDED.

