FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
THE GEO GROUP, INC.,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
JAY INSLEE, Governor; ROBERT
FERGUSON,

No. 24-2815
D.C. No.
3:23-cv-05626BHS
ORDER

Defendants - Appellants.
Filed February 11, 2026
Before: William A. Fletcher, Ronald M. Gould, and
Jacqueline H. Nguyen, Circuit Judges.
Order;
Statement by Judges W. Fletcher, Gould, and Nguyen;
Dissent by Judge Bumatay

2

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

SUMMARY *
Intergovernmental Immunity / Preemption
The panel denied a petition for panel rehearing and
rehearing en banc in a case in which the panel (1) vacated
the district court’s grant of a preliminary injunction sought
by GEO Group, Inc. against Washington’s Governor and
Attorney General, preventing the enforcement of Sections 2,
3, 5, and 6 of House Bill 1470, a Washington law that
protects the health and safety of civil detainees held in the
Northwest Immigration and Customs Enforcement
Processing Center; and (2) granted in part GEO’s motion to
remand to the district court for further proceedings.
Respecting the denial of rehearing en banc, Judges W.
Fletcher, Gould and Nguyen wrote that the panel correctly
decided that the appropriate comparators to GEO’s civil
detention facility are not Washington’s jails and prisons, but
rather the two types of involuntary civil detainment
facilities—residential treatment facilities for people with
mental and substance abuse disorders, and involuntary civil
commitment facilities that hold individuals, such as mentally
ill patients.
Dissenting from the denial of rehearing en banc, Judge
Bumatay, joined by Judges Callahan, Bennett, R. Nelson,
Collins, Bress, VanDyke and Tung, wrote that the court
should have reviewed this case en banc and affirmed the
district court’s injunction of the state regulation. The
appropriate comparators to federal immigration detention
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

3

centers are the State’s prisons and detainment facilities. By
its own terms, Washington’s new immigration detention
regime does not apply to state detention facilities, and
discriminates against the federal government by singling out
the federal government for unfavorable treatment. The
Supremacy Clause forbids Washington’s discrimination
against federal operations.

ORDER
The panel unanimously voted to deny appellee’s petition
for panel rehearing. Judge Gould and Judge Nguyen voted
to deny the petition for rehearing en banc, and Judge Fletcher
so recommended.
The full court has been advised of the petition for
rehearing en banc. A judge requested a vote on whether to
rehear the matter en banc. Judge Eric D. Miller did not
participate in the deliberations or vote in this case. The
matter failed to receive a majority of votes of the nonrecused
active judges in favor of en banc consideration. Fed. R. App.
P. 40.
The petition for panel rehearing and rehearing en banc
(Dkt. No. 75) is DENIED.

4

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

W. FLETCHER, GOULD, and NGUYEN, Circuit Judges,
respecting the denial of rehearing en banc:
Our dissenting colleague has unsuccessfully sought en
banc rehearing in two cases involving the GEO Group.
The first case involved work performed by civil
detainees in deportation proceedings, held by a for-profit
corporation, the GEO Group, in its privately owned and
operated facility located in Tacoma, Washington. Nwauzor
v. GEO Grp., Inc., 127 F.4th 750 (9th Cir. 2025). According
to GEO’s own estimate, eighty-five full-time employees
would have been required to do the work performed by those
civil detainees. Id. at 758. GEO’s contract with the
government allowed it to employ civilian detainees, but
required it to comply with “all applicable federal, state, and
local laws and standards,” including “labor laws and codes.”
Id. at 757.
The district court held, consistent with GEO’s contract
with the government, that GEO was required to comply with
Washington’s minimum wage law and to pay the state
mandated minimum wage to its civil detainees who
performed work on its behalf. Washington v. GEO Grp.,
Inc., No. C17-5806RJB, 2021 WL 5824570, at *3 (W.D.
Wash. Dec. 8, 2021). (Our colleague mischaracterizes the
district court’s holding when he writes that GEO was
required to pay an “inflated minimum wage.” Dissent at 7
(emphasis added)). A different panel of our court affirmed
the district court. Our colleague called the opinion en banc,
and his en banc call failed. Nwauzor v. GEO Grp., 146 F.4th
1280 (9th Cir. 2025). In his dissent from our denial of en
banc rehearing in the case now at issue, our colleague
continues to object to that denial.

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

5

The second case is the case now at issue. GEO Grp. v.
Inslee, 151 F.4th 1107 (9th Cir. 2025). This case involves
the conditions of confinement of the civil detainees held by
GEO in its Tacoma facility. GEO’s privately owned and
operated detainment facility holds civilian detainees pending
determination of their immigration status. Some of the
detainees will eventually be deported because they have no
right to be in this country. A smaller number of the detainees
will eventually be released back into this country because
they have a right to be here. None of the detainees in GEO’s
facility is being held because he or she has been convicted
of, or even charged with, a crime.
The parties agree that Washington may regulate
comparable detainment facilities in the same manner. The
disputed question is the appropriate comparator. The
government contends that GEO may treat its civil detainees
in the same manner Washington treats convicted criminals
held in its prisons and jails. Id. at 1120. Appellants contend
that GEO may not treat its civil detainees as if they are
convicted criminals. Instead, according to appellants, GEO
may treat its civil detainees in the same manner Washington
treats civil detainees held in two other types of involuntary
confinement—residential treatment facilities for people with
“mental disorders or substance abuse disorders,” and
involuntary civil commitment facilities that hold individuals,
such as mentally ill patients, against their will. Id. Our panel
concluded unanimously that the appropriate comparators are
these two other types of involuntary civil confinement
facilities.
There are two important differences between GEO’s
civil detention facility and Washington’s prisons and jails
that make that comparison inappropriate.

6

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

First, detainees in GEO’s Tacoma facility are not being
held because they are serving criminal sentences or are
charged with crimes. Our colleague appears to suggest
otherwise by including in his dissent a table published by
Immigration and Customs Enforcement that purports to
show that “most immigration-facility detainees nationwide
have either a criminal conviction or a pending criminal
charge.” Dissent at 10. Any such suggestion is wrong. As
we wrote in our opinion, “Detainees at the NWIPC are
awaiting administrative review of their immigration status.
They are civil detainees. They are not in criminal
proceedings.”
Nwauzor, 127 F.4th at 757.
Their
confinement is not punitive. See, e.g., Zadvydas v. Davis,
533 U.S. 678, 690 (2001) (Immigration detention is “civil,
not criminal” and “nonpunitive in purpose and effect.”). By
contrast, individuals in Washington’s prisons and many of
those held in its jails are there because they have been
convicted of crimes. Their conditions of confinement are,
by definition and design, punitive. Second, GEO’s facility
is privately owned and operated. By contrast, Washington’s
prisons and jails are governmentally owned and operated.
After concluding that the appropriate comparators are
not Washington’s jails and prisons, but rather the two types
of involuntary civil detainment facilities, we remanded to the
district court to make that comparison in the first instance.
Our dissenting colleague contends that it is so obvious
that the appropriate comparator is Washington’s prisons and
jails that this should have been an “easy” case. Dissent at
10. We disagree with him as to the appropriate comparator,
but we agree that this is an easy case. We believe that we
have decided it correctly. Our court has appropriately
declined to rehear the case en banc.

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

7

BUMATAY, Circuit Judge, joined by CALLAHAN,
BENNETT, R. NELSON, COLLINS, BRESS, VANDYKE,
and TUNG, Circuit Judges, dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc:
We’ve seen this before. Just a few months ago, the Ninth
Circuit ignored the Supremacy Clause of the Constitution by
permitting the State of Washington to interfere with the
federal government’s housing of aliens in removal
proceedings simply because the government chose to use
federal contractors to run its immigration detention facility.
See Nwauzor v. GEO Grp., Inc., 146 F.4th 1280, 1282 (9th
Cir. 2025) (Bumatay, J., dissenting from the denial of
rehearing en banc). Under the ruling, we let a Washington
law force the federal government’s contractors to classify its
alien detainees as “employees” under state law and pay them
an inflated minimum wage. Id. This law violated the
Supremacy Clause because, at minimum, it discriminated
against the federal government.
See id. at 1285
(Washington’s law “punishes the federal government for its
policy choice to use private contractors and treats the federal
government differently from state facilities. That is the very
definition of a state affording itself better treatment than it
affords the United States.”) (quoting Nwauzor v. GEO Grp.,
Inc., 127 F.4th 750, 774 (9th Cir. 2025) (Bennett, J.,
dissenting)). Such a decision was a “dangerous precedent”
allowing “any State [to] impair any federal policy—no
matter how central to the federal government—so long as the
State regulates federal contractors rather than the federal
government itself.” Id. at 1286.
This case is merely the latest round in the State of
Washington’s crusade against the federal government’s use
of federal contractors to enforce immigration policy. See

8

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

GEO Grp., Inc. v. Inslee, 151 F.4th 1107, 1111 (9th Cir.
2025). The Washington Legislature imposed a series of state
regulations directed solely at the Northwest Immigration and
Customs Enforcement Processing Center in Tacoma,
Washington (“Northwest ICE Center”).
See Second
Substitute House Bill 1470, 68th Leg., Reg. Sess. (Wash.
2023); Second Substitute House Bill 1232, 69th Leg., Reg.
Sess. (Wash. 2025). The regulations dictate nearly every
facet of how the federal government must treat alien
detainees at the Center—from the detainees’ right to use
their personal belongings, to the mandatory provision of
special diets, to free phone calls, to a right of “privacy”
during personal visits, to housekeeping. Wash. Rev. Code
§§ 70.395.040(1)(a), (e), 70.395.060(2)(b)–(d). Not only
that. Washington claims a right to enforce these regulations
through unannounced inspections and hefty penalties. See
Wash. Rev. Code §§ 70.395.050(2)(a), 70.395.070(1),
70.395.080. The reason Washington claims to get away with
this? The Northwest ICE Center is run by a federal
contractor—The GEO Group, Inc.
These are no across-the-board state regulations. Instead,
to avoid the fiscal and safety burdens of these obligations,
Washington exempts any of its own facilities—including
state and local detention facilities, jails, and prisons—from
both the regulations and their enforcement mechanisms. See
Wash. Rev. Code § 70.395.080(6) (“The state and its
agencies are not liable for a violation of this chapter.”). And
so, these regulations apply only to the Northwest ICE Center.
In effect, what Washington State has told Washington, D.C.,
is: “Rules for thee but not for me!”
In the normal course, the discriminatory exclusion of
Washington’s comparable facilities would doom the law.
Whatever else the Supremacy Clause requires, it prohibits

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

9

States from targeting the federal government and its
contractors with burdensome regulation while exempting
themselves from its costs. See United States v. Washington,
596 U.S. 832, 838 (2022) (The Constitution prohibits state
laws that “discriminate against the Federal Government or
those with whom it deals (e.g., contractors)” (simplified)).
As we’ve said, “any discriminatory burden on the federal
government is impermissible.” United States v. California,
921 F.3d 865, 883 (9th Cir. 2019). In determining whether
a State engaged in discrimination, we look to state law’s
burdens on appropriate comparators. See North Dakota v.
United States, 495 U.S. 423, 438 (1990) (“Since a regulation
imposed on one who deals with the Government has as much
potential to obstruct governmental functions as a regulation
imposed on the Government itself, the Court has required
that the regulation be one that is imposed on some basis
unrelated to the object’s status as a Government contractor
or supplier, that is, that it be imposed equally on other
similarly situated constituents of the State.”). And we’ve
already indicated that the appropriate comparators to federal
immigration detention centers are the State’s “prisons and
detainment facilities.” California, 921 F.3d at 882.
This comparison is obviously right—both immigration
detention facilities and state jails and prisons detain those
accused or convicted of violating the law, whether
immigration or state criminal law. Both have comparable
concerns for public safety and ensuring appearances at future
proceedings. Congress has authorized, and in many cases
required, the detention of certain aliens in removal
proceedings. See 8 U.S.C. §§ 1225(b)(1)(B)(ii), (b)(2)(A),
1226(a)–(c), 1231(a). Mandatory detention is required for
aliens involved in serious criminal activities, such as
burglary, theft, assault of a law enforcement officer, or

10

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

crimes resulting in another’s death or serious bodily injury.
See 8 U.S.C. § 1226(c)(1)(E). Indeed, according to ICE,
most immigration-facility detainees nationwide have either
a criminal conviction or a pending criminal charge. 1

So immigration detention serves two security-related
goals—“preventing flight” and “protecting the community.”
Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U.S. 678, 690 (2001). Indeed,
“Congress adopted [the detention provisions] against a
backdrop of wholesale failure by the INS to deal with
increasing rates of criminal activity by aliens.” Demore v.
Kim, 538 U.S. 510, 518 (2003). So close are the goals of
immigration and criminal detention that Congress instructed
the government to consider using “existing prison[s], jail[s],
detention center[s], or other comparable facilit[ies]” before
constructing new immigration detention facilities. See 8
U.S.C. § 1231(g)(2).
So this case should have been easy. By its own terms,
Washington’s new immigration detention regime doesn’t
apply to state detention facilities. It thus discriminates
against the federal government by “singling out the Federal
Government for unfavorable treatment.” Washington, 596
U.S. at 839.
This is an open-and-shut case of
intergovernmental immunity—as the district court
U.S. Immigr. and Customs Enf’t, Detention FY 2026 YTD (Feb. 2,
2026),
https://www.ice.gov/doclib/detention/FY26_detentionStats02022026.xl
sx [https://perma.cc/B3UC-DGAC].

1

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

11

concluded. See GEO Grp., Inc. v. Inslee, 720 F. Supp. 3d
1029, 1067 (W.D. Wash. 2024).
Unfortunately, we didn’t follow the normal course.
Instead, the panel invents a new set of rules when it comes
to immigration detention centers run by federal contractors.
Rather than looking to the state’s prisons and detention
facilities, the panel directs the district court to focus
myopically on the smallest subset of inapt comparators—
“private residential treatment facilities and civil
commitment facilities.” Inslee, 151 F.4th at 1119. This is a
wholly unfitting comparison.
Ignoring the obvious
similarities between criminal and immigration detention, the
panel wants to look only at private sector healthcare
facilities, such as mental health and substance abuse
treatment centers.
While these private institutions
sometimes detain patients involuntarily, they simply don’t
have the same public safety concerns as immigration
detention centers and state prisons and jails. And healthcare
facilities involve a focus on medical treatment and
rehabilitation that immigration detention facilities lack.
Moreover, although the panel would have us compare the
Northwest ICE Center to private treatment facilities,
Washington’s law exempts state contractors who provide
these services. See Wash. Rev. Code § 70.395.100. In
creating this mismatch, the panel ignores both our circuit
precedent and common sense.
As is almost axiomatic, the power to burden is the power
to destroy. And state destruction of federal operations is
something the Supremacy Clause doesn’t permit. But that’s
the clear intent of Washington’s laws. Given this, we should
have reviewed this case en banc and affirmed the injunction
of the state regulation. Because the Supremacy Clause
forbids Washington State’s discrimination against federal

12

THE GEO GROUP V. INSLEE

operations, I respectfully dissent from the denial of rehearing
en banc.

