FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
ROY PAYAN; PORTIA MASON;
NATIONAL FEDERATION OF
THE BLIND, INC.; NATIONAL
FEDERATION OF THE BLIND OF
CALIFORNIA, INC.,

No. 24-1809
D.C. No.
2:17-cv-01697SVW-SK

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.

OPINION

LOS ANGELES COMMUNITY
COLLEGE DISTRICT,
Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Stephen V. Wilson, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 18, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed March 11, 2026
Before: Jay S. Bybee, Kenneth K. Lee, and Ana de Alba,
Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge de Alba;
Partial Dissent by Judge Lee

2

PAYAN V. LACCD

SUMMARY *
Americans with Disabilities Act / Damages
Reversing and vacating the district court’s final
judgment after retrial on remand in a disability
discrimination action under Title II of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (“ADA”) against Los Angeles Community
College District (“LACCD”), the panel held that the district
court abused its discretion in granting remittitur of damages.
Roy Payan, Portia Mason, National Federal of the Blind,
Inc., and National Federation of the Blind of California, Inc.,
alleged discrimination in Payan’s and Mason’s treatment as
students at LACCD. The jury found LACCD liable on
fourteen factual allegations, and it found that LACCD had
intentionally violated Title II on nine of them. Based on
LACCD’s intentional conduct, the jury awarded damages to
Payan and Mason. The district court granted LACCD’s
motion for remittitur, reducing the damages from $218,500
to $1,650 for Payan and from $24,000 to $0 for Mason. The
district court also awarded injunctive relief against LACCD.
The panel concluded that LACCD did not forfeit the
argument that emotional distress damages were not
available. The panel held that in light of Cummings v.
Premier Rehab Keller, P.L.L.C., 596 U.S. 212 (2022)
(holding that emotional distress damages are not recoverable
under antidiscrimination laws enacted pursuant to Congress’
Spending Clause power), emotional distress damages are not
available under Title II of the ADA. The panel explained
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

PAYAN V. LACCD

3

that, while Title II is a non-Spending Clause
antidiscrimination law, it explicitly defines its rights and
remedies as those of the Rehabilitation Act, which was
enacted pursuant to the Spending Clause. Agreeing with the
Eleventh Circuit, the panel nonetheless held that the district
court erred in failing to consider whether Payan and Mason
were awarded other appropriate forms of relief, such as
compensatory damages for loss of educational
opportunities. The panel concluded that the jury’s award
was consistent with the evidence presented at trial and the
district court’s instructions regarding damages. The panel
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion and a corresponding memorandum disposition, with
instructions to reinstate the jury’s damages award of
$218,500 to Payan and $24,000 to Mason.
Dissenting in part, Judge Lee agreed with the majority
that Payan and Mason could not recover emotional distress
damages under Title II of the ADA but could still seek other
pecuniary damages for opportunities lost after suffering
unlawful discrimination. Judge Lee disagreed, however,
with the majority’s conclusion that Payan and Mason offered
sufficient evidence to prove that they were entitled to
damages for lost educational opportunities.

4

PAYAN V. LACCD

COUNSEL
Jessica P. Weber (argued), Monica R. Basche, Kevin D.
Docherty, and Erin E. O’Neill, Brown Goldstein & Levy
LLP, Baltimore, Maryland; Patricia Barbosa, Barbosa
Group, Huntington Beach, California; for PlaintiffsAppellants.
David A. Urban (argued), Morgan J. Johnson, Mark H.
Meyerhoff, and Richard D. Seitz, Liebert Cassidy
Whitmore, Los Angeles, California, for DefendantAppellee.
Elizabeth B. Wydra, Brianne J. Gorod, and Smita Ghosh,
Constitutional Accountability Center, Washington, D.C.; for
Amicus Curiae Constitutional Accountability Center.
Amy F. Robertson, Fox & Robertson PC, Denver, Colorado;
Andrew Rozynski, Eisenberg & Baum LLP, New York,
New York; Claudia Center, Maria M. Uzeta, Disability
Rights Education and Defense Fund, Berkeley, California;
for Amici Curiae Disability Rights Education and Defense
Fund and Sixteen Other Organizations.

PAYAN V. LACCD

5

OPINION
DE ALBA, Circuit Judge:
Roy Payan, Portia Mason, National Federation of the
Blind, Inc., and National Federation of the Blind of
California, Inc., 1 appeal the district court’s final judgment
and permanent injunction after retrial on remand from this
Court in appellants’ disability discrimination action under
Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act (“ADA”)
against Los Angeles Community College District
(“LACCD”). Because the district court abused its discretion
in granting remittitur, we reverse, vacate, and remand with
instructions to reinstate the jury’s damages award.
I. Background
Appellants Roy Payan and Portia Mason are two blind
individuals who enrolled as students in Los Angeles City
College (“LACC”), a campus of LACCD, in 2015. Payan
and Mason both registered as students with disabilities with
LACC’s Office of Special Services and were approved for
accommodations, set to start in the Spring 2016 semester.
Payan’s accommodations included tape-recorded lectures,
preferential seating, and access to electronic text materials.
Mason’s accommodations included recorded lectures,
preferential seating, access to electronic text materials, and
test-taking accommodations. Payan and Mason also both
We refer to Payan, Mason, National Federation of the Blind, Inc., and
National Federation of the Blind of California, Inc. as “Plaintiffs.”
Although the National Federation of the Blind, Inc. and the National
Federation of the Blind of California, Inc. are also appellants in this case,
in keeping with the scope of the issues on appeal—the remittitur of the
damages awarded to Payan and Mason—this opinion uses “Appellants”
to refer solely to Payan and Mason.

1

6

PAYAN V. LACCD

use Jobs Access With Speech (“JAWS”) screen-reading
software, which reads electronic text to them.
A. First Trial and Appeal
Despite their approved accommodations, Payan and
Mason encountered several issues accessing the materials
needed for their studies, and in March 2017, the plaintiffs
sued LACCD under Title II of the ADA, 42 U.S.C. § 12132,
and Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. After the district
court determined LACCD’s liability, it held a jury trial in
June 2019 to decide the question of whether LACCD was
deliberately indifferent in violating the rights of Payan and
Mason, thereby entitling the plaintiffs to damages. The jury
awarded $40,000 in damages to Payan and $0 to Mason.
Following the jury trial, the district court also issued a
permanent injunction.
All parties appealed the district court’s 2019 judgment.
In August 2021, this Court vacated the district court’s
judgment in part and remanded the case for a new trial on
the plaintiffs’ claims. Payan v. Los Angeles Cmty. Coll.
Dist., 11 F.4th 729, 740 (9th Cir. 2021) [hereinafter Payan
I]; Payan v. Los Angeles Cmty. Coll. Dist., Nos. 19-56111,
19-56146, 2021 WL 3743307 (9th Cir. Aug. 24, 2021). This
Court instructed the district court to reconsider the plaintiffs’
individual claims on remand under either a disparate impact
or a failure-to-accommodate framework and to permit the
plaintiffs to introduce evidence to support these claims under
either theory. Payan I, 11 F.4th at 740.
B. Second Trial
On remand, the district court specified that the plaintiffs
could try their claims under one of three theories of potential
liability under Title II of the ADA: disparate impact,

PAYAN V. LACCD

7

reasonable accommodation, or disparate treatment. During
the second trial, Payan and Mason testified as to their many
experiences encountering accessibility issues as a result of
LACCD’s actions and inactions. Payan testified that he
could not keep up with his Math 124A course because he
only received the necessary chapters of his textbook after
they were discussed in class. He also testified that he could
not use the classroom management software used for his
math classes, MyMathLab, because it was inaccessible.
While other students could complete homework assigned
through MyMathLab at their discretion, Payan had to sit with
a tutor at the Office of Special Services to complete his math
assignments. Payan also testified that he was limited to two
one-hour tutoring sessions per week, which meant that he
frequently could not complete all his math homework for the
week. Similarly, Payan was unable to access the online
learning platform, Etudes, for his psychology course,
preventing him from participating in online class
discussions.
The students also encountered issues with other
inaccessible resources. Payan was not provided with the
accessible textbooks, handouts, and PowerPoint
presentations from class lectures that he required. Both
Payan and Mason were unable to use the LACC library
resources because the databases were inaccessible and the
computers lacked functioning screen-reading software.
Additionally, Payan testified that the LACC and LACCD
websites were inaccessible, making it difficult for him to
register for courses, apply for financial aid, or stay abreast of
the goings-on of campus.
Moreover, the students testified that LACCD failed to
honor their approved accommodations. First, LACCD only
provided Payan and Mason with their accommodation letters

8

PAYAN V. LACCD

in an inaccessible print format, preventing them from having
an effective memorialization of their approved
accommodations. Payan and Mason also reported repeated
issues securing test-taking accommodations. Payan testified
that he was not always guaranteed a notetaker for his classes,
despite his approved accommodation. He also testified that
on at least one occasion, a professor did not allow him to
record class.
Lastly, Payan testified about his experience being steered
away from taking certain courses because of his disability.
He testified that after a couple of attempts to take Math 125,
a single-semester class, a math professor prompted him to
take Math 124A and 124B in sequence, which comprised the
same material as Math 125 but would require two semesters
to complete.
On retrial, the jury found LACCD liable on fourteen of
the nineteen factual allegations. Moreover, the jury found
that LACCD had intentionally violated Title II of the ADA
on nine of the factual allegations. These include the
accessibility issues pertaining to the websites, library
resources, classroom management software programs,
textbooks, accommodation letters, testing accommodations,
and the refusal to permit Payan to attend the math class.
Finding that LACCD committed the requisite intentional
conduct to render damages available, Ferguson v. City of
Phoenix, 157 F.3d 668, 674 (9th Cir. 1998) (holding that
compensatory damages are available under Title II of the
ADA with a showing of discriminatory intent); Duvall v.
Cnty. of Kitsap, 260 F.3d 1124, 1138–39 (9th Cir. 2001)
(clarifying that, to recover damages under the ADA,
plaintiffs must establish deliberate indifference to make a
showing of discriminatory intent), the jury determined the

PAYAN V. LACCD

9

amount of damages LACCD owed Payan and Mason. The
district court’s jury instructions on damages stated that the
jury could award damages to “reasonably and fairly”
compensate the plaintiff for “any injury” they found the
defendant’s violations of the ADA caused. The court also
noted that the jury could “consider the testimony of the
plaintiffs regarding the expenses they incurred if [they]
found that those expenses were the result of a violation of
the ADA.” Accordingly, the jury awarded “$218,500 +
attorney’s fees” to Payan and “24,000 + attorney’s fees” to
Mason.
C. Post-Trial Hearings and Orders
In July 2023, LACCD filed a motion for remittitur,
which the district court granted the following year. The
district court reduced the damages to $1,650 for Payan and
$0 for Mason, finding that the record only supported an
award of out-of-pocket expenses. The district court found
that the “figures [were] not supported by the record and [did]
not fall within the definition of ‘expenses’ that the Court
noted in its jury instruction.” It reasoned that the awarded
damages “could only be attributed to one of two
impermissible sources: emotional damages or lost
educational opportunities.”
The district court informed its remittitur order by the
parties’ pre-trial back-and-forth on the availability of
emotional distress damages under Title II of the ADA after
the Supreme Court’s ruling in Cummings v. Premier Rehab
Keller, P.L.L.C., which held that emotional distress damages
are not recoverable under antidiscrimination laws enacted
under Congress’ Spending Clause power. 596 U.S. 212, 230
(2022). Citing Cummings, LACCD objected in August 2022
to proposed jury instructions making emotional distress

10

PAYAN V. LACCD

damages available. LACCD raised the issue again in the
pretrial conference hearings in May 2023, after which the
district court requested briefing on the topic from both
parties. In a subsequent pretrial conference, the district court
announced that it was limiting the scope of available
damages because Title II does not permit emotional distress
damages. The district court memorialized its ruling in
writing the following day, holding that the plaintiffs could
not pursue emotional distress damages or damages for lost
employment opportunities.
After the second trial, the district court set subsequent
hearings on the issue of how to structure the injunctive relief.
The court heard testimony from LACCD witnesses and the
plaintiffs’ experts. A key issue that arose during the posttrial hearings was how LACCD’s programs and procedures
had changed since 2015–2018, the time period at issue in the
case. During these hearings, LACCD provided evidence that
it had made significant changes to its websites, existing
software programs, and its process for procuring new
software programs. Accounting for these changes, the
district court determined that the issues of liability
warranting injunctive relief were those pertaining to the
inaccessible library resources, school websites, and
accommodation forms.
Payan and Mason timely appealed the district court’s
grant of remittitur and injunctive order.
II. Jurisdiction and Standards of Review
The district court had jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C.
§ 1331. We have jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291.
We review district court orders on motions for a new trial
and remittitur, including the remitted amount of damages set

PAYAN V. LACCD

11

by the district court, for abuse of discretion. See Unicolors,
Inc. v. H&M Hennes & Mauritz, L.P., 52 F.4th 1054, 1063
(9th Cir. 2022); Oracle Corp. v. SAP AG, 765 F.3d 1081,
1087 (9th Cir. 2014). The factual findings underlying the
district court’s decision must be affirmed unless they are
“illogical, implausible or without support in inferences that
may be drawn from the record.” Unicolors, Inc., 52 F.4th at
1063 (quoting United States v. Hinkson, 585 F.3d 1247,
1262 (9th Cir. 2009) (en banc)). “We review the district
court’s interpretation of the relevant disability
discrimination laws de novo.” Payan I, 11 F.4th at 734
(citing Molski v. Foley Ests. Vineyard & Winery, LLC, 531
F.3d 1043, 1046 (9th Cir. 2008)); see Silver Sage Partners,
Ltd. v. City of Desert Hot Springs, 251 F.3d 814, 819 (9th
Cir. 2001).
III. Discussion
Payan and Mason challenge the district court’s grant of
remittitur and seek reinstatement of the jury’s damages
award. They argue the district court erred in three distinct
ways. First, they argue the district court erred by allowing
LACCD to raise a forfeited argument against emotional
distress damages. Second, they argue the district court
erroneously applied Supreme Court precedent in barring
plaintiffs from recovering emotional distress damages under
Title II of the ADA. Third, they alternatively argue that even
if emotional distress damages are unavailable, the district
court still erred in reducing the plaintiffs’ damages to out-ofpocket expenses despite evidence that the jury could have
awarded compensatory damages for the recoverable harm of
lost educational opportunities.

12

PAYAN V. LACCD

Because we find the emotional distress damages issue
was not forfeited, 2 we must consider the scope of
compensatory relief available under Title II of the ADA in
light of the Supreme Court’s decision in Cummings v.
Premier Rehab Keller, P.L.L.C. In Cummings, the Court
held that emotional distress damages are not recoverable
under antidiscrimination laws enacted pursuant to Congress’
Spending Clause power. 596 U.S. at 230. While Title II of
the ADA is a non-Spending Clause antidiscrimination law,
it explicitly defines its rights and remedies as those of the
Rehabilitation Act, which was enacted pursuant to the
Spending Clause. See 42 U.S.C. § 12133; 29 U.S.C.
§ 794a(a)(2). Applying Cummings, the district court in this
case concluded that emotional distress damages are therefore
also not available under Title II of the ADA. We agree; but
we also hold that the district court erred in failing to consider
whether Payan and Mason were awarded other appropriate
forms of relief.

Payan and Mason specifically argue that LACCD forfeited the
argument against emotional distress damages by not raising it at any
point during the previous trial or appeal. See Jimenez v. Franklin, 680
F.3d 1096, 1099–1100 (9th Cir. 2012) (“We need not and do not consider
a new contention that could have been but was not raised on the prior
appeal.”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted). LACCD,
however, was not foreclosed from arguing on remand that emotional
distress damages are unavailable because this specific issue was not
considered, nor decided by implication, in the previous dispositions. See
United States v. Lummi Nation, 763 F.3d 1180, 1185 (9th Cir. 2014)
(“For the [law-of-the-case] doctrine to apply, the issue in question must
have been decided explicitly or by necessary implication in the previous
disposition.”) (internal quotation marks and citation omitted) (emphasis
in original). Therefore, LACCD was permitted to challenge the
availability of emotional distress damages in the second trial.

2

PAYAN V. LACCD

13

A. Emotional Distress Damages
In Cummings, the Supreme Court addressed the question
of whether emotional distress damages were recoverable
under anti-discrimination laws enacted pursuant to
Congress’ Spending Clause power. 596 U.S. at 229–30. 3
Directly at issue in the case was whether emotional distress
damages were available under the Affordable Care Act and,
as relevant here, the Rehabilitation Act. Id. at 218. Because
the Rehabilitation Act “expressly incorporates the rights and
remedies provided under Title VI,” the Court examined the
scope of remedies available under Title VI to determine
whether emotional distress damages were recoverable under
the Rehabilitation Act. Id. To do so, the Court applied a
contract-law analogy whereby “[a] particular remedy is thus
‘appropriate relief’ in a private Spending Clause action ‘only
if the funding recipient is on notice that, by accepting federal
funding, it exposes itself to liability of that nature.’” Id. at
219–20 (quoting Barnes v. Gorman, 536 U.S. 181, 187
(2002) (emphasis in original)). Critically, courts may
presume that a funding recipient is aware that it could be
subject “to the usual contract remedies in private suits.” Id.
at 221. Following this analogy, the Cummings Court
concluded that emotional distress damages are not
recoverable under the Rehabilitation Act because
“emotional distress is generally not compensable” in
contract law. Id. at 221–22.
“Pursuant to its authority to ‘fix the terms on which it shall disburse
federal money,’ Congress has enacted four statutes prohibiting recipients
of federal financial assistance from discriminating based on certain
protected grounds[:] Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964[,] . . . . Title
IX of the Education Amendments of 1972[,] . . . the Rehabilitation Act[,]
[and] . . . . the Affordable Care Act.” Cummings, 596 U.S. at 217–18
(cleaned up and internal citations omitted).

3

14

PAYAN V. LACCD

Consistent with the approach articulated in Cummings,
we hold that emotional distress damages are not available
under Title II of the ADA, as the remedies available under
Title II of the ADA are defined by the statutory text’s
reference to the Rehabilitation Act. See 42 U.S.C. § 12133;
29 U.S.C. § 794a(a)(2). Specifically, the law states that “the
‘remedies, procedures, and rights’ that Title II ‘provides to
any person alleging discrimination on the basis of disability
in violation of section 12132’” are “the ‘remedies,
procedures, and rights set forth in’ the Rehabilitation Act.”
A.W. by & Through J.W. v. Coweta Cnty. Sch. Dist., 110
F.4th 1309, 1314 (11th Cir. 2024) (quoting 42 U.S.C.
§ 12133; 29 U.S.C. § 794a(a)(2)). The Rehabilitation Act,
in turn, establishes that its “remedies, procedures and rights”
are those “set forth in title VI of the Civil Rights Act of
1964.” 29 U.S.C. § 794a(a)(2). Following the chain of
incorporation articulated in the statutes, the scope of
remedies available under Title II of the ADA is ultimately
determined by Title VI’s remedial scheme.
Payan and Mason contend, however, that Cummings
does not apply here because the ADA was enacted pursuant
to Congress’ Fourteenth Amendment and Commerce Clause
powers, and not its Spending Clause power. But this
argument was already considered and rejected by the
Supreme Court in Barnes v. Gorman. 536 U.S. 181 (2002).
In Barnes, the Supreme Court held that punitive damages
were not available under Title VI because “punitive damages
. . . are generally not available for breach of contract.” Id. at
187. The Court then also held that, because Title II of the
ADA incorporated the rights and remedies of Title VI vis-àvis the Rehabilitation Act, it followed that punitive damages
could also not be awarded in private suits brought under
§ 202 of the ADA or § 504 of the Rehabilitation Act. Id. at

PAYAN V. LACCD

15

189. The Supreme Court specifically stated that “[t]he ADA
could not be clearer that the ‘remedies, procedures, and
rights . . . are the same as the ‘remedies, procedures, and
rights set forth in’. . . the Rehabilitation Act . . . . These
explicit provisions make discussion of the ADA’s status as a
‘non Spending Clause’ tort statute quite irrelevant.” Id. at
190 n.3. (internal citations omitted).
Taking Cummings and Barnes together, we read the text
of Title II of the ADA as making its remedies coextensive
with those of the Rehabilitation Act and Title VI of the Civil
Rights Act. Because emotional distress damages are
unavailable under those causes of action, we likewise hold
that such damages are unavailable under Title II of the ADA.
Therefore, the district court correctly barred Payan and
Mason from recovering emotional distress damages.
B. Damages for Lost Educational Opportunities
Payan and Mason alternatively argue that the jury’s
damages award rightly compensated them for their loss of
educational opportunities and that the record and the district
court’s instructions support such an award. We agree.
While we review district court orders on remittitur for
abuse of discretion, Unicolors, Inc., 52 F.4th at 1063, we
must also provide substantial deference to a jury’s finding of
the appropriate amount of damages, Del Monte Dunes at
Monterey, Ltd. v. City of Monterey, 95 F.3d 1422, 1435 (9th
Cir. 1996); United States v. CB & I Constructors, Inc., 685
F.3d 827, 839 (9th Cir. 2012). “We must uphold the jury’s
award ‘[u]nless the amount is grossly excessive or
monstrous, clearly not supported by the evidence, or based
only on speculation or guesswork.’” CB & I Constructors,
Inc., 685 F.3d at 839 (quoting Harper v. City of Los Angeles,
533 F.3d 1010, 1028 (9th Cir. 2008)).

16

PAYAN V. LACCD

Several courts post-Cummings have found that plaintiffs
may still seek compensatory damages for opportunities lost
as a result of a violation of their rights under federal
antidiscrimination statutes. In fact, one of our sister circuits
has found that, while emotional distress damages are not
recoverable under Title II of the ADA post-Cummings,
plaintiffs may still seek “compensation for lost educational
benefits” under Title II. A.W. by & Through J.W., 110 F.4th
at 1315–16. We agree that plaintiffs may seek compensatory
damages for lost educational opportunities under Title II of
the ADA. See Franklin v. Gwinnett Cnty. Pub. Schs., 503
U.S. 60, 66 (1992) (“[W]here legal rights have been invaded,
and a federal statute provides for a general right to sue for
such invasion, federal courts may use any available remedy
to make good the wrong done.”) (quoting Bell v. Hood, 327
U.S. 678, 684 (1946)). We therefore find the district court
erred in barring Appellants from seeking damages for lost
educational opportunities.
We also find that the jury’s award was consistent with
the evidence presented at trial and the district court’s
instructions regarding damages. During trial, Appellants
presented the jury with evidence that they lost opportunities
to meaningfully learn class material, engage in classroom
discussions, and explore their educational interests as a
result of LACCD’s violations of the ADA. Such testimony
included Payan recounting that he was deprived of “the
opportunity to participate at the same level of participation
as the rest of the students” and that he was unable to
participate in aspects of his math and psychology courses
because they used inaccessible software programs.
Moreover, the general instruction provided to the jury
regarding damages could reasonably have been understood
as allowing the jury to compensate Appellants for lost

PAYAN V. LACCD

17

educational opportunities. While LACCD contends that the
jury could not have awarded damages for lost educational
opportunities because it did not receive specific instructions
on such damages, the instructions broadly allowed the jury
to compensate Payan and Mason for “any injury” they found
was caused by the LACCD’s violations of the ADA. The
district court did not require that the jury make specific
findings as to lost opportunities, nor did it require the jury to
exclude lost opportunity damages and solely award out-ofpocket expenses. After instructing the jury to compensate
Appellants for any injury they found resulted from
LACCD’s violations, the district court provided, “You can
consider the testimony of the plaintiffs regarding the
expenses they incurred.” The use of the word “can”
reasonably indicated to the jury that it had “permission to”
or “may” consider out-of-pocket expenses, Can (Verb),
MERRIAM-WEBSTER’S UNABRIDGED DICTIONARY (2025),
but the structure and syntax of the instruction did not clearly
require the jury to only consider out-of-pocket expenses.
Because Payan and Mason presented evidence of the
educational opportunities they lost as a result of LACCD’s
violations and because of the general nature of the damages
instructions, the jury could have reasonably calculated
Appellants’ damages to be the amount awarded at trial. 4 See
We agree with the dissent that plaintiffs seeking lost opportunity
damages must prove the amount of damages with reasonable certainty.
See Vestar Dev. II, LLC v. Gen. Dynamics Corp., 249 F.3d 958, 962 (9th
Cir. 2001). However, we disagree in the ultimate conclusion. Plaintiffs
in this case testified they were unable to avail themselves of the
educational opportunities they paid for, including being deterred from
taking certain classes, being unable to access critical educational
materials, and being unable to participate in necessary educational
assessments such as homework and online classroom discussions. Such
4

18

PAYAN V. LACCD

Tortu v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dep’t, 556 F.3d 1075,
1086 (9th Cir. 2009). Therefore, the jury’s award is not
against the clear weight of the evidence. See Bell v.
Williams, 108 F.4th 809, 819 (9th Cir. 2024); see also Kode
v. Carlson, 596 F.3d 608, 613 (9th Cir. 2010). By failing to
consider whether the jury’s award was based on the legally
viable basis of lost educational opportunities, the court
abused its discretion by granting remittitur. See Tortu, 556
F.3d at 1086 (finding district court abused discretion in
granting new trial based on “speculative, excessive
damages” where its reasoning “reflect[ed] an inaccurate
view of the law”); Kode, 596 F.3d at 613 (“A finding of
abuse of discretion is warranted when the district court's
conclusion—although not perhaps the same conclusion that
we would reach—was outside of a broad range of
permissible conclusions.”).
IV. Conclusion
We conclude that the district court erroneously remitted
damages, and we accordingly REVERSE, VACATE, and
REMAND for further proceedings consistent with this
opinion and corresponding memorandum disposition, with
instructions to reinstate the jury’s damages award of
$218,500 to Payan and $24,000 to Mason.

experiences demonstrate how they were effectively unable to access
educational opportunities or benefits, meeting the evidentiary threshold
to establish the damages to which they are entitled. Cf. Davis Next
Friend LaShonda D. v. Monroe Cnty. Bd. of Educ., 526 U.S. 629, 633
(1999) (holding that private damages are available under Title IX where
harassment is severe enough that it effectively bars access to education
opportunities or benefits).

PAYAN V. LACCD

19

LEE, Circuit Judge, dissenting in part:
The majority correctly concludes that the plaintiffs Roy
Payan and Portia Mason may not recover emotional distress
damages under Title II of the Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA). The majority is also right that ADA plaintiffs
may still seek other pecuniary damages for opportunities lost
after suffering unlawful discrimination. But I part with my
colleagues over their conclusion that the plaintiffs offered
sufficient evidence to prove that they suffered lost
educational opportunities to the tune of $218,500. Because
the district court fairly reasoned that the jury in reality
compensated the plaintiffs for impermissible emotional
distress—not lost educational opportunities—I would affirm
the district court’s grant of remittitur of damages.
Because Title II of the ADA permits a plaintiff to recover
only those remedies traditionally available in private
contract suits—i.e., economic damages—a plaintiff seeking
lost opportunity damages must prove the amount of damages
with reasonable certainty. See Vestar Dev. II, LLC v. Gen.
Dynamics Corp., 249 F.3d 958, 962 (9th Cir. 2001)
(requiring plaintiff to offer the jury a way to determine
damages beyond mere speculation).
The plaintiffs simply did not provide any concrete
evidence of lost educational opportunities that would justify
an award of over $200,000. The reason is obvious: As the
majority explains, the district court—incorrectly—barred
them from introducing evidence of lost educational
opportunities (more on that error later). The record is thus
devoid of evidence about such damages.
To be sure, Payan and Mason argued they lost some
opportunities to learn class material, explore interests, or

20

PAYAN V. LACCD

enjoy the full benefits of classroom participation. But the
evidence presented at trial amounts to little more than the
parties’ feelings that they failed to receive the full value of
their educational program. The record has no testimony
about the reasonable value of these opportunities compared
to the expected value of the parties’ educational programs.
Payan testified that he felt “more [like] a spectator than a
student,” fell behind in classes, lost opportunities to learn
about events on campus due to inaccessible websites, and
was encouraged to slow the pace of his studies. But such
vague testimony provides no basis for a jury to reasonably
calculate the value of Payan’s losses. The evidence of
damages is even skimpier for Mason: She did not point to
any evidence of her lost opportunities in the record.
The plaintiffs should have appealed the district court’s
error in barring evidence of lost educational opportunities.
But they did not do so. Instead, they chose to argue that they
had presented evidence of such damages, despite the district
court’s order precluding them from doing so. Perhaps that
was a strategic choice because the plaintiffs believed that
they would not likely obtain a $200,000-plus verdict based
on lost educational opportunities and out-of-pocket
expenses. But it is implausible that the jury calculated the
value of any lost opportunities to exceed $200,000, given the
record.
In sum, the district court correctly found that the jury
compensated the plaintiffs for the emotional impacts of
discrimination—which are not recoverable under Title II of
the ADA. The district court thus did not abuse its discretion
in granting the defendant’s request for remittitur of damages,
and I would uphold the district court’s reduced award.
I respectfully dissent.

