FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JACKSON WELLS, as Personal
Representative for the Estate of
Thomas E. Wells, deceased; JUDITH
HEMPHILL, as Personal
Representative for the Estate of Joyce
H. Walder, deceased,

No. 24-4802
D.C. No.
4:21-cv-00097BMM
OPINION

Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
BNSF RAILWAY COMPANY, a
Delaware corporation,
Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Montana
Brian M. Morris, Chief District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 21, 2025
Portland, Oregon
Filed February 24, 2026
Before: Consuelo M. Callahan, Morgan B. Christen, and
Andrew D. Hurwitz, Circuit Judges.

2

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

Opinion by Judge Christen;
Concurrence by Judge Callahan
SUMMARY*
Common Carrier Exception / Montana Law
The panel reversed the district court’s judgment in favor
of Plaintiffs, former residents of Libby, Montana who
developed mesothelioma from asbestos exposure, on their
strict liability claims against BNSF Railway Company
arising from BNSF’s transportation of asbestos-containing
vermiculite.
BNSF was required by federal law to transport asbestoscontaining vermiculite from the world’s largest vermiculite
mine to its railyard in Libby, Montana, and from there to
destinations nationwide.
Recently, in another case against BNSF for personal
injuries caused by asbestos exposure in Libby, the Montana
Supreme Court adopted § 521 of the Restatement (Second)
of Torts, which provides for an exception to strict liability
for abnormally dangerous activities. BNSF Ry. Co. v. Eddy,
459 P.3d 857 (Mont. 2020). The common carrier exception
bars the imposition of strict liability for an abnormally
dangerous activity if the activity is undertaken pursuant to a
public duty imposed upon the actor as a common carrier.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

3

The panel held that the district court erred by interpreting
the common carrier exception too narrowly when it held that
BNSF was ineligible for the common carrier exception on
the grounds that it did not act pursuant to a public duty when
it failed to maintain its railyard and tracks where asbestos
collected. The dangerous condition here—accumulated
asbestos dust—arose solely from BNSF’s operation as a
common carrier executing its federally mandated duty to
transport vermiculite. Montana caselaw strongly supported
the conclusion that BNSF was entitled to the protection
afforded by the common carrier exception. Accordingly, the
panel held that BNSF was protected from strict liability by
the common carrier exception.
The panel concluded that certification to the Montana
Supreme Court on the question of whether the common
carrier exception applied to BNSF’s actions was
unwarranted because there was sufficient Montana state law
to answer the question.
The panel reversed the district court’s judgment and
remanded with instructions to enter judgment for BNSF.
Concurring, Judge Callahan joined the opinion in full
because it correctly concluded that under Montana law the
common carrier exception protects BNSF from plaintiffs’
strict liability claims. She wrote separately to stress that the
Interstate Commerce Commission Termination Act
separately preempts plaintiffs’ strict liability claims.

4

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

COUNSEL
Kevin P. Parker (argued), C. Alfred Mackenzie, Megan M.
Waida, and W. Mark Lanier, The Lanier Law Firm PC,
Houston, Texas; Jinnifer J. Mariman and John F. Lacey,
McGarvey Law, Kalispell, Montana; for PlaintiffsAppellees.
Dale Schowengerdt (argued) and Timothy Longfield,
Landmark Law PLLC, Helena, Montana; Chad Knight,
Knight MacKay Morrow LLC, Kansas City, Missouri; for
Defendant-Appellant.

OPINION
CHRISTEN, Circuit Judge:
From 1922 to 1990, BNSF Railway Company was
required by federal law to transport asbestos-containing
vermiculite from the world’s largest vermiculite mine to its
railyard in Libby, Montana, and from there to destinations
nationwide. Thomas Wells and Joyce Walder were former
residents of Libby who developed mesothelioma from
asbestos exposure. Their estates asserted negligence and
strict liability claims against BNSF arising from its
transportation of vermiculite and sought compensatory and
punitive damages. After a ten-day trial, the jury returned a
verdict for Plaintiffs on their strict liability claims but in
favor of BNSF on Plaintiffs’ negligence claims. The jury
did not award punitive damages.
On appeal, BNSF argues that the common carrier
exception shields it from strict liability. Plaintiffs counter

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

5

that BNSF was not acting as a common carrier when it
allowed vermiculite that contained asbestos to accumulate in
its railyard. In the alternative, Plaintiffs ask us to certify to
the Montana Supreme Court the question whether the
common carrier exception applies to BNSF’s actions.
We conclude that BNSF is protected from strict liability
by the common carrier exception. Plaintiffs’ claims arose
from activities BNSF engaged in while pursuing its
statutorily imposed duty as a common carrier. Separately,
we conclude that certification is unwarranted. We therefore
reverse the district court’s judgment and remand with
instructions to enter judgment for BNSF.
I.
A.
Between 1922 and 1990, the world’s largest source of
vermiculite was a mine located approximately seven miles
outside of Libby, Montana. Vermiculite is a mineral that
was commonly used during that period for fireproof roofing,
insulation, and wallpaper.
For the most part, two companies were involved in the
extraction, processing, and shipment of vermiculite from
Libby: W.R. Grace & Company and BNSF. W.R. Grace
extracted vermiculite from a mine outside of Libby from
1963 to 1990, and processed raw vermiculite ore to remove
impurities. This created vermiculite concentrate and leftover
waste, or tailings.
It is now known that the concentrate contained asbestos
fibers. Processing the vermiculite ore into concentrate
decreased the amount of asbestos in the material, but the
exact extent of this reduction was contested at trial. By one
measure, the raw vermiculite ore contained up to twenty-six

6

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

percent asbestos, and evidence showed that the tailings could
contain up to eighty percent.
BNSF was required by federal law to transport W.R.
Grace’s vermiculite concentrate upon request. 49 U.S.C.
§ 11101(a).
W.R. Grace filled empty railcars with
concentrate at the mine site and sealed them before BNSF
hauled the cars to its Libby railyard. The railyard spanned
approximately twenty acres in the northern downtown area.
From the railyard, BNSF shipped the railcars nationwide.
Initially, W.R. Grace certified on bills of lading prepared
for each railcar that the vermiculite concentrate shipments
were not hazardous.
The Montana Department of
Environmental Quality reported as late as 1974 that asbestos
was removed by processing vermiculite ore into concentrate.
However, evidence at trial showed that by 1977, W.R. Grace
posted placards on at least some railcars stating that the
vermiculite concentrate inside contained asbestos. It was not
until decades later, in 2000, that the Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA) began an extensive cleanup in
Libby pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental
Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C.
§ 9601 (CERCLA). United States v. W.R. Grace & Co., 429
F.3d 1224, 1232 (9th Cir. 2005) (summarizing the EPA’s
response to the “truly extraordinary” situation in Libby as
“no mere run-of-the-mill CERCLA cleanup,” but rather, “a
unique removal action of a size and cost not previously
seen”).
At trial, the evidence showed that asbestos-containing
vermiculite escaped from railcars during the regular course
of transportation and also during railcar switching operations
in the railyard. The evidence further demonstrated that
vermiculite pervaded downtown Libby. W.R. Grace stored

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

7

vermiculite in an export plant in the downtown area and
donated tailings to spread over a local baseball field to
absorb rainwater. Unaware of the danger, many Libby
residents used vermiculite in a variety of ways in their homes
and on their lawns.
Thomas Wells worked for the Forest Service in Lincoln
County, Montana from June through September and most of
November in 1978 and also from July to August in 1981.
Between June to November in 1978, he lived in a trailer
home abutting BNSF’s railyard. Joyce Walder lived in
Libby from 1954 to 1972 and from 1976 to 1978, then visited
periodically through 2009. During her childhood, Walder
frequented the baseball and football fields and the running
track near the railyard. She also walked across the railyard
and swam in the city pool, which was located near the
railyard.
The jury found that Plaintiffs had been exposed to
asbestos. Both Wells and Walder were diagnosed with
mesothelioma, a cancer caused by exposure to asbestos that
affects tissues surrounding the lungs. See Norfolk & W. Ry.
Co. v. Ayers, 538 U.S. 135, 142 & n.4 (2003). Tragically,
each died within months after receiving this diagnosis.
B.
In 2021, the personal representatives of Plaintiffs’ estates
filed this action against BNSF in the United States District
Court for the District of Montana, asserting negligence and
strict liability claims.
Two divergent narratives of BNSF’s activities in Libby
emerged. Before trial, BNSF sought summary judgment on
Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims, arguing that it had acted
pursuant to its statutorily imposed duty as a common carrier

8

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

when it transported vermiculite concentrate. Plaintiffs
argued that BNSF had not acted as a common carrier when
it stored “‘reservoirs’ of asbestos and asbestos contaminated
materials at [its] Libby railyard.” The district court denied
BNSF’s motion, reasoning that if Plaintiffs could establish
their allegations at trial, “harbor[ing] a toxic asbestos dump
in the Libby railyard” would be “removed from BNSF’s role
as a [common] carrier of vermiculite.”
A ten-day jury trial commenced in Helena in April 2024.
In contrast to their opposition to BNSF’s motion for
summary judgment, Plaintiffs’ opening statement made no
mention of BNSF storing vermiculite or reservoirs of
asbestos on its property. After opening statements, the
district court expressed “serious questions about the viability
of [Plaintiffs’] strict liability claim,” because its initial
understanding that “the material was . . . stored at the
railyard, and then loaded on railcars” now “seem[ed] to be
erroneous.” As trial progressed, testimony showed that
BNSF did not store vermiculite ore or concentrate at its
Libby railyard, but asbestos dust had nonetheless
accumulated on BNSF’s property. At the close of Plaintiffs’
case, the district court questioned whether Plaintiffs’ theory
of BNSF’s liability was actually premised on BNSF’s
“inactivity” for failing to properly maintain the railyard.
BNSF moved for judgment as a matter of law on Plaintiffs’
strict liability claims, again invoking the common carrier
exception. The court denied the motion, explaining its view
that “[n]othing under BNSF’s duty as a common carrier
prevented [BNSF] from periodically cleaning the railyard, or
from improving its facilities to capture vermiculite dust for
safe disposal.” During closing argument, Plaintiffs’ counsel
characterized BNSF’s conduct underlying their lawsuit as
“the condition of [BNSF’s] yard.”

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

9

The jury rejected Plaintiffs’ negligence claims and
request for punitive damages, but it found in Plaintiffs’ favor
on their strict liability claims and awarded $4,000,000 in
compensatory damages to each estate. The district court
denied BNSF’s renewed motion for judgment as a matter of
law on Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims, and BNSF timely
appealed.
This lawsuit is one of many concerning asbestos
exposure in Libby. Initially, many individuals who claimed
to have been exposed to asbestos in the Libby area sued W.R.
Grace, but in 2001, W.R. Grace declared bankruptcy and
placed $2.9 billion in an irrevocable trust to settle all present
and future claims. According to BNSF, after W.R. Grace
declared bankruptcy, hundreds of lawsuits were filed against
BNSF. See, e.g., BNSF Ry. Co. v. Eddy, 459 P.3d 857 (Mont.
2020); Gallegos v. BNSF Ry. Co., No. 22-68, 2023 WL
8187923 (D. Mont. Nov. 27, 2023). This is the first such
lawsuit to go to trial.1
II.
The district court had jurisdiction to hear Plaintiffs’
claims in this diversity action pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1332.
We have appellate jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291
and review de novo the district court’s interpretation of state
law. Casun Inv., A.G. v. Ponder, 119 F.4th 637, 642 (9th
Cir. 2024), cert. denied sub nom. NVWS Props., LLC v.
Casun Inv., A.G., 145 S. Ct. 1927 (2025).

1

Another has been stayed pending the resolution of this appeal. See Moe
v. BNSF Ry. Co., No. 9:22-cv-00068-DLC, Stay Order, ECF # 141 (D.
Mont. May 1, 2024).

10

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

III.
A.
Decades ago, Montana adopted §§ 519 and 520 of the
Restatement (Second) of Torts, which outline strict liability
for abnormally dangerous activities. See Matkovic v. Shell
Oil Co., 707 P.2d 2, 4 (Mont. 1985). Section 519 provides:
(1) One who carries on an abnormally
dangerous activity is subject to liability for
harm to the person, land or chattels of another
resulting from the activity, although he has
exercised the utmost care to prevent the harm.
(2) This strict liability is limited to the kind
of harm, the possibility of which makes the
activity abnormally dangerous.
Restatement (Second) of Torts § 519 (A.L.I. 1977). Section
520 provides six factors to consider when determining
whether an activity is abnormally dangerous:
(a) existence of a high degree of risk of some
harm to the person, land or chattels of
others;
(b) likelihood that the harm that results from
it will be great;
(c) inability to eliminate the risk by the
exercise of reasonable care;
(d) extent to which the activity is not a matter
of common usage;
(e) inappropriateness of the activity to the
place where it is carried on; and

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

11

(f) extent to which its value to the community
is outweighed by its dangerous attributes.
Though a court must consider all factors, all factors “need
not be present” for an activity to qualify as abnormally
dangerous. Covey v. Brishka, 445 P.3d 785, 792 (Mont.
2019).
Recently, in another case against BNSF for personal
injuries caused by exposure to asbestos in Libby, the
Montana Supreme Court also adopted § 521 of the Second
Restatement, which provides for an exception to strict
liability for common carriers. See Eddy, 459 P.3d at 873–
74. The common carrier exception bars the imposition of
“strict liability for abnormally dangerous activities . . . if the
activity is carried on in pursuance of a public duty imposed
upon the actor . . . as a common carrier.” Restatement
(Second) of Torts § 521 (A.L.I. 1977). This exception
addresses concerns that “it would be unjust to subject a
common carrier to strict liability for any danger done by a
material the carrier is required to transport by law.” Eddy,
459 P.3d at 873. Accordingly, Montana law applies the
exception to abnormally dangerous activities “carried on in
pursuance of a public duty” when “that public duty is
imposed on the actor as a common carrier.” Id. at 874.
B.
We begin from the premise that BNSF’s transportation
of vermiculite concentrate was an abnormally dangerous
activity. The district court ruled that BNSF was precluded
from arguing otherwise by the Montana Supreme Court’s
decision in Eddy, 459 P.3d at 868–73, and BNSF does not
challenge that ruling on appeal. Rather, BNSF argues only
that the common carrier exception exempts it from strict

12

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

liability. BNSF contends that the district court construed the
common carrier exception too narrowly, interpreting it to
apply only to “public-duty-imposed common carrier
activities.” More specifically, BNSF argues that the district
court erred by ruling that it was ineligible for the common
carrier exception on the grounds that BNSF did not act
pursuant to a public duty when it failed to maintain its
railyard and tracks where asbestos collected.
We agree that the district court interpreted the scope of
the common carrier exception too narrowly.2 As adopted by
Montana and the vast majority of states, the exception
shields common carriers from strict liability for harm caused
2

The concurrence addresses preemption of the strict liability claims by
the Interstate Commerce Commission Termination Act of 1995
(ICCTA), Pub. L. 104-88, 109 Stat. 803, an issue we do not reach
because we can resolve this appeal on the common carrier exception and
the scope of ICCTA’s potential preemption was not adequately briefed.
As the concurrence notes, the parties did not address whether the ICCTA
would preempt other state law claims, such as negligence, because the
jury did not find BNSF negligent and Plaintiffs did not appeal that
adverse finding. At oral argument before our court, BNSF equivocated
on the scope of the ICCTA’s proposed preemption; specifically, whether
it might apply to negligence. The common carrier exception provides a
simpler ground for resolution of this appeal and does not implicate the
same federalism concerns that attend preemption of state laws of general
applicability. See Wyeth v. Levine, 555 U.S. 555, 565 (2009); Bates v.
Dow Agrosciences LLC, 544 U.S. 431, 449 (2005); see also Moore v.
Trader Joe’s Co., 4 F.4th 874, 880 (9th Cir. 2021) (affirming dismissal
of state law claims on the basis that the complaint failed to state a claim
and declining to reach federal preemption). By declining to reach
preemption, we adhere to the principle of judicial restraint that “if it is
not necessary to decide more, it is necessary not to decide more.” Morse
v. Frederick, 551 U.S. 393, 431 (2007) (Breyer, J., concurring in the
judgment in part and dissenting in part) (quoting PDK Labs., Inc. v. Drug
Enforcement Admin., 362 F.3d 786, 799 (D.C. Cir. 2004) (Roberts, J.,
concurring in part and concurring in judgment)).

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

13

during transport “because common carriers must accept,
carry, and deliver all goods offered to them for transport
within the scope of the operating authority set forth in their
permits.” In re Hanford Nuclear Rsrv. Litig., 534 F.3d 986,
1006 (9th Cir. 2008). 3 Unlike private shippers, common
carriers “cannot discriminate against customers or refuse to
accept commodities that may be dangerous for transport.”
Id. Eddy explained that a common carrier is not strictly
liable for dangers inherent in “a material the carrier is
required to transport by law.” 459 P.3d at 873. Eddy also
held that as a rail carrier, BNSF qualifies as a common
carrier for the purposes of the common carrier exception. Id.
at 874.
The parties do not dispute that the “asbestoscontaminated vermiculite entered the Libby railyard via
BNSF’s transport.”
The jury heard testimony that
vermiculite dust fell “along the tracks and within the
railyard” after it escaped from railcars during car switching
operations and during transport along the railroad. Federal
law defines “transportation” broadly to include “delivery,”
“storage,” “handling,” and “services related to [the]
movement” of property. 49 U.S.C. § 10102(9). Plaintiffs’
theory of liability thus stems directly from BNSF’s statutory
3

Eddy recognized that this exception has been broadly adopted. 459
P.3d at 873; see, e.g., Pecan Shoppe of Springfield, Inc. v. Tri-State
Motor Transit Co., 573 S.W.2d 431, 435 (Mo. Ct. App. 1978); Town of
East Troy v. Soo L. R.R. Co., 409 F. Supp. 326, 330 (E.D. Wis. 1976);
Christ Church Parish v. Cadet Chem. Corp., 199 A.2d 707, 708 (Conn.
Super. Ct. 1964); Albig v. Mun. Auth. of Westmoreland Cnty., 502 A.2d
658, 663 (Pa. Super. Ct. 1985); Ruiz v. S. Pac. Transp. Co., 638 P.2d
406, 412 (N.M. Ct. App. 1981); Peneschi v. Nat’l Steel Corp., 295 S.E.2d
1, 5 (W. Va. 1982); Cairl v. St. Paul, 268 N.W.2d 908, 911 (Minn. 1978);
Voelker v. Delmarva Power & Light Co., 727 F. Supp. 991, 994 (D. Md.
1989).

14

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

duty to transport vermiculite concentrate.
§ 11101(a).

See id. at

Plaintiffs attempt to distinguish the condition of BNSF’s
railyard from BNSF’s role as a common carrier, because
escaped asbestos that accumulated in BNSF’s railyard was
no longer in transit. Plaintiffs argue that the escaped
asbestos constituted an abnormally dangerous condition on
the land for which BNSF should be strictly liable as a
property owner. In support, Plaintiffs cite Covey, a case in
which the Montana Supreme Court concluded that
maintaining a man-made fishpond on a mountainside was an
abnormally dangerous condition that triggered strict
liability. 445 P.3d at 790–91. This analogy is inapt. Covey
involved the voluntary maintenance of a man-made 4.5million-gallon fishpond for private purposes, upslope from
other property owners. Id. at 789. The Covey defendant was
held strictly liable after his “pond breached its banks
and . . . [t]he water carried boulders, trees, and other debris
downhill[,] . . . carv[ing] large channels into the hillside.”
Id. In contrast, the dangerous condition here—accumulated
asbestos dust—arose solely from BNSF’s operation as a
common carrier executing its federally mandated duty to
transport vermiculite. Cf. Anderson v. BNSF, No. ADV2008-101, 2010 Mont. Dist. LEXIS 73, at *4 (Mont. Dist.
Feb. 2, 2010) (concluding that the common carrier exception
immunized BNSF from strict liability for diesel fuel stored
at BNSF’s railyard that leaked to surrounding property
because storing fuel “is an integral part of its operation as a
common carrier”).
The result we reach today is consistent with Town of East
Troy v. Soo Line Railroad Company, 409 F. Supp. 326, 328
(E.D. Wis. 1976), which the Eddy court cited with approval.
See Eddy, 459 P.3d at 873. Town of East Troy involved a

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

15

train that derailed while transporting hazardous acid. 409 F.
Supp. at 328. The railroad company waited nine days before
attempting to remove acid-contaminated soil from the
derailment site, and that delay allowed the spill to foul the
surrounding community’s groundwater supply. Id. at 330.
The plaintiff in Town of East Troy alleged that the railroad
company “knew or should have known” that it was engaged
in an abnormally dangerous activity by transporting
hazardous acid. Id. But the district court dismissed the
claim because it concluded that the common carrier
exception shielded the company from strict liability. Id.; see
also Walsh v. Mont. Rail Link, 2001 ML 1418, 2001 Mont.
Dist. LEXIS 3033, at *21–22 (Mont. Dist. May 8, 2001)
(holding that the common carrier exception immunized a rail
company from strict liability for injuries resulting from toxic
chemicals spilled when a train derailed); Griffin v. Mont.
Rail Link, 2000 ML 2438, 2000 Mont. Dist. LEXIS 1331, *2
(Mont. Dist. Aug. 29, 2000) (same).
This caselaw strongly supports the conclusion that BNSF
is entitled to the protection afforded by the common carrier
exception because it is uncontested that the asbestos dust that
accumulated in BNSF’s railyard leaked or escaped from rail
cars during BNSF’s required transportation of vermiculite
concentrate. The fact that the dust accumulated gradually
along the railroad tracks and in BNSF’s railyard, rather than
spilling abruptly, does not alter our analysis because the
gradual spillage still occurred during BNSF’s shipment of
vermiculite.
In reaching the opposite conclusion, the district court
emphasized that Montana does not apply the common carrier
exception when a common carrier engages in “abnormally
dangerous activit[ies] for ‘its own purposes’” rather than in
“pursuance of a public duty,” Eddy, 459 P.3d at 875 (quoting

16

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

Murphy-Fauth v. BNSF Ry. Co., No. 17-79, 2018 WL
3601235, at *2 (D. Mont. July 27, 2018)). 4 The court
reasoned that no public duty obligated BNSF to “maintain[]
uncontained asbestos-containing material open air on its
property,” and that BNSF allowed accumulated dust to
remain in the railyard for its own gain because foregoing
maintenance of the yard increased revenue and prevented
transportation delays. The district court analogized this case
to In re East Palestine Train Derailment, a case decided by
the United States District Court for the Northern District of
Ohio in which a railroad company “transport[ed] over a
million pounds of hazardous chemicals and,” after a
derailment, “intentionally set[] fire to them in a residential
neighborhood.”
No. 4:23-cv-0242-BYP, 2024 WL
1096064, at *10 (N.D. Ohio Mar. 13, 2024). Crucial to the
East Palestine court’s conclusion that the common carrier
exception did not apply was the fact that, in responding to
the spill, the railroad company “voluntarily undertook
activities for [its] own purpose; namely to release and burn
vinyl chloride in order to get the derailed cars out of the way
to start . . . trains running through East Palestine again to
earn revenue.” Id. at *11. Unlike the situation in East
Palestine, here the district court cited no evidence, and on
appeal Plaintiffs point to no evidence, that BNSF aimed to
save money by not cleaning its railyard. Indeed, for decades,
4

The plaintiff in Murphy-Fauth alleged injury from asbestos exposure
as a result of BNSF’s activities in Libby. See Murphy-Fauth, 2018 WL
3601235, at *1–2. The plaintiff’s allegations extended beyond just the
transport of vermiculite and included allegations that “BNSF played a
central role in the vermiculite operations in Libby” by collaborating with
W.R. Grace to “develop[] new uses for vermiculite products and assist[]
in marketing.” See D. Mont. No. 17-cv-00079-BMM-JTJ, Dkt. No. 63
¶ 23. The district court denied BNSF’s motion to dismiss, but the parties
settled shortly thereafter. Id. at *4.

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

17

even the Montana Department of Environmental Quality
advised that vermiculite concentrate did not contain
asbestos.
The district court adopted Plaintiffs’ characterization of
BNSF’s “abnormally dangerous activity” as “maintain[ing]
asbestos on its property.” Plaintiffs framed BNSF’s conduct
as an affirmative act (“maintaining”), but their theory of
strict liability was actually premised on BNSF’s alleged
“fail[ure] to take measures to prevent toxic dust from
collecting upon and escaping from its property.” That
theory, which assumes that the risk of harm would have been
eliminated if BNSF had “adequately clean[ed]” its railyard,
effectively treats Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims as
negligence claims. To be sure, the Montana Supreme Court
has explained that the common carrier exception would not
have shielded BNSF from a negligence claim, Eddy, 459
P.3d at 874, but the jury expressly rejected Plaintiffs’
negligence theory and found that BNSF “exercise[d]
reasonable care in its handling of asbestos.”
C.
Plaintiffs chose to file this action in federal court, but on
appeal they urge us to certify to the Montana Supreme Court
the question whether Montana’s common carrier exception
for strict liability encompasses BNSF’s failure to maintain
its railyard.5 We decline to do so.

5

Specifically, Plaintiffs ask this panel to certify the following question:
Does Montana’s common carrier exception to strict
liability for an abnormally dangerous activity or
condition immunize BNSF from strict liability for
harm caused by asbestos in or on its Libby railyard,
when the prolonged presence of this toxic substance in

18

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

A federal court sitting in diversity is empowered “to
decide questions of state law.” Abraham v. Corizon Health,
Inc., 985 F.3d 1198, 1202 (9th Cir. 2021). “However, if state
law permits it, we may exercise our discretion to certify a
question to the state’s highest court.” Murray v. BEJ
Minerals, LLC, 924 F.3d 1070, 1071 (9th Cir. 2019) (en
banc). The Montana Supreme Court permits certification of
questions of law from federal courts when “[t]he answer may
be determinative of an issue in pending litigation in the
certifying court” and “[t]here is no controlling appellate
decision, constitutional provision, or statute of this State.”
Mont. R. App. P. 15(3).
In deciding whether to certify a question, we consider
“(1) whether the question presents ‘important public policy
ramifications’ yet unresolved by the state court; (2) whether
the issue is new, substantial, and of broad application; (3) the
state court’s caseload; and (4) ‘the spirit of comity and
federalism.’” Murray, 924 F.3d at 1072 (quoting Kremen v.
Cohen, 325 F.3d 1035, 1037 (9th Cir. 2003)). Because
certification burdens state courts and the parties and can
prolong litigation, we do not invoke it lightly. Id. Moreover,
we have explained that “[w]hen there is little reason to doubt
the answer to a state-law question, we ought not outsource
our work to a state court.” Bliss Sequoia Ins. & Risk
Advisors, Inc. v. Allied Prop. & Cas. Ins. Co., 52 F.4th 417,
423 (9th Cir. 2022).
In Eddy, the Montana Supreme Court applied the
common carrier exception to “the manner in which [BNSF]
conducted the transport of vermiculite,” reasoning that
“BNSF is entitled to the common carrier exception for strict
and on its Libby railyard was not required by BNSF’s
statutory duties as a common carrier?

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

19

liability imposed as a result of its transporting of vermiculite,
which it was required to do by law.” Id. at 874. Eddy
remanded to the trial court to determine whether BNSF’s
other activities fell within the scope of the exception. Id. at
875. The complaint in Eddy alleged that BNSF’s other
actions included “industrial activities” such as disturbance
of asbestos and collaboration with W.R. Grace to “strategize
regarding distribution of the product and geologic
sampling,” as well as other undertakings “not required of a
common carrier.” Eddy, 459 P.3d at 864 & n.1, 873. Eddy
leaves little doubt that the outcome of this case is controlled
by the common carrier exception because Plaintiffs
complain about the deposit of asbestos-containing
vermiculite along the tracks and in the Libby railyard, and
the asbestos-containing vermiculite fell on the tracks and
entered the railyard during the course of BNSF’s
transportation of vermiculite concentrate. In other words,
Plaintiffs attempt to hold BNSF strictly liable “for the
manner in which it conducted the transport of vermiculite,”
which the Montana Supreme Court specifically foreclosed in
Eddy. Id. at 874.
We therefore conclude that certification is unwarranted
because there is sufficient Montana state law to answer the
question presented. See Syngenta Seeds, Inc. v. Cnty. of
Kauai, 842 F.3d 669, 681 (9th Cir. 2016). These claims have
been pending since 2021 and involve alleged exposure to
asbestos dating back to 1954. See Riordan v. State Farm
Mut. Auto. Ins. Co., 589 F.3d 999, 1009 (9th Cir. 2009)
(“[W]e do not find it necessary to further prolong these
proceedings [by certifying questions to the Montana
Supreme Court] where the state law is clear.”).
REVERSED and REMANDED with instructions.

20

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

CALLAHAN, J., concurring:
I join the opinion in full because it correctly concludes
that under Montana law the common carrier exception
protects BNSF from Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims. I write
separately to stress that, in my view, the Interstate
Commerce Commission Termination Act separately
preempts Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims.
I
A
To substantially reform excessive economic regulation
of the Nation’s transportation industries, Congress adopted
the Interstate Commerce Commission Termination Act of
1995 (ICCTA). Pub. L. 104-88, 109 Stat. 803. ICCTA
grants the Surface Transportation Board jurisdiction over
specific modes and locations of “transportation by rail
carrier.” 49 U.S.C. § 10501(a). For that transportation and
certain related activities, the Board has exclusive
jurisdiction. Id. § 10501(b). ICCTA also provides a
comprehensive remedial scheme for enforcing regulations of
rail transportation, holding rail carriers liable, and providing
remedies to persons injured by rail carriers. Id. §§ 1170111707. Remedies provided by ICCTA “with respect to
regulation of rail transportation are exclusive and preempt
the remedies provided under Federal or State law.” Id.
§ 10501(b).
We first interpreted ICCTA’s preemptive scope in City of
Auburn v. United States, observing that “[i]t is difficult to
imagine a broader statement of Congress’s intent to preempt
state regulatory authority over railroad operations.” 154
F.3d 1025, 1030 (9th Cir. 1998) (quoting CSX Transp., Inc.
v. Ga Pub. Serv. Comm’n, 944 F. Supp. 1573 (N.D. Ga.

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

21

1996)). There, we held that ICCTA preempts not only
nominal “economic” regulations but also other regulations
that “will in fact amount to ‘economic regulation.’” Id. at
1031; see also Or. Coast Scenic R.R., v. Or. Dep’t of State
Lands, 841 F.3d 1069, 1076-77 (9th Cir. 2016). We have
also held that ICCTA preemption applies both to laws
targeting railroad operations, City of Auburn, 154 F.3d at
1031, and to laws of general applicability that would have
the “effect of managing or governing rail transportation,”
Ass’n of Am. R.R.s v. S. Coast Air Quality Mgmt. Dist., 622
F.3d 1094, 1097 (9th Cir. 2010).
B
Montana, like many states, has adopted Sections 519,
520, and 521 of the Restatement (Second) of Torts. See
Majority Op. at 10-11. Section 519 provides for strict
liability for abnormally dangerous activities; Section 520
lays out a multifactor test for courts to use to determine
whether an activity should be deemed abnormally
dangerous; and Section 521 grants an exception to strict
liability for abnormally dangerous activities undertaken by
common carriers pursuant to a public duty. Id.
In 2020, decades after BNSF stopped transporting
vermiculite for W.R. Grace & Company, the Montana
Supreme Court applied Section 520 to hold that BNSF’s past
“handling of asbestos under the facts presented here
constitutes an abnormally dangerous activity for which
BNSF is strictly liable.” BNSF Ry. Co. v. Eddy, 459 P. 3d
857, 873 (Mont. 2020). The Montana Supreme Court ruled
that BNSF, as a common carrier, is protected by Section 521
from “strict liability imposed as a result of its transporting
vermiculite,” but further stated that BNSF could face strict
liability for its asbestos-handling “activities other than

22

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

transportation of vermiculite.” Id. at 874-75 (emphasis
added). The court further noted that “BNSF may still be
found liable under a theory of ordinary negligence for the
manner in which it conducted the transport of vermiculite
ore.” Id. at 874.
In 2021, Plaintiff estates sued BNSF in federal district
court for personal injuries, resulting in death, caused by
BNSF’s handling of vermiculite. Majority Op. at 7.
Plaintiffs’ suit asserted state law causes of action for both
negligence and strict liability. Id. Plaintiffs premised these
claims on the central proposition that BNSF failed to prevent
toxic vermiculite residuals from “collecting upon and
escaping from” its Libby, Montana railyard.
In 2024, a jury found for BNSF on Plaintiffs’ negligence
claims but found BNSF liable on Plaintiffs’ strict liability
claims. Id. at 8-9. In obtaining their favorable jury verdict
on the strict liability claims, Plaintiffs relied on a finegrained distinction between BNSF’s “transportation of
vermiculite” and its “other activities” dealing with
vermiculite. The district court accepted this distinction,
rejecting both BNSF’s common carrier exception argument
and ICCTA preemption argument in BNSF’s renewed
motion for judgment as a matter of law. BNSF also
asserted—and the district court also rejected—an argument
that the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA),
49 U.S.C. § 5101 et seq., separately preempts Plaintiffs’

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

23

strict liability claims.1 BNSF timely appealed. 2 Majority
Op. at 9.
II
We review de novo the district court’s legal conclusion
about the scope of ICCTA preemption. Or. Coast Scenic
R.R., 841 F.3d at 1072 (citing In re Korean Air Lines Co.,
642 F.3d 685, 691 n.3 (9th Cir. 2011)).
III
To determine whether ICCTA preempts Plaintiffs’ strict
liability claims, we first consider whether “the activity in
question” comes “within the statutory grant of jurisdiction to
the Surface Transportation Board.” Id.; see 49 U.S.C.
§ 10501(a). If the Board possesses jurisdiction, then we next
assess whether its jurisdiction is exclusive. Or. Coast Scenic
R.R., 841 F.3d at 1073; see 49 U.S.C. § 10501(b). An
affirmative answer to both inquiries follows from the
reasoning supporting our unanimous opinion today
regarding the common carrier exception.
BNSF’s handling of vermiculite falls within ICCTA’s
grant of jurisdiction to the Surface Transportation Board.
ICCTA grants jurisdiction to the Board over particular
1

HMTA is the Nation’s primary law regulating the transportation of
hazardous materials and seeks “to protect against the risks to life,
property, and the environment that are inherent in the transportation of
hazardous material in intrastate, interstate, and foreign commerce.” 49
U.S.C. § 5101.
2

Plaintiffs have not appealed the jury’s adverse finding on their
negligence claims. I therefore do not reach the question of whether
ICCTA would preempt Plaintiffs’ attempt to recover damages from
BNSF based on negligence. I also do not address BNSF’s alternative
argument that HMTA preempts Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims.

24

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

modes and locations of “transportation by rail carrier.” 49
U.S.C. § 10501(a). This case concerns only whether
BNSF’s handling of vermiculite counts as “transportation by
rail carrier,” as defined by 49 U.S.C. § 10501(a). Our
opinion makes clear that it does. See Majority Op. at 11-17.
In applying the Montana Supreme Court’s precedential
holding that the common carrier exception protects BNSF
from “strict liability imposed as a result of its transporting
vermiculite,” Eddy, 459 P. 3d at 874, we utilized ICCTA’s
definition of “transportation.” Majority Op. at 13 (citing 49
U.S.C. § 10102(9)).
Using ICCTA’s definition, we
determined that BNSF’s handling of vermiculite qualifies as
“transportation,” and thus the common carrier exception
protects BNSF from Plaintiffs’ strict liability claims. Id.
That conclusion also answers the first question of the ICCTA
preemption analysis.
Further, the Board’s jurisdiction over BNSF’s
transportation of vermiculite is exclusive. 49 U.S.C.
§ 10501(b) makes the Board’s jurisdiction exclusive over
“transportation by rail carriers.” That Section also expressly
states that “the remedies provided under this part with
respect to regulation of rail transportation are exclusive and
preempt remedies provided under Federal or State law.” Id.
Thus, because our opinion makes clear that BNSF’s
handling of vermiculite falls within ICCTA’s definition of
“transportation,” the Board has exclusive jurisdiction and
Section 10501(b) facially preempts Plaintiffs’ attempt to
recover on a Montana strict liability cause of action. See
Majority Op. at 11-17.
But the preemption analysis does not end there.
Montana’s strict liability law is a common law tort claim of
general applicability, and we have held that “ICCTA does
not preempt state or local laws if they are laws of general

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

25

applicability that do not unreasonably interfere with
interstate commerce.” Ass’n of Am. R.R.s, 622 F.3d at 1097.
So this case requires determining whether the application of
Montana’s strict liability law to BNSF’s transportation of
vermiculite “may reasonably be said to have the effect of
managing or governing rail transportation,” or instead has
only “a more remote or incidental effect on rail
transportation.” Id. at 1097-98 (internal quotation marks
omitted).
Here, applying Montana’s strict liability law to BNSF’s
transportation of vermiculite would have the effect of
managing or governing rail transportation; ICCTA
preemption therefore applies. Several related reasons
support this conclusion.
First, allowing strict liability for BNSF’s transportation
of vermiculite would impose severe compliance costs.
Recall that in this case, Plaintiffs seek to hold BNSF strictly
liable for all injuries resulting from BNSF’s failure to use
equipment and practices that would have prevented the
release of vermiculite residuals from its railyard. To ensure
future compliance with this sky-high standard of care, BNSF
would have to adopt a variety of new equipment and
practices—including possibly redesigning its railcars,
altering switching operations in its railyard, purchasing new
equipment, and implementing new training and operating
procedures. Adopting these measures would impose a
serious financial burden. And BNSF would have to
implement these onerous compliance measures despite the
fact that under HMTA, vermiculite does not qualify as a
hazardous material warranting federal regulation of its
transportation by rail carriers—even when the vermiculite
contains toxic asbestos. See 49 U.S.C. § 5101 et seq.; 49
C.F.R. § 172.102(c)(1)(156) (stating that “[a]sbestos that is

26

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

immersed or fixed in a . . . mineral ore . . . is not subject” to
HMTA regulatory requirements). Plaintiffs’ strict liability
claims, regardless of whether separately preempted by
HMTA, function as regulations akin to those issued under
HMTA authority.
Second, permitting strict liability here would allow for
unpredictable and unfair penalties for noncompliance.
Under a strict liability regime, the remedy provided by
Montana law for any harmful release of vermiculite residuals
is damages, as awarded by a jury. And as the Supreme Court
has recognized, “state regulation can be . . . effectively
exerted through an award of damages, and the obligation to
pay compensation can be, indeed is designed to be, a potent
method of governing conduct and controlling policy.”
Kurns v. R.R. Friction Prods. Corp., 565 U.S. 625, 637
(2012) (citation modified). In this case, Plaintiffs’ damage
awards totaled to eight million dollars, not including
additional taxable costs or interest. This suggests the
magnitude of BSNF’s potential exposure in the many other
pending claims against it. See Majority Op. at 9. These
damage awards resemble financial penalties for
noncompliance similar to (1) remedies provided by ICCTA
for regulatory violations and for persons injured by rail
carriers, see 49 U.S.C. §§ 11701-11704, and (2) fees and
penalties assessed for noncompliance with HMTA
regulations, see id. §§ 5122-5124.
Third, applying strict liability here can be expected to
increase rates that BNSF and other rail carriers charge
customers. Based on the facts of this case, liability would
show rail carriers that they can face future liability for
transporting materials that are not considered to be
hazardous at the time of transport. So carriers may
reasonably seek to hike rates to account for the costs and

WELLS V. BNSF RAILWAY CO.

27

penalties associated with a strict liability standard for
transporting not only vermiculite but also an unforeseen
range of other materials.
In sum, the application of strict liability to BNSF’s
transportation of vermiculite would have tremendous
economic consequences, effectively governing BNSF’s
railroad operations and unreasonably interfering with
interstate commerce. In this regard, Montana’s generally
applicable strict liability law appears similar to state and
local regulations that we have previously held to be
preempted by ICCTA. See City of Auburn, 154 F.3d at 102731 (invalidating county review of the environmental impact
of proposed operations on railway line); Ass’n of Am. R.R.s,
622 F.3d at 1095-98 (nullifying local rules “aimed at limiting
the air pollution created by idling trains”); Or. Coast Scenic
R.R., 841 F.3d at 1076-77 (enjoining application of Oregon’s
“‘remove-fill law,’ which, among other things, require[d] a
state permit for the removal of any amount of material from”
designated waters).
* * *
Today we correctly hold that BNSF is entitled to the
common carrier exception to strict liability for its
transportation of vermiculite. Majority Op. at 11-17. I
would further hold that ICCTA preempts Plaintiffs’ attempt
to recover damages from BNSF, based on strict liability
under Montana law, for injuries resulting from BNSF’s
transportation of vermiculite.

