FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
CLAUDIA ELENA MONTEJOGONZALEZ; DANY JUAN
FRANCISCO MONTEJO; MARIA
NATALIA FRANCISCO
MONTEJO,
Petitioners,

No. 21-304
Agency Nos.
A201-670-355
A201-670-354
A201-670-353
OPINION

v.
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney
General,
Respondent.
On Petition for Review of an Order of the
Board of Immigration Appeals
Argued and Submitted September 11, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed February 5, 2026
Before: Mary H. Murguia, Chief Judge, and Consuelo M.
Callahan, Morgan B. Christen, Jacqueline H. Nguyen,
Michelle T. Friedland, Ryan D. Nelson, Kenneth K. Lee,
Lucy H. Koh, Jennifer Sung, Salvador Mendoza, Jr. and
Roopali H. Desai, Circuit Judges.

2

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

Opinion by Judge Desai;
Concurrence by Judge Friedland;
Dissent by Judge R. Nelson
SUMMARY *
Immigration
Granting Claudia Elena Montejo-Gonzalez’s petition for
review of a Board of Immigration Appeals (“BIA”) decision,
the en banc court held that the immigration judge (“IJ”) and
the BIA abused their discretion in denying reopening of her
in-absentia removal order and those of her children, and
remanded.
An IJ ordered petitioners removed in absentia when they
did not appear for their initial hearing. Petitioners moved to
reopen, explaining that they were late because of two major
car accidents that caused a severe traffic jam. The IJ and
BIA denied the motion on the ground that traffic is not an
“exceptional circumstance.”
Under 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i), as relevant here, an
in-absentia removal order may be rescinded if the noncitizen
demonstrates that failure to appear was because of
“exceptional circumstances.” In addition, 8 U.S.C.
§ 1229a(e)(1) defines “exceptional circumstances” and
provides a non-exhaustive list of examples of sufficiently
exceptional circumstances, including “battery or extreme
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

3

cruelty” and “serious illness or death,” but not “less
compelling circumstances.”
The en banc court concluded that “exceptional
circumstances” must (1) cause the failure to appear, (2) be
beyond the petitioner’s control, and (3) be sufficiently
compelling. The en banc court explained that the agency
must consider the totality of the circumstances.
However, to the extent the court suggested in
Hernandez-Galand v. Garland, 996 F.3d 1030 (9th Cir.
2021), that the possibility of unconscionable results is a
standalone element of “exceptional circumstances” that the
agency must consider, the en banc court overruled that
holding.
The en banc court also clarified that the court has never
adopted a rule that traffic delay is per se
unexceptional. Likewise, the en banc court rejected any
categorical rules dictating what does or does not meet that
standard. Accordingly, the en banc court held that the IJ and
BIA abused their discretion by applying a bright line rule
here that “traffic” cannot constitute exceptional
circumstances.
The en banc court also concluded that the agency failed
to consider the totality of the circumstances here, such as
whether the extraordinary traffic delays were exceptional
and beyond petitioners’ control, whether petitioners were
diligent, and whether they lacked motive to evade their
hearing.
Concurring in part and concurring in the judgment,
Judge Friedland wrote that, prior to oral argument, she had
not read the agency’s decision as applying a per se
rule. Instead, Judge Friedland initially understood the

4

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

agency’s decision as having properly considered the totality
of the circumstances. But because the Government asserted
at oral argument that the court’s decisions established a per
se rule that traffic is never an extraordinary circumstance,
and because it asserted that the agency had relied upon that
rule in denying reopening here, Judge Friedland agreed that
the proper course was to remand.
Dissenting, Judge R. Nelson, joined by Judges Callahan,
Nguyen, and Lee, wrote that the majority correctly overruled
Hernandez-Galand v. Garland, but wrongly concluded that
the agencies applied a per se traffic rule here. Even if the
traffic problems here were extraordinary, unusual, and
beyond petitioners’ control, Judge R. Nelson explained it
was not an abuse of discretion to conclude that they were
less compelling than serious illness or death (statutory
examples of “exceptional circumstances”). Reviewing the
administrative record (and not the government’s statements
at oral argument), Judge R. Nelson concluded that the
agencies faithfully applied precedent and reasonably
analyzed the totality of the circumstances to reach the correct
conclusion—and in any event did not abuse their discretion.

COUNSEL
Katherine E. Munyan (argued) and Daniel A. Rubens, Orrick
Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP, New York, New York; Nicole
R. Fox, Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP, Irvine,
California; Tina N. Malek, Malek Law Group APC, San
Diego, California; for Petitioner.
Drew C. Ensign (argued), Deputy Assistant Attorney
General; Anthony Nardi and Rosanne M. Perry, Trial

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

5

Attorneys; Elizabeth K. Fitzgerald-Sambou and Jessica E.
Burns, Senior Litigation Counsel; Melissa Neiman-Kelting,
Assistant Director; John W. Blakeley, Senior Counsel for
Appellate Litigation; Office of Immigration Litigation;
Brian M. Boynton, Principal Deputy Assistant Attorney
General; Brett A. Shumate, Assistant Attorney General;
Civil Division, United States Department of Justice,
Washington, D.C.; for Respondent.

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
On their way to an initial hearing before an immigration
judge (“IJ”) in Seattle, Washington, petitioners Claudia
Elena Montejo-Gonzalez and her two children encountered
two major car accidents that caused a severe traffic jam on
the highway. Petitioners were late for their hearing, and the
IJ ordered them removed in absentia. Petitioners promptly
moved to reopen under 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i),
explaining that they were late because of exceptional
circumstances beyond their control. The IJ and Board of
Immigration Appeals (“BIA”) denied the motion on the
ground that traffic cannot qualify as an exceptional
circumstance.
We took this case en banc to clarify what constitutes
exceptional circumstances beyond a petitioner’s control. The
statutory term “exceptional circumstances” necessarily
involves a fact-intensive and case-specific inquiry. And it
precludes any categorical rules dictating what can or cannot
be an “exceptional circumstance” in every case. We hold that

6

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

the IJ and BIA abused their discretion by applying a per se
rule, and we remand to the BIA to consider the totality of the
circumstances.
Background
Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez entered the United States in
December 2018 with her eleven-year-old son and sevenyear-old daughter. They applied for asylum, withholding of
removal, and protection under the Convention Against
Torture (“CAT”).
Petitioners were scheduled to appear before an IJ in
Seattle, Washington at 8:30 a.m. on October 31, 2019. At
6:45 a.m. that morning, Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez and her
children got in a car with a family friend whom they
prearranged to drive them from Bremerton, Washington, to
Seattle for their hearing. Under ordinary circumstances and
accounting for typical rush hour traffic, the trip would take
an hour and a half. But the drive that day turned into almost
four hours on the highway.
On their way to the hearing, petitioners encountered two
major accidents that caused severe traffic delay. Petitioners,
who were unrepresented by counsel at the time, did their best
to document the traffic and get to court. They were two hours
late for the hearing. When Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez got to the
courthouse, she spoke with two clerks to try to have her and
her children’s cases heard. Her requests were denied, and an
IJ entered an order removing them in absentia.
Petitioners moved to reopen and asked the IJ to give
them “an opportunity to present” their applications for
asylum, withholding of removal, and CAT protection. They
attached their applications and supporting evidence to their
motion to reopen, including several photos they took on their

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

7

way to the hearing and a news alert showing the major
accidents and extensive traffic.
The IJ denied the motion. He held that Ms. MontejoGonzalez did not “articulate[] a compelling circumstance”
that justified her late arrival to the hearing because, under
Arredondo v. Lynch, 824 F.3d 801, 806 (9th Cir. 2016),
“[t]raffic and trouble finding parking, standing alone, do not
constitute exceptional circumstances justifying a motion to
reopen.” The IJ did not grapple with petitioners’ evidence
documenting the severity of the traffic conditions or their
efforts to get to court, nor did the IJ address whether their
late appearance was beyond their control.
The BIA adopted and affirmed the IJ’s decision. The
BIA likewise relied on this court’s decisions in Arredondo
and Sharma v. I.N.S., 89 F.3d 545, 547 (9th Cir. 1996), to
hold that “traffic congestion, coupled with the respondent’s
explanation that she miscalculated the time it would take to
arrive at the court and a lack of showing that the Immigration
Judge was still on the bench, do not constitute exceptional
circumstances.” The BIA acknowledged petitioners’
arguments that Arredondo is factually distinguishable, but it
simply concluded that “typical daily occurrences” like traffic
delays “do not qualify as exceptional circumstances.” Ms.
Montejo-Gonzalez petitioned this court for review.
Standard of Review
We review the denial of a motion to reopen for abuse of
discretion. Hernandez-Galand v. Garland, 996 F.3d 1030,
1034 (9th Cir. 2021). “The BIA abuses its discretion when it
acts arbitrarily, irrationally, or contrary to the law, and when
it fails to provide a reasoned explanation for its actions.” Id.
(quoting Tadevosyan v. Holder, 743 F.3d 1250, 1252–53
(9th Cir. 2014)). Because the BIA adopted and affirmed the

8

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

IJ’s decision here, we review both decisions. See Ali v.
Holder, 637 F.3d 1025, 1028 (9th Cir. 2011) (citing Matter
of Burbano, 20 I. & N. Dec. 872, 874 (BIA 1994)).
Discussion
Under the Immigration and Nationality Act (“INA”), an
in-absentia removal order “may be rescinded . . . upon a
motion to reopen filed within 180 days after the date of the
order of removal if the [noncitizen] demonstrates that the
failure to appear was because of exceptional circumstances.”
8 U.S.C. § 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i). The INA defines “exceptional
circumstances” as “exceptional circumstances (such as
battery or extreme cruelty to the [noncitizen] or any child or
parent of the [noncitizen], serious illness of the [noncitizen],
or serious illness or death of the spouse, child, or parent of
the [noncitizen], but not including less compelling
circumstances) beyond the control of the [noncitizen].” 8
U.S.C. § 1229a(e)(1). In other words, the circumstances
(1) must cause the noncitizen’s failure to appear, (2) must be
beyond the petitioner’s control, and (3) must be sufficiently
compelling.
“Exceptional circumstances” are “by definition unique,”
and the statute’s listed examples of compelling
circumstances are “explicitly not exhaustive.” V. Singh v.
Garland, 117 F.4th 1145, 1150 (9th Cir. 2024). We thus look
“to the particularized facts presented in each case” to decide
whether a failure to appear was because of sufficiently
compelling circumstances beyond the petitioner’s control. B.
Singh v. I.N.S., 213 F.3d 1050, 1052 (9th Cir. 2000). This
requires considering the totality of the circumstances.
Evidence relevant to the statutory factors may include
whether the petitioners were diligent, whether they
encountered external or unforeseen circumstances, and

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

9

whether they lacked a motive to evade the hearing. See, e.g.,
Chete Juarez v. Ashcroft, 376 F.3d 944, 948 (9th Cir. 2004);
Lo v. Ashcroft, 341 F.3d 934, 938 (9th Cir. 2003); R. Singh
v. I.N.S., 295 F.3d 1037, 1040 (9th Cir. 2002).
Other factors may be relevant depending on the
circumstances. To the extent we suggested in HernandezGaland that the possibility of unconscionable results is a
standalone element of “exceptional circumstances” that the
agency must consider, we overrule that holding. 996 F.3d at
1036–37. To be sure, the agency may consider whether a
petitioner had a colorable claim for relief or was merely
delaying the inevitable. If, for example, a petitioner has a
valid claim for relief from removal, this evidence may
support an inference that the petitioner intended to attend
their hearing and missed it for a compelling reason beyond
their control. See R. Singh, 295 F.3d at 1040; Chete Juarez,
376 F.3d at 949 & n.5. On the other hand, if a petitioner faces
“adverse actions” or has “no asylum or other claims for relief
pending,” this evidence may support an inference that the
petitioner had no motive to appear. See R. Singh, 295 F.3d at
1040. Thus, whether any particular evidence is relevant to
the statutory requirements will depend on the “particularized
facts” presented in each case. Id.
Our totality-of-the-circumstances approach adheres to
Congress’s intent. Congress “expect[ed] that in determining
whether [a noncitizen’s] failure to appear” was because of
exceptional circumstances beyond their control, “the
Attorney General will look at the totality of the
circumstances.” H.R. Rep. No. 101-955 (1990), as reprinted
in 1990 U.S.C.C.A.N. 6784, 6797. Our approach also aligns
with the BIA and several other circuits. The BIA instructs
IJs to consider the “totality of the circumstances” when
“determining whether [a noncitizen] has established

10

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

exceptional circumstances.” Matter of S-L-H- & L-B-L-, 28
I. & N. Dec. 318, 321 (BIA 2021); see also In Re B-A-S-, 22
I. & N. Dec. 57, 58 (BIA 1998). And at least three of our
sister circuits require the same. See E. A. C. A. v. Rosen, 985
F.3d 499, 504 (6th Cir. 2021) (the agency must consider the
“totality of the circumstances” when deciding whether a
petitioner meets the exceptional circumstances standard
(quoting Acquaah v. Holder, 589 F.3d 332, 335 (6th Cir.
2009))); Murillo-Robles v. Lynch, 839 F.3d 88, 91 (1st Cir.
2016) (the agency “must take into account the totality of the
circumstances”); Nazarova v. I.N.S., 171 F.3d 478, 484 (7th
Cir. 1999) (considering “[t]he entire unfortunate chain of
events”).
I. There is no per se rule that a traffic delay cannot be
an exceptional circumstance.
The IJ and BIA relied on Arredondo and Sharma for the
categorical proposition that traffic delays “do not constitute
exceptional circumstances justifying a motion to reopen.”
See Arredondo, 824 F.3d at 806; Sharma, 89 F.3d at 547.
The government likewise claimed at oral argument that our
cases have “adopted a rather categorical rule” that traffic
cannot be an exceptional circumstance.
That is incorrect. In Arredondo, the petitioner missed her
hearing because of her car’s mechanical failure and was
removed in absentia. We concluded that the car’s
mechanical failure “does not alone compel granting a motion
to reopen based on ‘exceptional circumstances.’”
Arredondo, 824 F.3d at 806 (emphasis added). But our
analysis did not stop there. We considered the “totality of the
circumstances,” including that the petitioner “purposely took
an unnecessarily long route to court,” gave herself “little
margin for error” despite the “usual traffic conditions,” and

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

11

did not attempt to get to court “but instead had her car towed
to a mechanic.” Id. Worse yet, the petitioner had counsel but
ignored “her lawyer’s phone calls in the days before the
hearing,” and “failed to contact her lawyer” when her car
broke down. Id. & n.3. Considering all these factors, we held
that the petitioner did not establish that she missed her
hearing because of exceptional circumstances.
Sharma, the other case cited by the BIA, also did not
adopt a bright-line rule. There, we held without elaboration
that the petitioners’ “traffic difficulties” did “not qualify as
exceptional circumstances beyond petitioners’ control.”
Sharma, 89 F.3d at 547 (citation modified). The petitioners
in that case argued only that we should import the former
“reasonable cause” statutory standard into the current
“exceptional circumstances” standard, which we declined to
do. Id. We did not address the meaning or scope of
“exceptional circumstances,” nor did we adopt a categorical
rule that traffic can never qualify.
Not only did the agency misconstrue our cases, it also
disregarded the BIA’s precedent rejecting a “per se rule that
traffic conditions cannot be an acceptable reason for a tardy
appearance at a hearing.” Matter of S-L-H-, 28 I. & N. Dec.
at 323; see Israel v. I.N.S., 785 F.2d 738, 740 (9th Cir. 1986)
(“The BIA acts arbitrarily when it disregards its own
precedents and policies without giving a reasonable
explanation for doing so.”). Indeed, the BIA must decide
“case-by-case” whether a petitioner established exceptional
circumstances by considering all “relevant factors in the
totality of the circumstances.” Matter of S-L-H-, 28 I. & N.
Dec. at 324, 325. Applying the correct standard in that case,
the BIA concluded that the petitioner established exceptional
circumstances for missing her hearing because a snowstorm
“caused multiple accidents and severe traffic” on the

12

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

highway. Id. at 324. The BIA considered several relevant
factors, including that the petitioner hired a driver and
planned to attend the hearing, appeared at multiple prior
hearings, and submitted documents corroborating the
“severe weather and traffic conditions” that exceeded
“ordinary or foreseeable traffic delays.” Id. Thus, while the
accidents and traffic that the petitioner experienced in Matter
of S-L-H-, standing alone, may not have been exceptional,
the BIA held that the petitioner established exceptional
circumstances for missing her hearing under the totality of
the circumstances.
We have never adopted a rule that traffic (or any other
circumstance) is per se unexceptional. 1 And we reject any
bright-line rules about what can or cannot qualify as an
exceptional circumstance because the statutory test depends
on the totality of the circumstances in each petitioner’s case.
II. The IJ and BIA failed to consider the totality of the
circumstances.
Because they misunderstood our case law, the IJ and BIA
applied a per se rule that “traffic” cannot satisfy 8 U.S.C.
§ 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i) and ignored multiple relevant factors.
This was an abuse of discretion. See V. Singh, 117 F.4th at
1150.
First, the IJ and BIA did not consider whether the traffic
conditions petitioners encountered were sufficiently
compelling and beyond their control. Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez
filed a declaration explaining that she encountered “two
The inverse is also true. If a noncitizen moved to reopen under 8 U.S.C.
§ 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i), citing a family member’s serious illness, we would
not hold that the noncitizen is automatically entitled to relief without
considering the totality of the circumstances.
1

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

13

major accidents” on the way to court, became stuck in traffic,
and spent almost four hours on the road. She also attached
multiple photographs showing the severe traffic and a
screenshot of a news alert stating that traffic on the highway
was backed up for ten miles. The agency ignored this
evidence.
The government conceded at oral argument that the
traffic conditions on the day of the hearing were
“extraordinary and unusual.” BIA precedent has also found
similar road conditions—“multiple accidents and severe
traffic” on the highway—sufficiently compelling to
establish exceptional circumstances. Matter of S-L-H-, 28 I.
& N. Dec. at 324. Yet the agency characterized the
circumstances here as a mere “typical daily occurrence[]”
without considering petitioners’ evidence about the severity
of the traffic they encountered. The dissent insists that
“[t]raffic accidents and bumper-to-bumper traffic are
common contingencies” that do “not meet the statutory
definition” of compelling circumstances. Dissent at 31. But
the agency cannot simply conclude that traffic and car
accidents are “common” without considering the specific
circumstances of each case.
The BIA also read too much into Ms. MontejoGonzalez’s statement in her declaration apologizing for
“miscalculating” the time it would take to get to court. The
government contends this isolated statement proves that her
failure to appear was not beyond her control. Not so. The
other parts of Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez’s declaration make
clear that she did not “miscalculate” the time to get to court.
To the contrary, she calculated that it would take an hour and
a half to get to court accounting for normal traffic and under
usual rush hour conditions, and that she would arrive with
time to spare. There is no evidence that those calculations

14

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

were wrong. Instead, two major accidents caused the trip to
take over twice as long on the day of the hearing. A
petitioner’s attempt to express remorse or accept
responsibility does not defeat a claim of exceptional
circumstances.
Consider an example. A petitioner drives to his
immigration hearing, parks across the street, and gets hit by
a car while crossing the street resulting in an emergency
transport to the hospital. The petitioner misses his hearing
and is removed in absentia. The petitioner moves to reopen
and submits a declaration explaining that he planned to
attend the hearing, but a car hit him while he was in a
crosswalk with a “walk” signal. He attaches documentation
of his claim that he was hit by a car and was immediately
transported to the hospital for treatment. In his declaration,
petitioner also expresses remorse for not looking both ways
before crossing the street and apologizes for this mistake.
His apology does not dictate that a court will find that the
circumstances were within his control. Rather, the BIA must
consider the facts in the record—in context and in totality—
to determine whether the circumstances were beyond the
petitioner’s control. So too here. Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez’s
apology for failing to predict that two major car accidents
would cause a multi-hour traffic jam does not prove that her
tardiness was within her control. The BIA must consider the
entire record to decide whether petitioners’ late appearance
was beyond their control.
Second, because the IJ and BIA misunderstood our case
law, they ended the analysis before considering petitioners’
diligence. Petitioners presented evidence suggesting they
“did all they reasonably could” to have their day in court. Lo,
341 F.3d at 938. They arranged for a friend to drive them to
court, accounted for typical traffic conditions, and left home

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

15

early enough to make it to court in advance of their hearing.
When they encountered severe traffic that more than doubled
their travel time, they took several photographs to document
the reason for their delay, and they persisted in getting to the
courthouse. They were also unrepresented by counsel and
thus unable to call an attorney for help to seek a continuance.
When they arrived at the courthouse at 10:30 a.m.—almost
four hours after leaving home—the judge had adjourned.
Still, Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez spoke to two clerks to try to
have her and her children’s cases heard that day. The IJ and
BIA did not address any of these facts.
The government and the dissent maintain that petitioners
cannot show diligence because they should have given
themselves a greater “cushion” to get to court. Dissent at 31.
But there is nothing inherently unreasonable about planning
to arrive at a hearing fifteen minutes before it starts. Indeed,
even if ordinary rush hour traffic made petitioners slightly
late, “a petitioner who arrives late for his immigration
hearing, but while the IJ is still in the courtroom, has not
failed to appear for that hearing.” See Perez v. Mukasey, 516
F.3d 770, 774 (9th Cir. 2008). And more to the point, the
fifteen-minute cushion petitioners gave themselves did not
cause their failure to appear. Petitioners were two hours late
for their hearing, and it was the two major accidents causing
a ten-mile backup that caused them to be late. Even if they
gave themselves an extra ninety minutes to get to court, they
still would have been late because of the severe traffic that
morning. Exercising diligence does not mean a petitioner
must predict the very “extraordinary circumstance” they
contend caused their failure to appear. The BIA must
consider petitioners’ diligence based on what a reasonable
person would do under the circumstances, without the
benefit of 20/20 hindsight.

16

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

Similarly, because it drew a bright-line rule on traffic,
the agency did not consider whether petitioners lacked a
motive to evade their hearing. Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez’s
declaration detailed her intent and preparations to appear.
She arranged for a ride to court, she tried to have her and her
children’s case heard when they arrived late, and she
promptly moved to reopen their cases. She also explained
that she never missed a prior appointment with the DHS
agents who came to her house every month since she arrived
in the United States. See, e.g., Chete Juarez, 376 F.3d at 948
(considering that “[p]etitioner appeared for every scheduled
hearing” before the one she missed when evaluating whether
she had motive to evade the hearing); R. Singh, 295 F.3d at
1040 (considering that petitioner “diligently appeared for all
of his previous hearings” when concluding that he “had no
possible reason to try to delay the hearing”). Beyond that,
Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez is pursuing not only her own rights
but also the rights of her children. The agency did not
address whether Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez had any motive to
evade her and her children’s immigration proceedings.
*

*

*

In sum, the agency’s truncated analysis failed to consider
the totality of the circumstances relevant in this case, such as
whether the extraordinary traffic delays were exceptional
and beyond petitioners’ control, whether petitioners were
diligent, and whether petitioners lacked motive to evade
their hearing. On remand, the BIA must assess the totality of
the circumstances to determine whether petitioners missed
their hearing because of exceptional circumstances and are
thus entitled to have their day in court.

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

17

Conclusion
Whether a petitioner can establish “exceptional
circumstances” under 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i) depends
on the totality of the circumstances in each case, and we
reject any categorical rules dictating what does or does not
meet that standard. The IJ and BIA abused their discretion
by misreading our prior case law and applying a bright line
rule that “traffic” cannot constitute exceptional
circumstances.
The petition is GRANTED. We remand to the BIA for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
FRIEDLAND, Circuit Judge, concurring in part and
concurring in the judgment:
The majority holds that the BIA “abused [its] discretion
by applying a per se rule” that “traffic delays ‘do not
constitute exceptional circumstances justifying a motion to
reopen.’” Majority Op. at 5-6, 10. Prior to oral argument, I
was inclined to disagree—I had not read the agency’s
decision as applying a per se rule. At oral argument,
however, the Government asserted that our prior decisions
established a per se rule that traffic is never an extraordinary
circumstance, and it asserted that the agency had relied upon
that rule in denying reopening here. Because applying such
a per se rule would have been incorrect for the reasons
discussed in Section I of the majority opinion, I now agree
that the proper course is to remand this case for the agency

18

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

to exercise its discretion under a correct understanding of the
law. 1
The majority reads both the IJ’s and the BIA’s decisions
less charitably than I would have prior to the Government’s
statements at oral argument. It is true that the IJ quoted our
holding in Arredondo that “[t]raffic and trouble finding
parking, standing alone, do not constitute exceptional
circumstances justifying a motion to reopen” in the course
of concluding that Montejo-Gonzalez had not “articulated a
compelling circumstance that prevented her from appearing
at her hearing.” See Majority Op. at 7; see also Arredondo
v. Lynch, 824 F.3d 801, 806 (9th Cir. 2016). The BIA, too,
cited Arredondo when it explained that “typical daily
occurrences that may cause mishaps, delays, and oversight
do not qualify as exceptional circumstances.” See Majority
Op. at 7. But those quotations were only part of the relevant
discussion.
In addition to citing the traffic difficulties that Petitioners
encountered, the IJ also noted that Montejo-Gonzalez
admitted in her declaration that she “miscalculated how long
it would take for her to get to the court.” The BIA’s analysis
went further. In assessing whether Petitioners’ lateness was
beyond their control, the BIA noted that, according to
Montejo-Gonzalez’s declaration, she left herself a very small
margin for error: “only . . . approximately 15 minutes to
park and go through courthouse security, notwithstanding
any traffic delays.” The BIA considered Petitioners’
I fully join in the majority’s conclusion that the possibility of
unconscionable results is not a standalone element that the agency must
consider in assessing whether a petitioner has shown “exceptional
circumstances” under 8 U.S.C. § 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i) and therefore do not
comment further upon that holding.

1

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

19

evidence that they went “directly” to court, showing their
intent to attend the hearing, but it explained that their intent
did not demonstrate that their absence was caused by
something other than a “typical daily occurrence[].”
Based on its review of that evidence, the BIA concluded
that “the alleged difficulty [Petitioners] experienced” was
“‘less compelling’ than the examples of circumstances listed
in [8 U.S.C. § 1229a(e)(1)], such as ‘battery or extreme
cruelty to the alien or any child or parent of the alien, serious
illness of the alien, or serious illness or death of the spouse,
child, or parent of the alien.’” The BIA accordingly agreed
with the IJ that “[t]he traffic congestion” Petitioners
encountered that day, “coupled with” Montejo-Gonzalez’s
“explanation that she miscalculated the time it would take to
arrive at the court,” did not constitute “exceptional
circumstances to justify the reopening of her proceedings.”
I disagree with the majority that the BIA “ignored multiple
relevant factors” in its totality of the circumstances analysis,
Majority Op. at 12, and I originally read it as having
appropriately considered the traffic within a totality of the
circumstances analysis, see Hernandez v. Garland, 52 F.4th
757, 770 (9th Cir. 2022) (explaining that the BIA need not
“individually identify and discuss every piece of evidence in
the record”).
The Government’s statements at oral argument,
however, complicate the analysis. The Government argued
that our court has a per se rule that traffic is never an
extraordinary circumstance. Specifically, the Government
stated that our “court appears to have adopted a rather
categorical rule,” and that the Government had “not asked
this court to overrule that.” Although the Government
further stated that it did not “need to depend” on the
existence of a categorical rule, the Government still

20

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

responded at least once that it read Arredondo in that
manner, and it acknowledged that the BIA had relied on
Arredondo in denying reopening here.
Remand is appropriate when it is unclear whether the
agency applied the correct legal standard. See MendozaGarcia v. Garland, 36 F.4th 989, 999 (9th Cir. 2022).
Although I would not have read the BIA’s decision as having
relied upon a per se rule, taking the Government’s
representations at oral argument seriously leads to the
conclusion that the agency’s decision is at least somewhat
ambiguous, so I now think that remand is warranted here.
Under the correct legal test, the resolution of Petitioners’
motion to reopen is not a forgone conclusion. The totality of
the circumstances analysis allows the agency discretion to
conclude that certain factors and pieces of evidence are
relevant in certain cases but not relevant in others. The
proper application of the totality of the circumstances
analysis means that a traffic-based delay may prove an
exceptional circumstance in one case but not in another.
Whether Petitioners can meet the demanding statutory
standard here is a question the agency must answer in the
first instance.

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

21

R. NELSON, Circuit Judge, with whom CALLAHAN,
NGUYEN, and LEE, Circuit Judges, join, dissenting:
The majority correctly overrules Hernandez-Galand v.
Garland, 996 F.3d 1030, 1036–37 (9th Cir. 2021), and its
progeny, which held “that the possibility of unconscionable
results is a standalone element of ‘exceptional
circumstances’ that the agency must consider.” Maj. Op. at
9. That is no longer the law in this circuit. And the majority
wisely does not defend the three-judge panel majority
opinion.
Still, I disagree with the majority’s separate justification
for remand. It wrongly concludes that the agencies applied
a per se rule that traffic conditions can never be exceptional
circumstances. Id. at 12. As Judge Friedland notes, the
majority “reads both the IJ’s and the BIA’s decision less
charitably than I would have.” Conc. Op. at 18. I agree that
the majority does not afford the Immigration Judge (IJ) and
Board of Immigration Appeals (BIA) proper deference. The
agencies considered the totality of the circumstances and did
not abuse their discretion. And our legal test must remain
tied to the statutory language in 8 U.S.C.
§§ 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i) and 1229a(e)(1). I respectfully dissent.
I
Understand how we got here. The three-judge majority
opinion extended our misguided precedent into indefensible
territory. The en banc majority declines to defend the threejudge panel majority opinion, and for good reason. That
wrongly decided opinion contravened controlling precedent
and replaced a strict statutory standard with a judge-made
multifactor balancing test.
See Montejo-Gonzalez v.
Garland, 119 F.4th 651, 655–56 (9th Cir. 2024), vacated,

22

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

141 F.4th 1334 (9th Cir. 2025). The three-judge panel
majority only reached its result by ignoring the statutory
language. Sections 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i) and 1229a(e)(1) allow
discretion to excuse an alien’s failure to appear only in
“exceptional circumstances” that were both “beyond the
control of the alien” and no “less compelling” than the listed
extreme examples of “battery or extreme cruelty to the alien
or any child or parent of the alien, serious illness of the alien,
or serious illness or death of the spouse, child, or parent of
the alien.”
The three-judge panel majority wrongly reframed the
statutory standard as a broader consideration about whether
exceptional circumstances might warrant reopening or
justify an alien’s failure to appear. Montejo-Gonzalez, 119
F.4th at 653–55. By generalizing and broadening the
governing text, the three-judge panel majority placed
dispositive weight on factors with no causal relationship to
Montejo-Gonzalez’s failure to appear. See, e.g., id. at 658–
59. It also created “a punch list of prescribed non-statutory
factors” that IJs would have to tick through “as part of an
overall assessment into whether the circumstances are
sufficiently exceptional to ‘warrant’ or ‘justify’ reopening
and to avoid ‘unconscionable results.’” Id. at 671 (Collins,
J., dissenting). The three-judge panel “majority’s loosely
framed test b[ore] no relation to the stringent statutory
standard that Congress adopted.” Id.
The en banc majority rightly repudiates HernandezGaland, which set the court down this anti-statutory path. I
agree with the majority on three points.
A
First, the majority draws the standard closer to the
statutory language. We now clarify that to qualify as

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

23

“exceptional circumstances” under § 1229a(e)(1), “the
circumstances (1) must cause the [alien’s 1] failure to appear,
(2) must be beyond the petitioner’s control, and (3) must be
sufficiently compelling.” Maj. Op. at 8. In other words,
under the statute’s plain language, the circumstances must
be causal (not post hoc), outside the petitioner’s ability to
account for and control, and not “less compelling” than
“extreme cruelty” or serious illness or death of the alien or a
close family member. See § 1229a(e)(1). The majority
correctly uses the conjunctive “and,” because all three
conditions must be met for a circumstance to be
“exceptional” under § 1229a. See Antonin Scalia & Bryan
A. Garner, Reading Law: The Interpretation of Legal Texts
116–25 (2012) (conjunctive/disjunctive canon).
This
enunciation of the standard is both faithful to the statutory
text and comprehensible for IJs as they consider the
thousands of petitions to reopen in this circuit each year.
B
Second, the majority repudiates the three-judge panel
majority’s holding that “[t]he IJ and BIA must consider
‘whether the in absentia removal order would cause
The majority replaces the statutory term “alien” with “noncitizen.” We
should apply Congress’s statutory language, especially where the
statutory language makes a difference. See Monsalvo v. Bondi, 604 U.S.
712, 749 n.1 (2025) (Alito, J., dissenting) (“[I]n the language of the
[Immigration and Nationality] Act, ‘alien’ and ‘noncitizen’ are not
synonymous.”); Avilez v. Garland, 69 F.4th 525, 541 (9th Cir. 2023)
(Bea, J., concurring) (“Federal courts applying federal immigration laws
should not invent their own terminology to stand in place of definitions
used in the congressional statutes they are tasked with applying.”).
Section 1229a applies only to an “alien” (“any person not a citizen or
national of the United States,” 8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(3)), and not to a
“noncitizen” more broadly.
1

24

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

unconscionable results’ when determining whether a
petitioner has shown exceptional circumstances.” MontejoGonzalez, 119 F.4th at 658 (quoting Hernandez-Galand, 996
F.3d at 1034–35). The majority correctly holds that “[t]o the
extent we suggested in Hernandez-Galand that the
possibility of unconscionable results is a standalone element
of ‘exceptional circumstances’ that the agency must
consider, we overrule that holding.” Maj. Op. at 9. Now
“the agency may consider whether a petitioner had a
colorable claim for relief or was merely delaying the
inevitable” if, for example, “this evidence may support an
inference that the petitioner intended to attend their hearing
and missed it for a compelling reason beyond their control.”
Id. (emphasis added). That course correction is welcome,
especially since a “compelling reason” must comply with the
statutory text of § 1229a(e)(1).
Likewise, the majority clarifies that we “look ‘to the
particularized facts presented in each case’ to decide whether
a failure to appear was because of sufficiently compelling
circumstances beyond the petitioner’s control.” Id. at 8
(quoting B. Singh v. I.N.S., 213 F.3d 1050, 1052 (9th Cir.
2000)). Because “exceptional circumstances” are “by
definition unique,” courts must consider the totality of the
circumstances. Id. (quoting V. Singh v. Garland, 117 F.4th
1145, 1150 (9th Cir. 2024)). But the totality of the
circumstances must relate to the statutory language defining
“exceptional circumstances.”
Congress has defined “exceptional circumstances” such
that not every factor courts may consider relevant can be
considered. To the extent relevant evidence “may include
whether the petitioners were diligent, whether they
encountered external or unforeseen circumstances, and
whether they lacked a motive to evade the hearing,” id. at 8–

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

25

9, the evidence must causally relate back to the statutory
language describing “exceptional circumstances.” We
should not—and the majority does not—lay out specific
judge-made “factors” that IJs must consider before denying
a motion to reopen. So long as the IJ “assess[es] the totality
of the circumstances to determine whether petitioners
missed their hearing because of exceptional circumstances”
(defined as causal reasons outside the petitioners’ control
and no less compelling than the listed examples of battery,
extreme cruelty, serious illness, or death involving the alien
or the alien’s child, spouse, or parent), he does not abuse his
discretion by declining to analyze any extra-statutory
“factor.” Id. at 8, 16.
C
Third, the majority correctly rejects “any bright-line
rules about what can or cannot qualify as an exceptional
circumstance because the statutory test depends on the
totality of the circumstances in each petitioner’s case.” Id.
at 12. The IJ is charged with determining whether the
petitioner’s absence was caused by “exceptional
circumstances” outside her control or merely by
understandable but “less compelling circumstances.”
§ 1229a(e)(1). If traffic delays are to be considered
exceptional, it can only be because those delays were no less
compelling than serious illness or death.
The majority correctly notes that even one of the extreme
examples specified in the statute—such as “serious illness or
death of the spouse, child, or parent of the alien,”
§ 1229a(e)(1)—would not mean that the alien “is
automatically entitled to relief without considering the
totality of the circumstances.” Maj. Op. at 12. n.1. For
example, if a petitioner’s child happened to fall seriously ill,

26

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

but the petitioner chose to go to Disneyland rather than
attend her hearing, her failure to appear would not be
“because
of”
any
exceptional
circumstance.
§ 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i). And if a petitioner missed her hearing
because she caused the death or illness of her spouse, that
would not be “beyond the control of the alien.”
§ 1229a(e)(1).
Still, in most cases, traffic conditions alone will not
qualify as exceptional circumstances. See Sharma v. I.N.S.,
89 F.3d 545, 547 (9th Cir. 1996); Arredondo v. Lynch, 824
F.3d 801, 806 (9th Cir. 2016). Only circumstances that
comport with the statutory language satisfy the standard.
And IJs may rely on our precedent to weigh the
exceptionality of circumstances. As here, an IJ does not
abuse his discretion by examining our precedent, analyzing
the totality of the circumstances as circumscribed by the
statutory language, and concluding that the precedent applies
in a given case.
II
Despite its rollback of our prior misguided precedent, the
majority reaches the wrong result because it misreads the
agencies’ decisions and the record and misapplies the abuse
of discretion standard of review. The IJ did not apply a per
se rule that traffic can never be exceptional and reasonably
considered the totality of the circumstances.
A
Contrary to the majority’s assertions, the IJ and BIA did
not see the words “traffic delays,” ignore the circumstances,
and apply a per se rule. Judge Friedland gets this analysis
correct. See Conc. Op. at 18–19. The agencies examined
the totality of the circumstances and reasonably concluded

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

27

that Montejo-Gonzalez did not meet the statutory criteria for
reopening her case.
The agencies did not apply a “truncated analysis” or “a
bright-line rule on traffic.” Maj. Op. at 16. The agencies
properly weighed the evidence (including MontejoGonzalez’s declaration), examined the totality of the
circumstances (including Montejo-Gonzalez’s failure to
leave early enough to account for even the smallest of
contingencies), and applied our caselaw to the facts. The
agencies also considered Montejo-Gonzalez’s likelihood of
success on the merits, considered whether she might be
mistaken about her hearing time, and considered our
holdings in similar cases. That the agencies cited Sharma
and Arredondo—precedent with similar enough facts to be
persuasive—does not mean that they applied a categorical
rule without examining the totality of the circumstances. On
the contrary, given our caselaw and the facts here, they
reached reasonable conclusions.
The agencies also did not misread our caselaw to say that
traffic can never constitute an exceptional circumstance.
The IJ cited our caselaw in support of his conclusion that this
particular “respondent has [not] articulated a compelling
circumstance.”
The BIA did the same—citing Arredondo in support of
its particularized conclusion that “the alleged difficulty the
respondent experienced on the day of her hearing is still ‘less
compelling’ than the examples” listed in the statute
(emphasis added). Far from falling back on a per se rule, the
BIA explained that “[t]he traffic congestion, coupled with
the respondent’s explanation that she miscalculated the
time,” “a lack of showing that the Immigration Judge was
still on the bench,” and her failure to demonstrate “that she

28

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

would have been entitled to relief had she appeared” all
factored into its conclusion that Montejo-Gonzalez failed to
show exceptional circumstances (emphasis added). As in
Arredondo, the BIA’s “analysis did not stop” with
consideration of the traffic delays. Montejo-Gonzalez, 119
F.4th at 656–57 (attempting to distinguish Arredondo). The
BIA faithfully applied Arredondo, and the majority errs in
trying to distinguish Arredondo’s analysis from the BIA’s
here. See Maj. Op. at 10–11. Neither the IJ nor the BIA
applied a per se rule that traffic—especially when truly
extraordinary and unusual—can never be an “exceptional
circumstance” under the statute. They just concluded that it
was not an exceptional circumstance here.
Judge Friedland recognizes this reasonable reading of
the BIA’s decision, to which we must give deference. Conc.
Op. at 18–19. She reaches a different result based on the
government’s suggestion at oral argument that Arredondo
imposed a per se rule that traffic delays can never constitute
exceptional circumstances. Id. at 19–20. Although the
government’s counsel initially stated that he read Arredondo
as imposing a per se rule, when pressed on whether the BIA
did so, counsel stated that he was “not sure exactly how [the
BIA] read” Arredondo, and did not think that the BIA
“necessarily was” applying a per se rule about traffic in this
case. The government further clarified that “the BIA has
precedent that suggests that extreme traffic, at least when
paired with both diligence and extreme weather, could
potentially suffice.”
Regardless, we review the administrative record of the
agency, not the government’s post-hoc legal arguments. See
DHS v. Regents of Univ. of Cal., 591 U.S. 1, 67 (2020)
(Kavanaugh, J., concurring in part) (“Courts assess agency
action based on the official explanations of the agency

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

29

decisionmakers, and not based on after-the-fact explanations
advanced by agency lawyers during litigation.”). Strictly
reviewing the administrative record—as we must—confirms
that the BIA did not apply a per se rule. Judge Friedland
reached the right conclusion before argument. The BIA did
not apply a per se rule given the factors it considered other
than the traffic delay.
B
The agencies—after considering the totality of the
circumstances—reasonably concluded that MontejoGonzalez did not miss her hearing because of exceptional
circumstances “beyond the control of the alien” and no “less
compelling” than the extreme examples of battery, serious
illness, or death. § 1229a(e)(1).
The agencies “provide[d] a reasoned explanation” and
reached a conclusion well within the range of reasonable
applications of the statutory standard to these facts.
Movsisian v. Ashcroft, 395 F.3d 1095, 1098 (9th Cir. 2005).
1
First, Montejo-Gonzalez did not miss her hearing
“because of” any circumstance “beyond [her] control.”
§§ 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i), 1229a(e)(1). The agencies reasonably
concluded that she missed her hearing due, at least in part, to
her own failure to plan. The IJ considered MontejoGonzalez’s admission that “she miscalculated how long it
would take for her to get to court.” Montejo-Gonzalez
admits that “[t]he main reason that [she] did not appear is
because there was heavy traffic on the way to the court, and
because of [her] miscalculation of time of how long it takes
to arrive to court.” The majority disagrees with the IJ’s
determination. But the IJ did not abuse his discretion in

30

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

concluding that the “main reason” Montejo-Gonzalez was
two hours late for her hearing was because she failed to
account for the possibility of heavy traffic. “Traffic and
parking trouble are circumstances that an alien may fairly be
expected to anticipate.” Perez v. Mukasey, 516 F.3d 770,
774 n.2 (9th Cir. 2008). And Montejo-Gonzalez admitted
that she did not leave early enough to account for possible
traffic issues.
The majority reasons around this admission by arguing
that “other parts of Ms. Montejo-Gonzalez’s declaration
make clear that she did not ‘miscalculate’ the time to get to
court.” Maj. Op. at 13. But the majority replaces its
interpretation of the evidence with the IJ’s reasonable
interpretation. That is contrary to abuse of discretion review.
That reasonable minds could disagree whether
Montejo-Gonzalez’s “miscalculation” statement constituted
an admission of fault only shows that there was no abuse of
discretion. See id. at 13–14. It was well within the agencies’
discretion to interpret Montejo-Gonzalez’s statement as an
admission of at least partial fault. Indeed, the agencies
reasonably concluded that even if the car accidents could
have been a cause of her absence, they were not the only
cause.
The declaration supports the agencies’ conclusion that
Montejo-Gonzalez did not “articulate[] a compelling
circumstance that prevented her from appearing at her
hearing.”
It is undisputed that Montejo-Gonzalez
“calculated that it would take an hour and a half to get to
court accounting for normal traffic,” left at 6:45 AM for her
8:30 AM hearing, and therefore gave herself at most 15
minutes to find parking, get through security, and locate her
hearing room. Id. at 13. If the two car accidents caused

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

31

“extraordinary traffic delays,” id. at 16, it was still within
Montejo-Gonzalez’s control to leave earlier in the morning.
Given the time it takes to find parking in downtown
Seattle and get through security, Montejo-Gonzalez left
herself hardly any margin of error for the slightest
misestimation of time or any contingency that may have
arisen. The statutory language should be read to require a
petitioner to give herself an ample cushion to make her
hearing on time.
This might be a harder case if
Montejo-Gonzalez had left at 4:00 AM (or even the night
before) and still missed her hearing due to truly exceptional
gridlock—caused by, say, an unforeseen terrorist attack or
natural disaster. But that is not the case here.
After considering Montejo-Gonzalez’s statements and
other circumstances, the agencies reasonably concluded that
her excuse was not “exceptional” as she did not miss her
hearing “because of” an event “beyond [her] control.”
§§ 1229a(b)(5)(C)(i), 1229a(e)(1).
2
Second, the agencies reasonably concluded that the
circumstances were not “sufficiently compelling.” Maj. Op.
at 8. Thus, even if the traffic conditions were the sole cause
of Montejo-Gonzalez’s absence and beyond her control, they
still did not meet the statutory definition. Traffic accidents
and bumper-to-bumper traffic are common contingencies in
big cities. At least common enough that it is well within an
IJ’s discretion to determine whether they constitute
exceptional circumstances no less compelling than serious

32

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

injury or death. 2 Indeed, the BIA reasonably concluded that
the “typical daily occurrences that may cause mishaps,
[traffic] delays, and oversight [by Montejo-Gonzalez] do not
qualify as exceptional circumstances.”
Even if bumper-to-bumper traffic because of two car
crashes in a major metropolitan area could constitute
“extraordinary and unusual” traffic, id. at 13, it was not
unreasonable for the agencies to conclude that the traffic
conditions were not sufficiently compelling circumstances
under the statute. Congress has set a high bar: the
circumstances cannot be “less compelling” than “battery or
extreme cruelty to the alien or any child or parent of the
alien, serious illness of the alien, or serious illness or death
of the spouse, child, or parent of the alien.” § 1229a(e)(1).
While this list is not exhaustive, the listed circumstances
must mean something. Congress’s constraint cannot be
ignored. Any excuse must be at least as compelling as
violent crimes, serious illness, or death involving the
petitioner or her family members. And the agencies
reasonably concluded that Montejo-Gonzalez’s excuse did
not satisfy the statutory standard.
Prior to 1990, the statutory standard governing rescission
of in absentia orders was whether the petitioner “without
reasonable cause fail[ed] or refuse[d] to attend” her hearing.
8 U.S.C. § 1252(b) (amended 1990). That lower standard
was creating a major backlog in the agencies’ dockets. So
Congress expressly amended the language to impose the
stricter “exceptional circumstances” standard, which
supersedes the previous “reasonable cause” standard. See
I do not insist, as the majority asserts, that traffic accidents and bumperto-bumper traffic can never meet the statutory definition. Maj. Op. at 13.
But here it was reasonable for the agencies to so conclude.
2

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

33

Sharma, 89 F.3d at 547. We owe deference to Congress’s
decision to stiffen the statutory standard.
Reviewing for abuse of discretion, this is an easy case.
That another IJ might decide the other way in a different case
on similar (or even identical) facts does not make the
decision arbitrary, irrational, or contrary to law. See
Tadevosyan v. Holder, 743 F.3d 1250, 1252–53 (9th Cir.
2014) (stating rule that “[t]he BIA abuses its discretion when
it acts ‘arbitrarily, irrationally, or contrary to law’” (quoting
Movsisian, 395 F.3d at 1098)). Even if the traffic problems
Montejo-Gonzalez encountered were extraordinary,
unusual, and beyond her control, it was not an abuse of
discretion to conclude that they were less compelling than
serious illness or death. Discretion means allowing for a
reasonable range of disagreement. To be sure, the statute’s
strict standard—or application of that standard in a particular
case—sometimes may lead to unfortunate or harsh results.
But faithfully applying a law enacted by the People through
Congress, however harsh it may seem, is not an abuse of
discretion.
Under our precedent and given the standard of review,
the petition should have been denied. The BIA remains free
on remand to once again conclude that there were no
exceptional circumstances and deny the petition to reopen.
Under the majority’s holding, the BIA need only
acknowledge that severe traffic conditions could
hypothetically contribute to exceptional circumstances
under the statute. Then—after thoroughly analyzing the
totality of the circumstances causally related to the statute
here (which the agencies did already)—the BIA can reach
the same conclusion.

34

MONTEJO-GONZALEZ V. BONDI

III
Because the agencies faithfully applied our precedent
and reasonably analyzed the totality of the circumstances to
reach the correct conclusion—and, in any event, did not
abuse their discretion—I respectfully dissent.

