FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
B.B., a minor by and through her
mother, Chelsea Boyle,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 24-1770
D.C. No.
8:23-cv-00306DOC-ADS

v.
CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL
DISTRICT; JESUS BECERRA, an
individual in his individual and
official capacities; CLEO VICTA, an
individual in her individual and
official capacities,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
David O. Carter, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted April 9, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed March 10, 2026
Before: Consuelo M. Callahan, Roopali H. Desai, and Ana
de Alba, Circuit Judges.
Per Curiam Opinion

2

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

SUMMARY *
First Amendment
The panel vacated the district court’s grant of summary
judgment for Jesus Becerra, the school principal at Viejo
Elementary School in the Capistrano Unified School
District, and remanded, in a 42 U.S.C. § 1983 action brought
by first-grade student B.B., alleging her First Amendment
rights were violated when she was punished after she drew a
picture that included the words “Black Lives Mater [sic] any
life” and gave it to M.C., an African American classmate.
Under Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community
School District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969), student speech is
protected until it collides with the school’s interest in
(1) preventing disruption and (2) protecting other students.
When this occurs, schools must achieve a balance between
protecting the safety and well-being of their students and
respecting those same students’ constitutional rights.
Disagreeing with the district court’s determination that
the drawing was not protected by the First Amendment, the
panel held that elementary students’ speech is protected by
the First Amendment, Tinker applies in the elementary
student speech context, and elementary students’ young age
is a relevant, but non-dispositive, factor. The panel also
reaffirmed that under the Tinker balancing test school
officials have the burden of showing that their actions were

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

3

reasonably undertaken to protect the safety and well-being
of their students.
Here, because there was no suggestion that B.B.’s
drawing created a reasonable likelihood of material
disruption of classwork or substantial disorder at her school,
the panel focused on the second prong of Tinker: whether
B.B.’s drawing interfered with M.C.’s right to be secure and
let alone. Applying Tinker, the panel held that B.B. raised
genuine disputes of material fact and Becerra was not
entitled to summary judgment because there was conflicting
evidence about whether Becerra could reasonably conclude
that the drawing interfered with M.C.’s rights and whether
the actions taken were reasonably necessary. The panel
explained that while age is a relevant factor under Tinker, it
does not negate the existence of a genuine dispute of material
fact and the district court erred to the extent that it relied on
the students’ ages as the dispositive factor. The students’
very young ages gave the school broader discretion, but did
not relieve the school and Becerra from meeting their burden
of showing that their actions were reasonably undertaken to
protect the safety and well-being of the school’s students.
The panel also vacated the grant of summary judgment
for Becerra on B.B.’s First Amendment retaliation claim
because the district court’s grant of summary judgment on
that claim was based on its determination that the drawing
was not protected by the First Amendment.

4

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

COUNSEL
Caleb R. Trotter (argued), Pacific Legal Foundation,
Sacramento, California; Wilson Freeman, Pacific Legal
Foundation, Phoenix, Arizona; Plaintiff-Appellant.
Courtney L. Hylton (argued) and Brendan M. Gardiner,
Hylton & Associates, Irvine, California, for DefendantsAppellees.
Ilya Shapiro and Tim Rosenberger, Manhattan Institute,
New York, New York; Alan Gura, Institute for Free Speech,
Washington, D.C.; Madison Hahn, Young America’s
Foundation, Reston, Virginia; Timothy D. Keller, Center for
the Rights of Abused Children, Phoenix, Arizona; Cynthia
F. Crawford and Casey Mattox, Americans for Prosperity
Foundation, Arlington, Virginia; for Amici Curiae
Manhattan Institute, Institute for Free Speech, Young
America’s Foundation, Center for the Rights of Abused
Children, and Americans for Prosperity Foundation.
J. Michael Connolly and Thomas S. Vaseliou, Consovoy
McCarthy Park PLLC, Arlington, Virginia, for Amicus
Curiae Parents Defending Education.
Jordan R. Miller and Celia H. O’Leary, Southeastern Legal
Foundation Inc., Roswell, Georgia, for Amicus Curiae
Southeastern Legal Foundation.
D. Gill Sperlein, The Law Office of D. Gill Sperlein, San
Francisco, California; Harmeet K. Dhillon, Mark Trammell,
Josh W. Dixon, and Eric A. Sell, Center for American
Liberty, Mount Airy, Maryland; for Amicus Curiae Center
for American Liberty.

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

5

Julie A. Hamill, Hamill Law & Consulting, Rolling Hills
Estates, California, for Amici Curiae California Policy
Center and Californians for Equal Rights Foundation.
Mathew W. Hoffmann and Tyson C. Langhofer, Alliance
Defending Freedom, Lansdowne, Virginia; John J. Bursch,
Bursch Law PLLC, Caledonia, Michigan; for Amicus Curiae
Douglass Leadership Institute.
Dean McGee and James McQuaid, Liberty Justice Center,
Austin, Texas, for Amicus Curiae Liberty Justice Center.

OPINION
PER CURIAM:
In March 2021, B.B., a first-grade student, drew a picture
which included the words “Black Lives Mater [sic] any life”
and gave it to M.C., an African American classmate. When
M.C.’s mother raised concerns, the school principal, Jesus
Becerra, spoke to B.B. and allegedly told her that the picture
was inappropriate and racist, and that she was not allowed to
give her drawings to classmates. B.B., through her mother,
sued the school district and Becerra under 42 U.S.C. § 1983,
alleging that Becerra’s actions punished B.B. and violated
her First Amendment rights. The district court granted
summary judgment for the defendants, stating that the
drawing was not protected by the First Amendment. B.B.
filed a timely appeal. This case presents an important issue:
to what extent is elementary students’ speech protected by
the First Amendment? Applying the criteria set forth in
Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School
District, 393 U.S. 503 (1969), we hold that elementary

6

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

students’ speech is protected by the First Amendment, the
age of the students is a relevant factor under Tinker, and
schools may restrict students’ speech only when the
restriction is reasonably necessary to protect the safety and
well-being of its students. Because the Tinker analysis raises
genuine issues of material fact, we vacate the grant of
summary judgment and remand.
I. The Controversy
In March 2021, when B.B. was a first-grade student at
Viejo Elementary School in the Capistrano Unified School
District, her teacher read the class a story about Dr. Martin
Luther King, Jr. After the story, B.B. “felt bad” because
“black people . . . were put in a worse position” and made a
drawing showing “all her friends holding hands.” B.B. gave
the drawing to her classmate, M.C., who is African
American. M.C. thanked B.B. Here is the drawing:

B.B. did not know that “Black Lives Matter” had any
particular meaning but included the phrase because it was at

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

7

the end of the book her teacher read to the class. 1 She stated
that she included the phrase “any life” in her drawing
because “all lives matter.”
M.C. took the drawing home, where her mother found it
in her backpack. M.C. asked her mother what the drawing
meant, and her mother told her not to worry about it as it was
not part of the curriculum. However, M.C.’s mother was
concerned that M.C. was the only black child in her grade to
receive such a drawing. She emailed the school’s principal,
Becerra, stating, in part:
While we can appreciate the sentiment of
Black Lives Matter, my husband and I do not
trust the place where the “any life” is coming
from. We do not want this to become a larger
issue. My husband and I will not tolerate any
more messages given to our daughter because
of her skin color. We do not send [M.C.] to
school with flyers or propaganda. We only
send her to school to learn the curriculum and
that is it. As the administrator we trust you
know the actions that need to be taken to
address this issue. If you want to further
discuss, my husband and I will be happy to
meet you in person.
The next day at school, Becerra took B.B. aside and told
her that the drawing was “not appropriate,” she was not to
give drawings to other students, and she should apologize to
M.C. B.B. thought that Becerra used the word “racist” to
When later deposed, B.B. further stated that at the school, in the room
where colored papers are kept, there was a picture of a man with a fist
raised which read at the top “Black lives” and at the bottom “matters.”
1

8

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

describe the drawing but could not remember for sure. 2 B.B.
did not understand why the drawing was inappropriate or
racist, but twice apologized to M.C. In addition, B.B.
testified that she was barred from recess for two weeks.
B.B. did not tell her parents about the drawing or her
conversation with Becerra. Over eleven months later, B.B.’s
mother learned of the incident from another parent. She
subsequently filed a complaint with the school district. The
complaint proceeded through several administrative levels,
but ultimately, the school district found the “weight of the
evidence” did not substantiate the allegation that B.B. “was
punished or disciplined” for her drawing.
On February 21, 2023, B.B., through her mother, filed a
complaint in the United States District Court for the Central
District of California pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 alleging
(among other claims) that Becerra violated B.B.’s First
Amendment rights by punishing B.B. and retaliating against
her for the drawing. Following discovery and multiple
motions to dismiss, the defendants moved for summary
judgment on the remaining cause of action, B.B.’s First
Amendment claims. 3
Becerra denies calling the drawing inappropriate or racist. However,
because this is an appeal from a grant of summary judgment, we construe
the facts in favor of the nonmoving party, B.B. See Animal Legal Def.
Fund v. U.S. Food & Drug Admin., 836 F.3d 987, 989 (9th Cir. 2016)
(en banc).
2

B.B. and B.B.’s mother brought various other federal and state claims
against Becerra, the school district, and a counselor at B.B.’s school. The
district court dismissed B.B.’s mother’s claims and the federal claims
against the school district. The district court later granted summary
judgment to Becerra and the counselor on B.B.’s First Amendment
claims. After resolving all the federal claims in the defendants’ favor, the
district court declined to exercise supplemental jurisdiction over B.B.’s

3

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

9

Applying Tinker, 393 U.S. 503, and its progeny, the
District Court extracted three applicable principles:
(1) “where speech is directed at a ‘particular vulnerable’
student based on a ‘core identifying characteristic,’ such as
race, sex, religion, or sexual orientation, educators have
great leeway to regulate it”; (2) “the mere fact that speech
touches upon a politically controversial topic is not sufficient
to bring it under the First Amendment’s protective
umbrella”; and (3) “age is an important factor when deciding
whether speech is protected.” The District Court concluded
that “the Drawing is not protected by the First Amendment.”
It recognized that the drawing interfered with M.C.’s right to
be let alone, but it noted that B.B.’s intentions were
undoubtedly innocent, and that teachers “are far better
equipped than federal courts at identifying when speech
crosses the line from harmless schoolyard banter to
impermissible harassment.” The District Court concluded
that Becerra’s action, whether right or wrong, “does not
warrant federal court intervention.” On this ground, the
district court granted Becerra summary judgment on B.B.’s
First Amendment claims. B.B. timely appealed.
II. Standards of Review
We review a grant of summary judgment de novo.
Animal Legal Def. Fund, 836 F.3d at 988. “Summary
judgment is appropriate if, viewing the evidence in the light
most favorable to the nonmoving party, (a) ‘the district court
correctly applied the relevant substantive law’ and (b) there
are no genuine issues of material fact.” LaVine v. Blaine
Sch. Dist., 257 F.3d 981, 987 (9th Cir. 2001) (quoting Balint

state-law claims. B.B. appeals only the summary judgment on her First
Amendment claims against Becerra.

10

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

v. Carson City, 180 F.3d 1047, 1050 (9th Cir. 1999) (en
banc)).
III. Discussion
As established in Tinker, 393 U.S. at 506, students do not
“shed their constitutional rights to freedom of speech or
expression at the schoolhouse gate.” But Tinker also
“emphasized the need for affirming the comprehensive
authority of the States and of school officials, consistent with
fundamental constitutional safeguards, to prescribe and
control conduct in the schools.” Id. at 507. Here, as in
Tinker, “[o]ur problem lies in the area where students in the
exercise of First Amendment rights collide with the rules of
the school authorities.” Id.
The Supreme Court has recognized “three specific
categories of student speech that schools may regulate in
certain circumstances: (1) indecent, lewd, or vulgar speech
uttered during a school assembly on school grounds;
(2) speech, uttered during a class trip, that promotes illegal
drug use; and (3) speech that others may reasonably perceive
as bearing the imprimatur of the school, such as that
appearing in a school-sponsored newspaper.” Mahanoy
Area Sch. Dist. v B.L. ex rel. Levy, 594 U.S. 180, 187–88
(2021) (cleaned up).
Speech that does not fall into one of these categories is
nonetheless subject to the balancing test in Tinker. In
Mahanoy, the court noted that under Tinker, “schools have a
special interest in regulating speech that ‘materially disrupts
classwork or involves substantial disorder or invasion of the
rights of others’” and “[t]hese special characteristics call for
special leeway when schools regulate speech that occurs
under its supervision.” Id. at 188 (quoting Tinker, 393 U.S.
at 513). Thus, a student always has rights under the First

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

11

Amendment, but the degree to which a school may restrict
those rights varies according to a number of factors. As the
Supreme Court noted in Hazelwood School District v.
Kuhlmeier, “the First Amendment rights of students in the
public schools ‘are not automatically coextensive with the
rights of adults in other settings,’ and must be ‘applied in
light of the special characteristics of the school
environment.’” 484 U.S. 260, 266 (1988) (quoting Bethel
Sch. Dist. No. 403 v. Fraser, 478 U.S. 675, 682 (1986) and
Tinker, 393 U.S. at 506).
Tinker stressed that a school’s prescription and control
of speech must be “consistent with fundamental
constitutional safeguards.” 393 U.S. at 507. The Court held
that, “[i]n order for the State in the person of school officials
to justify prohibition of a particular expression of opinion, it
must be able to show that its action was caused by something
more than a mere desire to avoid the discomfort and
unpleasantness that always accompany an unpopular
viewpoint.” 4 Id. at 509. Rather, schools may regulate speech
4

The Court explained:
Students in school as well as out of school are
‘persons’ under our Constitution. They are possessed
of fundamental rights which the State must respect,
just as they themselves must respect their obligations
to the State. In our system, students may not be
regarded as closed-circuit recipients of only that which
the State chooses to communicate. They may not be
confined to the expression of those sentiments that are
officially approved. In the absence of a specific
showing of constitutionally valid reasons to regulate
their speech, students are entitled to freedom of
expression of their views.

Id. at 511.

12

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

only when the speech (1) “materially disrupts classwork or
involves substantial disorder,” or (2) creates an “invasion of
the rights of others.” Id. at 513. “In the absence of a specific
showing of constitutionally valid reasons to regulate their
speech, students are entitled to freedom of expression of
their views.” Id. at 511. Put simply, Tinker protects student
speech under the First Amendment until it collides with the
school’s interest in preventing disruption and protecting
other students. Id. at 507–09. When this occurs, the school’s
actions are reviewed under the Tinker balancing test.
We have followed Tinker. For example, in C.R. v.
Eugene School District 4J, we reiterated that “[s]chools must
achieve a balance between protecting the safety and wellbeing of their students and respecting those same students’
constitutional rights.” 835 F.3d 1142, 1148 (9th Cir. 2016)
(citing LaVine, 257 F.3d at 987). We also stated that (1) the
targeted student’s age was relevant, (2) “grade schools may
exercise a greater degree of control over student speech than
colleges,” and (3) “[b]ecause C.R.’s speech interfered with
the younger students’ rights to be secure and let alone, . . .
his suspension was permissible under Tinker.” Id. at 1153
(footnote omitted). Moreover, we have recognized that
“[p]ublic school students who may be injured by verbal
assaults on the basis of a core identifying characteristic such
as race, religion, or sexual orientation, have a right to be free
from such attacks while on school campuses.” Harper v.
Poway Unified Sch. Dist., 445 F.3d 1166, 1178 (9th Cir.
2006), judgment vacated sub nom., Harper ex rel. Harper v.
Poway Unified Sch. Dist., 549 U.S. 1262 (2007).
The parties agree that B.B.’s drawing qualifies as speech
under the First Amendment. They also agree that first
graders enjoy some First Amendment protection for their
speech at school. And they agree that we must evaluate

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

13

whether Becerra permissibly regulated B.B.’s speech under
Tinker. But the fact that the Tinker balancing test is invoked
does not resolve our case. We do not agree with the District
Court’s determination that the “Drawing is not protected by
the First Amendment.” 5 It overlooks that even when some
administrative action is appropriate under Tinker, the school
has the burden of showing that its interference with a
student’s First Amendment right was reasonably necessary
to protect “the safety and well-being” of its students, C.R.,
835 F.3d at 1148, including their rights “to be secure and to
be let alone.” Tinker, 393 U.S. at 508.
The parties dispute (1) how Tinker should apply here,
given the young age of the students involved, (2) the scope
of Tinker’s second prong, and (3) whether there are any
genuine disputes of fact material to the application of Tinker.
We first outline the bounds of elementary schools’ authority
and students’ First Amendment rights under Tinker. Next,
turning to this case, we hold that there are genuine disputes
of material fact relevant to the Tinker analysis. We vacate
and remand.
A. The age of the students is a relevant but nondispositive factor in the Tinker balancing test.
As noted by the Fifth Circuit in Morgan v. Swanson, 659
F.3d 359, 377 (5th Cir. 2011) (en banc), Tinker “did
not, by its own terms, address the rights of elementary
students . . . .” However, elementary students’ First
Amendment rights have been recognized since West
The statement is ambiguous. It is not clear whether the District Court
was asserting that a first grader has no First Amendment rights—a
position that is contrary to Tinker and our precedent—or indicating that
in this instance the school’s obligation to provide a safe environment
outweighed any restriction on B.B.’s rights under the First Amendment.

5

14

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

Virginia Board of Education v. Barnette, 319 U.S. 624
(1943). Four of our sister circuits have concluded that
Tinker applies to elementary student speech. See C.S. v.
McCrumb, 135 F.4th 1056, 1066 (6th Cir. 2025) (applying
Tinker to an elementary student’s First Amendment claim
and noting that “elementary students enjoy at least some free
speech protections”); N.J. by Jacob v. Sonnabend, 37 F.4th
412, 425 (7th Cir. 2022) (holding that “Tinker is the
controlling authority” in the elementary school setting); K.A.
ex rel. Ayers v. Pocono Mountain Sch. Dist., 710 F.3d 99,
110–11 (3d Cir. 2013) (concluding that “Tinker applies to
elementary school student speech”); Morgan, 659 F.3d at
407–09 (applying Tinker to elementary student speech).
Although we have not had occasion to apply the Tinker
balancing test to elementary students, our prior opinions
have recognized both that students have First Amendment
rights and that the students’ ages are relevant to evaluating
whether a school’s actions were reasonably designed to
protect the safety and well-being of its students.
In Harper, we upheld the ban on a high school
sophomore wearing a T-shirt with an anti-homosexual
message because doing so collided ‘“with the rights of other
students’ in the most fundamental way.” 445 F.3d at 1178
(quoting Tinker, 393 U.S. at 508). We recognized that
“name-calling is ordinarily protected outside the school
context,” but held that “[s]tudents cannot hide behind the
First Amendment to protect their ‘right’ to abuse and
intimidate other students at school.” Id. (quoting Sypniewski
v. Warren Hills Reg’l Bd. of Educ., 307 F.3d 243, 264 (3d
Cir. 2002)). We noted that, “[a]s young students acquire
more strength and maturity, and specifically as they reach
college age, they become adequately equipped emotionally

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

15

and intellectually to deal with the type of verbal assaults that
may be prohibited during their earlier years.” Id. at 1183.
In C.R., we determined that the two-day suspension was
a reasonable punishment for a twelve-year-old who had
sexually harassed two younger students. 6 835 F.3d at 1152–
53. We recognized that sexual harassment “implicates the
rights of students to be secure” and that schools “must have
the authority to discipline students for engaging in sexually
inappropriate and harassing speech.”
Id. at 1152.
Importantly, we further held that the “targeted students’ age
is also relevant” and that C.R.’s “speech interfered with the
younger students’ rights to be secure.” Id. at 1153.
Consistent with our sister circuits, we hold that the age
of the students is a relevant factor in evaluating the school’s
restriction on a student’s speech. But age is not dispositive.
This is consistent with our general approach in student
speech cases in which we “treat the Tinker rule as a flexible
one dependent upon the totality of relevant facts in each
case.” Karp v. Becken, 477 F.2d 171, 174 (9th Cir. 1973). 7
6

We noted that the student’s harassment could cause the victim to:
feel less secure in school, affecting her ability to
perform as a student and engage appropriately with her
peers. Moreover, the harassment had already begun to
escalate from the repetition of curse words to sexual
comments directed at the victims. The school could
reasonably expect the harassment to escalate further if
allowed to continue unchecked. Without intervening
administrative action, the younger students would be
deprived of their right to be secure at school.

C.R., 835 F.3d at 1152–53.
This approach is also consistent with our sister circuits. See McCrumb,
135 F.4th at 1062 (“Tinker applies the First Amendment to student
7

16

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

In sum, elementary students’ speech is protected by the
First Amendment, Tinker applies in the elementary student
speech context, and elementary students’ young age is a
relevant factor.
B. Under the Tinker balancing test school officials
have the burden of showing that their actions
were reasonably undertaken to protect the safety
and well-being of their students.
As there is no suggestion that B.B.’s drawing created a
reasonable likelihood of material disruption of classwork or
substantial disorder at her school, we focus on the second
prong of Tinker: whether B.B.’s drawing interfered with
M.C.’s right to be secure and let alone.
“The precise scope of Tinker’s interference with the
rights of others[’] language is unclear” because we have
rarely applied it. C.R., 835 F.3d at 1152 (quoting Wynar v.
Douglas Cnty. Sch. Dist., 728 F.3d 1062, 1072 (9th Cir.
2013)). But a few principles are clear. On the one hand,
“speech that is merely offensive to some listener” is not
sufficient and does not fall within Tinker’s scope. Id. To
regulate student speech under this prong of Tinker, a school
“must be able to show that its action was caused by
speech in light of the special characteristics of the school environment,
which may include such factors as the age and emotional maturity level
of schoolchildren viewing the speech, particularly with respect to
sensitive topics.”) (citation modified); L.M. v. Town of Middleborough,
103 F.4th 854, 881 (1st Cir. 2024) (noting the relevance of the “middleschool setting, with some kids as young as ten,” to the Tinker analysis);
Sonnabend, 37 F.4th at 426 (“The application of Tinker must account for
such factors as the age and grade level of the students to whom the speech
is directed.”); Ayers, 710 F.3d at 109 (“[T]he Tinker test has the requisite
flexibility to accommodate the age-related developmental, educational,
and disciplinary concerns of elementary school students.”).

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

17

something more than a mere desire to avoid the discomfort
and unpleasantness that always accompany an unpopular
viewpoint.” Tinker, 393 U.S. at 509.
On the other hand, targeted speech that threatens,
harasses, or bullies a specific student interferes with the right
to be secure and let alone, and may be regulated by schools
under Tinker. See Mahanoy, 594 U.S. at 188 (describing
how schools may regulate “severe bullying or harassment
targeting particular individuals” and “threats aimed at
teachers or other students”); Wynar, 728 F.3d at 1072
(holding that the school could regulate speech that
threatened to commit a school shooting and “targeted
specific students by name”); C.R., 835 F.3d at 1152 (holding
that the school could punish speech that constituted sexual
harassment of two other students); see also Doe v. Hopkinton
Pub. Schs., 19 F.4th 493, 509 (1st Cir. 2021) (“Speech or
conduct that actively and pervasively encourages bullying
by others or fosters an environment in which bullying is
acceptable and actually occurs . . . is not protected under the
First Amendment.”).
But what of student speech that does not bully, threaten,
or harass a specific student but has potential consequences
beyond avoiding discomfort and unpleasantness? We
tackled this gray area in Harper, 445 F.3d 1166. There, a
high school student wore a shirt to school that “displayed
derogatory remarks about homosexuals.” Id. at 1171. He
wore the shirt on the day that the school’s Gay-Straight
Alliance held an event, but his speech did not target any
particular student. Id.
We held that the school could lawfully regulate the
student’s speech because “verbal assaults on the basis of a
core identifying characteristic such as race, religion, or

18

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

sexual orientation” interfere with other students’ “right to be
free from such attacks while on school campuses.” Id. at
1178. We reasoned that “such attacks on young minority
students can be harmful to their self-esteem and to their
ability to learn,” and thus fall under Tinker’s second prong.
Id. at 1180. Although the student’s right to wear the t-shirt
is protected outside of school, we held that Tinker allowed
the school to regulate or prohibit this speech given its
“special need to maintain a safe, secure and effective
learning environment.” Id. at 1176.
Harper thus clarified that, under Tinker’s “rights of
others” prong, schools may regulate not only speech that
bullies or harasses particular students, but also speech that
generally denigrates other students on the basis of a core
identifying characteristic. Although “political speech, even
when it is offensive to others, is an important right of all
Americans and learning the value of such freedoms is an
essential part of a public school education,” the school may
restrict “instances of derogatory and injurious remarks
directed at students’ minority status such as race, religion,
and sexual orientation.” Id. at 1183. We focused on “the
type and degree of injury the speech involved cause[d] to
impressionable young people” in high schools and
elementary schools. Id.
Although Harper was vacated as moot, 8 we find its
reasoning sound: schools may regulate student speech under
Tinker’s second prong when it involves “derogatory and
injurious remarks directed at students’ minority status such

See Harper ex rel. Harper v. Poway Unified Sch. Dist., 549 U.S. 1262
(2007).

8

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

19

as race, religion, and sexual orientation.” 445 F.3d at 1183. 9
Indeed, the First Circuit recently adopted a similar rule. See
L.M. v. Town of Middleborough, 103 F.4th 854, 872–74 (1st
Cir. 2024) (allowing schools to regulate speech under Tinker
if it demeans other students’ personal identities and will have
a “serious negative psychological impact on” those students
and “poison[s] the educational atmosphere”). Several other
circuits have similarly recognized that derogatory comments
about other students’ personal identity, when sufficiently
severe, may be regulated under Tinker. See Nuxoll ex rel.
Nuxoll v. Indian Prairie Sch. Dist. #204, 523 F.3d 668, 672,
675–76 (7th Cir. 2008) (upholding a school rule forbidding
derogatory comments about personal identity, but
determining that a specific phrase could not be prohibited
because it was “only tepidly negative,” and not “derogatory”
or “demeaning”); Sypniewski, 307 F.3d at 263–66
(upholding a school policy prohibiting racial harassment and
intimidation “by name calling, using racial or derogatory
slurs, wearing or possession of items depicting or implying
racial hatred or prejudice . . . [or] that is racially divisive or
creates . . . hatred” under Tinker).
Of course, the students’ ages affect what is derogatory or
injurious. Certain speech may be merely negative or
controversial to high schoolers, but may constitute
derogatory and injurious remarks against elementary
students given their greater vulnerability. See C.R., 835 F.3d
at 1152–53 (holding that “questions about sex acts and
B.B. notes that at least one circuit previously limited the second prong
of Tinker to school regulation of speech that would render the school
liable for torts. See Kuhlmeier v. Hazelwood Sch. Dist., 795 F.2d 1368,
1376 (8th Cir. 1986), rev’d on other grounds, 484 U.S. 260 (1988). We
reject such a limited reading of Tinker, which has not been endorsed by
the Supreme Court. See Kuhlmeier, 484 U.S. at 273 n.5.
9

20

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

whether [students] were dating” are “inappropriate and
unsettling questions for students just out of elementary
school” and thus interfere with the students’ right to be let
alone); see also L.M., 103 F.4th at 881 (concluding that,
“while oral argument indicated the Shirt’s message is not at
the farthest end of demeaning, neither is it, on its face, only
tepidly negative” in part because the shirt was worn in “a
middle-school setting” around “kids as young as ten”)
(citation modified); Morgan, 659 F.3d at 387 (concluding
that an analysis of whether student speech infringes on the
right to be let alone may “look different in the elementaryschool context” given that elementary students are “more
susceptible to coercion and peer pressure” than older
students) (Benavides, J., separate opinion).
In sum, we reaffirm that although a school’s decision is
entitled to deference, the school has the burden of showing
that its actions were reasonably designed to protect the safety
and well-being of its students. See LaVine, 257 F.3d at 989
(stating that “school officials must justify their decision by
showing facts which might reasonably have led school
authorities to forecast substantial disruption of or material
interference with school activities”) (cleaned up). Age is
relevant as younger students are more vulnerable than
students who are approaching adulthood. But, as all
students, including elementary school students, have First
Amendment rights, the school has the burden, under the
Tinker balancing test, of showing that its actions were
reasonably undertaken to protect the safety and well-being
of its students. See Karp, 477 F.2d at 176 (stating that, “for
discipline resulting from the use of pure speech to pass
muster under the First Amendment, the school officials have
the burden to show justification for their action”).

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

21

C. Applying the Tinker balancing test, Becerra is
not entitled to summary judgment.
We now turn to this case. Has Becerra shown that the
restrictions on B.B’s First Amendment rights were
reasonably necessary to protect the safety and well-bring of
the students?
Becerra presents some evidence suggesting that the
school could reasonably believe the drawing invaded M.C.’s
right to “be secure and let alone” at school. See Harper, 445
F.3d at 1178. M.C.’s mother emailed Becerra that she would
“not tolerate any more messages given to [M.C.] at school
because of her skin color.” She also testified that M.C. “was
the only black child” to get such a message and that she
“does not go to school to be judged because she’s a black
girl.” M.C.’s mother further stated that, although she knew
that B.B. did not intend to hurt M.C. by including the phrase
“any life” in the drawing, “those kind[s] of things hurt.”
Additionally, her statement that she “did not want this to
become a larger issue” could be interpreted as threatening
additional action if Becerra did not act. Accordingly,
Becerra may have believed that B.B.’s drawing interfered
with M.C.’s right to be “let alone” because it targeted her
based on her race, a core identifying characteristic. See id.
At a minimum, M.C.’s mother’s email required Becerra to
investigate the situation to determine whether some action
was necessary to protect M.C.’s right to be “let alone.” See
LaVine, 257 F.3d at 989 (“Tinker does not require school
officials to wait until disruption actually occurs before they
may act.”); see also Karp, 477 F.2d at 175 (“Tinker does not
demand a certainty that disruption will occur, but rather the
existence of facts which might reasonably lead school
officials to forecast substantial disruption.”).

22

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

But there is also evidence that M.C. was unaffected by
the drawing and thus did not experience the kind of
expressive attack on the basis of a core identifying
characteristic required for a restriction on speech under
Tinker. M.C.’s mother testified that M.C. did not understand
the drawing, and she told M.C. not to worry about it. Nor is
there evidence connecting the phrase “any life”—used by
B.B. in the drawing—to the somewhat controversial phrase
“All Lives Matter” or to show that M.C. made that
connection. 10 B.B. argues that Becerra could not reasonably
think that the drawing communicated a denigrating message
that required a reprimand.
The parties also dispute whether B.B. was punished for
the drawing. For instance, Becerra denies telling B.B. that
the drawing was “inappropriate” or “racist” and denies that
B.B. was prohibited from playing at recess in the weeks
following the incident. 11 He does not, however, deny that he
spoke to B.B. We assume the facts in B.B.’s favor for the
purposes of summary judgment. See LaVine, 257 F.3d at
987. But if a factfinder later determines that B.B. was not
actually punished for her drawing, her First Amendment
The district court cited a news article that commented that “the phrase
‘All Lives Matter’ gained popularity in response to the growth of the
Black Lives Matter movement (“BLM”), a social movement protesting
violence against Black individuals and communities, with a focus on
police brutality.” The article noted that the phrase is seen by some as an
offensive response to BLM because it obscures “the fact that [B]lack
people have not yet been included in the idea of ‘all lives.’”

10

11
It appears that B.B.’s suspension from recess was not documented.
B.B., however, testified that although Becerra did not tell her she had to
miss recess, after Becerra talked to her, her teachers told her she wasn’t
allowed to have recess. Denying a student recess may constitute
punishment. See Cal. Code Regs. tit. 5, §§ 304, 352.

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

23

claim will fail. See Walker-Serrano ex rel. Walker v.
Leonard, 325 F.3d 412, 419 (3d Cir. 2003) (“Absent
punishment for expression, a significant pattern of concrete
suppression, or some other form of clear suppression of the
expression of elementary school students, a federal First
Amendment action is not an appropriate forum for resolution
of disputes over schools’ control of third graders’ conduct.”).
Thus, there is conflicting evidence about whether Becerra
could reasonably conclude that the drawing interfered with
M.C.’s rights and whether the actions taken were reasonably
necessary. Applying the Tinker balancing test, B.B. has
raised genuine disputes of material fact, and Becerra is not
entitled to summary judgment.
The district court emphasized that B.B. and M.C. were
in first grade at the time of the incident. But while age is a
relevant factor under Tinker, it does not negate the existence
of a genuine dispute of material fact. The students’ very
young ages gave the school broader discretion, but it does
not relieve the school and Becerra from meeting their burden
of showing that their actions were reasonably undertaken to
protect the safety and well-being of the school’s students.
Tinker remains a “demanding standard,” and schools must
prove that they meet it. Mahanoy, 594 U.S. at 193. The
district court erred to the extent that it relied on the students’
ages as the dispositive factor because genuine issues of
material fact exist as to the reasons for restricting B.B.’s First
Amendment rights and the extent of the restrictions. We
vacate the district court’s grant of summary judgment on
B.B.’s First Amendment claim against Becerra.

24

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

D. Summary judgment on B.B.’s retaliation claim is
vacated.
We also vacate the grant of summary judgment for
Becerra on B.B.’s First Amendment retaliation claim
because the district court’s grant of summary judgment on
that claim was based on its determination that the drawing
was not protected by the First Amendment. To establish a
retaliation claim in the student speech context, a plaintiff
must allege “that (1) [she] was engaged in constitutionally
protected activity; (2) the defendant’s actions would chill a
person of ordinary firmness from continuing to engage in the
protected activity; and (3) the protected activity was a
substantial motivating factor in the defendant’s conduct.”
Ariz. Students’ Ass’n v. Ariz. Bd. of Regents, 824 F.3d 858,
867 (9th Cir. 2016) (citation modified). As there may be
material issues of fact relevant to these criteria, we decline
to reach the merits of B.B.’s retaliation claim. 12
CONCLUSION
Although schools have comprehensive authority to
“prescribe and control conduct” in schools, see Tinker, 393
U.S. at 507, when their actions infringe on a student’s First
Amendment rights to expression, even for an elementary
school student, the school has the burden of showing that its
actions were reasonably undertaken to protect the safety and
well-being of its students. Because the district court failed
to properly apply the Tinker balancing standard, the grant of

12
The parties raise other dispositive issues, such as Becerra’s assertion
of qualified immunity. We decline to reach those issues in the first
instance. See Singleton v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 120 (1976) (“It is the
general rule, of course, that a federal appellate court does not consider
an issue not passed upon below.”).

B.B. V. CAPISTRANO UNIFIED SCHOOL DISTRICT

25

summary judgment is vacated, and the case is remanded to
the district court. 13

The motions for leave to file amici briefs by (1) the California Policy
Center and Californians for Equal Rights Foundation, (2) the Center for
American Liberty, (3) the Douglas Leadership Institute, (4) the Liberty
Justice Center, (5) the Manhattan Institute, Institute for Free Speech,
Young America’s Foundation, Center for the Rights of Abused Children,
and Americans for Prosperity Foundation, (6) the Parents Defending
Education, and (7) the Southeastern Legal Foundation are granted.
13

