FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JACOB HOWARD, for himself and on
behalf of all others similarly situated,
Plaintiff-Appellant,
v.
REPUBLICAN NATIONAL
COMMITTEE, a Political Action
Committee,

No. 23-3826
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00993SPL

OPINION

Defendant-Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Arizona
Steven P. Logan, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted September 11, 2024
Phoenix, Arizona
Filed January 13, 2026
Before: Johnnie B. Rawlinson and Daniel P. Collins,
Circuit Judges, and Sidney A. Fitzwater, District Judge.*
*

The Honorable Sidney A. Fitzwater, United States District Judge for
the Northern District of Texas, sitting by designation.

2

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

Opinion by Judge Collins;
Dissent by Judge Rawlinson
SUMMARY**
Telephone Consumer Protection Act
Affirming the district court’s dismissal, for failure to
state a claim, of a putative class action, the panel held that
the Telephone Consumer Protection Act does not prohibit,
absent prior express consent, the sending of text messages
containing video files.
The TCPA generally makes it unlawful, absent the “prior
express consent of the called party,” (1) “to make any
call . . . using . . . an artificial or prerecorded voice . . . to any
telephone number assigned to a . . . cellular telephone
service; or (2) “to initiate any telephone call to any
residential telephone line using an artificial or prerecorded
voice to deliver a message.” See 47 U.S.C.
§§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii), 227(b)(1)(B). By its plain terms, the
statutory text in § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) and § 227(b)(1)(B) only
reaches the use of prerecorded voices in the manner in which
a call is begun. Although the text message at issue in this
case contained a video file, the recipient of the text message
had to affirmatively act, after receiving the message, to
choose to listen to the video. Because the resulting “call”
was made and initiated without the playing of a prerecorded
voice, it did not violate these provisions.
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

3

Dissenting, Judge Rawlinson disagreed with majority’s
conclusion that the text message sent in this case, which
included a video file, did not come within the protections of
the TCPA.

COUNSEL
Jon L. Phelps (argued), Phelps & Moore PLLC, Scottsdale,
Arizona; Shannon A. Lindner, Shannon Lindner Law PLLC,
Phoenix, Arizona; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Dallin B. Holt (argued), Drew C. Ensign, and Brennan A.R.
Bowen, Holtzman Vogel Baran Torchinsky & Josefiak
PLLC, Phoenix, Arizona; Jonathan Lienhard, Holtzman
Vogel Baran Torchinsky & Josefiak PLLC, Haymarket,
Virginia; for Defendant-Appellee.
Megan Iorio and Chris Frascella, Electronic Privacy
Information Center, Washington, D.C., for Amici Curiae
Electronic Privacy Information Center and the National
Consumer Law Center.

4

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

OPINION
COLLINS, Circuit Judge:
As relevant here, § 227 of the Communications Act of
1934, as added by the Telephone Consumer Protection Act
of 1991 (“TCPA”), generally makes it unlawful, absent the
“prior express consent of the called party,” (1) “to make any
call . . . using . . . an artificial or prerecorded voice . . . to any
telephone number assigned to a . . . cellular telephone
service,” 47 U.S.C. § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii); or (2) “to initiate any
telephone call to any residential telephone line using an
artificial or prerecorded voice to deliver a message,” id.
§ 227(b)(1)(B).1 As stated in the TCPA itself, these
provisions were aimed at eliminating the “nuisance” and
“invasion of privacy” associated with answering a call only
to hear a “prerecorded” voice rather than a live person. See
TCPA, Pub. L. No. 102-243, § 2(10), 47 U.S.C. § 227 note.
The question presented in this case is whether these
provisions should be construed to also prohibit, absent prior
express consent, the sending of text messages containing
video files, even when the recipient must affirmatively act,
after receiving the message, to choose to listen to the video.
Because such a reading of the TCPA would be inconsistent
with the statutory text, we affirm the district court’s
judgment dismissing the complaint in this case.

1

Although the TCPA was a 1991 statute that added § 227 to the
Communications Act, and although subsequent amendments to § 227 are
therefore amendments to the Communications Act and not to the
“TCPA” itself, see, e.g., Pub. L. No. 116-105, § 3(a), 133 Stat. 3274,
3274 (2019), it has become customary to refer to § 227, even in its
current form, as the “TCPA.” We will follow the same practice here.

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

5

I
A
Because the district court dismissed Howard’s lawsuit
under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6), we must
take as true the complaint’s well-pleaded factual allegations
and draw all reasonable inferences in favor of Howard. See
Shields v. Credit One Bank, N.A., 32 F.4th 1218, 1220 (9th
Cir. 2022). Under those standards, we assume the following
facts to be true for purposes of this appeal.
Howard is a resident of Arizona, and his personal cell
phone serves as his residential telephone line. On October
24, 2020, during the final weeks of the presidential election
campaign, the Republican National Committee (“RNC”)
“placed, or caused to be placed, an automated text message
to Howard’s cellular telephone number.” The text message,
which purported to relay a message from President Trump’s
daughter Ivanka, consisted of written text, together with an
accompanying video file. The written portion of the text
message, which consisted of a few sentences and a URL link,
was as follows:
Ivanka’s message...
We’re in the fight for the future of our
Country. It all depends on your VOTE. Find
your Early Voting location NOW:
earlyvote.us/gDasyFs_s
The text message’s accompanying video file “was
automatically downloaded to Howard’s phone.” The video
appeared above the written words of the text message as a
still-image thumbnail of Ivanka Trump, with a play button
overlaid on the image. See generally United States v. Arce,

6

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

49 F.4th 382, 388 n.4 (4th Cir. 2022) (“A thumbnail is a
reduced-size version of a frame in a video.”). As depicted in
the complaint, the text message and accompanying video file
appeared as follows on Howard’s phone:

Howard alleges that the video “contained an artificial or
prerecorded voice.”
Although the video downloaded automatically onto
Howard’s phone, Howard does not allege that the video
played automatically. On the contrary, Howard conceded at
oral argument that a recipient of this text message must tap
the play button or the still-image thumbnail to play the video.
Cf. United States v. Frommelt, 971 F.3d 823, 828 (8th Cir.
2020) (summarizing testimony that a video sent as a message
on Facebook was shown as a thumbnail with a play button
overlaid and started playing only after the play button was
clicked).

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

7

Howard considered the text message to be an invasion of
his privacy. The message was “unsolicited,” and at no point
had Howard “provide[d] [the RNC] with his express consent
to be contacted by telephone using an artificial or
prerecorded voice.” “It is unknown how [the RNC] obtained
[Howard’s] Number.” The complaint further alleged, on
information and belief, that the text message sent to Howard
was part of a broader campaign targeting Arizona residents.
B
Howard filed this putative class action, asserting two
statutory claims under § 227(b)(3)’s private right of action.
See 47 U.S.C. § 227(b)(3) (providing a private right of action
for violations of § 227(b)); see also Mims v. Arrow Fin.
Servs., LLC, 565 U.S. 368, 372 (2012) (holding that “federal
and state courts have concurrent jurisdiction over private
suits arising under the TCPA”). Specifically, Howard
alleged that the RNC’s unsolicited text message to him
violated both § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii)’s general prohibition on
“mak[ing] any call” to a cellular telephone number “using
. . . an artificial or prerecorded voice” and § 227(b)(1)(B)’s
general prohibition on “initiat[ing] any telephone call to any
residential telephone line using an artificial or prerecorded
voice.” 47 U.S.C. §§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii), 227(b)(1)(B). These
claims were asserted on behalf of a putative class generally
consisting of all persons in the United States who within the
last four years received, without prior consent, a text
message from the RNC with “an artificial or prerecorded
voice in a video.” For each cause of action, Howard sought,
pursuant to § 227(b)(3), “a permanent injunction against
future calls or text messages” and a minimum of $500.00 in
statutory damages for each violation.

8

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

The district court granted the RNC’s motion to dismiss
Howard’s complaint for failure to state a claim under Federal
Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6). The court held that,
because the recipient of the challenged text message “had to
actively press play . . . to watch” the accompanying video,
the RNC had not “ma[d]e a call” using a prerecorded voice
in violation of § 227(b)(1)(A). The court also stated, without
further analysis, that the same conclusion also applied to
Howard’s claim of a violation of § 227(b)(1)(B).
The court also held that Howard’s claim under
§ 227(b)(1)(B) failed for the alternative reason that the
challenged text message fell within a regulatory exemption
from § 227(b)(1)(B)’s coverage.
See 47 U.S.C.
§ 227(b)(2)(B) (authorizing the Federal Communications
Commission (“FCC”) to “exempt,” “by rule or order,”
certain categories of calls “from the requirements of
paragraph (1)(B) of this subsection”); see also id.
§ 227(b)(1)(B) (stating that the prohibitions of
§ 227(b)(1)(B) apply “unless,” inter alia, the call “is
exempted” by the FCC under § 227(b)(2)(B)). Specifically,
the district court held that Howard’s § 227(b)(1)(B) claim
was barred by a regulation generally exempting from that
provision calls “made by or on behalf of a tax-exempt
nonprofit organization [if] the caller makes no more than
three calls within any consecutive 30-day period to the
residential line and honors the called party’s request to opt
out of future calls.” 47 C.F.R. § 64.1200(a)(3)(iv).
The court dismissed Howard’s complaint with prejudice
and without leave to amend, concluding that the foregoing
deficiencies in Howard’s claims could not be cured by the
allegation of any additional facts.

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

9

Howard timely appealed. We have jurisdiction under 28
U.S.C. § 1291, and we review de novo the district court’s
dismissal under Rule 12(b)(6). See Zimmerman v. City of
Oakland, 255 F.3d 734, 737 (9th Cir. 2001).
II
A
In addressing whether the relevant prohibitions in § 227
apply to the challenged text message at issue here, we begin,
as in all questions of statutory construction, “with the text of
the statute.” See Bartenwerfer v. Buckley, 598 U.S. 69, 74
(2023).
Section 227(b)(1) provides, in relevant part:
It shall be unlawful for any person within
the United States, or any person outside the
United States if the recipient is within the
United States—
(A) to make any call (other than a call
made for emergency purposes or made
with the prior express consent of the
called party) using any automatic
telephone dialing system or an artificial
or prerecorded voice—
....
(iii) to any telephone number
assigned to a paging service, cellular
telephone service, specialized mobile
radio service, or other radio common
carrier service, or any service for

10

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

which the called party is charged for
the call . . . ; [or]
(B) to initiate any telephone call to
any residential telephone line using an
artificial or prerecorded voice to deliver a
message without the prior express
consent of the called party, unless the call
is initiated for emergency purposes . . . or
is exempted by rule or order by the
[Federal Communications] Commission
....
47 U.S.C. § 227(b)(1).
By their terms, the two relevant subsections—
§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) and § 227(b)(1)(B)—impose comparable
prohibitions on using “an artificial or prerecorded voice” to
make calls, respectively, to a “cellular telephone” number
and to a “residential telephone line.”2
Specifically,
§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) generally makes it unlawful (1) “to make
any call” (2) “to any telephone number assigned to a . . .
cellular telephone service” (3) “using . . . an artificial or
prerecorded voice,” and § 227(b)(1)(B) generally makes it
unlawful (1) “to initiate any telephone call” (2) “to any
residential telephone line” (3) “using an artificial or
prerecorded voice to deliver a message.” 47 U.S.C.
2

Section 227(b)(1)(A)(iii)’s text also separately prohibits “mak[ing] any
call . . . using any automatic telephone dialing system . . . to any
telephone number assigned to a . . . cellular telephone service.” 47
U.S.C. § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii); see, e.g., Facebook, Inc. v. Duguid, 592 U.S.
395, 402 (2021) (addressing claim that a particular system used by
Facebook to send text messages used an “automatic telephone dialing
system” that violated § 227(b)(1)(A)). That theory of liability, however,
is not at issue in this case.

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

11

§§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii), 227(b)(1)(B). The parties do not
dispute that, for purposes of these provisions, the challenged
text message was sent “to a[] telephone number assigned to
a . . . cellular telephone service” and that that cell phone
number also qualifies as a “residential telephone line.” Id.
The key question, then, is whether the sending of this text
message involved (1) “mak[ing] a[] call” or “initiat[ing] a[]
telephone call” to that phone number, (2) “using an artificial
or prerecorded voice.” Id.
B
Before addressing the meaning of the quoted statutory
language as a whole, we first summarize our prior caselaw
expounding on the meaning of two important constituent
terms, namely “call” and “voice.”
We have previously held that, under Chevron v. Natural
Resources Defense Council, Inc., 467 U.S. 837 (1984), it
was “reasonable” to defer to the FCC’s conclusion that the
term “call” in § 227 includes a “text message.” Satterfield
v. Simon & Schuster, Inc., 569 F.3d 946, 954 (9th Cir. 2009).
Although we thus framed our holding in Satterfield in terms
of the then-applicable deference required to be given to the
FCC’s construction, we think it is clear from Satterfield’s
substantive analysis that the conclusion would be the same
even in the absence of Chevron deference. See Loper Bright
Enters. v. Raimondo, 603 U.S. 369, 412 (2024) (“Chevron is
overruled.”). Satterfield emphasized two key points about
statutory construction that supported the FCC’s
understanding of a “call,” see Satterfield, 569 F.3d at 953–
54, and even under de novo review, those same two points
support the conclusion that a “text message” constitutes a
“call” within the meaning of the TCPA.

12

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

First, Satterfield held that, in accordance with its “plain
and ordinary meaning[]” in this context, the statutory term
“‘call’ . . . refer[s] to an attempt to communicate by
telephone.” Satterfield, 569 F.3d at 953 n.3; see also Call,
WEBSTER’S THIRD NEW INTERNATIONAL DICTIONARY 318
(1981 ed.) (hereinafter “WEBSTER’S THIRD”) (stating that a
“call” means a “communicat[ion] with or [an attempt] to get
in communication with a person by telephone”). Text
messaging plainly fits within that literal definition of a
“call,” because “text messaging is a form of communication
used primarily between telephones.” Satterfield, 569 F.3d at
954.
Second, Satterfield also noted, see id., that treating a text
message as a “call” was consistent with the statute’s declared
purpose “to protect” “privacy rights,” 47 U.S.C.
§ 227(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I); id. § 227(b)(2)(C) (same). See also
Los Angeles Lakers, Inc. v. Federal Ins. Co., 869 F.3d 795,
803 (9th Cir. 2017) (holding that, in light of the declared
purpose stated in § 227(b)(2)(B)(ii)(I) and § 227(b)(2)(C),
“the purpose of the TCPA is to protect privacy rights and
privacy rights alone”). At issue in Satterfield were written
text messages allegedly sent using an automatic telephone
dialing system (as opposed to a “prerecorded voice”) in
violation of § 227(b)(1)(A). See Satterfield, 569 F.3d at
949–50; see also supra note 2 (referencing that distinct
prohibition against using automatic telephone dialing
systems). Given how text messaging typically works as used
on individuals’ phones, an arriving auto-dialed text message
(unlike, for example, an arriving email) usually results in an
immediate intrusion in the form of a display of a preview of
the text on the phone’s screen (even if locked), a sound, a

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

13

vibration, or some combination of those.3 Consequently, the
sort of auto-dialed text messages at issue in Satterfield will
typically produce the particular type of intrusion on privacy
at which the statute is aimed, which is an intrusion upon
“seclusion.” Los Angeles Lakers, 869 F.3d at 806; see also
Yahoo! Inc. v. National Union Fire Ins. Co. of Pittsburgh,
913 F.3d 923, 925 (9th Cir. 2019) (noting that “[c]ourts have
consistently held the TCPA protects a species of privacy
interest in the sense of seclusion,” “such as where the
insured’s unsolicited advertising message disturbs the
recipient’s privacy” (citation omitted)). In other words, an
auto-dialed text message to a phone number thus frequently
entails an immediate intrusion on privacy comparable to that
associated with the ring of an incoming auto-dialed phone
call. That critical fact confirms that a text message is
properly deemed to be a “call” within the meaning of the
TCPA. See ANTONIN SCALIA AND BRYAN A. GARNER,
READING LAW: THE INTERPRETATION OF LEGAL TEXTS 57
(2012) (noting that the “purpose” disclosed by the statutory
text “sheds light only on deciding which of various textually
permissible meanings should be adopted”).
We later addressed the meaning of the TCPA’s use of the
term “voice” in Trim v. Reward Zone USA LLC, 76 F.4th
1157 (9th Cir. 2023). In Trim, the plaintiff contended that
unwanted text messages that she received on her cell phone
and that consisted of words and an accompanying link to a
website “constituted ‘prerecorded voice messages’” and
3

The mere fact that a phone can be set to shut off notifications for text
messages does not mean that text messages do not, as a class, fall within
the ordinary understanding of a potentially privacy-intruding “call.” A
classic telephone call, which typically results in ringing of the phone,
remains a “call” even if the particular user has his or her ringer turned
off.

14

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

were therefore prohibited by § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii). Id. at 1159.
In making this assertion, the plaintiff argued that the term
“voice” broadly included any “instrument or medium of
expression,” including ones that did not use sound. Id. We
disagreed, holding that, for two reasons, “Congress clearly
intended ‘voice’ in 47 U.S.C. § 227(b)(1)(A) to encompass
only audible sounds.” Id. at 1161.
First, we noted that contemporary dictionaries confirmed
that “[t]he ordinary meaning of ‘voice’ when the TCPA was
enacted was a ‘[s]ound formed in or emitted from the human
larynx in speaking.’” Trim, 76 F.4th at 1162 (quoting Voice,
OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY (2d ed. 1989)) (additional
citations omitted). Although “voice” also could have a
broader meaning that includes more symbolic or poetic uses
(as in, for example, phrases such as “the party [that] became
the voice of the workers”), we noted that the fact “that a
definition is broad enough to encompass one sense of a word
does not establish that the word is ordinarily understood in
that sense.” Id. (simplified). Because there was no
indication that Congress intended to adopt any such
“idiosyncratic definition,” we concluded that “Congress
intended to legislate the primary meaning of voice, which
requires an audible component.” Id. (citation omitted).
Second, we held that the “context of the statute”
confirmed that the plaintiff was wrong in arguing, in effect,
that every text message involved the use of a “voice.” Trim,
76 F.4th at 1162. We pointed to another subsection of § 227
that regulated use of “caller identification information” and
that expressly defined that phrase to include identifying
information concerning both “a call made using a voice
service or a text message sent using a text message service.”
Id. (quoting 47 U.S.C. § 227(e)(8)(A)). Under the plaintiff’s
overbroad reading of “voice,” we concluded, all text

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

15

messages would already be covered by the phrase “call made
using a voice service,” thereby rendering the additional
language concerning “text messages” as surplusage. Id. We
also rejected the plaintiff’s converse surplusage argument
that, under a narrower reading of “voice,” a text message
could never be said to use a “prerecorded voice.” Id. at
1162–63. That was wrong, we held, because “a ‘text’ call
could come via MMS (Multimedia Messaging Service),
which could include audio sound with an artificial or
prerecorded voice.” Id. at 1163 n.4; see generally United
States v. Palms, 21 F.4th 689, 695 n.5 (10th Cir. 2021)
(explaining that “MMS is an acronym for multimedia
message service and refers to text messages combined with
pictures, video, or sound files,” in contrast to SMS, which
“stands for short messaging service . . . and is a system that
allows cell phones to send and receive short text
m[e]ssages”).
C
Against this backdrop, we conclude that Howard’s
complaint failed to state a claim under either
§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) or § 227(b)(1)(B). Although the RNC’s
text message was a “call” and contained a video file with an
artificial or prerecorded “voice” within the meaning of those
subsections, Howard has not alleged that the RNC “ma[d]e”
or “initiate[d]” that “call” “using” the artificial or
prerecorded voice, as required to state a claim under the
subsections. 47 U.S.C. §§ 227(b)(1)(A), 227(b)(1)(B)
(emphasis added).
As relevant here, § 227(b)(1)(A) makes it unlawful “to
make any call . . . using . . . an artificial or prerecorded
voice,” and § 227(b)(1)(B) makes it unlawful “to initiate any
telephone call . . . using an artificial or prerecorded voice to

16

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

deliver a message.” 47 U.S.C. §§ 227(b)(1)(A), 227(b)(1)
(B) (emphasis added). Construed in accordance with their
ordinary meaning, the words “make” or “initiate,” when
used with reference to a “call,” refer to the manner in which
a call to a telephone is begun. See Make, WEBSTER’S THIRD,
supra, at 1363 (defining “make” to mean “to cause to exist,
occur, or appear : bring to pass : create, cause”); Initiate,
WEBSTER’S THIRD, supra, at 1164 (defining “initiate” as “to
begin or set going : make a beginning of : perform or
facilitate the first actions, steps, or stages of”). Because the
identical phrase “using an artificial or prerecorded voice” in
each subsection respectively modifies the verbs “make” and
“initiate,” those provisions only limit the use of artificial or
prerecorded voices to begin a call.4
The line drawn by this plain-language reading also
coheres with the declared purpose of the statute, which is to
prevent the intrusion upon seclusion associated with
answering a “call” only to be subjected to the nuisance of
hearing an artificial or prerecorded voice rather than the
voice of a live person.5 A call that is begun with an artificial
4

Because this construction follows from the TCPA’s plain language, the
dissent is quite wrong in claiming that we have somehow added to the
statutory text. See Dissent at 25–29. Rather, it is the dissent that has
disregarded the TCPA’s text by ignoring the import of the critical
statutory language stating that the “us[e]” of the prerecorded voice must
be tied to the “mak[ing]” or “initiat[ing]” of the call.
5

As explained in the formal findings contained in the text of the TCPA,
the “[e]vidence compiled by the Congress indicates that residential
telephone subscribers consider automated or prerecorded telephone
calls, regardless of the content or the initiator of the message, to be a
nuisance and an invasion of privacy.” TCPA, Pub. L. No. 102-243,
§ 2(10), 47 U.S.C. § 227 note. Congress therefore “[b]ann[ed] such
automated or prerecorded telephone calls to the home, except when the

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

17

or prerecorded voice directly implicates that privacy interest,
because the person called, upon being reached, is
immediately and involuntarily subjected to the nuisance of
listening to an artificial or prerecorded voice. Likewise, a
voicemail message that consists of a prerecorded robocall,
rather than a recording of a live speaker contemporaneously
leaving a message, intrudes on the recipient’s privacy as
soon as he or she plays back the message and is subjected to
listening to an entirely prerecorded voicemail message. See
Loyhayem v. Fraser Fin. & Ins. Servs., Inc., 7 F.4th 1232,
1233–34 (9th Cir. 2021).6 By contrast, if the caller is a live
receiving party consents to receiving the call or when such calls are
necessary in an emergency situation affecting the health and safety of the
consumer.” Id. § 2(12). Congress likewise found that “[b]usinesses,”
and not merely residential subscribers, also had complained “that
automated or prerecorded telephone calls are a nuisance,” id. § 2(14),
and the prohibition contained in § 227(b)(1)(A) therefore extended
beyond the residential telephone lines covered by § 227(b)(1)(B).
6

Contrary to what the dissent wrongly contends, see Dissent at 30 n.5,
Loyhayem had no occasion to address the question presented here, which
is whether § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) applies to the sending of a text message
that includes a video file that is playable only if the recipient
affirmatively elects to view it. In Loyhayem, the district court had held
that, when construed in light of its implementing regulations, the
TCPA’s prohibition on using automatic dialing systems or prerecorded
voices to make calls to cell phones does not apply unless the content of
the message involves an “advertisement” or “telemarketing.” 7 F.4th at
1234. We rejected this interpretation of the TCPA as lacking any basis
in the statutory text, which applies to calls made in the prohibited manner
“regardless of content.” Id. The question here, by contrast, is not
whether the call involved any particular type of subject matter; rather, it
is whether the challenged call was “ma[d]e” in the manner that the TCPA
prohibits in the first place. 47 U.S.C. § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii). And the
dissent’s further insinuation that the Supreme Court supposedly
addressed this question in Facebook is demonstrably incorrect:

18

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

person, and, after the call is begun with the recipient, the
caller then asks the recipient if he or she is willing to listen
to a prerecorded message or is willing to complete an
automated survey, there is no sense in which that “use” of
an automated or prerecorded voice implicates the same
privacy interest. In the language of the statute, such a call
was not “ma[d]e” or “initiate[d]” by use of an automated or
prerecorded voice, and such a call neither falls within the
statute’s text nor implicates its declared purpose.
The dissent’s broader reading of § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) and
§ 227(b)(1)(B) would lead to anomalous, if not absurd,
results. For example, if these provisions were construed (as
the dissent would have it) to reach any use of an automated
or prerecorded voice during a call (as opposing to use in
making or initiating the call), that would potentially prohibit
the common practice of on-hold messaging, in which
prerecorded informational messages are played for
individuals while they are on hold. See generally Info-Hold,
Inc. v. Sound Merch., Inc., 538 F.3d 448, 451 (6th Cir. 2008)
(describing on-hold messaging).
But a business
representative who makes or initiates a live call and then
later, to assist the call recipient, places the recipient on hold,
thereby resulting in prerecorded messages being heard,
plainly does not violate § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) or
§ 227(b)(1)(B). In such a case, the representative has not
“ma[d]e” or “initiate[d]” a call “using” a prerecorded voice.
47 U.S.C. §§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii), (b)(1)(B). Moreover, the
Facebook involved § 227(b)(1)(A)’s distinct prohibition on using
automatic telephone dialing systems, and the Court’s passing
observation that the TCPA also prohibits “‘artificial or prerecorded
voice’ calls,” see Facebook, 592 U.S. at 408 n.8, says nothing about
whether the inclusion of an unplayed video file in a text message counts
as “using” a prerecorded voice to “make” or “initiate” a call.

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

19

dissent’s flawed reading of the provisions as prohibiting any
“use” of prerecorded voices during a call would prohibit
playing recorded music while on hold, but only if the music
has vocals. The notion that Congress sought to draw any
such line in these provisions is absurd.7
Because § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) and § 227(b)(1)(B) thus
regulate only the manner in which a call is made or initiated,
Howard has failed to state a claim under either provision.
The call at issue here—the text message and accompanying
video file—included an artificial or prerecorded voice. See
Trim, 76 F.4th at 1163 n.4 (recognizing that a text message
“could include audio sound with an artificial or prerecorded
voice” (emphasis added)). But like a telephone call in which
a live caller offers to play an artificial or prerecorded voice
to the recipient, the RNC’s text message was made or
initiated by its textual content and its silent inclusion of a
ready-to-play video file. As Howard conceded at argument,
he would only hear the prerecorded voice in the video file if
he chose to tap the thumbnail and play the file. The text
message therefore communicated to Howard a textual
statement and the option to play what the thumbnail
disclosed was a video recording made by Ivanka Trump.
Because Howard’s voluntary engagement with the video file
was a necessary intervening action between the RNC’s
initial contact and the playing of the video’s artificial or
7

Indeed, the dissent’s atextual reading of the TCPA would make it
presumptively unlawful to ever put video files in text messages absent
“prior express consent of the called party.” 47 U.S.C. §§ 227(b)(1)(A),
227(b)(1)(B). Depending upon how broadly or narrowly the “prior
express consent” exception is read, see Van Patten v. Vertical Fitness
Grp., LLC, 847 F.3d 1037, 1043–46 (9th Cir. 2017) (discussing the scope
of “consent” under the TCPA and its implementing regulations), such a
sweeping reading of the provisions could potentially raise serious First
Amendment issues.

20

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

prerecorded voice, any subsequent playing and hearing of
the prerecorded voice in the video file is not included within
the means by which the RNC made or initiated the “call.”
Under these circumstances, the “call” at issue in the RNC’s
text message was not “ma[d]e” or “initiat[ed]” using an
artificial or prerecorded voice, and it therefore did not violate
§ 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) or § 227(b)(1)(B).8
III
For the foregoing reasons, we conclude that the relevant
language in § 227(b)(1)(A)(iii) and § 227(b)(1)(B) only
reaches the use of prerecorded voices in the manner in which
a call is begun. Because the text message at issue here was
made and initiated without the playing of a prerecorded
voice, it did not violate these provisions. We therefore
affirm the district court’s order dismissing the complaint for
failure to state a claim on which relief can be granted.
AFFIRMED.

8

We recognize that an individual’s phone settings could conceivably be
changed so that, upon viewing a text message containing certain video
files, the file would automatically begin to play. That would not change
the ultimate result here. There are no allegations in the complaint that
use of such an auto-viewing setting is sufficiently widespread that it
would be expected by a sender (and thus arguably understood to be part
of the typical process for “initiating” or “making” the call). Moreover,
anyone who sets his or her phone so that it plays all incoming video files
automatically has plainly given “prior express consent” to listening to
the prerecorded voices on any such video files that may be received. 47
U.S.C. §§ 227(b)(1)(A), 227(b)(1)(B).

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

21

Rawlinson, Circuit Judge, dissenting:
I respectfully dissent from my colleagues’ conclusion
that the text message sent in this case, which included a
video file, did not come within the protections of the
Telephone Consumer Protection Act of 1991 (TCPA).
As the majority acknowledges, the video file in this case
was not sent separately to Howard’s telephone. Rather, it
was “automatically downloaded onto Howard’s phone” as a
visual image that accompanied the text message. Majority
Opinion, p. 6. So the video file was sent contemporaneously
with the text message. But, the majority inexplicably parses
the language of the statute to conclude that the call made to
Howard by way of a text message1 did not fall within the
provisions of Section 227 of the TCPA.
Section 227(b)(1) of the TCPA provides in pertinent
part:2
It shall be unlawful for any person . . .
(A) to make any call (other than a call
made for emergency purposes or made with
the prior express consent of the called party)
using any automatic telephone dialing system
or an artificial or prerecorded voice . . .
(B) to initiate any telephone call to any
residential telephone line using an artificial
or prerecorded voice to deliver a message
1

The majority acknowledges, as it must, that the term “call” includes “a
text message” under the TCPA. Majority Opinion, p. 12. See also
Satterfield v. Simon & Schuster, Inc., 569 F.3d 946, 954 (9th Cir. 2009).
2

The plaintiff sought relief under this section of the TCPA.

22

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

without the prior express consent of the
called party, unless the call is initiated for
emergency purposes.
(Emphasis added).
We have repeatedly noted that the TCPA was enacted “to
protect the privacy interests of residential telephone
subscribers by placing restrictions on unsolicited, automated
telephone calls.” Trim v. Reward Zone USA LLC, 76 F.4th
1157, 1160 (9th Cir. 2023) (quoting S. Rep. No. 102-178 at
1 (1991)) (internal quotation marks omitted) (emphasis
added). Similarly, in Satterfield, we emphasized:
The TCPA was enacted in response to an
increasing number of consumer complaints
arising from the increased number of
telemarketing calls.
The consumers
complained that such calls are a “nuisance
and an invasion of privacy.” The purpose and
history of the TCPA indicate that Congress
was trying to prohibit the use of [Automatic
Telephone Dialing Systems (ATDSs)] to
communicate with others by telephone in a
manner that would be an invasion of privacy.
The language and purpose of the TCPA
support the conclusion that the use of an
ATDS to make any call, regardless of
whether that call is communicated by voice
or text, is prohibited. . . .
569 F.3d at 954 (citing and quoting S. Rep. No. 102-178 at
*2 (1991)) (emphases added); see also Loyhayem v. Fraser
Fin. and Ins. Servs., Inc., 7 F.4th 1232, 1234 (9th Cir. 2021)

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

23

(holding that the TCPA “prohibits in plain terms ‘any call,’
regardless of content, that is made to a cell phone using an
automatic telephone dialing system or an artificial or prerecorded voice”) (citation omitted) (emphasis added);
Facebook, Inc. v. Duguid, 592 U.S. 395, 408 n.8 (2021)
(observing that the TCPA prohibits “artificial or prerecorded
voice calls, irrespective of the type of technology used”)
(citation omitted) (emphasis added).
The district court dismissed Howard’s action for failure
“to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.”
Ashcroft v. Iqbal, 556 U.S. 662, 678 (2009) (citation
omitted). However, in his complaint, Howard alleged that
“Defendant placed, or caused to be placed, an automated text
message to Howard’s cellular telephone number” and that
“the text message included a video file that was
automatically downloaded to Howard’s phone and contained
an artificial or prerecorded voice.” These allegations set
forth the elements of the statute. Defendant made a call by
way of a text message. See Satterfield, 569 F.3d at 954
(holding that the term “call” includes a “text message” for
purposes of the TCPA). In addition, Howard alleged that the
call was made using an “artificial or prerecorded voice.”
These allegations stated a plausible claim under Section
227(b)(1)(A). See Loyhayem, 7 F.4th at 1234 (recognizing
that the plaintiff stated a valid claim by alleging that the call
“was made using . . . an artificial or pre-recorded voice.”).
Under our analysis in Loyhayem, Howard also plausibly
stated a violation of Section 227(b)(1)(B) by alleging that
Defendant “placed, or caused to be placed, an automated text
message to [Howard’s] cellular telephone number,” which
also served as his “residential telephone.”

24

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

To state a plausible claim under Rule 8 of the Federal
Rules of Civil Procedure, a plaintiff need only file a
complaint that “contain[s] sufficient factual matter, accepted
as true, to state a claim to relief that is plausible on its face.”
Ashcroft, 556 U.S. at 678 (citation and internal quotation
marks omitted). A claim is “plausible on its face . . . when
the plaintiff pleads factual content that allows the court to
draw the reasonable inference that the defendant is liable for
the misconduct alleged.” Id. (citation omitted).
As previously stated, Howard alleged that “Defendant
placed, or caused to be placed, an automated text message to
[Howard’s] cellular telephone number,” and that “the text
message contained an artificial or prerecorded voice.” From
the allegations, a reasonable inference may be drawn that the
defendant is liable for violating Section 227(b)(1)(A), which
proscribes making an unconsented to call using “an artificial
or prerecorded voice.” Since it is undisputed that a text
message constitutes a call for purposes of the statute, see
Satterfield, 569 F.3d at 954, the only element of the statute
at issue is the use of “an artificial or prerecorded voice.” 47
U.S.C. § 227(b)(1)(A).3
The majority takes the position that Howard failed to
state a plausible claim because he failed to allege that the
“video file that was automatically downloaded” to his
cellular telephone was “made or initiated” by the defendant
“using the artificial or prerecorded voice.” Majority
Opinion, p. 15 (alteration and internal quotation marks

3

The majority takes no issue with Howard’s allegation that his cellular
telephone is also his residential telephone for purposes of § 227(b)(1)(B).

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

25

omitted).4 The majority reasons that the prohibitions of
Section 227 apply only when artificial or prerecorded voices
are used “to begin a call.” Id. p. 16 (emphasis in the
original). But the majority’s interpretation falters for two
independent reasons. The first is that it violates a cardinal
commandment of statutory construction: thou shall not add
words to a statute in the process of rendering an
interpretation. See Jones v. Bock, 549 U.S. 199, 216-17
(2007). In Jones, the United States Supreme Court
addressed the issue of exhaustion under the Prison Litigation
Reform Act (PLRA), which requires administrative
exhaustion of prisoner claims before filing a court action.
See id. at 211. The Supreme Court acknowledged that
“exhaustion is mandatory under the PLRA and that
unexhausted claims cannot be brought in court.” Id. (citation
omitted). Nevertheless, the Supreme Court rejected a
reading of the PLRA that would place the burden on the
prisoner “to plead and demonstrate exhaustion in the
complaint.” Id. at 211-12 (citation omitted). In rejecting this
reading of the statute, the Supreme Court reasoned:
We conclude that failure to exhaust is an
affirmative defense under the PLRA, and that
inmates are not required to specially plead or
demonstrate exhaustion in their complaints.
We understand the reasons behind the
decisions of some lower courts to impose a
4

The majority accuses me of ignoring “the import of the critical terms
‘make’ and ‘intake.’” Majority Opinion, p. 16 n.4. However this
accusation embodies some sophistry. If one looks closely at this
argument, it becomes obvious that the majority has switched the focus
of the “make” and “initiate” language from the “call” as stated in the
statute, to the video file, which is actually part of the “call” in the text
message. Satterfield, 569 F.3d at 954.

26

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

pleading requirement on plaintiffs in this
context, but that effort cannot be fairly
viewed as an interpretation of the PLRA.
Whatever temptations the statesmanship of
policy-making might wisely suggest, the
judge’s job is to construe the statute – not to
make it better. The judge must not read in by
way of creation, but instead abide by the duty
of restraint, the humility of function as merely
the translator of another’s command.
Id. at 216 (citation, alteration, and internal quotation marks
omitted) (emphasis added).
In reaching its conclusion, the Supreme Court quoted
and relied upon its seminal and time-tested decision in the
case of United States v. Goldenberg, 168 U.S. 95 (1897). In
that case, the Supreme Court cautioned against “judicial
addition to the language of the statute.” Id. at 103. The
Supreme Court in Goldenberg emphasized that:
The primary and general rule of statutory
construction is that the intent of the lawmaker
is to be found in the language that he has
used. . . . The courts have no function of
legislation, and simply seek to ascertain the
will of the legislator. . . . No mere omission,
no mere failure to provide for contingencies,
which it may be wise to have specifically
provided for, justify any judicial addition to
the language of the statute. . . .
Id. at 102-03 (emphases added).

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

27

In accordance with its holding in Goldenberg, the
Supreme Court ruled in Jones that “[g]iven that the PLRA
does not itself require plaintiffs to plead exhaustion, such a
result must be obtained by the process of amending the
Federal Rules, and not by judicial interpretation.” Jones,
549 U.S. at 217 (citation and internal quotation marks
omitted) (emphasis added).
Similarly, in Planes v. Holder, 652 F.3d 991 (9th Cir.
2011), we relied upon Goldenberg to foreclose the adding of
elements to a statute under the guise of interpretation. In
Planes, we declined to “deviate from the plain language of
the statute” defining the term “conviction” by “hold[ing] that
an alien does not stand ‘convicted’ for immigration purposes
until any direct appeals as of right have been waived or
exhausted.” Id. at 995. Citing Jones and quoting from
Goldenberg, we reiterated that “[r]egardless of our view on
the wisdom or efficacy of Congress’s policy choices, we are
not free to read in additional elements where the legislature
has declined to include them.” Id. at 996 (citation omitted).
Yet, that is precisely what the majority has done. The
majority interprets the TCPA as “only limit[ing] the use of
artificial or prerecorded voices to begin a call.” Majority
Opinion, p. 16 (emphasis in the original). Essentially, the
majority changes the wording of the statute from making it
“unlawful [under § 227 (b)(1)(A)] for any person . . . to
make any call using an . . . artificial or prerecorded voice” to
making it “unlawful for any person . . . to begin any call
using an . . . artificial or prerecorded voice.” Similarly, the
majority’s reading would change the statute making it
“unlawful [under § 227(b)(1)(B)] to initiate any telephone
call to any residential telephone using an artificial
prerecorded voice” to making it “unlawful to initiate any

28

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

telephone call to any residential telephone line beginning
with an artificial or prerecorded voice.”
This change to the wording of the statute strays from the
clear direction provided in Jones. As with the PLRA statute
in Jones that did not “itself require” the pleading of
exhaustion, neither does the TCPA “itself require” that the
call begin with the use of an artificial or prerecorded voice.
549 U.S. at 217. The majority’s addition of this language to
the statute cannot be reconciled with the Supreme Court’s
decision in Jones and Goldenberg or our decision in Planes.
The majority couches its addition to the statute as
“coher[ing] with the declared purpose of the statute.”
Majority Opinion, p. 16. But in Goldenberg, the Supreme
Court instructed that “the intent of the lawmaker is to be
found in the language that he has used,” not in adding
additional language to the statute. 168 U.S. at 102-03.
Indeed, any omission in the statute cannot “justify any
judicial addition to the language of the statute.” Id. at 103.
And in Van Patten v. Vertical Fitness Group, 847 F.3d 1037,
1047 (9th Cir. 2017), we emphasized that “[b]ecause the
TCPA is a remedial statute intended to protect consumers
from unwanted automated telephone calls and messages, it
should be construed in accordance with that purpose.”
(citation omitted). The majority’s interpretation does
exactly the opposite.
The Supreme Court acknowledged in Jones that it is
understandable why the majority is of the view that a better
reading of the statute would make unlawful only those calls
that “begin with the use of an artificial or prerecorded
voice.” But that is simply not how the statute reads. As in
Jones, the majority’s preferred reading of the statute “must
be obtained by the process of amending the [TCPA], and not

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

29

by judicial interpretation.” 549 U.S. at 217. It is not our role
to “make [the statute] better,” or “read in by way of
creation.” Id. at 216. Rather, we must “abide by [our] duty
of restraint [and] humility of function as merely the
translator[s] of [Congress’s] commands.” Id. (citations
omitted). The majority’s unrestrained rewriting of the
statute “cannot be fairly viewed as an interpretation of the
[TCPA].” Id.
I remain singularly unpersuaded by the majority’s
conviction that the scope of the TCPA should be
circumscribed. See Majority Opinion, p. 16, describing the
“line drawn” limiting the statute to “artificial or prerecorded
voices [that] begin a call.” Id. There is absolutely nothing
in our precedent that supports this limitation on the reach of
the TCPA. As discussed, the language of the statute
encompasses “any call,” not a limited set of calls.
Loyhayem, 7 F.4th at 1234. And we have consistently and
definitively cast the word “any” as conveying a broad scope.
See, e.g., Hertzberg v. Dignity Partners, 191 F.3d 1076,
1080 (9th Cir. 1999); United States v. Hernandez, 894 F.3d
1104, 1108 (9th Cir. 2018); Patel v. Garland, 596 U.S. 328,
329 (2022).
Secondly, and importantly, the majority’s interpretation
of the statute conflicts with our precedent. In Loyhayem, we
held that the plaintiff stated a plausible claim when he
alleged that the defendant “left a pre-recorded voicemail
message . . . using both an automated telephone dialing
system and an artificial or pre-recorded voice.” 7 F.4th at
1233-34. We explained that the statute “prohibits in plain
terms ‘any call,’ regardless of content . . . using . . . an
artificial or pre-recorded voice.” Id. at 1234 (emphases
added). Unlike the majority, we did not require that the call
“begin” with the artificial or prerecorded voice. Majority

30

HOWARD V. REPUBLICAN NAT’L COMM.

Opinion, pp. 16-17. Rather, the text message is the “call,”
Satterfield, 569 F.3d at 954, and the “content” is the video
file containing the “artificial or pre-recorded voice.”
Loyhayem, 7 F.4th at 1234.5
In sum, under the “plain terms” of the TCPA, Loyhayem,
7 F.4th at 1234, Howard stated a plausible claim. The
majority impermissibly adds language to the “plain terms”
of the TCPA in concluding otherwise. Id. I respectfully
dissent.

5

The majority seeks to avoid our holding in Loyhayem by maintaining
that in Loyhayem we did not address the issue before this panel. See
Majority Opinion, p. 17, n.6. I beg to differ. In Loyhayem, we expressly
ruled that the TCPA “prohibits in plain terms, any call, regardless of
content . . . using . . . an artificial or pre-recorded voice.” 7 F.4th at 1234
(emphasis added). This language plainly encompasses a text message
call where the “content” used an artificial or pre-recorded voice.” Id.
The Supreme Court agrees. See Facebook, 592 U.S. at 408 n.8
(describing the TCPA as prohibiting “artificial or prerecorded voice
calls, irrespective of the type of technology used”) (citation and internal
quotation marks omitted). The majority seeks to downplay the quoted
language from Facebook, see Majority Opinion, p. 17-18, n.6 (cont.), but
the fact remains that the Supreme Court quote is verbatim.

