FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
RODNEY GENE BEELER,
Petitioner-Appellant,
v.

No. 20-99014
D.C. No.
2:96-cv-00606GW

RONALD BROOMFIELD, Acting
Warden, California State Prison at San
Quentin,

OPINION

Respondent-Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
George H. Wu, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted December 11, 2024
Pasadena, California
Filed January 23, 2026
Before: Johnnie B. Rawlinson, Jacqueline H. Nguyen, and
Jennifer Sung, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Nguyen

2

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

SUMMARY *
Habeas Corpus / Death Penalty
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of Rodney
Gene Beeler’s habeas corpus petition challenging his
California conviction and death sentence for first-degree
murder.
Beeler raised three arguments concerning his
competency to stand trial: (1) the trial court procedurally
erred by not sua sponte holding a competency hearing; (2) he
was incompetent to stand trial; and (3) defense counsel was
ineffective in failing to raise his incompetency. Beeler also
argued that, because he established a prima facie case, the
California Supreme Court’s summary denial of relief
without issuing an order to show cause was
unreasonable. Applying the highly deferential review
required under the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death
Penalty Act of 1996 (AEDPA), the panel held that the
California Supreme Court could have reasonably concluded
the evidence does not sufficiently support Beeler’s
competency claims.
Beeler argued that his counsel provided ineffective
assistance by failing to investigate and present evidence
regarding his mental illness and organic brain damage at
both the guilt and penalty phases. The panel held that, under

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

3

AEDPA review, the district court correctly denied Beeler’s
ineffective assistance of counsel claims.
•

Beeler claimed that defense counsel
should have used penalty phase
mitigation and extra-record evidence of
his mental illness and brain damage at the
guilt phase to show that he did not form
the specific intent to kill. The panel held
that even assuming defense counsel
performed deficiently in its investigation
and presentation of evidence, Beeler was
not
prejudiced
by
counsel’s
decisions. And while Beeler was clearly
not prejudiced, the California Supreme
Court could also have determined that
trial counsel acted reasonably and
diligently during the guilt stage.

•

Beeler claimed that the neurological
evidence not presented at the penalty
phase would have constituted additional
mitigation, and there is a reasonable
probability that one juror would have
made a different decision based on that
evidence. The panel held that the
California Supreme Court could have
reasonably determined that defense
counsel’s performance was not deficient,
as counsel diligently sought neurological
testing both before trial and after Beeler
volunteered new information. Beeler
failed to establish a prima facie case as to
the ineffective assistance of counsel at the

4

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

penalty phase, and the California
Supreme Court’s summary denial of this
claim was reasonable.
Beeler alleged that the trial court coerced the jury’s death
verdict by failing to replace a juror with an alternate after the
juror informed the court of his father’s sudden
death. Applying AEDPA review, the panel held that the
California Supreme Court neither erroneously applied
federal law nor made an unreasonable determination.
The panel rejected as foreclosed by Karis v. Calderon,
283 F.3d 1117 (9th Cir. 2002), Beeler’s argument that
California fails to adequately narrow the pool of defendants
eligible for the death penalty.

COUNSEL
Marta VanLandingham (argued) and John S. Crouchley,
Deputy Federal Public Defenders; Cuauhtemoc Ortega,
Federal Public Defender; Office of the Federal Public
Defender, Los Angeles, California; for Petitioner-Appellant.
Vincent P. LaPietra (argued), Lise S. Jacobson, and
Stephanie A. Mitchell, Deputy Attorneys General; Holly D.
Wilkens, Supervising Deputy Attorney General; James W.
Bilderback II, Senior Assistant Attorney General; Rob
Bonta, California Attorney General; Office of the California
Attorney General, San Diego, California; for RespondentAppellee.
Susan Garvey and Natalie Link, Habeas Corpus Resource
Center, San Francisco, California, for Amicus Curiae
Habeas Corpus Resource Center.

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

5

Jessica E. Oats, Senior Deputy State Public Defender; Mary
K. McComb, State Public Defender; Office of The State
Public Defender, Sacramento, California; for Amicus Curiae
Office of The State Public Defender.

OPINION
NGUYEN, Circuit Judge:
A jury sentenced Rodney Gene Beeler to death following
his conviction for the first-degree murder of Anthony
“Tony” Joseph Stevenson during a daytime robbery in
December 1985. Beeler appeals the district court’s denial of
his petition for writ of habeas corpus. We affirm.
I. BACKGROUND 1
A. The Guilt Phase
Tony Stevenson lived with his two brothers, Michael and
Dino, in a house in Orange, California. On the morning of
December 30, 1985, all three brothers left for work. But just
before 11:00 a.m., the Stevensons’ neighbor discovered
Tony lying on the front lawn of the neighbor’s house, shot
in the back. Police and paramedics arrived after the neighbor
called 911, but Tony died at the scene.
The rear, sliding-glass door of Tony’s house had been
pried open with a screwdriver, and the house had been
ransacked. Bullets for Tony’s .22-caliber semi-automatic
rifle were strewn across his bed. The rifle was found on a
These facts are largely taken from the California Supreme court’s
opinion in Beeler’s direct appeal, People v. Beeler, 9 Cal. 4th 953 (1995).

1

6

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

hallway floor, its wooden parts badly damaged. One of the
bedroom doors had a large gash that police attributed to the
butt of the rifle. Jewelry, a camera and lens, $1,200 in cash,
a dark blue gym bag, Dino’s fake Rolex watch, and
Michael’s .22-caliber single-action Ruger revolver, which
he kept unloaded under his bed with two bullets nearby, were
taken from the house. Michael’s gun was never recovered.
An autopsy revealed Tony died from a single .22 caliber
bullet that entered his back and pierced his lung and heart.
The muzzle of the gun had been more than two feet away
from Tony when he was shot. A ballistics expert determined
the bullet that killed Tony was not fired from the broken rifle
found inside the house but could have been fired from
Michael’s missing revolver. Another .22 caliber bullet was
found lodged in a car parked across the street from the
Stevensons’ house. But the recovered bullet was too
damaged to determine whether it had been fired from either
weapon.
A small bullet hole in the screen door aligned with the
bullet hole in the car across the street, suggesting a gun was
shot through the screen door. Relying on the evidence of
forced entry, ransacking, and a violent struggle inside the
Stevensons’ house, the prosecution theorized that Tony had
returned home during a burglary and confronted the
perpetrator, but as he fled the house, the perpetrator shot him
in the back with Michael’s gun.
Beeler, whose identity as the burglar is not at issue in this
appeal, was linked to the crime by fingerprint evidence and
the testimony of three neighbors. In one of the bedrooms,
Beeler’s fingerprint was found on top of a file cabinet. Floyd
Raney, a neighbor living down the street from the
Stevensons, testified that he was in his garage around the

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

7

time of the killing with the door open. Raney heard a motor
running outside and saw a pickup truck parked directly
across the street. Beeler approached Raney in his garage in
what Raney described as pale blue jeans and a solid blue
shirt. Beeler asked Raney, “My cat jumped the wall in your
backyard. Would you look back there, please, and see if my
cat is back there?” When Raney returned from checking the
backyard, he saw Beeler taking off in the pickup truck.
About fifteen minutes later, the police arrived in response to
the discovery of Tony’s body. At trial, Raney identified a
picture of Beeler’s truck as being similar to the one he saw
the day of the murder.
Lavada Hoskins lived on the street running parallel to the
Stevensons’ street. A block wall ran between the backyards
of the houses on Hoskins’s street and the Stevensons’ street,
including Raney’s yard. The morning of the killing, Hoskins
was in her backyard talking to her neighbor, Fern Awalt,
when both women saw a man walking along the top of the
block wall between 10:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. Neither
Hoskins nor Awalt saw the man’s face, but Hoskins recalled
him wearing a blue plaid shirt and carrying a small, dark
sports bag. Awalt remembered the man wearing work pants
and a solid blue shirt. Neither woman saw any other
unknown person in the neighborhood around the time of the
killing.
The prosecution also offered testimony of Beeler’s
coworkers to link him to the crime. At the time of the killing,
Beeler worked as a senior line operator at a laminated
products company. Jim Anderson, who reported to Beeler,
testified that Beeler had left work early, at about 10 a.m., on
the day of the killing. Calvin Brunsting, the company’s
manager, testified that Beeler’s timecard for December 30,
1985, showed him clocking in at 5:45 a.m. But sometime

8

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

after December 30, Beeler had asked him to write in that
Beeler had left at 3:40 p.m., explaining that he had forgotten
to clock out.
John Lorenzi, another coworker, testified that sometime
between Christmas and New Year’s Eve, Beeler had said to
him, “John, let me ask you a hypothetical question. If I
was—if you were robbing somebody’s house, someone who
lived there caught you in the act, would you shoot him?”
Lorenzi replied, “Why? Did you kill somebody?” Lorenzi
testified that Beeler became upset and responded, “No,
asshole.” Beeler posed a similar question to Anderson,
asking “Hypothetically speaking, if you were robbing a
house and the guy came home—the guy that lived there, this
is, came home and you had a gun, would you shoot him?”
Anderson said, “No, I wouldn’t. I wouldn’t put myself in
that position to begin with. Why, did you do something, did
you kill somebody?” Beeler said no and walked away.
Sometime after January 1, 1986, Beeler offered
Anderson the stolen watch for $500. On January 7, 1986,
Beeler sold an Italian gold charm taken from the Stevensons.
Police eventually searched Beeler’s locker at work and
found the stolen camera and lens.
The defense offered two alternative theories to counter
the intent-to-kill requirement of the felony-murder special
circumstance. The primary theory was that Beeler’s work
supervisor, Mitchell Jackley, participated in the burglary and
was the actual killer. Jackley testified for the prosecution at
Beeler’s preliminary hearing under a grant of immunity for
receiving stolen property from Beeler. But the defense
called him as a witness at trial in an attempt to undermine his
credibility.

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

9

The defense argued that Jackley knew details about the
crime that suggested he was the shooter. Jackley testified
that he had breakfast with Beeler the day of the killing and
authorized Beeler to leave work early. Beeler told Jackley
later that day that he had broken into the Stevensons’ house
and killed Tony. Jackley also testified that he stole the key
to Beeler’s locker and found the camera, handling it with silk
gloves so as not to leave fingerprints.
On January 9, 1986, Jackley called the police to
implicate Beeler for killing Tony. Jackley testified that he
reported Beeler anonymously because he feared being
connected to the crime for two reasons. First, Jackley said
he had been inside the Stevensons’ house before the killing
because his wife was acquainted with Dino, so he feared his
fingerprints might show up. Second, Jackley testified that
he had previously been charged with murder. Additionally,
Jackley had received stolen belongings from Beeler from a
prior robbery.
Jackley provided the following account of the crime to
police investigators:
The way [Beeler] explained it to me is that
while he was in the house, that is, ah, ah,
Tony apparently’s his name, came in and
brought his—brought his dog in? Ya. Called
his dog. His dog was with him. [Beeler] was
saying his dog was with him and he thought
he was calling some friends or somethin’ and
then—what the fuck else did he say?—he
said right after that took place, [Beeler]
apparently was in one of the bedrooms, he
said or somethin’, and went behind the corner
or somethin’ like that . . . . And the guy

10

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

[Tony] went into his room. He [Beeler] told
me he [Tony] came out with a goddamn ah
rifle and told him he was gonna beat the shit
out of him with it, and he’s gonna to do [sic]
bodily damage . . . . And he [Beeler] said
somethin’ to the effect that they got into an
altercation in the hallway, and that the guy
came at him with a rifle, used it like a
club—.
Jackley provided other details of the crime. For instance,
Beeler told him he “hit” two rooms in the Stevensons’ house
and was in the third when Tony unexpectedly returned home.
Beeler took a .22-calliber revolver from the house and shot
Tony in the back with a hollow-point bullet as Tony ran
away from the house. Beeler told Jackley that Tony fell on
the front lawn and that Beeler escaped “down a brick wall
running on the back of” the Stevensons’ house. Beeler said
he had left his truck idling and had a conversation with a
person outside the house at the end of the wall.
The defense attacked Jackley’s credibility with the fact
that he had been charged with a similar crime years earlier,
but those charges were dropped once Jackley agreed to
testify for the prosecution. Jackley and his accomplices were
arrested in 1974 in connection with a robbery-murder in
South Carolina. Jackley admitted to the burglary but denied
any involvement with the killing. Jackley provided a similar
story in that case, alleging that one of his acquaintances
confessed the killing to Jackley, an anonymous call was
made to the police implicating that defendant, Jackley had
received stolen goods from the defendant, and Jackley knew
many of the details of the crime. And, similar to this case,

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

11

the charges against Jackley were dropped once he testified
for the prosecution.
Jackley also admitted to three other burglaries in which
he knew the victims, the items taken were similar to those
stolen from the Stevensons’ house, and his fingerprints were
not found at any of the crime scenes. The defense argued
that all the similarities to the instant case pointed to Jackley
as the killer and principal burglar, not Beeler.
The second theory the defense offered assumed that
Beeler was the shooter but that the evidence of the bullet’s
trajectory was consistent with “at least two reasonable
interpretations.” One was the prosecutor’s theory; the other
was that during the struggle inside the house, Tony used the
rifle to fire a shot “down the hall” that hit the car outside,
and Beeler fell and shot Tony as Tony was standing over
him.
The prosecution’s expert conceded on crossexamination that the evidence of the bullet’s trajectory was
compatible with this defense theory.
After a seven-day guilt-phase trial and less than a half
day of deliberations, the jury found Beeler guilty of firstdegree murder and burglary. The jury also found Beeler
personally used a handgun during the commission of the
offense and the felony-murder special circumstance to be
true, making Beeler eligible for the death penalty.
B. The Penalty Phase
1. Prosecution’s Case in Aggravation
During the penalty phase, the prosecution presented
evidence of Beeler’s three prior burglaries and one prior
rape. The parties stipulated that Beeler had convictions for
second-degree burglary in 1971, first-degree burglary in
1974, and second-degree burglary in 1976. He was

12

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

committed to the California Youth Authority for the first
burglary and sentenced to state prison for the subsequent
convictions.
In 1985, Beeler raped Roxanne Doyle as she was
delivering newspapers. She testified that he told her a false
story about his truck breaking down as an excuse to
accompany her along her route. After Doyle completed her
deliveries, Beeler hit her in the face, forced her to the ground,
and orally and vaginally raped her while threatening her with
a knife.
Beeler then forced Doyle to give him her wedding and
engagement rings. She begged to keep her rings because she
had recently gotten married, but he threatened, “Give me
your rings or I’ll cut your finger off.” He also laughed when
he discovered that he had broken her eyeglasses. Beeler’s
coworker testified that when Beeler arrived at work that
morning, he bragged that he had robbed and “fucked the shit
out of” a “good looking” woman with a “nice figure” and
“big tits.”
2. The Defense’s Case in Mitigation
The defense presented a substantial mitigation case,
featuring five mental health experts and several lay
witnesses from Beeler’s personal life. 2 The mitigation
evidence focused on the physical and sexual abuse Beeler
suffered as a child and his long-term mental impairments.
The defense also offered evidence of his positive qualities as

A total of five mental health expert witnesses testified on Beeler’s
behalf. At counsel’s request, the trial court appointed two additional
psychologists, Drs. Jay Adams and Francis Crinella, to evaluate Beeler,
but they did not testify.

2

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

13

a father and his successful adjustment to the structured
setting of incarceration.
Beeler’s mother, Lillian Morris, testified that Beeler had
been a normal child growing up, even though Beeler’s father
was known to beat him and his brother, Tom. This abuse
involved beating the boys with a piece of automative rubber
when Beeler was as young as six years old. Nonetheless, it
was not until she and Beeler’s father separated in 1960—
when Beeler was about ten years old—that Beeler began to
show behavioral issues. After the separation, Beeler and his
brother were forced to live with their father and stepmother
Lorna Jenkins, who treated Beeler cruelly.
The jury heard from several lay and expert witnesses
about Jenkins’ abuse of Beeler. Beeler’s mother said that
Jenkins prevented Beeler from having contact with or
receiving presents from his mother. Beeler’s stepsister,
Rebecca Mullins, testified that Jenkins was “a very violent
person” who abused Beeler and her other children. Jenkins
would burn Beeler’s hands with a lighter, lock him in the
closet from 30 minutes to several hours, force him to eat fruit
preserves until he vomited, and beat him with a belt buckle
hard enough to draw blood and leave welts.
Several neighbors also testified to Jenkins’ abuse of
Beeler. Byron and Barbara Fellows testified that on one
occasion Jenkins punished Beeler for smoking by forcing
him to smoke unfiltered cigarettes until he burned his lips
and fingers. On another occasion, Beeler was outside at 4:00
a.m. after being locked in the closet all night. The neighbors
later reported Jenkins to the police when Beeler’s brother
came to their house with injuries to his body from being
beaten with an electrical cord. Jolene Higley testified that
she was “raised with [Beeler] like a sister” and witnessed the

14

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

severe abuse inflicted on Beeler by his stepmother, who
regularly referred to him as “a little bastard.” The abuse
included being locked in a small closet for hours, chained to
a basement post, thrown down a flight of stairs with his
hands tied behind his back, beaten with a belt buckle and
brush, and forced to hold his hands over a flame. Moreover,
Beeler once touched Higley “in the breast and vagina area,”
and said, “It’s okay, Mom showed me this.”
Dr. Lenore Walker, a clinical and forensic psychologist,
provided some of the most disturbing testimony regarding
Jenkins. Dr. Walker testified that she and her associate, Lon
Kopit, another psychologist, spent 29.5 hours over the
course of fourteen sessions interviewing Beeler and
administering cognitive and personality tests. In addition to
the other abuse already described, Dr. Walker deemed
credible Beeler’s accounts of Jenkins smearing fecal matter
on his face as punishment for soiling himself and the sexual
abuse she inflicted when Beeler was between the ages of ten
and twelve. She would tie his penis back with a string and
make him wear dresses because she wanted him to look like
a girl. Later, she began inserting her soiled tampons into his
anus and forcing him to masturbate and orally copulate her.
She would also masturbate him and painfully squeeze his
testicles to prevent him from reaching an orgasm, or “take
the semen and smear it all over his face” as punishment. This
abuse progressed to vaginal intercourse during which Beeler
was not allowed to reach an orgasm.
In 1964, there was a juvenile proceeding due to the
reported abuse. Dr. Robbert Lippold, a former clinical
psychologist who had assessed Jenkins characterized her as
a “potentially explosive” and “character-disordered
individual who . . . was fully capable of operating in a very
bizarre and very disturbed manner,” including sexually.

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

15

Jenkins admitted to Dr. Lippold that she had beat Beeler and
his brother but appeared to be “more concerned about being
caught than the action itself.” Even though “deprivation of
custody cases were relatively rare at that point in time,” Dr.
Lippold recommended to the court that “the children be
taken away from her.”
Beeler was removed from Jenkins’ home and thereafter
spent time in foster homes, mental hospitals, youth camps,
the military, and prison. Cleo Christensen’s family was one
of Beeler’s foster homes. Christensen testified that he
caught Beeler molesting his four-year-old son in a corn field.
At the caseworker’s direction, Christensen took Beeler back
to his stepmother, even though he was reluctant to do so
because he knew that Beeler previously had been “tied up to
a pole and beaten by her.” In 1966, Beeler was committed
to a mental hospital. Upon his release, Beeler temporarily
moved in with his mother, but she did not receive any refills
for his medication or other information regarding his mental
health issues. John Cahill, a camp counselor while Beeler
was incarcerated at Spring Mountain Youth Camp as a 15year-old, testified that Beeler was “a pitiful character” who
“tended to be easily manipulated and generally picked on.”
Another camp counselor, Marlin Robinson, said Beeler did
not engage in violent or aggressive behavior but would steal
“small inconsequential items.”
Dr. Noble testified to his examination of Beeler in 1971,
while he worked for the California Department of
Corrections. Dr. Noble opined that Jenkins was “extremely
vicious” to Beeler, priming him from an early age to view
his life as a cycle of misbehavior and punishment. He
believed that Beeler’s prior burglaries were “almost routine,
automatic kind of behaviors” and a subconscious cry for help
because “he had virtually no insight” into his “psychiatric

16

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

problems.” Dr. Noble had recommended psychotherapy for
Beeler, but the prison only provided him with medication
used to treat manic depression.
According to Dr. Walker, Beeler’s past abuse caused him
to experience various forms of gender confusion and engage
in sexual misconduct and compulsive theft. Beeler also had
learning disorders, and suffered from feelings of guilt, a need
to be punished, and dissociative symptoms, which
manifested in him “often wak[ing] up in the middle of a
burglary” without “know[ing] how he got there or . . . what
he was doing.” She believed that his tendency to steal was
not motivated by greed, but by a compulsion he could not
control.
In her opinion, Beeler exhibited “a very
inconsistent, unusual kind of diagnostic pattern” that was
consistent with—but went beyond—post-traumatic stress
and dissociative disorders. At times, “his mind [was] so
interfered with that . . . he would look like a schizophrenic”
or “profoundly emotionally disturbed,” but “there [we]re
other times when he d[id] not appear to be that way.”
Particularly during bouts of significant stress, Beeler would
become “psychotic” and “not know the difference
between . . . what is real and what is in his head.” Dr.
Walker noted that Beeler had consistently “plead[ed]” for
counseling and psychotherapy, but the institutional systems
had offered only medication, including the antipsychotic
medication Stelazine, and had not provided “the kind of help
that would have made a difference for him.”
Similarly, Dr. Stephen Wells, a clinical psychologist,
found that Jenkins’ prolonged and severe abuse “was almost
an impossible group of experiences [for Beeler] to recover
from.” Dr. Wells generally agreed with Dr. Walker
regarding Beeler’s severe emotional problems, including
“occasional psychotic episodes” and bouts of dissociation

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

17

during which “he did things without being aware of what he
was doing.”
Dr. Walker, Dr. Noble, and Dr. Wells all testified that
Beeler had adjusted well to an institutionalized setting. For
instance, Beeler had volunteered to help the prison laundry
and chapel during an inmate strike. And Dr. Wells
determined that Beeler would not pose a danger to guards or
inmates if he were to serve a sentence of life without the
possibility of parole.
Beeler has two children, who were minors at the time of
the trial. Beeler’s wife, Kathleen Beeler, and his welding
instructor, Lee Saylor, both testified that Beeler was a loving
father to his two children and that he never abused them. Dr.
John Selden, another clinical psychologist, testified that he
had been treating Beeler and his five-year-old son for
behavioral issues around the time of the murder. Dr. Selden
learned that the family was under great stress due to medical
and financial problems and that Beeler was very concerned
about his family’s welfare and not repeating the abuse he
himself had suffered as a child. He also testified that
Beeler’s son seemed very attached to him.
3. Closing Arguments, Verdict, and Sentencing
On July 12, 1988, after deliberating for one full day and
brief portions of two others, the jury reached its death
verdict. At defense counsel’s request, the sentencing hearing
was continued to November 4. On November 4, defense
counsel successfully moved for a second continuance,
asserting, among other things, the need to investigate a
previously unreported head injury, which Beeler had only
recently realized was potentially significant.

18

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

On December 16, the trial court held a hearing on
Beeler’s motion, brought pursuant to People v. Marsden,
465 P.2d 44, 49 (Cal. 1970) (in bank), seeking to discharge
and substitute counsel. At the hearing, Beeler stated that he
wanted to undergo an electroencephalogram (“EEG”) and a
computed axial tomography (“CAT”) scan, imploring, “I
feel there is something wrong.” Defense counsel explained
that, during the time granted by the previous continuance,
they had deemed such tests unnecessary after investigating
and consulting with two doctors about the possibility of
organic brain damage based on Beeler’s self-reported
blackouts from several years ago. But defense counsel stated
that Beeler “has today informed us, for the first time, that
these blackouts, such as the two or three that we were
previously aware of, continue and [occur] perhaps even on a
daily basis now.” Beeler said at the hearing that the new
blackouts, which he had not reported to the jail medical staff,
“last for a few minutes but I’m having them so often that
hours go by that I don’t even remember what’s going on.”
The trial court denied the Marsden motion but granted
counsel’s motion for a third continuance.
On January 27, 1989, the trial court again granted a
fourth continuance for counsel to “obtain[] . . . additional
expert information based on tests yet to be completed.” On
March 24, counsel obtained a fifth continuance to allow
psychiatrist Dr. Monte Buchsbaum time to complete
analysis and calculations on recent positron emission
topography (“PET”) scan results of Beeler’s brain, after
which a forensic neurologist would review Dr. Buchsbaum’s
findings and conclusions.
While the trial court had previously warned against
further delays, defense counsel requested a sixth continuance
at the next hearing on May 5. As support, defense counsel

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

19

filed their own declaration, stating that preliminary
interpretations from the neurological testing indicated
“significant evidence of dysfunction in the right temporal
and bilateral frontal lobes of Mr. Beeler’s brain.” Counsel
explained that while this evidence was potentially relevant
to the guilt phase issue of intent and the penalty phase issue
of mitigation, there was no further information available
because “the people who gave the test . . . aren’t really
qualified to interpret the data,” and a qualified expert had
just agreed to conduct the analysis. The trial court denied
the continuance motion, expressing doubt that any expert
could provide new insights into Beeler’s mental status. The
trial court also emphasized that defense counsel “ha[d] done
a diligent effort in pursuing everything that [they saw] fit,”
and the failure to find a new expert was not due to delay or
incompetence.
At that same hearing, the trial court denied the defense’s
motion for a new trial based on insufficient evidence of
intent to kill and Beeler’s alleged organic brain damage. The
trial court further denied the defense motion to modify the
death verdict after reweighing the aggravating and
mitigating circumstances.
4. Post-Trial Proceedings
On automatic direct appeal, the California Supreme
Court affirmed Beeler’s conviction and sentence in a
reasoned opinion, issued on April 10, 1995. See Beeler, 9
Cal. 4th 953. The U.S. Supreme Court denied certiorari.
Beeler filed his first state habeas petition while his
appeal was pending. As relevant here, he claimed that trial
counsel was prejudicially ineffective for failing to present
evidence of his diagnoses of organic brain damage, possible
seizure disorder and multiple personality disorder in the guilt

20

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

and penalty phases of his trial and for failing to provide
competent evidence of his organic brain damage before
sentencing. In November 1995, the California Supreme
Court denied the petition on the merits as well as some of the
claims on procedural grounds.
Beeler filed a second state habeas petition in 1997,
arguing that he had been incompetent to stand trial, the trial
court violated his rights by failing to sua sponte hold a
competency hearing, and trial counsel rendered prejudicially
ineffective assistance for failing to declare a doubt as to his
competency. Beeler also asked the California Supreme
Court to reconsider his prior ineffective assistance of counsel
claim. In 2004, the state court denied the petition on the
merits, except for Beeler’s claim that he was incompetent to
be executed, which it denied as premature. The court also
ruled that certain claims and/or subclaims were procedurally
barred, including Beeler’s claim that the trial court erred by
failing to conduct competency proceedings.
Beeler filed a first amended federal habeas petition on
February 11, 2005, and the district court granted the State’s
motion to dismiss an unexhausted claim. On September 9,
2009, Beeler filed an amended petition without the
unexhausted claim. On December 2, 2020, the district court
entered judgment denying the amended petition and issued a
certificate of appealability on claims K (incompetency
claim) and L (ineffective assistance of counsel at guilt and
penalty phases) of the amended petition. Beeler timely
appealed.
II. STANDARD OF REVIEW
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 2253, and we
review de novo a district court’s denial of habeas relief.
Avena v. Chappell, 932 F.3d 1237, 1247 (9th Cir. 2019).

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

21

Because Beeler filed his federal habeas petition after April
24, 1996, the Anti-Terrorism and Effective Death Penalty
Act of 1996 (“AEDPA”) applies. Murray v. Schriro, 745
F.3d 984, 996 (9th Cir. 2014). Under AEDPA, habeas relief
is barred unless the state court’s denial of the claim “was
contrary to, or involved an unreasonable application of,
clearly established Federal law, as determined by the
Supreme Court of the United States,” or “was based on an
unreasonable determination of the facts in light of the
evidence presented in the State court proceeding.” 28 U.S.C.
§ 2254(d)(1)–(2).
Review under § 2254(d) applies to the last reasoned state
court decision. Hibbler v. Benedetti, 693 F.3d 1140, 1146
(9th Cir. 2012). This court “confine[s its] § 2254(d)(1)
analysis to the state court’s actual decisions and analysis,”
as opposed to “some hypothetical alternative rationale.”
Frantz v. Hazey, 533 F.3d 724, 738 (9th Cir. 2008) (en banc).
However, where there is no reasoned state court decision
addressing a claim, we conduct the AEDPA analysis by
“consider[ing] what arguments or theories could have
supported the state court’s summary denial.” Montiel v.
Chappell, 43 F.4th 942, 958 (9th Cir. 2022) (citing
Harrington v. Richter, 562 U.S. 86, 96, 102 (2011)), cert.
denied, 143 S. Ct. 1785 (2023).
When determining whether the state court violated
§ 2254(d), we look to California’s procedures for handling
habeas petitions, which require the state court to issue an
order to show cause when the petitioner makes out a prima
facie case for relief on a claim. See Cullen v. Pinholster, 563
U.S. 170, 188 n.12 (2011); People v. Duvall, 886 P.2d 1252,
1258 (Cal. 1995) (in bank). “If no prima facie case for relief
is stated, the court will summarily deny the petition.”
Duvall, 886 P.2d at 1258. The California Supreme Court

22

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

finds a prima facie case for relief when, “‘assuming the
petition’s factual allegations are true, the petitioner would be
entitled to relief.’” In re Figueroa, 412 P.3d 356, 364 (Cal.
2018) (quoting Duvall, 886 P.2d at 1258); but see Pinholster,
563 U.S. at 188 n.12 (noting that “wholly conclusory
allegations” do not state a prima facie case for relief under
California law). As a result, while the California Supreme
Court’s summary denial in this context “is a decision on the
merits and thus entitled to AEDPA deference,” Ochoa v.
Davis, 50 F.4th 865, 888 (9th Cir. 2022), cert. denied sub
nom Ochoa v. Smith, 144 S. Ct. 381 (2023), such a denial
“necessarily assume[s] the truth of [the petitioner’s] factual
allegations,” Michaels v. Davis, 51 F.4th 904, 940 n.17 (9th
Cir. 2022).
We treat Beeler’s opening brief, which addresses two
uncertified issues, as an application to expand the certificate
of appealability, see Fed. R. App. P. 22(b)(2) and Ninth Cir.
R. 22-1(e), and we grant the application as to both.
III. DISCUSSION
A. Competency Claim
Beeler raises three arguments concerning his
competency to stand trial: (1) the trial court procedurally
erred by not sua sponte holding a competency hearing; (2) he
was incompetent to stand trial; and (3) defense counsel was
ineffective in failing to raise his incompetency. Beeler also
argues that, because he established a prima facie case, the
California Supreme Court’s summary denial of relief
without issuing an order to show cause was unreasonable.
Applying the “highly deferential” AEDPA review, Clark v.
Arnold, 769 F.3d 711, 724 (9th Cir. 2014), we are compelled
to find that the California Supreme Court could have
reasonably concluded the evidence does not sufficiently

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

23

support Beeler’s competency claims, see Montiel, 43 F.4th
at 958; 28 U.S.C. § 2254(d)(2).
1.
“[T]he criminal trial of an incompetent defendant
violates due process.” Medina v. California, 505 U.S. 437,
453 (1992).
Competency requires “the capacity to
understand the nature and object of the proceedings . . . , to
consult with counsel, and to assist in preparing [one’s]
defense.” Drope v. Missouri, 420 U.S. 162, 171 (1975).
“Competency disputes can give rise to two distinct claims—
substantive and procedural—that trigger different analyses
under the general heading of due process.” Lounsbury v.
Thompson, 374 F.3d 785, 788 (9th Cir. 2004).
As to procedural competency, the trial court must sua
sponte conduct a hearing to determine a defendant’s
competency if “the evidence before [it] raises a ‘bona fide
doubt’ as to a defendant’s competence.” Maxwell v. Roe,
606 F.3d 561, 568 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting Pate v. Robinson,
383 U.S. 375, 385 (1966)); see also People v. Rogers, 141
P.3d 135, 152 (Cal. 2006) (noting that California Penal Code
§ 1368 similarly provides that the trial court must “suspend
trial proceedings and conduct a competency hearing
whenever the court is presented with . . . evidence that raises
a reasonable or bona fide doubt concerning the defendant’s
competence”). A bona fide doubt exists when “a reasonable
judge, situated as was the trial court judge whose failure to
conduct an evidentiary hearing is being reviewed, should
have experienced doubt with respect to competency to stand
trial.” Stanley v. Cullen, 633 F.3d 852, 860 (9th Cir. 2011)
(internal quotation marks omitted). Under this standard, the
trial court must have been presented with substantial

24

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

evidence of incompetence. Williams v. Woodford, 384 F.3d
567, 604 (9th Cir. 2004).
While the court’s “responsibility [to conduct
competency assessment] continues throughout trial,”
Maxwell, 606 F.3d at 568, there is no “general standard with
respect to the nature or quantum of evidence necessary” to
trigger a hearing, Drope, 420 U.S. at 172. Instead, “the trial
judge must evaluate all the evidence and evaluate the
probative value of each piece of evidence in light of the
others.” Chavez v. United States, 656 F.2d 512, 518 (9th Cir.
1981).
Relevant “evidence includes the defendant’s
demeanor before the trial judge, irrational behavior of the
defendant, and available medical evaluations of the
defendant’s competence to stand trial.” Williams, 384 F.3d
at 604 (citing Drope, 420 U.S. at 180). The evidence may
include the observations of trial counsel, Medina, 505 U.S.
at 450, but counsel’s opinion “certainly is not
determinative,” Hernandez v. Ylst, 930 F.2d 714, 718 (9th
Cir. 1991); see also Michaels, 51 F.4th at 943 (explaining
that, “[g]iven the generality and flexibility of the
competency inquiry,” state courts have even more leeway
under AEDPA in reaching a reasonable decision).
Beeler points to three categories of evidence to support
his claim. 3 He first points to significant trial testimony
recounting his childhood, institutionalizations, and mental
health issues, which included schizophrenia, manic
depression, and dissociation. He next points to post-verdict
Beeler never states when exactly the trial court should have ordered a
competency hearing. Nonetheless, “[t]he competency right does not end
at a conviction, but rather persists through sentencing,” United States v.
Dreyer, 705 F.3d 951, 961 (9th Cir. 2013) (cleaned up), so the totality of
the circumstances will be considered.

3

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

25

evidence of his self-reported blackouts and counsel’s
assertion that the uninterpreted raw testing data showed
“significant evidence of [neurological] dysfunction.” And
lastly, Beeler relies on juror declarations stating that, during
the trial, Beeler “seldom talked to his attorneys,” “did not
show any emotion,” “looked very strange,” and “just [sat]
like a lump.”
The evidence of Beeler’s mental health and blackouts
does not raise a bona fide doubt as to his competency
because none of it demonstrates “a causal connection
between the mental disease or defect and his inability to
understand the proceedings.” United States v. Neal, 776
F.3d 645, 656 (9th Cir. 2015); see also United States v.
Garza, 751 F.3d 1130, 1136 (9th Cir. 2014) (“Even a
mentally deranged defendant is out of luck if there is no
indication that he failed to understand or assist in his
criminal proceedings.”). Trial counsel and expert witnesses
never raised an argument regarding his competency to stand
trial but instead focused on connecting Beeler’s mental
health to the issues of his guilt and penalty. In fact, Dr.
Walker specifically testified that Beeler was aware of the
charges against him, understood the purpose of
psychological tests, and shared his views on his wife’s
potential as a witness. See Davis v. Woodford, 384 F.3d 628,
647 (9th Cir. 2004) (rejecting competency claim in part
because the expert “gave no indication that he thought
[petitioner] was not competent”).
Nor does Beeler allege that he displayed any irregular
behavior in or out of the courtroom. See Williams, 384 F.3d
at 605 (deeming it relevant that petitioner did not “evidence
any bizarre or irrational behavior”). He cites to juror
declarations that describe his passivity at the counsel table,
but such evidence on its own neither proves nor disproves

26

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

competency. See, e.g., Odle v. Woodford, 238 F.3d 1084,
1088–89 (9th Cir. 2001). Moreover, the trial court had more
information as to Beeler’s capabilities than the jury. For
example, the trial court was informed that Beeler had
significantly participated in the preparation of a lengthy
mitigation document. And at sentencing, the trial court
observed Beeler coherently explain the reasons for his
Marsden motion. Because the evidence at trial was
insufficient to raise doubt as to his competency, we cannot
conclude that the California Supreme Court acted
unreasonably in denying this claim. See 28 U.S.C.
§ 2254(d)(2).
2.
Beeler next raises a substantive due process argument
based on his claim that he was incompetent to stand trial.
See Williams, 384 F.3d at 608. In comparison to procedural
competency, substantive competency involves both an easier
and a more difficult standard. It involves an easier standard
because, unlike procedural competency, review of
substantive competency is not limited to the “facts and
evidence that were” at “the state trial court before and during
trial.” Williams, 384 F.3d at 608. It involves a more difficult
standard, however, because the petitioner must show actual
incompetence at the time of trial. Id. In assessing actual
incompetence, the court “disfavor[s] retrospective
determinations of incompetence, and give[s] considerable
weight to the lack of contemporaneous evidence of a
petitioner’s incompetence to stand trial.” Id. Moreover,
while “not a trained mental health professional,” Odle, 238
F.3d at 1088–89, the fact that counsel did not move for a
competency hearing is “especially relevant,” Williams, 384
F.3d at 608; see Cal. Penal Code § 1368 (providing that
either counsel or the trial court may move for a competency

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

27

hearing); Medina, 505 U.S. at 450 (noting that “defense
counsel will often have the best-informed view of the
defendant’s ability to participate in [the] defense”).
Because, as discussed above, the evidence during trial
was not enough to raise a bona fide doubt of competency,
Beeler’s success on the substantive competency claim
necessarily hinges on evidence that was not available to the
trial court. See Williams, 384 F.3d at 608. On appeal, Beeler
points to five pieces of additional evidence. First, in a
declaration filed alongside Beeler’s first state habeas
petition, Dr. Walker stated that she “advised Beeler’s
counsel that Beeler’s blackouts and mental condition may
have a neurological basis, and . . . that counsel [should]
retain a neurologist and neuropsychologist.” Second, Dr.
Wells also provided a declaration, in which he declared that
he had “recommended to [counsel] that Beeler undergo a
highly sophisticated mental health evaluation to alleviate”
his self-reported “auditory and visual hallucinations.” Third,
a declaration from Dr. Monte Buchsbaum—the doctor who
evaluated Beeler’s post-verdict EEG and PET scans—
confirmed counsel’s representation to the trial court that
Beeler’s scans showed brain abnormalities consistent with
head injury. Dr. Buchsbaum declared that Beeler’s results
were “among the most abnormal” he had seen and were
“similar to those often found in people diagnosed as
schizophrenics.” Fourth, jail records showed that before and
during trial, Beeler was on suicide watch, reported hearing
voices, suffered head injuries, pulled out his toenails, was
prescribed antidepressant and antipsychotic medications,
and experienced chest pains. Fifth, declarations from three
fellow inmates stated that Beeler appeared to be mentally
impaired, “understood very little of what went on at his
trial,” “would not have been able to assist his attorneys,”

28

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

“did not seem to understand the difference between his
lawyers and people who were potentially hostile to his
defense,” and “had memory lapses that covered long periods
of time.”
As with the procedural incompetency claim, the new
evidence of declarations from the medical professionals and
the jail records do not causally connect Beeler’s mental
health problems with his competency to stand trial. See
Neal, 776 F.3d at 656; Garza, 751 F.3d at 1136. For
instance, the jail records reflect that Beeler attributed his
self-harm that resulted in his placement on suicide watch “to
racial unrest on his floor and fear for his physical safety.”
See also Dennis ex rel. Butko v. Budge, 378 F.3d 880, 892
(9th Cir. 2004) (“[E]vidence of suicidal ideation or attempts
to commit suicide in the past is insufficient to demonstrate
incompetency.”). Medical reports from the jail reflected that
Beeler pulled out his toenails as a result of his stress about
going to court and as a means of manipulation. Further, the
reports noted that the antidepressant medications had helped
with his behavior and mood. As a result, instead of being
indicative of an inability to understand the proceedings or
participate in his defense, the mental health issues
experienced by Beeler in jail appear to have been the product
of situational stress or malingering, and his symptoms had
been effectively treated. See, e.g., United States v. Telles, 18
F.4th 290, 300–01 (9th Cir. 2021) (explaining that
malingering “behavior does nothing to demonstrate [a
defendant’s] inability to understand the proceedings or assist
in his defense”). And while the medical professional
declarations comment on the severity of Beeler’s mental
health issues, none of the declarations assert that his
struggles interfered with his competency to stand trial.

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

29

The declarations from Beeler’s fellow inmates provide a
stronger causal connection between Beeler’s mental health
and his competency, but they do not render the California
Supreme Court’s denial of this issue unreasonable under
AEDPA because they are merely conclusory lay opinions of
Beeler’s alleged incompetence. See Alpha & Omega Dev.,
LP v. Whillock Contracting, Inc., 200 Cal. App. 4th 656, 664
(2011) (noting that “speculative” or “conclusory”
declarations are insufficient to make a prima facie case under
California law).
The inmates were not medical
professionals, did not attend any of Beeler’s courtroom
proceedings, and did not participate in any discussions
between Beeler and counsel. Further, the declarations are
refuted by Dr. Walker’s testimony about Beeler’s
competence, Beeler’s active participation in the case before
the trial court, the absence of comment by any of the medical
experts, and the lack of concern by both the trial court and
defense counsel as to his competency. See Medina, 505 U.S.
at 450; Boyde v. Brown, 404 F.3d 1159, 1167 (9th Cir. 2005)
(“[T]he most telling evidence that [petitioner] was
competent at trial is that neither defense counsel—who
would have had every incentive to point out that his client
was incapable of assisting with his defense—nor the trial
court even hinted that [he] was incompetent.”). Under
deferential AEDPA review, we affirm the district court’s
denial of habeas relief on this claim.
3.
For counsel to be found ineffective for failing to raise a
competency issue, there must have been “sufficient indicia
of incompetence to give objectively reasonable counsel
reason to doubt the defendant’s competency, and . . . a
reasonable probability that the defendant would have been
found incompetent to stand trial had the issue been raised

30

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

and fully considered.” Stanley, 633 F.3d at 862 (internal
quotation marks omitted).
Similar to substantive
competency, “additional evidence submitted . . . [in a] state
habeas petition is cognizable as to [an ineffective assistance
of counsel] competency claim.” Michaels, 51 F.4th at 943.
Beeler’s ineffective assistance of counsel claim relies on
the same evidence presented to support the procedural and
substantive competency claims. As a result, his ineffective
assistance of counsel claim fails for the same reasons. Davis,
384 F.3d at 647 (“In light of our evaluation of the substantive
competence claim, [petitioner’s] claim that his trial attorneys
rendered ineffective assistance of counsel by failing to move
for a competency hearing in the trial court also fails.”); see
also Stanley, 633 F.3d at 862–63 (holding that an ineffective
assistance competency claim lacked merit where both the
trial and post-conviction experts failed to conclude that
petitioner was incompetent).
4.
Because the California Supreme Court could have
reasonably concluded that Beeler’s evidence of substantive
and procedural incompetency did not establish a prima facie
case, Beeler’s claim that there should have been an
evidentiary hearing on his competency claim also lacks
merit. See Pinholster, 563 U.S. at 188 n.12; Michaels, 51
F.4th at 940 n.17. His claim that the district court was
required to conduct a hearing fails for the same reason. See
Murray v. Schriro, 882 F.3d 778, 802 (9th Cir. 2018) (“[S]o
long as we are reviewing a petitioner’s claim under AEDPA,
our review is limited to the facts before the state court and
the petitioner is not entitled to an evidentiary hearing in
federal court.”).

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

31

B. Guilt and Penalty Phases Ineffective Assistance of
Counsel Claims
Beeler argues that his counsel provided ineffective
assistance of counsel under Strickland v. Washington, 466
U.S. 668 (1984), by failing to investigate and present
evidence regarding his “mental illness and [organic brain
damage]” at both the guilt and penalty phases.
To succeed on this claim, the “defendant must show that
counsel’s representation fell below an objective standard of
reasonableness” and prejudiced him, “considering all the
circumstances.” Id. at 687–88. Under this standard,
“[c]ounsel in a death-penalty case has ‘a duty to make
reasonable investigations or to make a reasonable decision
that makes particular investigations unnecessary.’” Andrus
v. Texas, 590 U.S. 806, 814 (2020) (per curiam) (quoting
Wiggins v. Smith, 539 U.S. 510, 521 (2003)). “[T]he
defendant must overcome the presumption that, under the
circumstances, the challenged action might be considered
sound trial strategy.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689 (internal
quotation marks omitted). Our examination of defense
counsel’s performance “must be highly deferential,”
Strickland, 466 U.S. at 689, and, when conducted through
AEDPA’s lens, our review of counsel performance is
“doubly deferential,” Hardy v. Chappell, 849 F.3d 803, 825
n.10 (9th Cir. 2016).
To show that the deficient performance was prejudicial,
the defendant must establish that the alleged errors “actually
had an adverse effect on the defense,” meaning that “but for
counsel’s unprofessional errors, the result of the proceeding
would have been different.” Strickland, 466 U.S. at 693–94.
“Establishing prejudice in the death sentence context
requires a showing that ‘there is a reasonable probability

32

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

that, absent the errors, the sentencer would have concluded
that the balance of aggravating and mitigating circumstances
did not warrant death.’” Bible v. Ryan, 571 F.3d 860, 870
(9th Cir. 2009) (quoting Strickland, 466 U.S. at 695)
(cleaned up). We do not apply “double deference” in the
prejudice analysis. Hardy, 849 F.3d at 825 n.10.
Again, we conclude that the district court, under AEDPA
review, correctly denied Beeler’s ineffective assistance of
counsel claim.
1.
Counsel consulted with five psychologists before trial,
and two of those psychologists, Drs. Wells and Walker,
recommended that Beeler also be evaluated by a neurologist.
Dr. Walker declared that defense counsel had “represented
to [her] that they had already petitioned the court for funds
for the appointment of a neurologist, but their request was
denied.” On appeal, Beeler asserts that defense counsel had
lied to Dr. Walker, but he provides no explanation or
evidentiary support.
As discussed above, after receiving a death verdict,
Beeler pressed defense counsel for neurological testing
based on his newly reported head injury and frequency of
blackouts. In response, counsel arranged for Dr. Arnold
Starr, a neurologist, to interview Beeler. Dr. Starr reported
that Beeler’s “mental status would be in keeping with
someone who was mentally slow with an IQ estimated to be
75 or 80.” Dr. Starr also suggested a possible diagnosis of
schizophrenia based on Beeler’s history of trauma,
institutionalizations,
and
self-reported
auditory
hallucinations.
Accordingly, Dr. Starr recommended
neurological testing, including a PET scan. Defense counsel
had a PET scan conducted and hired Dr. Buchsbaum to

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

33

review the scan. Dr. Buschbaum determined that Beeler’s
PET scan indicated “brain damage or dysfunction.” But the
trial court denied the defense motion for an additional
continuance to have a qualified neurologist review the scan.
About four years later, in connection with Beeler’s first
state habeas petition, he was evaluated by Dr. Jonathan
Pincus, a neurologist, and Dr. Stephen Marmer, a
psychiatrist. Dr. Pincus’s report states that, after reviewing
Beeler’s medical and social history, as well as examining
him, Dr. Pincus was “convinced that Mr. Beeler has brain
damage.” He opined that Beeler’s reported blackouts “could
be dissociative episodes or seizures,” and recommended an
8-hour EEG in order to confirm a possible “diagnosis of
epilepsy.” Dr. Marmer also focused on Beeler’s blackouts,
concluding that Beeler suffers from multiple personality
disorder, a type of dissociative disorder. He believed that
“Beeler’s host personality does not have control over the
conduct of his alternate personalities and generally suffers
from a blackout while alternate personalities are present.”
As a result, Dr. Marmer opined that it was highly probable
that “Beeler’s host personality was not . . . co-conscious at
the time of the death of [Tony] Stevenson” or “the rape of
Mrs. Doyle, if Beeler was present at all.”
2.
Beeler first claims that defense counsel should have used
penalty phase mitigation and extra-record evidence of his
mental illness and brain damage at the guilt phase to show
that he did not form the specific intent to kill. He argues that
had defense counsel presented evidence showing that he
lacked “the capacity to think clearly enough, in the panic of
the moment, to form the specific intent to kill,” the jury

34

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

would not have found true the burglary murder special
circumstance.
But even assuming defense counsel performed
deficiently in its investigation and presentation of evidence,
Beeler was not prejudiced by counsel’s decisions. See
Strickland, 466 U.S. at 697 (“If it is easier to dispose of an
ineffectiveness claim on the ground of lack of sufficient
prejudice, which we expect will often be so, that course
should be followed.”).
To the extent Beeler is arguing that his counsel should
have presented a defense of diminished capacity, his
argument fails because at the time of his trial, that defense
was not allowed by California law. Noguera v. Davis, 5
F.4th 1020, 1048 (9th Cir. 2021) (“[B]ecause [the] murder
took place after June 1982, a diminished capacity defense
was unavailable to [petitioner] under California law.”). As
a result, defense counsel could have only used the mental
health evidence to argue that Beeler did not form the specific
intent to kill. Cal. Penal Code § 28 (“Evidence of mental
disease, mental defect, or mental disorder is admissible
solely on the issue of whether or not the accused actually
formed a required specific intent . . . .”). Neither Beeler’s
trial experts nor post-trial experts, however, opined that his
mental health issues prevented him from forming the intent
to kill. These experts gave opinions only about compulsion,
dissociation, epilepsy, and multiple personality disorder. As
a result, without a nexus between Beeler’s conditions and his
specific intent, any mental health evidence would have been
inadmissible at the guilt phase.
Moreover, the crime scene evidence strongly disputes a
finding of lack of specific intent. Beeler’s mental incapacity
argument relies on the premise that the circumstances of the

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

35

crime—even without consideration of his mental health
evidence—showed a lack of intent. While the defense
theorized that Tony had been shot during a struggle inside
the house, significant evidence established that Beeler shot
Tony in the back as Tony fled from the house. James v.
Borg, 24 F.3d 20, 26 (9th Cir. 1994) (holding that conclusory
allegations that fail to explain how counsel could have
rebutted overwhelming evidence of guilt are insufficient to
warrant relief under Strickland). And defense counsel had
in fact argued during trial that the killing was unintentional
and done in the heat of the struggle. The jury chose the
prosecution’s view that the killing was intentional.
The penalty phase mental health evidence likely would
not have changed the jury’s determination, as it could have
been easily rebutted. See Andrews v. Davis, 944 F.3d 1092,
1108–09 (9th Cir. 2019). Any evidence suggesting that
Beeler had no memory of the killing due to a blackout or
dissociation would have been contradicted by his post-crime
activities, including his discussion of the crime with
coworkers and efforts to create an alibi. Evidence of
dissociation also could have opened the door to additional
rebuttal, such as Beeler’s bragging about his rape of Doyle
despite a similar claim of having suffered a blackout during
that crime. See Bolin v. Davis, 13 F.4th 797, 821 (9th Cir.
2021) (noting that, under California law, expert mental
health testimony could have opened door to rebuttal
evidence).
Similarly, the additional neurological evidence collected
after trial could have been rebutted. Expert testimony
suggesting that Beeler was suffering from a seizure or
multiple personality disorder at the time of the crime would
have been rebutted by his deliberate shooting of Tony, his
furtive post-crime conduct, as well as the fact that Dr.

36

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

Walker never diagnosed Beeler as suffering from multiple
personality disorder. See id. at 816 (holding that “a
reasonable jurist could conclude that [petitioner’s]
neurological deficits theory [wa]s of uncertain relevance to
the offenses” and “unpersuasive” because it did not explain
petitioner’s “deliberate shooting of three people and his
strategic thinking after the murders”); Williams, 384 F.3d at
617 (holding that counsel reasonably could have determined
that “a defense of diminished mental capacity was not
feasible” in part because “[t]he facts of the crimes reflected
deliberate and methodical action”).
Beeler points to juror declarations discussing what effect
learning about Beeler’s brain damage would have had on
their assessment of his crimes and his failure to testify, but
that evidence is barred by the no-impeachment rule. See
Fed. R. Evid. 606(b)(1) (prohibiting, subject to exceptions
not applicable here, “a juror’s affidavit or evidence of a
juror’s statement” regarding “the effect of anything on that
juror’s or another juror’s vote[] or any juror’s mental
processes concerning the verdict”); see also Cal. Evid. Code
§ 1150(a) (“No evidence is admissible to show the effect of
[a] statement, conduct, condition, or event upon a juror either
in influencing him to assent to or dissent from the verdict or
concerning the mental processes by which it was
determined.”). Further, the juror declarations merely state
that the jurors thought the evidence of brain damage “would
have explained more . . . about Mr. Beeler’s actions” or
“why [Beeler’s] judgment was so impaired.” These are
vague statements that do not affirmatively say that the
evidence would have changed their verdict.
While Beeler was clearly not prejudiced, the California
Supreme Court could have also determined that trial counsel
acted reasonably and diligently during the guilt stage. For

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

37

instance, trial counsel presented various defense theories,
such as that another person shot Tony, which “indicate[d]
active and capable advocacy.” Harrington, 562 U.S. at 111.
And trial counsel’s decision not to pursue a defense
based on Beeler’s alleged inability to form intent was not
because defense counsel failed to investigate. Beeler argues
that “numerous red flags” should have alerted counsel to the
fact that he had brain damage, such as the abuse he suffered
as a child, his impaired motor skills, his repeated
institutionalizations, evidence of a head injury, signs of
depression and memory lapses, and more. But the record
shows that trial counsel heeded these “red flags,” hiring
numerous medical professionals to evaluate Beeler both
before and after trial. Beeler does not provide any support
for his assertion that defense counsel lied about
unsuccessfully filing a pre-trial request for funds to hire a
neurologist. In fact, the evidence shows that counsel
diligently attempted to pursue the issue when Beeler
volunteered new information before sentencing. But as
discussed above, this evidence would not have been helpful
to Beeler at the guilt phase, so counsel’s decision not to
present it does not show deficient performance.
Accordingly, we affirm the denial of habeas relief as to
Beeler’s claim of a Strickland violation at the guilt phase.
3.
Beeler also claims that the neurological evidence not
presented at the penalty phase would have constituted
additional mitigation, and there is a reasonable probability
that one juror would have made a different decision based on

38

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

that evidence. 4 Just as with Beeler’s claim of guilt-phase
ineffective assistance of counsel, the California Supreme
Court could have reasonably determined that defense
counsel’s performance was not deficient, as counsel
diligently sought neurological testing both before trial and
after Beeler volunteered new information. See Demetrulias
v. Davis, 14 F.4th 898, 915 (9th Cir. 2021) (“Because we
conclude that [counsel’s] performance was not deficient, we
need not address whether [the petitioner] was prejudiced by
any deficiency.”).
The California Supreme Court could have also
reasonably determined that even if counsel had lacked
diligence, counsel’s failures did not prejudice Beeler. The
additional neurological testing would have done little to
explain or excuse Tony’s killing. Dr. Starr, the neurologist
who interviewed Beeler prior to sentencing, stated that
testing was needed to offer an affirmative diagnosis
regarding organic brain damage. Dr. Buchsbaum, who
determined that Beeler’s PET scan “indicated . . . brain
damage or dysfunction,” was a psychiatrist and did not offer
a neurological diagnosis. Dr. Pincus, who evaluated Beeler
As an initial matter, the parties dispute which California Supreme Court
ruling we should review for this claim. Beeler asserts that this court
should “look through” that California Supreme Court’s 2004 summary
denial and review the reasoning of the California Supreme Court’s direct
appeal opinion while still taking into account “the additional supporting
evidence” presented on state habeas. See Wilson v. Sellers, 584 U.S. 122,
125 (2018) (holding that a federal habeas court should “look through” an
unexplained state court decision and apply AEDPA deference to “the last
related state-court decision that does provide a relevant rationale”). But
“the operative decision is the California Supreme Court’s summary
denial because its decision on direct review did not address [Beeler’s]
more fully developed claim . . . .” Cain v. Chappell, 870 F.3d 1003,
1018 n.5 (9th Cir. 2017).
4

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

39

for his state habeas petitions, concluded that Beeler has
organic brain damage, but he also qualified its impact on
Beeler and recommended additional testing to confirm a
possible diagnosis of epilepsy. See Runningeagle v. Ryan,
825 F.3d 970, 987–88 (9th Cir. 2016) (concluding that
mental health reports were “not of material mitigating
weight” because the experts “used qualifying language” and
“gave no affirmative diagnosis”).
Dr. Marmer’s diagnosis of multiple personality disorder
could have also been refuted by Dr. Walker’s assessment and
findings that Beeler understood the nature of his actions.
The jury likely would have accorded little weight to this
speculative and indefinite evidence. Apelt v. Ryan, 878 F.3d
800, 834 (9th Cir. 2017) (determining that an ineffective
assistance mitigation claim failed for lack of prejudice in
part because “none of the proffered mitigating evidence
excuse[d] [the petitioner’s] callousness” or “reduce[d] [his]
responsibility for planning and carrying out the murder”).
More importantly, defense counsel presented an
extensive mitigation case. Through the testimony of
nineteen lay and expert witnesses, defense counsel offered
classic and substantial mitigation evidence regarding
Beeler’s severe childhood abuse, mental health issues,
positive character, and institutional adjustment. See Avena,
932 F.3d at 1249 (“[T]estimony by character witnesses and
the presentation of a defendant’s social history and
background play a fundamental role in securing confidence
in the outcome of the penalty phase.”); Bonin v. Calderon,
59 F.3d 815, 834 (9th Cir. 1995) (concluding it was
reasonable for counsel to rely on an “institutional
adjustment” theory for mitigation without also presenting
brain dysfunction or psychiatric testimony); cf. Summerlin v.
Schriro, 427 F.3d 623, 635 (9th Cir. 2005) (en banc) (noting

40

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

that counsel failed to present “available classic mitigation
evidence concerning family history, abuse, … and mental
disorders”). And contrary to Beeler’s assertion, trial counsel
provided extensive evidence of his social history. Given the
relative weakness of the unpresented evidence, combined
with counsel’s extensive mitigation presentation, the
neurological evidence likely would not have affected the
jury’s balancing of the aggravating and mitigating
circumstances.
As a result, Beeler failed to establish a prima facie case
as to the ineffective assistance of counsel at the penalty
phase, and the California Supreme Court’s summary denial
of this claim was reasonable.
4.
Finally, as with the competency claim, Beeler asserts that
he established a prima facie case, so the California Supreme
Court’s summary denial of his ineffective assistance claims
was unreasonable. As discussed, Beeler’s ineffective
assistance claims lack merit, so the California Supreme
Court reasonably denied relief, and no federal hearing was
required under AEDPA. See Pinholster, 563 U.S. at 188
n.12; Michaels, 51 F.4th at 940 n.17; Murray, 882 F.3d at
802. We therefore affirm the denial of habeas relief as to all
of Beeler’s claims of ineffective assistance of counsel.
C. Coercion of Death Verdict Claim
Beeler alleges that the trial court coerced the jury’s death
verdict by failing to replace a juror, Michael C., with an
alternate after Michael C. informed the court of his father’s
sudden death. According to Beeler, the trial court placed the
jury in the “suddenly intensified” position of either reaching
a verdict during a truncated morning deliberation session, or

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

41

“fac[ing] . . . the prospect of their service being extended”
until Michael C. returned from his father’s funeral the
following week. Applying AEDPA review, we find that the
California Supreme Court neither erroneously applied
federal law nor made an unreasonable determination.
1.
Before the start of the third day of jury deliberations on
Tuesday, July 12, 1988, Michael C. called the court clerk to
explain that his father had suddenly died and he had
scheduled a flight for 2 p.m. that afternoon. The attorneys
were informed of the dilemma but were delayed at another
courthouse, so at 10:00 a.m., the court met with Michael C.
ex parte to discuss the issue. The court instructed Michael
C. to continue deliberations, which would be recessed
“sometime before noon” in order to allow him to leave for
the airport. The court also instructed Michael C. that
deliberations would resume on the following Monday, July
18, when he was scheduled to return from his father’s
funeral. Michael C. then returned to the jury room to
deliberate, and the trial court did not pass along any further
instructions or information to the rest of the jury.
The attorneys arrived shortly thereafter. Outside the
presence of the jury, the court relayed its decision, to which
counsel then objected and requested that Michael C. be
replaced with an alternate. Defense counsel argued that “the
jury may feel some sense of urgency in reaching a verdict
today” because “if they have to come back next week that’s
going to put them beyond” the court’s earlier estimate that
the case would not extend past the middle of July. Counsel
also expressed concern that the court had failed to inquire
into Michael C.’s emotional state or admonish him and the

42

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

other jurors to refrain from quickly reaching a verdict in
order to avoid returning the following week.
In declining to appoint an alternate, the trial court
explained that keeping Michael C. on the jury would result
in only a two-day delay in deliberations in light of Beeler
having a medical appointment that afternoon and Friday
being an off-day. The court also stated that it would
reconvene the jury at 11:00 a.m. The jury, however, reached
its death verdict before 11:00 a.m.
Prior to reading the verdict, with counsel and the jury
present, the trial court inquired of the jury foreman whether
the jurors felt pressure to reach a decision due to Michael
C.’s situation. The jury foreman responded negatively. The
trial court further probed, “if any juror now feels that they
need additional time to discuss the case or reconsider the
verdict because of the pressure of time, I’ll hear from any
juror.” After receiving no response, the trial court then
requested that any juror who had such a feeling to “please
raise your hand.” None of the jurors raised a hand. The trial
court continued to press, asking whether the fact that
Michael C. was going to be excused and there was a
probability that deliberations would not resume until the
following Monday had anything to do with the verdict the
jury reached. The jury foreman again answered, “no.” The
trial court asked the jurors whether anyone felt “differently
than that, that there might be some impropriety in the verdict
because of the press of time? If so, please raise your hand.”
Again, no juror raised a hand or voiced any disagreement.
The trial court then proceeded with reading the jury’s death
verdict. After the verdict was read, the trial court inquired
whether this was the jury’s verdict which, in unison, the jury
affirmed. The court then individually polled each member

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

43

of the jury, and each answered affirmatively that the verdict
read was his or her verdict.
On direct appeal, Beeler claimed that Michael C.’s
presence on the jury resulted in a coerced penalty-phase
verdict. The California Supreme Court rejected this
contention, holding that the trial court did not abuse its
discretion in denying Beeler’s request to excuse the juror.
Beeler again raised the issue as part of his second state
habeas petition, which he supplemented with declarations
from jury members. For instance, juror Catherine A.
declared that
On the last day of our deliberations, a juror
came in and told the rest of us that his father
had passed away and that he had to leave that
afternoon for the funeral. He stated that we
should get this done and urged us to reach a
verdict that day because if we did not, we
would have to introduce an alternate to our
deliberations and everything would get more
complicated.
And Harold W. stated that after four days of deliberations,
I did not want to hold everything up if I could
not convince others of my positions. . . . I
told my fellow jurors that I just did not feel it
was right to give Mr. Beeler the death
penalty. But everyone knew I was the one
holding up the verdict, and given the

44

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

situation, I did not feel like I could take any
more of the jurors’ time.
Lois L. recalled that the penalty deliberations had been
going on for days without any consensus. But on the
morning her fellow juror had a death in the family, the jurors
came to a unanimous decision on the first vote. Similarly,
Walter P. said that the verdict and sentence were just but also
recalled that the jury reached a verdict quickly after learning
that a juror needed to leave to attend a funeral.
2.
As a threshold issue, the parties dispute whether AEDPA
deference or de novo review applies to this issue. Beeler
asserts the last reasoned decision is the California Supreme
Court’s majority opinion on direct appeal, as the denial on
state habeas merely stated that his claim failed procedurally
and on the merits. Kipp v. Davis, 971 F.3d 939, 948 (9th Cir.
2020) (“When the state’s highest court does not provide
reasoning for its decision, a federal habeas court may ‘look
through the unexplained decision to the last related statecourt decision that does provide a relevant rationale’ and
‘presume that the unexplained decision adopted the same
reasoning.’” (quoting Wilson, 584 U.S. at 125)). Because
the majority opinion on direct appeal failed to address the
federal aspect of his claim, Beeler argues that de novo
review applies. See Pirtle v. Morgan, 313 F.3d 1160, 1167
(9th Cir. 2002) (“[W]hen it is clear that a state court has not
reached the merits of a properly raised issue, we must review
it de novo.”).
The State disagrees on two points. First, the State argues
that the look through doctrine is inapplicable because the
California Supreme Court clearly denied the claim on

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

45

different grounds on state habeas than it did on direct appeal.
See Kernan v. Hinojosa, 578 U.S. 412, 415 (2016) (“It quite
obviously rested upon some different ground. [The] ‘lookthrough’ approach is therefore inapplicable.”). Second, even
looking through to the opinion on direct appeal, the
California Supreme Court’s majority necessarily rejected the
federal aspect of the claim, so AEDPA deference is
appropriate. 5
The State is correct that Beeler’s jury coercion claim was
denied on the merits on state habeas, and “AEDPA deference
‘applies even where there has been a summary denial.’”
Ochoa, 50 F.4th at 888 (quoting Pinholster, 563 U.S. at 187).
As a result, even if we “look through” to the majority opinion
The State contends the claim is procedurally barred due to the
California Supreme Court’s alternative untimeliness determination. The
California Supreme Court did not explain why it found this claim
untimely. If the claim was not altered, the state’s time-bar ruling does
not constitute a procedural bar or affect the proper exhaustion of the
claim on direct appeal. See Koerner v. Grigas, 328 F.3d 1039, 1053 (9th
Cir. 2003) (“A claim cannot be both previously litigated and
procedurally defaulted; either it was raised in a prior proceeding or it was
not.”). It is therefore likely that the California Supreme Court deemed
Beeler’s addition of the juror declarations to have altered the claim such
that the procedural bar applies.
We have not resolved the question of whether the addition of evidence
changes a claim. See Reno v. Davis, 46 F.4th 821, 831 n.4 (9th Cir.
2022), cert. denied sub nom. Reno v. Broomfield, 144 S. Ct. 119 (2023)
(stating that where the state contended that new evidence changed the
claim, this court did “not resolve this question” because it found that the
claim did not survive AEDPA review on the merits). We need not
resolve it here because, regardless, the claim does not survive review on
the merits even with the additional evidence. See Apelt, 878 F.3d at 825
(“[W]hen a state court ‘double-barrels’ its decision—holding that a claim
was procedurally barred and denying the claim on its merits—both its
procedural default ruling and its merits ruling are entitled to deferential
review by federal courts, as intended by AEDPA.”).
5

46

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

on direct appeal to fill in the summary denial on habeas, we
must apply deference to the underlying reasoning. Wilson,
584 U.S. at 125 (explaining that a federal habeas court
should “look through” an unexplained state court decision
and apply AEDPA deference to “the last related state-court
decision that does provide a relevant rationale”).
Moreover, Beeler’s argument that we should “look
through” to the majority opinion on direct appeal is
incompatible with Beeler’s claim that the California
Supreme Court has failed to address his constitutional claim
entirely. While the look-through doctrine instructs that we
should rely on the reasoning provided in an earlier ruling to
fill the gaps of an unreasoned opinion, Kipp, 971 F.3d at 948,
Beeler asks that we look through the summary denial on state
habeas to conclude that the preceding opinion on direct
appeal had no reasoning. Beeler cites no legal support for
such a maneuver. Absent such showing, we apply the
traditional analysis called for by AEDPA, “consider[ing]
what arguments or theories could have supported the state
court’s summary denial.” Montiel, 43 F.4th at 958 (citing
Richter, 562 U.S. at 96, 102).
Even if we were to “look through” to the majority
opinion on direct appeal, that opinion does not establish that
the California Supreme Court failed to address the federal
claim. “[W]hen a federal claim has been presented to a state
court and the state court has denied relief, it may be
presumed that the state court adjudicated the claim on the
merits in the absence of any indication or state-law
procedural principles to the contrary.” Johnson v. Williams,
568 U.S. 289, 298 (2013) (quoting Richter, 562 U.S. at 99).
The presumption, often referred to as the “Richter
presumption,” is “strong but rebuttable.” Id. at 301. “We
adhere to this ‘strong’ presumption because ‘it is not the

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

47

uniform practice of busy state courts to discuss separately
every single claim to which a defendant makes even a
passing reference.’” Sherman v. Gittere, 92 F.4th 868, 875–
76 (9th Cir. 2024) (quoting Johnson, 568 U.S. at 298). As a
result, federal habeas law “does not require a state court to
give reasons before its decision can be deemed to have been
‘adjudicated on the merits.’” Johnson, 568 U.S. at 298
(quoting Richter, 562 U.S. at 100).
To be sure, this presumption can “rebutted” in “limited”
or “unusual circumstances.” Id. at 301–02. “Thus, for
example, the presumption doesn’t hold if the federal claim
was ‘rejected as a result of sheer inadvertence.’” Sherman,
92 F.4th at 876 (quoting Johnson, 568 U.S. at 302–03). But
“‘the evidence’ must ‘very clearly’ lead to ‘the conclusion
that a federal claim was inadvertently overlooked in state
court.’” Id. (quoting Johnson, 568 U.S. at 303).
Beeler points to Justice Kennard’s dissent as proof that
the majority failed to consider the federal law. Justice
Kennard criticized the majority for “analyz[ing] the trial
court’s conduct . . . solely in terms of [California] Penal
Code section 1089 . . . . More fundamental constitutional
rights, however, are also implicated by the trial court’s
course of action.” Beeler, 9 Cal. 4th at 1012. While Justice
Kennard is correct that the majority opinion focused on
Penal Code § 1089, see id. at 989, that does not necessarily
lead to the conclusion that the federal claim was overlooked.
The California Supreme Court may have simply regarded the
claim as “too insubstantial to merit discussion.” See
Johnson, 568 U.S. at 299. Indeed, it may very well be that
the dissent’s criticism merely shows that the majority
decided against writing on the federal claim in its opinion,
not that the majority overlooked the issue.

48

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

Moreover, we cannot say the California Supreme Court
“inadvertently overlooked” the issue when Justice
Kennard’s dissent, as Beeler himself recognizes, brought it
to the attention of the California Supreme Court. 6 And for
us to conclude that a line in a dissent speaks for the majority
is not only unprecedented, but in the habeas context, upends
the AEDPA deference we owe the majority opinion. We
therefore conclude that the California Supreme Court
addressed Beeler’s Sixth Amendment jury coercion claim on
the merits and apply AEDPA deference.
3.
“Any criminal defendant, and especially any capital
defendant, being tried by a jury is entitled to the uncoerced
verdict of that body.” Lowenfield v. Phelps, 484 U.S. 231,
241 (1988). Whether “the trial court’s actions and inactions
were noncoercive” should be assessed “individually and
cumulatively.” Early v. Packer, 537 U.S. 3, 9 (2002).
Beeler points to several cases, but none shows that the
California Supreme Court unreasonably applied clearly
established federal law. Wright v. Van Patten, 552 U.S. 120,
126 (2008) (“Because our cases give no clear answer to the
question presented, let alone one in [the defendant]’s favor,
‘it cannot be said that the state court unreasonably applied
clearly established Federal law.’” (cleaned up) (quoting
Carey v. Musladin, 549 U.S. 70, 77 (2006))). Beeler cites
Shields v. United States, 273 U.S. 583, 587 (1927) to argue
that there is coercion if the trial court’s direction to the jury
6
In fact, it is likely that the issue was deliberated by the Justices. See
generally Justice Goodwin Liu, How the California Supreme Court
Actually Works: A Reply to Professor Bussel, 61 UCLA L. Rev. 1246,
1255 (2014) (detailing the California Supreme Court’s unique and
intensive “deliberative process” of issuing opinions).

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

49

caused the jury to render a verdict “which they were plainly
reluctant to return.” But Shields concerned a district court’s
ex parte instruction to a deadlocked jury to continue
deliberating, which violated the defendant’s right “to be
present from the time the jury is impaneled until its discharge
after rendering the verdict.” 273 U.S. at 584–85, 588–89. It
did not concern a defendant’s Sixth Amendment right to an
uncoerced jury.
Beeler also cites to Jenkins v. United States, 380 U.S.
445 (1965) (per curiam) and United States v. United States
Gypsum Co., 438 U.S. 422 (1978), but they are factually
distinct. In Jenkins, the Supreme Court held that the district
court coerced the deadlocked jury’s verdict by demanding
that, “You have got to reach a decision in this case” after
they had been deliberating for only two hours. 380 U.S. at
446. And in Gypsum Co., the jury foreman had an ex parte
discussion with the judge about the deteriorating health of
the jurors and the jury’s deadlock, and the trial court’s stern
response gave the foreman the impression that there must be
a verdict “one way or the other.” 438 U.S. at 432. In
contrast, the jury here never indicated that it was deadlocked,
there was no supplemental instruction requiring the jury to
reach a verdict, and the trial court did not indicate the jury
was taking too long. To the contrary, the trial court
repeatedly confirmed that the verdict was reached
unanimously and voluntarily and was not rushed.
Additionally, because neither Shields, Jenkins, nor
Gypsum Co. were decided on constitutional grounds, Beeler
cannot rely on them under AEDPA. See Rushen v. Spain,
464 U.S. 114, 119 n.4 (1983) (explaining that Shields was
decided on non-constitutionally based rules of orderly trial
procedure); Early, 537 U.S. at 10 (“Neither Jenkins nor
Gypsum Co. is relevant to the § 2254(d)(1) determination,

50

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

since neither case sets forth a rule applicable to state-court
proceedings. . . . [N]either opinion purported to interpret any
provision of the Constitution. That alone would be enough
to defeat a claim that their application to state-court
proceedings is ‘clearly established.’”). We thus affirm the
district court’s denial of Beeler’s jury coercion claim. 7
D. California’s Death Eligibility Process
Beeler’s last uncertified claim argues that California fails
to adequately narrow the pool of defendants eligible for the
death penalty under the 1978 statute. This argument is
foreclosed. See Karis v. Calderon, 283 F.3d 1117, 1141 n.11
(9th Cir. 2002) (rejecting “argument that [California’s
sentencing] scheme does not adequately narrow the class of
persons eligible for the death penalty”); Mayfield v.
Woodford, 270 F.3d 915, 924 (9th Cir. 2001) (denying a
certificate of appealability because “[a] reasonable jurist
could not debate . . . that the 1978 California statute, which
narrowed the class of death-eligible defendants at both the
guilt and penalty phases, was constitutional”). We affirm the
denial of this claim.

The California Supreme Court also could have reasonably found that
the evidence does not amount to coercion. The trial court surveyed the
jurors multiple times to ensure that there was no “impropriety in the
verdict because of the press of time.” And none of the jurors claimed
that the delay caused them to change their vote. The most serious
declaration came from juror Harold W., who stated that he switched his
vote because he “did not want to hold everything up if [he] could not
convince others” to choose life without the possibility of parole and
“given the situation, [he] did not feel like [he] could take any more of the
jurors’ time.” But Harold W. did not say whether the “situation” had to
do with Michael C.’s family tragedy as opposed to feeling that no one
else would agree with him or that he was coerced into changing his vote.
7

BEELER V. BROOMFIELD

51

IV. CONCLUSION
We affirm the district court’s denial of Beeler’s petition
for a writ of habeas corpus.
AFFIRMED.

