FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
FRIENDS OF ANIMALS,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.

No. 24-5786
D.C. No.
3:22-cv-00365ART-CLB

DOUG BURGUM, in his official
capacity as Secretary of the Interior;
UNITED STATES BUREAU OF
LAND MANAGEMENT, an Agency
of the United States,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Anne R. Traum, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 21, 2025
Phoenix, Arizona
Filed January 14, 2026
Before: Richard C. Tallman, Bridget S. Bade, and Kenneth
K. Lee, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Tallman

2

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

SUMMARY*
Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act / National
Environmental Policy Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s summary
judgment in favor of the U.S. Bureau of Land Management
(BLM) in an action brought by Friends of Animals
challenging BLM’s decision to approve a contract with JS
Livestock for a new off-range corral (ORC) on private land
in Winnemucca, Nevada, to hold and feed up to 4,000 wild
horses and burros.
The panel held that Friends established representational
standing on behalf of its members at summary judgment.
The specificity of the members’ allegations and their
concrete plans to visit the Winnemucca ORC were sufficient
to establish an imminent, concrete, and particularized injury.
A sufficient causal connection between the alleged injury
and the challenged action also existed. Finally, the interests
at stake were germane to Friends’ interests in protecting
animals, and neither the claims asserted nor the relief
requested required individual participation in the lawsuit.
The Wild Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act (Wild
Horses Act) requires BLM to protect and manage wild freeroaming horses and burros as components of the public
lands, and that excess animals be humanely captured and
removed for private maintenance and care. To comply with
the Wild Horses Act and its regulations, BLM required JS
Livestock to follow BLM’s Comprehensive Animal Welfare
*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

3

Program Standards and imposed additional requirements
through its contract solicitation. Friends argued that the
Standards and requirements did not protect the animals from
unnecessary stress and suffering. The panel declined
Friends’ invitation to review BLM’s determinations of what
practices were necessary for humane treatment, and held that
Friends had not shown that BLM abused its discretion by
relying on the Standards and additional contract
requirements to ensure humane treatment of the animals
under the Wild Horses Act.
The panel rejected Friends’ argument that BLM violated
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). First, BLM
took the requisite “hard look” at the Project’s environmental
consequences as required by NEPA. Second, BLM
conducted
a
reasonable
analysis
of
project
alternatives. Finally, BLM provided a convincing statement
of reasons to explain why the Project’s impacts were
insignificant, and why it issued a Finding of No Significant
Impact. Therefore, BLM did not violate NEPA when it
decided not to issue an environmental impact statement.

4

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

COUNSEL
Andreia E. Marcuccio (argued) and Jennifer Best, Friends of
Animals, Wildlife Law Program, Centennial, Colorado, for
Plaintiff-Appellant.
Rebecca Jaffe (argued), Mark Pacella, Rickey Turner, and
Ezekiel A. Peterson, Attorneys; Environment & Natural
Resources Division; Adam R.F. Gustafson, Acting Assistant
Attorney General; United States Department of Justice,
Washington, D.C.; Virginia Tomova, Assistant United
States Attorney, Office of the United States Department of
Justice, Las Vegas, Nevada; Janell Bogue, Attorney, United
States Department of the Interior, Sacramento, California;
for Defendants-Appellees.
Jennifer R. Lovko, Greenfire Law PC, Berkeley, California,
for Amici Curiae Wild Horse Education and Rewilding
America Now.

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

5

OPINION
TALLMAN, Circuit Judge:
At issue in this case is the United States Bureau of Land
Management’s (BLM) decision to approve a contract for a
new off-range corral (ORC) on private land near
Winnemucca, Nevada, to hold and feed up to 4,000 wild
horses and burros. Plaintiff-Appellant Friends of Animals
(Friends) contends that BLM’s decision violated the Wild
Free-Roaming Horses and Burros Act (Wild Horses Act) and
the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA). The parties
filed cross-motions for summary judgment below. Finding
no violation of either statute, the district court granted
summary judgment in favor of BLM. Seeing no violations
either, we affirm.
I
A
In the early 1970s, the population of wild horses on
public lands had declined significantly because of the
encroachment of man and the continued impact of so-called
“mustangers” who harvested wild horses for commercial
purposes. In response to public outcry over this population
decline, Congress enacted the Wild Horses Act in 1971 to
protect these animals, which were “fast disappearing from
the American scene.” 16 U.S.C. § 1331. Declaring that
“wild free-roaming horses and burros are living symbols of
the historic and pioneer spirit of the West,” id., Congress
thus “extended federal protection to wild horses and
empowered BLM to manage horses roaming public ranges
as part of its management of public lands.” Am. Wild Horse

6

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

Campaign v. Bernhardt, 963 F.3d 1001, 1004 (9th Cir.
2020).
As it turns out, though, wild horses and burros have
virtually no natural predators, and herd sizes can double
every four years. The Wild Horses Act became “so
successful at replenishing the population of wild horses that
‘action [was] needed to prevent [the] program from
exceeding its goals and causing animal habitat destruction.’”
Id. at 1004–05 (alteration in original) (quoting H.R. Rep. No.
95-1122, 95th Cong., 2d Sess. 23 (1978)). Accordingly,
Congress amended the Wild Horses Act so that BLM could
more effectively “manage wild free-roaming horses and
burros in a manner that is designed to achieve and maintain
a thriving natural ecological balance on the public lands.” 16
U.S.C. § 1333(a).
Under the amended Wild Horses Act, Congress requires
BLM to maintain an inventory of wild horses and burros on
public lands so that BLM can determine whether “an
overpopulation exists on a given area” and whether “action
is necessary to remove excess animals.” Id. § 1333(b)(2). If
BLM makes such a finding, it “shall immediately remove
excess animals from the range so as to achieve appropriate
management levels.” Id. Removals must continue “until all
excess animals have been removed so as to restore a thriving
natural ecological balance to the range, and protect the range
from the deterioration associated with overpopulation.” Id.
Through its Wild Horse and Burro Program, BLM has
removed thousands of animals from the range to control herd
sizes as mandated by the Wild Horses Act. When BLM
removes excess animals from the range, it moves them to
ORCs throughout the United States. ORCs primarily serve
as temporary holding and preparation facilities for wild

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

7

horses and burros after they have been removed from the
public range through gather-and-removal operations. The
animals are then prepared for adoption by the public or for
placement in longer-term facilities known as off-range
pastures (ORPs). While at an ORC, animals are transitioned
to hay diets, examined by veterinarians, given necessary
vaccinations and deworming procedures, provided hoof
care, and may even be trained in advance of adoption or sale.
Each ORC is designed to handle large numbers of animals
with pens, corrals, alleys, and loading areas that facilitate
animal movement.
B
In March 2019, BLM estimated that there were over
88,000 wild horses and burros on public lands—more than
three times higher than the appropriate management level.
At that time, BLM did not have enough ORC capacity to
accommodate the wild horses and burros removed from the
range. And if left unchecked, this increasing overpopulation
would harm the land, other species, and the wild horses and
burros themselves. Accordingly, in 2020, BLM solicited
proposals for new ORCs to be located in Idaho, Nevada, and
Utah. The solicitation required that each ORC be able to
provide humane care for a one-year period and provided a
renewal option for four or nine one-year extensions. The
animals would remain in the ORCs until placed into private
maintenance through adoptions or sales, or transported to
permanent ORPs.
JS Livestock submitted a proposal to build an ORC in
Winnemucca in Humboldt County, Nevada, in response to
BLM’s solicitation (Winnemucca ORC or Project). JS
Livestock proposed to construct the Project on 100 acres of
private land previously used for growing alfalfa. The

8

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

Winnemucca ORC would house up to 4,000 wild horses and
burros. BLM issued JS Livestock an “apparent awardee
letter,” confirming that it would award the contract upon
successful completion of an environmental assessment (EA).
BLM then prepared a draft EA for the Winnemucca
ORC; notified interested individuals, organizations, and
agencies; and made the draft EA available for public
comment. BLM received over 6,700 comments, including
comments from the Nevada Division of Wildlife, Humboldt
County, and special interest groups, including Friends. In
November 2021, BLM issued the final EA, Finding of No
Significant Impact (FONSI), and Record of Decision
(ROD). BLM concluded that an environmental impact
statement (EIS) was unnecessary because the Winnemucca
ORC would not significantly impact the environment.
BLM issued the contract to JS Livestock after JS
Livestock obtained the required permits. BLM informs us
that the Winnemucca ORC is now operating and currently
houses about 3,000 animals.
Friends filed suit challenging BLM’s action to contract
with JS Livestock for the Winnemucca ORC. Both parties
moved for summary judgment. The district court denied
Friends’ motion and granted BLM’s motion, holding that
BLM complied with NEPA and the Wild Horses Act. This
appeal followed.
II
Because this case involves purported violations of the
Wild Horses Act and NEPA, the district court had original
jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1331. We have
appellate jurisdiction pursuant to 28 U.S.C. § 1291.

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

9

“This court reviews de novo a grant of summary
judgment.” In Def. of Animals v. U.S. Dep’t of Interior, 751
F.3d 1054, 1061 (9th Cir. 2014). In doing so, “[w]e ‘must
determine, viewing the evidence in the light most favorable
to the nonmoving party, whether the district court correctly
applied the relevant substantive law and whether there are
any genuine issues of material fact.’” Id. (quoting Balint v.
Carson City, 180 F.3d 1047, 1050 (9th Cir. 1999) (en banc)).
Because the Wild Horses Act and NEPA do not
articulate a standard of review, we review BLM’s action
under the Administrative Procedure Act (APA). Id. Under
the APA, we must set aside agency action if it is “arbitrary,
capricious, an abuse of discretion, or otherwise not in
accordance with law.” 5 U.S.C. § 706(2)(A). “Agency
action is arbitrary and capricious ‘if the agency has relied on
factors which Congress has not intended it to consider,
entirely failed to consider an important aspect of the
problem, offered an explanation for its decision that runs
counter to the evidence before the agency, or is so
implausible that it could not be ascribed to a difference in
view or the product of agency expertise.’” 350 Mont. v.
Haaland, 50 F.4th 1254, 1263 (9th Cir. 2022) (quoting
Motor Vehicle Mfrs. Ass’n of U.S., Inc. v. State Farm Mut.
Auto. Ins., 463 U.S. 29, 43 (1983)).
III
A
We examine first whether Friends has standing to bring
this case. Although BLM does not renew its argument on
appeal that Friends lacks standing, because “[s]tanding is a
necessary element of federal court jurisdiction,” “we must
determine that standing exists” before proceeding further.

10

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

Animal Prot. Inst. of Am. v. Hodel, 860 F.2d 920, 923 (9th
Cir. 1988).
The district court concluded that Friends established
representational standing on behalf of its members at
summary judgment. We agree.
An organization “has standing to bring suit on behalf of
its members when: (a) its members would otherwise have
standing to sue in their own right; (b) the interests it seeks to
protect are germane to the organization’s purpose; and
(c) neither the claim asserted nor the relief requested
requires the participation of individual members in the
lawsuit.” Hunt v. Wash. State Apple Adver. Comm’n, 432
U.S. 333, 343 (1977).
Turning to the first element, members of an organization
establish standing in their own right when (1) they have
suffered an “injury in fact” that is “concrete and
particularized” and “actual or imminent, not ‘conjectural’ or
‘hypothetical’”; (2) the injury is “fairly traceable to the
challenged action,” meaning there is “a causal connection
between the injury and the conduct complained of”; and
(3) it is likely that a favorable judicial decision will redress
the injury. Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560–61
(1992) (citation modified). “Cognizable injuries include
harm to aesthetic interests and environmental well-being.”
Animal Prot. Inst. of Am., 860 F.2d at 923.
Here, three of Friends’ members submitted declarations
at summary judgment describing their interest in wild horses
and burros. Two members live in Nevada, allege a deep
connection to the animals, and state that they feel compelled
to check on the animals at the Winnemucca ORC. One
member described an attempt he made to visit the Project
site, as well as his plans to visit the animals in light of BLM’s

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

11

public tours of the site. The members further described
alleged “inhumane and dangerous” conditions particular to
the Project and explained how seeing the animals there will
cause them “great sadness” and distress.
The specificity of the members’ allegations and their
concrete plans to visit the Winnemucca ORC are sufficient
under our precedent to establish an imminent, concrete, and
particularized injury. See id. at 924 (holding that plaintiff
organization’s members “have a special interest in
monitoring the well-being of wild horses and burros
removed from the range and kept in BLM holding
facilities”); see also Seattle Audubon Soc. v. Espy, 998 F.2d
699, 703 (9th Cir. 1993).
A sufficient causal connection between the alleged
injury and the challenged action also exists. But for BLM’s
decision awarding the contract, Friends’ members would not
be subjected to the alleged injury to their aesthetic interests.
A favorable outcome for Friends also would redress the
alleged injury: its members would not be subjected to
viewing wild horses and burros in allegedly inhumane
conditions if this court finds in Friends’ favor. Thus,
Friends’ members have shown standing to sue in their own
right.
In addition, the interests at stake are germane to Friends’
interests in protecting animals, and neither the claims
asserted nor the relief requested require individual
participation in the lawsuit. Accordingly, Friends has
established representational standing to bring this lawsuit.
B
Turning to the merits, we first consider Friends’ Wild
Horses Act claim.

12

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

The Wild Horses Act requires BLM to “protect and
manage wild free-roaming horses and burros as components
of the public lands,” 16 U.S.C. § 1333(a), and mandates that
excess animals “be humanely captured and removed for
private maintenance and care.” Id. § 1333(b)(2)(B). The
implementing regulations in turn prohibit “[t]reating a wild
horse or burro inhumanely.” 43 C.F.R. § 4770.1(f).
“Humane treatment means handling compatible with animal
husbandry practices accepted in the veterinary community,
without causing unnecessary stress or suffering to a wild
horse or burro.” Id. § 4700.0-5(e). “Inhumane treatment
means any intentional or negligent action or failure to act
that causes stress, injury, or undue suffering to a wild horse
or burro and is not compatible with animal husbandry
practices accepted in the veterinary community.” Id.
§ 4700.0-5(f).
To comply with the Wild Horses Act and its regulations,
BLM required JS Livestock to follow BLM’s
Comprehensive Animal Welfare Program Standards
(Standards), which provide comprehensive guidance for
building and managing ORCs. BLM developed these
Standards in collaboration with veterinarians and animal
welfare experts from the School of Veterinary Medicine at
the University of California, Davis, and based on its own
expertise. BLM also periodically reviews the Standards and
modifies them as necessary to improve effectiveness in
ensuring humane care for wild horses and burros. The
Standards set forth requirements addressing, among other
things, the condition of ground surfaces, vaccination
procedures, water systems, feeding areas, and shade and
shelter. They also require an on-site or on-call veterinarian’s
routine presence at the ORC. Animals “must be evaluated
daily by facility personnel to identify animals in poor body

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

13

condition, poor hoof condition, injured, or in need of
veterinary evaluation/treatment, and/or supplemental
feeding.”
BLM imposed additional requirements through its
contract solicitation, which is incorporated by reference into
the ROD. These additional requirements include, for
example, that all pens be cleaned twice per year or more
often when warranted; each pen provide at least 700 square
feet per animal and hold a maximum of 100 animals; 1
animals be fed good quality alfalfa or grass-alfalfa mix hay
sufficient to meet their nutritional needs; and contractors
minimize excitement and stress of animals in corrals and
chutes to prevent injuries.
Friends contends that the Standards and requirements do
not protect the animals from unnecessary stress and
suffering. Relying on public comments in the record,
Friends maintains that the Project’s requirements for the
density and number of animals, the size of the facilities,
cleaning and disease management, and extreme weather
shelter are all incompatible with accepted animal husbandry
practices. Based on our review of the record, BLM
addressed each of these issues through the Standards and
additional contract solicitation requirements. Friends simply
disagrees with BLM’s determination of what practices are
necessary for humane treatment and asks us to reweigh the
evidence in favor of its own experts. But it is not within our
purview to “engage in a battle of experts,” Morongo Band of
Mission Indians v. Fed. Aviation Admin., 161 F.3d 569, 577
(9th Cir. 1998) (citation omitted), and we decline Friends’
invitation to do so. BLM is “entitled to rely on the opinions
1

The Winnemucca ORC as designed exceeds this requirement as each
pen has approximately 750 square feet per animal.

14

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

of its own experts,” which it did here. HonoluluTraffic.com
v. Fed. Transit Admin., 742 F.3d 1222, 1233 (9th Cir. 2014);
see also Idaho Sporting Cong., Inc. v. U.S. Forest Serv., 92
F.3d 922, 928 (9th Cir. 1996). Such reliance was not
arbitrary and capricious. See HonoluluTraffic.com, 742 F.3d
at 1233.
Friends raises three additional arguments as to the
Standards, which we address now. First, Friends points out
that the Standards never went through notice and comment
rulemaking and are not referenced in the Wild Horses Act or
its regulations. While it is true that the Standards have not
been vetted through the formal rulemaking process and are
not referenced in the Wild Horses Act, it is not particularly
relevant. The real question here is whether BLM acted
reasonably in determining that the Standards, developed in
collaboration with veterinary experts, adequately ensure
humane treatment of animals at the Project, which, as
discussed above, it did.
Second, Friends cites various incidents and animal
deaths that have occurred at other ORCs as evidence that the
Standards will not ensure the animals at the Winnemucca
ORC are humanely treated. Here, however, BLM has
imposed additional requirements beyond the Standards.
Moreover, Friends does not provide evidence that the
incidents and deaths to which it cites are a result of
compliance with the Standards. To the extent Friends argues
that ORCs are inherently more hazardous than the wild, even
if true, that does not mean that ORCs are necessarily
inhumane.
Third, Friends emphasizes that the Standards are not sitespecific to the Project, particularly as to shade and shelter.
But BLM considered the Standards in relation to the

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

15

Winnemucca ORC. With respect to shade and shelter, the
Standards require that ORCs “provide access to shade and
shelter . . . for compromised animals,” and that ORC
managers evaluate and determine additional provisions for
shade and shelter as appropriate. As a term of the contract,
BLM is requiring JS Livestock to do so. The contract
solicitation further mandates that “[s]eparate corrals (with a
minimum of 400 sq. ft./animal) shall be available for
confining lame, sick, or compromised animals needing
special care, and must have access to overhead shelter and
wind break available within the corrals.” Accordingly, the
Standards are sufficiently specific to the Winnemucca ORC.
In sum, Friends has not shown that BLM abused its
discretion by relying on the Standards and additional
contract requirements to ensure humane treatment of the
animals under the Wild Horses Act.
C
We next consider Friends’ challenge to the district
court’s holding that BLM did not violate NEPA. Friends
contends that BLM violated NEPA by failing to (1) take a
“hard look” at the Project’s environmental impacts,
(2) address reasonable alternatives, and (3) prepare an EIS.
NEPA facilitates informed decisionmaking by requiring
agencies to consider the environmental impacts of their
actions. See Robertson v. Methow Valley Citizens Council,
490 U.S. 332, 348–51 (1989). “NEPA does not contain
substantive environmental standards,” but instead
“establishes ‘action-forcing’ procedures that require
agencies to take a ‘hard look’ at environmental
consequences.” Kern v. U.S. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 284
F.3d 1062, 1066 (9th Cir. 2002) (quoting Metcalf v. Daley,
214 F.3d 1135, 1141 (9th Cir. 2000)). Thus, while “NEPA

16

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

requires the agency to analyze environmental impacts and
prepare documents and make such analyses available for
public inspection, ‘NEPA does not require the agency to
weigh environmental consequences in any particular way.’”
Cascadia Wildlands v. U.S. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 153
F.4th 869, 880 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting Seven Cnty.
Infrastructure Coal. v. Eagle Cnty., 605 U.S. 168, 173
(2025)).
The procedural nature of NEPA limits the scope of
judicial review for these cases. As the Supreme Court has
recently reiterated, “[t]he bedrock principle of judicial
review in NEPA cases can be stated in a word: Deference.”
Seven Cnty. Infrastructure Coal., 605 U.S. at 185; see
Cascadia Wildlands, 153 F.4th at 903 (explaining that while
Seven County addressed a challenge to an EIS, “its teachings
[are] fully applicable” in the context of a challenge to an
EA).
Procedurally, an agency must prepare an EIS when
“undertaking a ‘major Federal action[] significantly
affecting the quality of the human environment.’” Montana
Wildlife Fed’n v. Haaland, 127 F.4th 1, 20 (9th Cir. 2025)
(alteration in original) (quoting 42 U.S.C. § 4332(C)). “To
determine whether an EIS is required, an agency may first
prepare an [EA].” Id. An EA is a “concise public
document,” 40 C.F.R. § 1508.1(h) (2020), 2 that “[b]riefly
provide[s] sufficient evidence and analysis for determining
whether to prepare an [EIS] or a finding of no significant
2

We cite to the 2020 version of NEPA’s implementing regulations
because that was the version in effect at the time BLM issued the
challenged decision. See Audubon Soc’y of Portland v. Haaland, 40
F.4th 967, 980 n.3 (9th Cir. 2022) (explaining that the version effective
at the time the ROD was issued governs our analysis).

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

17

impact.” Id. § 1501.5(c)(1) (2020). “If, after preparing the
[EA], an agency determines that the action ‘will not have a
significant effect on the human environment,’” the agency
“need not prepare an EIS” and may instead issue a FONSI,
which completes the NEPA process. Montana Wildlife
Fed’n, 127 F.4th at 20 (citation omitted). BLM properly did
so here.
1
As part of the EA, BLM was required to take a “hard
look” at the Project’s environmental consequences. Friends
contends that BLM failed to do so because it (1) relied on
the Project’s concentrated animal feeding operation (CAFO)
permit in its analysis, (2) did not fully consider the Project’s
impacts on soil and groundwater, and (3) did not fully
consider the Project’s impacts on the horses and burros
housed at the ORC. For the reasons discussed below, we
reject these arguments and conclude that BLM took the
requisite “hard look.”
a
Friends first argues that BLM used the CAFO permit to
limit the scope of its NEPA analysis and avoid addressing
the significance of the Project’s impacts.
The United States Environmental Protection Agency
regulates the discharge of pollutants from point sources to
waters of the United States through its National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permitting
program. Under this program, a CAFO operator must obtain
a NPDES permit, which sets forth requirements to prevent
pollution of water sources from manure and wastewater. 40
C.F.R. § 122.23(a). Along with the CAFO permit, a large
CAFO like the Winnemucca ORC must have a nutrient

18

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

management plan (NMP) to manage waste and prevent its
discharge into waters of the United States.
Id.
§ 122.42(e)(1). These permits require operators to take
specific measures to prevent pollutant discharges, including
ensuring
“adequate
storage
of
manure,”
id.
§ 122.42(e)(1)(i); “proper[ly] manag[ing] mortalities (i.e.,
dead animals),” id. § 122.42(e)(1)(ii); “ensur[ing] that clean
water is diverted,” id. § 122.42(e)(1)(iii); and preventing
confined animals from directly contacting waters of the
United States, id. § 122.42(e)(1)(iv).
In Nevada, CAFO permits are issued by the Nevada
Division of Environmental Protection (NDEP). While the
CAFO permit does not regulate discharges to groundwater,
Nevada state law does. Thus, NDEP also requires the terms
of a CAFO’s NMP to include provisions ensuring
compliance with state groundwater quality standards.
Accordingly, BLM required JS Livestock to obtain a
CAFO permit and NMP as part of the Project’s design
features and as a condition of its approval. BLM explained
that by requiring JS Livestock to obtain a CAFO permit and
NMP, “[i]mpacts to surface and ground water, potential for
nutrient release during flood events or creating nutrient
plumes, would be negligible.” BLM concluded that the
CAFO permit, NMP, and other design features would reduce
the risk of runoff and erosion, and ensure that all waste
would be stored “in a manner that prevents wastes and
sediment from entering surface water and seepage of
nutrients into ground water.” Thus, any impacts to
groundwater or soil would be insignificant.
In Robertson, the Supreme Court concluded that a
federal agency may condition project approval on obtaining
certain state agency permits when that project’s

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

19

environmental effects “cannot be mitigated unless
nonfederal government agencies take appropriate action.”
490 U.S. at 352–53 (explaining that in the context of a
mitigation plan “it would be incongruous to conclude that
the Forest Service has no power to act until the local agencies
have reached a final conclusion on what mitigating measures
they consider necessary”). The principles set forth in
Roberston are instructive here. BLM imposed as a condition
of approval a requirement that JS Livestock obtain a CAFO
permit and NMP and then analyzed the Project’s
environmental impacts under the assumption that those
permits would be in place. Consistent with Robertson, the
EA’s discussion addressed the environmental impacts and
“discussed” the CAFO permit and NMP requirements “in
sufficient detail to ensure that environmental consequences
[were] fairly evaluated.”3 Id. at 352; see also Env’t Prot.
Info. Ctr. v. U.S. Forest Serv., 451 F.3d 1005, 1015 (9th Cir.
2006) (upholding EA that “analyze[d] the Project under the
enumerated constraints and conclude[d] that any
environmental impacts [would] not be significant”). BLM’s
determination that the CAFO permit and NMP would
alleviate the Project’s impacts, particularly with respect to
groundwater and soil, was reasonable.
Friends relies on South Fork Band Council of Western
Shoshone v. United States Department of the Interior for the
proposition that BLM neglected its NEPA obligations by
relying on the CAFO permit. 588 F.3d 718 (9th Cir. 2009)
(South Fork). In South Fork, BLM did not discuss the air
quality impacts of transporting ore to an off-site processing
3

For this reason, BLM also did not abuse its discretion by conditioning
its approval on obtaining the CAFO permit, even though NDEP had not
started drafting the CAFO permit. See id. at 352–53.

20

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

facility in its EIS for a mining project because the off-site
facility operated “pursuant to a state permit under the Clean
Air Act.” Id. at 726. The court therefore held that BLM
violated NEPA because “[a] non-NEPA document—let
alone one prepared and adopted by a state government—
cannot satisfy a federal agency’s obligations under NEPA.”
Id. (citation omitted). But unlike BLM’s omission in South
Fork, here, BLM did evaluate the Project’s environmental
impacts. BLM then concluded that any impacts to soil and
groundwater would be rendered insignificant, in part,
through Nevada’s CAFO and NMP permitting process and
compliance with state water quality regulations.
Friends also contends that even if BLM could rely on the
CAFO permit in its environmental analysis, the CAFO
permit did not render the Project’s impacts insignificant.
The two cases Friends relies on for this argument are
distinguishable.
In Environmental Defense Center v. Bureau of Ocean
Energy Management, the agencies relied on a NPDES
permit in their EA approving a project for offshore well
stimulation treatments to conclude that any project impacts
would be insignificant to the marine environment. 36 F.4th
850, 874 (9th Cir. 2022). The court concluded that the
defendant agencies improperly relied on the NPDES permit
because the testing the NPDES permit required was not
intended for the treatments at issue and was inadequate to
measure the impacts of well stimulation treatments. Id. at
874–75. The permit would have to be modified to
adequately test those treatments, but because a different
agency issued the permit, the defendant agencies had no
power to do so. Id. at 875.

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

21

In contrast to the permit in Environmental Defense
Center, the CAFO permit is designed to address the exact
impacts of an animal operation like the Winnemucca ORC.
As noted by the district court, “the fit between the permit and
the regulated activity is” seamless “because the effluents of
a horse corral are precisely the type of discharge the CAFO
permit is designed to prevent.” Further, no modification to
the CAFO permit is required because, it is already “tailored
to specifically address the exact type of animal facility at
issue.” Accordingly, Environmental Defense Center is not
controlling.
Friends’ reliance on Calvert Cliffs’ Coordinating
Committee, Inc. v. United States Atomic Energy Commission
is also misplaced. 449 F.2d 1109 (D.C. Cir. 1971). In that
case, the Atomic Energy Commission had passed a rule
prohibiting its board from “conducting an independent
evaluation and balancing of certain environmental factors if
other responsible agencies [had] already certified that their
own environmental standards are satisfied.” Id. at 1117.
Here, BLM did not prohibit consideration of any
environmental impacts; rather, it considered potential
impacts and concluded that compliance with the CAFO
permit would ensure that groundwater impacts would be
negligible.
Accordingly, we see no abuse of discretion in BLM’s
reliance on the CAFO permit and NMP in considering its
environmental impact analysis.
b
Overlapping with its CAFO permit argument, Friends
next contends that BLM failed to take a “hard look” at the
impact on groundwater and soil, and ignored evidence
related to flooding.

22

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

As to groundwater, Friends asserts that BLM
contradicted its own experts’ findings that groundwater
contamination is likely to occur due to the lack of mitigation
measures for the area’s high-water table. But the record
reflects that BLM considered groundwater impacts and
adequately responded to public comments regarding this
issue. The EA determined that impacts to groundwater
would be negligible with the CAFO permit and NMP in
place. Further, an engineered drainage system would catch
any runoff from the site. These features would prevent
seepage of nutrients into groundwater.4
As to soil, Friends argues that BLM acknowledged the
“poor soil composition” at the Project site but failed to
provide any evidence that the Project’s design features
would adequately prevent impacts to the soil. But BLM
required the Project to implement a dust prevention and
control plan, establish a plan to manage soil drainage, and
obtain a CAFO permit to reduce impacts to soil. Friends
may disagree with BLM’s conclusion, but the record shows
that there is “a rational connection between the facts found
and the choice[] made” by BLM in the EA. Nw. Ecosystem
All. v. U.S. Fish & Wildlife Serv., 475 F.3d 1136, 1140 (9th
Cir. 2007) (quoting Nat’l Ass’n of Home Builders v. Norton,
340 F.3d 835, 841 (9th Cir. 2003)). Further, to the extent
that Friends complains the requirements were not set forth in
sufficient detail (i.e., BLM required adequate sloping to
ensure runoff, but did not specify what degree the sloping
needed to be), Friends in essence asks us to impose “a
4

Although Friends claims that “BLM’s own experts opposed BLM’s
reliance on the CAFO permit,” the email cited is part of a thread in which
a BLM employee was confirming that NDEP regulated groundwater
quality.

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

23

substantive requirement that a complete mitigation plan be
actually formulated and adopted” in BLM’s NEPA
evaluation. Robertson, 490 U.S. at 352. That is not what
NEPA prescribes. Id.
Lastly, we agree with the district court that the record
reflects BLM addressed potential impacts of flooding by
both mandating compliance with the CAFO permit and
recommending measures to prevent runoff in the event of a
100-year flood.
Accordingly, we conclude that BLM took the requisite
“hard look” at the Project’s impacts on groundwater and soil,
and in doing so, it did not neglect to consider evidence of
flooding.
c
Next, we consider whether BLM took a “hard look” at
the Project’s impacts on the wild horses and burros held at
the facility. See Am. Horse Prot. Ass’n, Inc. v. Andrus, 608
F.2d 811, 814 (9th Cir. 1979) (noting there that “the
environmental impact [was] not solely on the rangelands, but
on the horses as well” and that “wild free-roaming
horses . . . [are] ‘an integral part of the natural system of the
public land’” (quoting 16 U.S.C. § 1331)).
The EA does not have a separate section or conclusion
explicitly stating that there would be no significant impact
on the wild horses and burros housed at the Winnemucca
ORC. But as discussed, BLM reasonably relied on the
Standards and contract requirements to ensure humane
treatment of the animals housed at the facility. And it
concluded in the FONSI that the Project would not have any
significant environmental impacts.

24

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

Friends nevertheless asserts that the EA is deficient
because in response to public comments, BLM stated that
impacts on wild horses and burros within the facility were
“outside the scope” of the EA and that there were no wild
horses or burros in the Project area. Relatedly, Friends
contends that BLM improperly relied on unspecified EAs for
gather-and-removal actions (gather EAs) to conclude there
would be no significant impacts on the horses and burros at
the Project facility. These arguments stem primarily from a
BLM response to public comments, in which BLM stated:
This comment is outside the scope of this EA.
Impacts to individual animals are analyzed in
site-specific EAs. There are several other
ORC[s] throughout the west in similar
settings/climates with the same or similar
requirements. The conditions as a result of
these requirements in these other facilities
have shown to provide humane care for the
animals. Regardless of where these WHBs
are cared for, any WHB that is removed from
public land will be cared for in a similar
facility with the same or similar requirements
as described in the [site-specific] EAs,
therefore there is not a need to analyze the
impacts to individual animals within this EA.
As clarified by BLM’s counsel at oral argument, this
comment explains that BLM analyzes the impacts of
gathering, transporting, and holding individual animals
(including at ORCs) in separate gather EAs. Thus, BLM
concluded that because those impacts on animals are
separately considered, and because the decision at hand
related only to funding the contract for the Winnemucca

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

25

ORC, comments addressing the general impact of capture
and captivity on animals were outside the scope of the EA.5
In isolation, BLM’s response to the public comments
could be concerning. But in the context of the entire EA, it
is clear BLM did not ignore impacts on animals to be held at
the facility. BLM analyzed and addressed humane treatment
of the animals at the facility by requiring the contractor to
adopt and comply with the Standards and other requirements
to ensure animals are properly taken care of while housed at
the Winnemucca ORC. Mindful of the lower standard for
EAs, we conclude that BLM “reasonably explained its
environmental assessment.” Citizens Action Coal. of
Indiana, Inc. v. Fed. Energy Regul. Comm’n, 125 F.4th 229,
242 (D.C. Cir. 2025) (“When presented with an arbitrary and
capricious challenge, we must consider whether [the agency]
reasonably explained its environmental assessment, not
whether it used certain magic words.”).
Likening this case to Kern, Friends also asserts that
BLM’s analysis of impacts on wild horses and burros
violated NEPA because its reliance on the Standards
constitutes impermissible tiering to a non-NEPA document.
284 F.3d 1062. In Kern, the plaintiffs alleged that BLM
failed to adequately consider the impact of root fungus on a
specific variety of cedar. Id. at 1066. The court held that
BLM’s EIS and EA were inadequate because it tiered its
two-sentence analysis to a set of guidelines (for mitigating
5

Counsel for Friends also confirmed at oral argument that Friends is not
challenging the congressionally mandated capture and captivity of
excess wild horses and burros as a general matter. See Oregon Nat.
Desert Ass’n v. U.S. Forest Serv., 957 F.3d 1024, 1031 (9th Cir. 2020)
(“[A] party cannot challenge an entire agency management regime under
the auspices of the APA.”).

26

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

damage caused by the root fungus) that had never been
reviewed under NEPA. Id. at 1073–74.
In contrast to Kern, here, BLM did not tier its analysis to
a non-NEPA document; instead, it incorporated the contract
solicitation by reference into the EA, which incorporated the
Standards as a contract requirement. This incorporation was
not improper: “where an agency merely incorporates
material ‘by reference,’ without impeding agency and public
review of the action, the agency is not improperly tiering.”
All. for the Wild Rockies v. U.S. Forest Serv., 907 F.3d 1105,
1119 (9th Cir. 2018) (citation omitted).6
Finally, Friends argues that BLM did not consider how
the Winnemucca ORC would specifically impact the
animals, including the Project’s soil conditions, size and
capacity of the ORC, shelter, and disease transmission. As
discussed above, however, BLM considered these issues and
imposed the Standards and additional requirements to ensure
any impact would be nonsignificant. “While [Friends] may
disagree with the [EA’s] substantive conclusion
regarding . . . impacts [on horses], the [EA’s] discussion of
those impacts was reasonably thorough.”
Laguna
Greenbelt, Inc. v. U.S. Dep’t of Transp., 42 F.3d 517, 526
(9th Cir. 1994).
In sum, we are satisfied that BLM took the requisite
“hard look” at the environmental consequences of the
Project as required by NEPA.

6

BLM’s citation to site-specific gather EAs also does not appear to be
an attempt to tier or rely on unspecified documents to analyze the
Winnemucca ORC. Rather, BLM was clarifying the scope of its
assessment and the federal action at issue.

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

27

2
Next, we turn to whether BLM conducted a reasonable
analysis of project alternatives.
NEPA requires a federal agency to “study, develop, and
describe appropriate alternatives to recommended courses of
action in any proposal which involves unresolved conflicts
concerning alternative uses of available resources.” 42
U.S.C. § 4332(H). “[A]n agency’s obligation to consider
alternatives under an EA is a lesser one than under an EIS,”
and need only include a brief discussion of reasonable
alternatives. Native Ecosystems Council v. U.S. Forest
Serv., 428 F.3d 1233, 1246 (9th Cir. 2005).
“[T]he nature and scope of the proposed action” dictates
the range of alternatives for consideration.
Alaska
Wilderness Recreation & Tourism Ass’n v. Morrison, 67
F.3d 723, 729 (9th Cir. 1995) (quoting Idaho Conservation
League v. Mumma, 956 F.2d 1508, 1520 (9th Cir. 1992)).
Thus, “[w]hether the range of alternatives considered is
reasonable is to some degree circumscribed by the scope of
the statement of ‘purpose and need.’” Env’t Def. Ctr., 36
F.4th at 876 (quoting Westlands Water Dist. v. U.S. Dept. of
Interior, 376 F.3d 853, 865 (9th Cir. 2004)). Accordingly,
we “begin[] by determining whether or not the [EA’s]
Purpose and Need Statement was reasonable.” Westlands,
376 F.3d at 865. If it is, then we employ a “rule of reason”
analysis to determine whether the agency considered an
adequate range of alternatives to the proposed action. Id. at
868 (citation omitted).

28

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

BLM set forth the following purpose and need statement
for the Winnemucca ORC:
The purpose of the Proposed Action is to
construct, maintain, and operate an ORC
facility through a BLM contract with the
Contractor for a maximum of 4,000 excess
WHB on 100 acres of private land near
Winnemucca, Nevada. The need for the
Proposed Action is to provide holding space
necessary to safely and humanely care for
excess WHB removed from public lands
consistent with authority provided in Section
3 of the [Wild Horses Act].
Friends contends BLM drafted this statement too narrowly
to avoid addressing reasonable project alternatives and thus
preordained the outcome of the action. BLM responds that
it properly tailored the purpose and need statement to the
scope of the proposal under consideration.
BLM has the better argument. BLM has considerable
discretion in tailoring the purpose and need of the Project.
See Env’t Def. Ctr., 36 F.4th at 876 (explaining that
“agencies enjoy a good deal of discretion in framing the
purpose and need of an EA or EIS” (citation modified)).
Further, when preparing the purpose and need statement,
BLM must “consider the views of Congress” as expressed
“in the agency’s statutory authorization to act.” Nat’l Parks
& Conservation Ass’n v. U.S. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 606
F.3d 1058, 1070 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting Citizens Against
Burlington, Inc. v. Busey, 938 F.2d 190, 196 (D.C. Cir.
1991)). The need to provide holding space for excess
animals is consistent with Congress’s directives in the Wild

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

29

Horses Act, including to “immediately remove excess
animals from the range.” 16 U.S.C. § 1333(b)(2). Thus, it
does not appear unreasonable that BLM tailored the purpose
and need statement to JS Livestock’s specific proposal to
contract for an ORC on private land.
Additionally, as the district court explained, the Project’s
purpose and need statement “does not lead to a preordained
conclusion” because “BLM adequately considered the
alternative of no action.” See League of Wilderness Defs.Blue Mountains Biodiversity Project v. U.S. Forest Serv.,
689 F.3d 1060, 1070 (9th Cir. 2012) (concluding that
although some language “read in isolation” suggested that
purpose and need statement contemplated implementation of
study plan, the objectives were not too narrow when
considered in context). Accordingly, we conclude that the
purpose and need statement for the Winnemucca ORC was
reasonable.
The next prong of the analysis is whether BLM
considered an adequate number of alternatives given the
Project’s purpose and need. Here, BLM considered two
alternatives in its EA: funding the Winnemucca ORC and
taking no action.
We note at the outset that we have previously upheld
EAs that considered just two final alternatives. See, e.g., Ctr.
for Biological Diversity v. Salazar, 695 F.3d 893, 916 (9th
Cir. 2012) (upholding EA where agency initially considered
multiple alternatives, but ultimately considered only two of
those alternatives in detail); Earth Island Inst. v. U.S. Forest
Serv., 697 F.3d 1010, 1012 (9th Cir. 2012) (upholding EA
that considered the preferred alternative and no-action
alternative in detail and only briefly considered another
alternative proposed by the plaintiff); N. Idaho Cmty. Action

30

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

Network v. U.S. Dep’t of Transp., 545 F.3d 1147, 1153 (9th
Cir. 2008) (upholding EA that only discussed two
alternatives); Native Ecosystems Council, 428 F.3d at 1245
(upholding EA that considered six alternatives, four of
which were rejected without detail).
Friends nevertheless maintains that BLM’s analysis of
two alternatives was insufficient because it failed to consider
other alternatives, including (1) contracting with a long-term
ORP, (2) establishing a “BLM-owned and managed” ORC,
(3) reducing the number of removed horses and burros from
the range, and (4) imposing conditions that would make the
Winnemucca ORC safer and more humane. But the
Project’s purpose is to provide more ORC capacity, not to
reevaluate the system of management of wild horses and
burros. Accordingly, Friends’ suggested alternatives to
reduce the number of horses removed from the range and to
contract with a long-term ORP are beyond the scope of the
action. See Oregon Nat. Desert Ass’n, 957 F.3d at 1031.
Creating a “BLM-owned and managed” ORC also falls
outside the scope of the specific action proposed by JS
Livestock.
Friends’ assertion that BLM failed to consider an
alternative version of the contract with different terms
related to the conditions for the animals is also unavailing
for at least two reasons. First, although Friends asserts that
the public proposed this as a Project alternative, the
comment cited appears to be an attack on the standards of
care adopted by BLM—not a true proposal for a Project
alternative. Because Friends does not direct us to any record
citations containing this argument, we deem it unexhausted
and do not consider it. See Earth Island Inst. v. U.S. Forest
Serv., 87 F.4th 1054, 1064–65 (9th Cir. 2023) (“Because [the
plaintiff] failed to raise its proposed alternatives during the

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

31

comment period, it failed to exhaust its argument, and we
need not reach the merits of the suggested alternatives.”)
Second, and in any event, “it makes little sense to fault an
agency for failing to consider more environmentally sound
alternatives to a project which it has properly determined,
through its decision not to file an impact statement, will have
no significant environmental effects anyway.” Id. at 1066
(quoting Earth Island Inst., 697 F.3d at 1023); see also
Headwaters, Inc. v. U.S. Bureau of Land Mgmt., 914 F.2d
1174, 1181 (9th Cir. 1990) (explaining that “NEPA does not
require a separate analysis of alternatives which are not
significantly distinguishable from alternatives actually
considered, or which have substantially similar
consequences”).
As a final issue, Friends says that BLM did not address
the “no-action” alternative in “sufficient detail.” We
disagree. The EA explains that under the no-action
alternative, the Project site would not be impacted because
there would be no change to the local environment due to
any federal action. The EA addresses the no-action
alternative with respect to soil, raptors and migratory birds,
terrestrial wildlife, and social and economic conditions.
BLM concluded that the no-action alternative would result
in BLM not funding the contract and that “[i]t would be
speculative to assume how the Contractor would use the
existing agriculture land.” Such a statement was not
unreasonable: “NEPA does not demand a full discussion of
land use alternatives whose implementation is deemed
remote and speculative.” Friends of Endangered Species,
Inc. v. Jantzen, 760 F.2d 976, 988 (9th Cir. 1985) (citation
modified).
Accordingly, we conclude that BLM’s “consideration of
a ‘no action’ alternative and its ‘preferred’ alternative met its

32

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

statutory and regulatory duty to prepare appropriate
alternatives for the [] Project EA.” Native Ecosystems
Council, 428 F.3d at 1249.
3
Friends’ final challenge under NEPA is to BLM’s
decision to issue a FONSI. Friends contends that BLM
failed to provide a convincing statement that the Project’s
impacts would be insignificant and that it instead should
have moved forward with preparation of an EIS.
NEPA requires BLM to prepare an EIS if the Project will
“significantly affect[] the quality of the human
environment.” 42 U.S.C. § 4332(C). That requirement can
be triggered if “substantial questions are raised as to whether
a project may cause significant degradation of some human
environmental factor.” Blue Mountains Biodiversity Project
v. Blackwood, 161 F.3d 1208, 1212 (9th Cir. 1998) (citation
modified). Agencies determine significance by “analyz[ing]
the potentially affected environment and the degree of the
effects of the action.” 40 C.F.R. § 1501.3(b) (2020). When
considering the degree of the effects, agencies look at “shortand long-term effects,” “beneficial and adverse effects,”
“[e]ffects on public health and safety,” and “[e]ffects that
would violate Federal, State, Tribal, or local laws protecting
the environment.” Id. § 1501.3(b)(2) (2020).
BLM addressed the above factors in its FONSI and
concluded that the proposed action would not cause
significant environmental impacts. It also incorporated the
EA by reference into the FONSI analysis. It described the
potentially affected environment, including the affected area
and its resources, like migratory bird species. It considered
that while there would be short-term impacts during
construction, such as impacts to air quality, soil, and noise,

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

33

those impacts would dissipate once construction ended. It
found that the long-term benefits of providing a safe,
sanitary holding facility for wild horses and burros would
outweigh any short-term effects.
It addressed both
beneficial and adverse impacts and confirmed that no
concerns or known instances were identified where public
health or safety would be affected. It also concluded that the
action would comply with applicable federal, state, and local
laws.
Friends argues that BLM erred in reaching its conclusion
of no significant impact because it relied on “hypothetical
mitigation measures” and that mitigated FONSIs are subject
to additional requirements with respect to analysis of
mitigation measures. See 40 C.F.R. § 1501.6(c) (2020); 43
C.F.R. § 46.130(b) (2008). But BLM did not impose afterthe-fact mitigation measures; rather, it required the
contractor to comply with several requirements, like the
Standards and obtaining a CAFO permit, as mandatory
components of the contract. By incorporating those
measures “throughout the plan of action . . . the effects
[were] analyzed with those measures in place.” Env’t Prot.
Info. Ctr., 451 F.3d at 1015. Accordingly, “it cannot be said
that the EA fails to analyze the effects of the mitigation
measures; instead, the EA analyzes the Project under the
enumerated constraints and concludes that any
environmental impacts will not be significant.” Id. And to
the extent Friends complains that the EA’s discussion of
these design features is too short, we are mindful that an EA
is intended to be a “concise public document,” 40 C.F.R.
§ 1508.1(h) (2020), “[b]riefly providing sufficient evidence
and analysis for determining whether to prepare an [EIS] or
a finding of no significant impact.” Id. § 1501.5(c)(1)
(2020) (emphasis added).

34

FRIENDS OF ANIMALS V. BURGUM

Friends also argues that BLM provided no scientific
analysis or evidence in support of its determination that the
Project would not cause significant impacts. In doing so,
Friends reiterates the same arguments we have rejected
above regarding the insufficiency of the CAFO permit and
impacts to soil, groundwater, and the animals.
We conclude that BLM provided a “convincing
statement of reasons to explain why the Project’s impacts are
insignificant.” See Blue Mountains Biodiversity Project,
161 F.3d at 1212 (citation modified). Therefore, BLM did
not violate NEPA when it decided not to issue an EIS.
***
We conclude that BLM did not abuse its discretion or act
contrary to law when it approved funding for the
Winnemucca ORC contract. In reaching this determination,
we hold that BLM (1) did not violate the Wild Horses Act’s
mandate to ensure humane treatment of wild horses and
burros; (2) reasonably relied on contractor compliance with
the CAFO permit in its environmental impact analysis;
(3) took a “hard look” at the Project’s impacts to
groundwater, soil, and animals housed at the facility; (4) did
not abuse its discretion by considering only two alternatives;
and (5) provided a convincing statement of reasons why the
Project’s environmental effects would not be significant.
The district court thus properly granted summary judgment
to BLM, and it likewise properly denied Friends’ motion for
summary judgment.
AFFIRMED.

