FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
MAURICE LYDELL HARRIS,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
CLERIC MUHAMMAD, AKA: K.
Fasish; JACKSON, SQSP Christian
Chaplain; CHARLES RICHEY,
Chaplain, Community Resources
Manager of the CDCRs Division of
Adult Institutions Religious Programs
Oversight Unit,

No. 24-3307
D.C. No.
4:21-cv-00283HSG

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Haywood S. Gilliam, Jr., District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted September 17, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed February 4, 2026

2

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

Before: David F. Hamilton, Ryan D. Nelson, and Patrick J.
Bumatay, Circuit Judges. *
Opinion by Judge R. Nelson
SUMMARY **
First Amendment / Religious Land Use and
Institutionalized Persons Act
The panel vacated the district court’s denial of a
preliminary injunction, and remanded for further
proceedings, in an action brought by Maurice Lydell Harris,
a California state prisoner, who sought a diet consistent with
his religious beliefs.
Harris, a Nichiren Buddhist, asserted a sincere religious
belief in the need to eat cleanly and enrolled in the halal
prison diet as the option he believed most closely aligned
with his religious needs. The prison disenrolled Harris from
the religious diet program after he purchased non-halal items
from the prison commissary. He challenged that decision,
alleging violations of the First Amendment and the Religious
Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA).
The panel held that the district court erroneously dictated
the content of Harris’s beliefs and questioned the centrality
The Honorable David F. Hamilton, United States Circuit Judge for the
Court of Appeals, 7th Circuit, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

3

of those beliefs. Under a proper analysis, Harris could
demonstrate a substantial burden of his religious
exercise. And if so, then the government must show that its
regulation is the least restrictive means of achieving a
compelling government interest. If Harris’s RLUIPA claims
are likely to succeed, then the remaining factors would tip
sharply in Harris’s favor. Accordingly, the panel vacated the
district court’s denial of Harris’s request for a preliminary
injunction and remanded for the district court to conduct a
new analysis of whether Harris demonstrated a substantial
burden on his religious exercise.

COUNSEL
Adela Lilollari (argued), Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and
Dorr LLP, Boston, Massachusetts; Matthew T. Martens,
Wilmer Cutler Pickering Hale and Dorr LLP, Washington,
D.C.; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Gurpreet Sandhu (argued), Deputy Attorney General; Office
of the California Attorney General, San Francisco,
California; Martha P. Ehlenbach, Jaime Ganson, and George
R. Morris, Deputy Attorneys General; Neah Huynh,
Supervising Deputy Attorney General; Monica N.
Anderson, Senior Assistant Attorney General; Rob Bonta,
California Attorney General; Office of the California
Attorney General, Sacramento, California; for DefendantsAppellees.
Jeffrey C. Mateer, David J. Hacker, Stephanie Taub, and
Everett C. Marti, First Liberty Institute, Plano, Texas, for
Amicus Curiae First Liberty Institute.

4

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

OPINION
R. NELSON, Circuit Judge:
Maurice Lydell Harris is a prisoner in the California
prison system. He is a Nichiren Buddhist and asserts a
sincere religious belief in the need to eat cleanly. He
enrolled in the halal prison diet as the option he believes
most closely aligns with his religious needs. The prison
disenrolled Harris from the religious diet program after he
purchased non-halal items from the prison commissary. He
challenged that decision, alleging violations of the First
Amendment and the Religious Land Use and
Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA). The district court
denied a preliminary injunction. The district court erred in
concluding that Harris had no likelihood of success under
RLUIPA by wrongly questioning whether a halal diet is
central to Harris’s Nichiren Buddhist beliefs.
We
accordingly vacate and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
I
Maurice Lydell Harris, a practicing Nichiren Buddhist
since 2007, is incarcerated in the California prison system.
His beliefs require him to “eat wisely” and avoid
contaminating his body with “non-clean” food. He strives
to limit his diet to foods “not highly processed,” “organic,”
“[n]ot artificial or synthetic,” “[d]escribed as natural,” and
which do not “have a chemical-sounding name.” Harris also
tries to eat meat as close “to its natural state as possible.”

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

5

In 2007, 1 Harris asked the prison to provide a diet that
complies with his religious beliefs. Just one problem: the
California Department of Corrections and Rehabilitation did
not offer a Nichiren Buddhist diet that fully complied with
Harris’s religious practice. Instead, Harris could choose
from four alternatives to the standard prison diet: kosher,
vegetarian, plant-based, and the Religious Meat Alternative
Program (RMAP). RMAP offers the standard prison diet,
except that the meat is certified halal. Cal. Code Regs. tit.
15, § 3054.4(c). Halal meat is slaughtered according to
Islamic religious requirements, which typically requires that
the animal is healthy at the time of slaughter and all blood is
drained from the carcass. While RMAP is not a one-to-one
match of Harris’s religious beliefs, a prison chaplain advised
Harris that it was “the only religious diet she can offer which
best compliment[ed]” his request. Following the chaplain’s
advice, Harris accepted the diet “as an accommodation to
[his] ‘religious practice.’”
RMAP enrollees must agree to certain dietary
restrictions and monitoring of their diets. Id. § 3054.6(b)(3),
(f). In Harris’s case, he agreed that he could not purchase or
consume any food items not part of his religious diet. RMAP
enrollees are, however, allowed to eat food that does not
comply with their religious diet if RMAP compliant meals
are unavailable. Inmates must abide by these restrictions or
they will lose enrollment. See id. § 3054.6(f). The prison
explains that these regulations are necessary because
providing specialized religious diets to inmates is costly. By
enforcing these regulations, California argues that it screens
out inmates who insincerely enroll in a religious diet
There is some confusion whether Harris made the request in 2007 or
2010.

1

6

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

program because they prefer the food provided to the
ordinary prisoner diet.
From 2017 to 2018, Harris complained that the prison
enacted changes to RMAP meals, making the meals unable
to sustain him. The prison was allegedly replacing halal
meat with vegetarian options. This “negatively affect[ed]
his health,” causing him to “feel light headed” and
exacerbating his “history of fainting from lack of
nutriments.” During this time, a doctor told Harris to
increase his calorie and protein intake because of his
irregular heartbeat. These symptoms stymied his Nichiren
Buddhist “goal” of achieving “enlightenment” or
“Buddhahood,” which “requires him to maintain his strength
and focus.” As a result, Harris bought additional food from
the commissary, including non-halal products.
In
2018,
California
correctional
institutions
computerized their oversight of the religious-diet programs,
which allowed prison officials to track dietary violations
more efficiently.
Prison officials conduct quarterly
oversight reviews. When a prison official identifies a
violation, officials give the inmate a written notice without
penalty. Id. § 3054.9(a)(2). Enrollees may be subject to
removal from the program, however, if they commit two
violations within six months. Id. § 3054.9(a)(3). A religious
review committee determines whether violators may remain
enrolled case-by-case. See id. §§ 3054.3(g), 3054.9(d).
Soon after the 2018 computerization, the prison found
Harris in violation of RMAP requirements. Because RMAP
provides halal certified meat to inmates, enrollees who
consistently purchase non-halal certified meat products risk
disenrollment. Harris received multiple violation notices for
canteen purchases containing non-halal products, including

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

7

beef- and chicken-flavored instant ramen soups, pork rinds,
beef steaks, and salami. Many of these items appear highly
processed, contain artificial sounding ingredients, and are
not GMO-free.
Harris received his first notice of violation in 2019 for
his purchase of non-halal food, including instant ramen
noodle soup. He defended his purchase since “ramen soups
are such a staple in Nichiren Buddhist culture that adherents
promulgate, and work, in ramen restaurants.” Thus, he said
that ramen soups do not violate his religious diet or his
beliefs.
Harris continued purchasing non-halal products from
2020 through 2022. In 2023, Harris bought non-halal ramen
and other foods and received two notices of violation within
six months. As a result, the review committee disenrolled
Harris from RMAP.
In 2021, in response to several notices of violation,
Harris filed a pro se complaint against several named and
unnamed defendants. The district court screened the
complaint, removed several named defendants and all
unnamed defendants, and concluded the complaint “stated
cognizable claims for violation” of the First Amendment’s
Free Exercise Clause and Establishment Clause, the Eighth
Amendment, the Equal Protection Clause, and the Religious
Land Use and Institutionalized Persons Act (RLUIPA).
Later that year, Harris amended his complaint.
Harris sought preliminary injunctive relief.
He
explained that “Defendants are conditioning his ability to
maintain a GMO-free diet, as his Buddhist religion
requires,” and asked the court to grant him equitable relief to
continue eating ramen and other non-halal foods while
remaining on RMAP. The district court denied injunctive

8

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

relief because “the RMAP diet is not the GMO-free diet
Plaintiff contends is required by his religion.” Harris v.
Muhammad, 2022 WL 3030529, at *3 (N.D. Cal.
Aug. 1, 2022).
Two years later, Harris once again sought injunctive
relief to be “replaced back into the” RMAP without being
restricted to buying only halal foods from the canteen.
Again, the district court denied relief because “[e]xpulsion
from the RMAP diet would . . . not affect [Harris’s] ability
to observe his religion, as guaranteed by the First
Amendment’s free exercise clause or by RLUIPA.” Harris
v. Muhammad, 2024 WL 1745021, at *6 (N.D. Cal. Apr. 23,
2024). This timely appeal followed.
II
The district court had subject matter jurisdiction under
28 U.S.C. § 1343(a)(4). We have subject matter jurisdiction
to review the district court’s denial of a preliminary
injunction under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1). Harris has
also established Article III standing. 2 See Hartmann v.
California Dep’t of Corr. & Rehab., 707 F.3d 1114, 1128
(9th Cir. 2013).

In opposition to Harris’s first request for injunctive relief, defendants
claimed the appropriate officer was “Chaplain C. Richey.” But
defendants backtracked in their opposition to Harris’s second request for
relief because “Richey is not involved in these decisions” and instead,
alluded to two individuals not currently named as parties: “Corcoran
Chaplain Ugwu and Community Resources Manager Robicheaux.”
Given defendants’ own statements that Richey would be an appropriate
defendant for an injunction, it is reasonable to conclude that Harris has
established standing at this preliminary stage. On remand, the district
court should ensure standing exists and allow any reasonable amendment
by Harris to name the proper defendant.

2

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

9

We review the district court’s denial of a preliminary
injunction for abuse of discretion. See Baird v. Bonta, 81
F.4th 1036, 1040 (9th Cir. 2023). “A district court by
definition abuses its discretion when it makes an error of
law.” Koon v. United States, 518 U.S. 81, 100 (1996).
“Questions of law are reviewed de novo.” Jauregui v. City
of Glendale, 852 F.2d 1128, 1131 (9th Cir. 1988).
“The Supreme Court has instructed the federal courts to
liberally construe the ‘inartful pleading[s]’ of pro se
litigants.” Eldridge v. Block, 832 F.2d 1132, 1137 (9th Cir.
1987) (citation omitted). “This rule is particularly important
in civil rights cases,” id., like this one, when a plaintiff files
his complaint pro se and asserts constitutional and RLUIPA
claims.
III
To obtain a preliminary injunction, Harris must establish
that “he is likely to succeed on the merits, that he is likely to
suffer irreparable harm in the absence of preliminary relief,
that the balance of equities tips in his favor, and that an
injunction is in the public interest.” Winter v. Nat. Res. Def.
Council, 555 U.S. 7, 20 (2008); Klein v. City of San
Clemente, 584 F.3d 1196, 1201 (9th Cir. 2009) (burden for
each Winter factor on party seeking relief). The district court
erred by considering impermissible factors when it held that
Harris is unlikely to succeed on the merits. If Harris shows
an injury to his religious freedom rights, then the other
factors will likely tip in his favor. We therefore vacate and
remand.

10

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

A
1
“Congress enacted RLUIPA . . . to vindicate and protect
prisoners’ religious freedom rights.” The Federal Role in
Enforcing Religious Freedoms in Prison: Briefing Before
the U.S. Comm’n on Civil Rights, 34:8–10 (2024) (statement
of Professor Joshua C. McDaniel). RLUIPA provides that
“[n]o government shall impose a substantial burden on the
religious exercise of a person residing in or confined to an
institution, . . . even if the burden results from a rule of
general applicability.” 42 U.S.C. § 2000cc-1(a). The
government may do so, however, if the “imposition of the
burden on that person . . . is in furtherance of a compelling
governmental interest; and . . . is the least restrictive means
of furthering that compelling governmental interest.” Id.
RLUIPA should be construed broadly to favor “a broad
protection of religious exercise, to the maximum extent
permitted by the terms of . . . the Constitution.” Id.
§ 2000cc-3(g).
Harris bears the burden to prove a prima facie claim by
showing a substantial burden on his religious exercise.
Warsoldier v. Woodford, 418 F.3d 989, 994 (9th Cir. 2005).
Once that initial burden is satisfied, the government “bear[s]
the burden of persuasion to prove that any substantial burden
on [Harris’s] exercise of his religious beliefs is both in
furtherance of a compelling governmental interest and the
least restrictive means of furthering that compelling
governmental interest.” Id. at 995 (cleaned up). The district
court held that Harris failed to demonstrate a prima facie
case because “the RMAP diet is not providing Plaintiff with
the diet required by his religion.” This was an error.

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

11

2
“Inmates . . . have the right to be provided with food
sufficient to sustain them in good health that satisfies the
dietary laws of their religion.” McElyea v. Babbitt, 833 F.2d
196, 198 (9th Cir. 1987); see also Long v. Sugai, 91 F.4th
1331, 1337 (9th Cir. 2024) (“[F]ailure to provide food
consistent with a prisoner’s sincerely held religious beliefs
constitutes a substantial burden on the prisoner’s free
exercise.”). 3 Prison officials may deny a special diet if they
find that the prisoner is insincere in his religious beliefs. See
McElyea, 833 F.2d at 198. But a prisoner’s claim that he
sincerely believes a religious alternative is appropriate,
combined with a claim that being excluded interferes with
his faith, usually satisfies the test. Cf. Shakur v. Schriro, 514
F.3d 878, 889 (9th Cir. 2008) (prisoner sincerely believed
the kosher diet satisfied his Muslim religion).
RLUIPA defines “religious exercise” to include “any
exercise of religion, whether or not compelled by, or central
to, a system of religious belief.” § 2000cc-5(7)(A). And a
substantial burden is when the state “denies an important
benefit because of conduct mandated by religious belief,
thereby putting substantial pressure on an adherent to modify
his behavior and to violate his beliefs.” Shakur, 514 F.3d at
888 (cleaned up). RLUIPA “does not require” a prisoner “to
show his religious exercise . . . was required by his faith or
consistent with his past observance.” Slade, 23 F.4th at
1142–43.
While these cited cases focus on First Amendment challenges rather
than RLUIPA, First Amendment analyses can inform our understanding
of substantial burdens under RLUIPA. See Jones v. Slade, 23 F.4th
1124, 1139 (9th Cir. 2022) (RLUIPA protections are “more generous to
the religiously observant than the Free Exercise Clause”).

3

12

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

Harris sufficiently shows that the prison imposed a
substantial burden on his religious exercise as he
understands and interprets his faith. His Second Amended
Complaint details how his removal from RMAP leaves him
to choose “between his religious diet or receiving a prison
violation, and possible loss of his religious diet
accommodation of fifteen years.” By conditioning his
ability to receive the diet which most aligns with his beliefs
on whether he keeps Islamic dietary laws, Harris has shown
a substantial burden on his religious exercise. See Apache
Stronghold v. United States, 101 F.4th 1036, 1091 (9th Cir.
2024) (en banc) (Nelson, J., concurring) (“A government act
imposes a substantial burden on religious exercise if it
(1) requires the plaintiff to participate in an activity
prohibited by a sincerely held religious belief, (2) prevents
the plaintiff from participating in an activity motivated by a
sincerely held religious belief, or (3) places considerable
pressure on the plaintiff to violate a sincerely held religious
belief.”) (cleaned up).
Holding otherwise imposes a judicial assessment of what
diet is required by Harris’s Nichiren Buddhist faith, which is
the incorrect mode of analysis. The district court concluded
that Harris “is unlikely to succeed on the merits of his claim
because the RMAP diet is not providing Plaintiff with the
diet required by his religion.” The district court reasoned
that “whether meat is certified halal is irrelevant to his
religious dietary restrictions.” Thus, the district court
concluded that “[e]xpulsion from the RMAP diet would . . .
not affect Plaintiff’s ability to observe his religion, as
guaranteed by the First Amendment’s free exercise clause or
by RLUIPA.”
But “[i]t is not within the judicial ken to question the
centrality of particular beliefs or practices to a faith, or the

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

13

validity of particular litigants’ interpretations of those
creeds.” Shakur, 514 F.3d at 884 (citation omitted). Judges
ought not be Pharisees, decreeing from on high what
practices are relevant to a prisoner’s understanding of his
own faith. See Matthew 23:23. It is for Harris to determine
whether being on RMAP satisfies Harris’s Nichiren
Buddhist beliefs. And if external forces cause Harris to fall
short of the exact dictates of his religion, it is for him and his
conscience, not us as courts, to decide what compromises are
appropriate. Thus, it is sufficient that Harris asserts that he
sincerely believes that the RMAP program “is closest to his
spiritual needs.” In holding that an Islamic diet is not
required by Harris’s Buddhist faith, the district court erred
by discounting Harris’s own understanding of his faith—that
he should eat meat as close “to its natural state as possible”—
and instead reduced his faith to requiring a non-GMO diet. 4
Shakur bars this type of judicial reasoning. Shakur, who
was Muslim, was bound by the halal dietary requirements.
But he “assert[ed] that he sincerely believe[d] that the kosher
meat diet already provided to Jewish inmates would be
consistent with his religious faith.” Shakur, 514 F.3d at 885.
It mattered not that a practicing Muslim would eat only halal
meat, see id. at 882 n.2, or that kosher meat would therefore
not satisfy that standard, id. at 882. We held that denying
Shakur kosher meat burdened his religious exercise. What
mattered was that the prisoner sincerely believed that his
religious beliefs favored kosher meat.
4
Harris refers to his diet as a non-GMO diet in his complaint. And when
he claims his religion instructs him to eat meat as close “to its natural
state as possible,” he references a non-GMO diet. But as explained,
courts should not decide what Harris’s religion requires, and Harris
asserts that he enrolled in RMAP on the advice of a prison chaplain.

14

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

So too here. Harris believes that Islamic slaughter and
animal husbandry makes that meat religiously permissible
under the dictates of his religious conscience. Harris’s
departures from the Islamic diet—or even a Buddhist diet—
do not demonstrate that his beliefs do not require him to
adhere to that diet if possible. “[A] sincere religious believer
doesn’t forfeit his religious rights merely because he is not
scrupulous in his observance; for where would religion be
without its backsliders, penitents, and prodigal sons?”
Grayson v. Schuler, 666 F.3d 450, 454 (7th Cir. 2012). Each
man’s faith is his own, and judges must avoid questioning
whether a prisoner has strictly abided by the letter of his own
sincere belief.
The district court erred by considering these backslides
as part of a centrality inquiry (i.e., concluding that expulsion
from RMAP would not affect Harris’s ability to practice his
own religion). Thus, we vacate and remand for the district
court to reassess Harris’s prima facie substantial burden
argument.
Although courts may not determine what actions are
dictated by a plaintiff’s personal religious beliefs, a court
may determine whether those beliefs are sincerely held. See
Shakur, 514 F.3d at 885 (adopting sincerity test); Burwell v.
Hobby Lobby, 573 U.S. 682, 717–19 (2014). Sincerity is a
low bar, and all that it requires is “to determine whether the
line drawn reflects an honest conviction.” Burwell, 573 U.S.
at 725 (cleaned up); see also Ackerman v. Washington, 16
F.4th 170, 180 (6th Cir. 2021). In other words, sincerity is a
permissible inquiry for courts to make; centrality is not. This
rule makes sense. RLUIPA does not entitle insincere
believers in the “Church of Surf ‘n’ Turf” to luxury lobster
and steak dinners. But it also protects the rights of sincere
believers, who may not fully adhere to their stated beliefs.

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

15

Neither the district court nor the prison inquired into the
sincerity of Harris’s beliefs, only their centrality to his
religion. The district court should consider that issue in the
first instance.
If, after that inquiry, the district court concludes that
Harris’s religion was substantially burdened, then the
government must show that its regulation is the least
restrictive means to achieve its compelling interest. The
government has not yet established whether forcing Harris
off RMAP satisfies this standard. See Warsoldier, 418 F.3d
at 998–99 (prison officials have the burden to “establish that
the . . . policy is the least restrictive alternative”). If the
government cannot establish that its regulation is the least
restrictive alternative, then Harris would have a likelihood
of success on the merits of his RLUIPA claim.
B
If Harris can show a likelihood of success on the merits,
then he likely prevails on the other factors as well.
Infringement on religious liberties is significant irreparable
harm. See id., 418 F.3d at 1001; see also Opulent Life
Church v. City of Holly Springs, 697 F.3d 279, 295 (5th Cir.
2012) (RLUIPA infringement carries same irreparable
nature as a First Amendment harm). Harris plausibly alleges
that he must sacrifice his health or his beliefs.
The balance of the equities would also favor the narrow
equitable relief requested. Harris has shown that his access
to the RMAP will further his spiritual needs. On the other
hand, the state only cautions generally that courts should
minimally intrude “into the affairs of state prison
administration,” which requires “fashion[ing] the least
intrusive remedy that will still be effective” in righting
federal violations. Toussaint v. McCarthy, 801 F.2d 1080,

16

HARRIS V. MUHAMMAD

1086 (9th Cir. 1986) (citation omitted); accord Brown v.
Plata, 563 U.S. 493, 531 (2011). The narrow and temporary
equitable relief Harris requests—staying on RMAP while
awaiting a merits ruling—falls within that minimally
intrusive approach.
The public interest would also favor Harris. See
Associated Press v. Otter, 682 F.3d 821, 826 (9th Cir. 2012);
cf. § 2000cc-3(g) (Congress afforded “religious exercise”
“broad protection” under RLUIPA). Harris only requests to
be reenrolled in RMAP while being allowed to supplement
his diet, not to create a new Buddhist diet or any other broad
exception.
IV
The district court erroneously dictated the content of
Harris’s beliefs and questioned the centrality of those
beliefs. Under a proper analysis, Harris could demonstrate a
substantial burden of his religious exercise. And if so, then
the government must show that its regulation is the least
restrictive means of achieving a compelling government
interest. If Harris’s RLUIPA claims are likely to succeed,
then the remaining factors would tip sharply in Harris’s
favor. We therefore vacate and remand for the district court
to conduct a new analysis of whether Harris has shown a
substantial burden on his religious exercise.
VACATED AND REMANDED.

