FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
NANCY FIEDLER, Personal
Representative of the Estate of Lisa
Fiedler (Deceased); MATTHEW
GUINEY, Personal Representative of
the Estate of Marybeth Guiney
(Deceased); OLGA FAYNSHTEYN,
Personal Representative of the Estate
of Yuliya Krashennaya (Deceased);
KATIE OSBORNE, Personal
Representative of the Estate of Daniel
Garcia (Deceased); CHRISTINA
QUITASOL, Personal Representative
of the Estate of Michael Quitasol
(Deceased); SARMA WILLIAMS,
Personal Representative of the Estate
of Vaidehi Devi Campbell Williams
(Deceased); CHRISTINE
ALEXANDRA DIGNAM, Personal
Representative of the Estate of Justin
Dignam (Deceased); JASMINE
LORD, Personal Representative of
the Estate of Charles McIllvain
(Deceased); VICTORIA E. MOORE,
Personal Representative of the
Estates of Raymond Scott Chan
(Deceased) and Kendra Chan
(Deceased); YUKA OHASHI
MERRITT, Personal Representative

No. 24-5064
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-07065PA-MRW

OPINION

2

FIEDLER V. USA

of the Estate of Yuko Hatano
(Deceased); VIKRAM SINGH,
Personal Representative of the Estate
of Sunil Singh Sandhu (Deceased);
NINA HUTTEGGER, Personal
Representative of the Estate of JuhaPekka Ahopelto (Deceased);
YADIRA ALVAREZ, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Berenice Felipe (Deceased); SEJAY
TAN, Personal Representative of the
Estate of Wei Tan (Deceased); ERIC
BALTZ, Personal Representative of
the Estate of Neal Baltz (Deceased);
ANTHONY BEITZINGER, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Patricia Beitzinger (Deceased);
SHRUTI DEOPUJARI, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Sanjeeri Deopujari (Deceased);
ATLEE FRITZ, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Andrew Fritz (Deceased); SEEMA
SHARMA, Personal Representative
of the Estate of Kaustubh Nirmal
(Deceased); MARGARET STROM,
Personal Representative of the Estate
of Ted Strom (Deceased); RICHARD
X. LIU, Personal Representative of
the Estate of Xiang Lin (Deceased);
SUSANA SOLANO ROSAS,
Personal Representative of the
Estates of Evanmichel Solano

FIEDLER V. USA

Quitasol (Deceased), Angela Rose
Solano Quitasol (Deceased), and
Nicole Solano Quitasol (Deceased);
ARIEL TAKVAM, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Kristian Takvam (Deceased);
DOMINIC MICAEL SELGA,
Personal Representative of the Estate
of Fernisa June Sison (Deceased);
ROBERT KURTZ, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Alexandra Haley Kurtz (Deceased);
CHERIE MCDONOUGH, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Alexandra Haley Kurtz (Deceased);
JEAN ANNE ALLEN, as Executor
of the Estate of Steven John Salika,
Executor of the Estate of Carol Diana
Adamic and Administrator of the
Estate of Tia Nicole Adamic Salika;
JAMES ADAMIC, individually and
as beneficiary of the Estate of Carol
Diana Adamic (Deceased);
ANGELIKA ADAMIC, individually
and as beneficiary of the Estate of
Carol Diana Adamic (Deceased);
MARK ADAMIC, individually and
as beneficiary of the Estate of Carol
Diana Adamic (Deceased);
SHIRLEY SALIKA, individually and
as beneficiary of the Estate of Steven
John Salika (Deceased) and Tia
Nicole Salika (Deceased); DANIEL

3

4

FIEDLER V. USA

POH-HOCK CHUA, Personal
Representative of the Estate of
Kristina Oline Finstad (Deceased);
RYAN SIMS, individually; CHENG
LENG TAN; HENRY GARCIA,
Beneficiary of the Estate of Daniel
Garcia (Deceased); GREGORY
KRASHENNY, Beneficiary of the
Estate of Yuliya Krashennaya
(Deceased),
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Percy Anderson, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 22, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed January 30, 2026
Before: Richard R. Clifton, John B. Owens, and Patrick J.
Bumatay, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Owens;
Dissent by Judge Bumatay

FIEDLER V. USA

5

SUMMARY *
Suits in Admiralty Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal, under
the discretionary function doctrine, of an action against the
United States under the Suits in Admiralty Act (“SIAA”)
brought by personal representatives of people who were
killed and injured in a fire on the passenger dive boat M.V.
Conception.
Plaintiffs alleged that the United States Coast Guard was
negligent in authorizing the Conception to operate despite
various purported safety violations.
The panel held that the discretionary function exception
to the Federal Tort Claims Act (“FTCA”) applies to the
SIAA. The panel held that Thacker v. Tennessee Valley
Authority, 587 U.S. 218, 223 (2019), did not effectively
overrule Earles v. United States, 935 F.2d 1028, 1032 (9th
Cir. 1991) (holding that the discretionary function to the
FTCA applies to the SIAA), and Earles remains controlling
precedent.
The panel held that the district court correctly applied the
discretionary function exception. First, because no federal
statute, regulation, or policy mandates that Coast Guard
inspectors identify and correct the fire hazards alleged—
plastic trash cans and chairs and improper electrical
wiring—the inspectors’ alleged misfeasance was
discretionary. Second, Coast Guard inspections are
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

6

FIEDLER V. USA

textbook discretionary judgments, rooted in public policy
considerations, of the kind that the discretionary function
exception was designed to shield. Accordingly, the district
court correctly dismissed the suit for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction.
Dissenting, Judge Bumatay would hold that the plain text
of the SIAA expressly waives the United States’ sovereign
immunity over admiralty cases involving its vessels and
personnel. He would also hold that Earles has been
effectively overruled by Thacker, and would allow this suit
to proceed.

COUNSEL
Gretchen M. Nelson (argued) and Gabriel S. Barenfeld,
Nelson & Fraenkel LLP, Los Angeles, California; Matthew
D. Davis, Michael A. Kelly, and Spencer Pahlke, Walkup
Melodia Kelly & Schoenberger, San Francisco, California;
John R. Hillsman, McGuinn Hillsman & Palefsky, San
Francisco, California; E. Douglas DiSandro Jr., Robert J.
Mongeluzzi, and Jeffrey P. Goodman, Saltz Mongeluzzi &
Bendesky PC, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; Ilya D. Frangos,
Galine Frye Fitting & Frangos, San Mateo, California;
Robert H. Zimmerman, Zimmerman Law PC, Sacramento,
California; Jennifer Fiore and Sophia Achermann, Fiore
Achermann, San Francisco, California; A. Edward Fields,
W. Russell Fields, and W. Van Fields, The Law Offices of
W. Russell Fields, Sacramento, California; Alan Van
Gelder, Greene Broillet & Wheeler LLP, El Segundo,
California; Todd Abbott, Abbott & Abbott Law, Chula
Vista, California; Cory Itkin, Arnold & Itkin LLP, Houston,

FIEDLER V. USA

7

Texas; Kevin Mahoney and Daniel Rose, Kreindler &
Kreindler LLP, New York, New York; Theodore Poppinga,
Schuering Zimmerman & Doyle LLP, Sacramento,
California; for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Jill Rosa (argued), Senior Trial Counsel; Scott Perrygo and
Kyle Fralick, Trial Attorneys; Eric Kaufman-Cohen,
Attorney in Charge, West Coast; Civil Division; United
States Department of Justice, San Francisco, California;
Torts Branch; Gerard Sinzdak, Assistant Director, Appellate
Staff; Yaakov M. Roth, Acting Assistant Attorney General;
Civil Division; United States Department of Justice,
Washington, D.C.; Frank J. Anders, Trial Attorney; Office
of the United States Attorney, United States Department of
Justice, San Francisco, California; David M. Harris,
Assistant United States Attorney, Chief, Civil Division;
Bilal A. Essayli, United States Attorney; Office of the
United States Attorney, United States Department of Justice,
Los Angeles, California; for Defendant-Appellee.

8

FIEDLER V. USA

OPINION
OWENS, Circuit Judge:
On September 2, 2019, a devastating fire engulfed
passenger dive boat M.V. Conception. The inferno killed
thirty-four people, and extensive litigation followed. In this
case, personal representatives of the deceased and one
injured surviving crew member (“Plaintiffs”) have sued the
United States under the Suits in Admiralty Act (“SIAA”), 46
U.S.C. § 30901. They allege that the United States Coast
Guard—which previously inspected the Conception and
declared it safe—acted negligently and that its malfeasance
led to this tragedy. The district court dismissed the case
under the discretionary function doctrine. We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, and we affirm.
I.

FACTUAL
AND
BACKGROUND

PROCEDURAL

A. The Tragic Voyage
On August 31, 2019, thirty-three passengers and six crew
members boarded the Conception for a three-night scuba
diving excursion. The vessel had three levels: (1) an upper
deck with the wheelhouse and crew quarters, (2) a main deck
with the galley and bathrooms, and (3) a lower deck with
bunks, where all passengers and one crew member slept. In
the early hours of September 2, 2019, a fire ignited on the
vessel. The upper deck crew awoke to the main deck in
flames and abandoned ship. But all thirty-four people
trapped below deck perished. Post-accident inspectors
identified the vessel’s electrical system as well as electronic
devices and batteries as possible ignition sources, and plastic
trash cans and chairs as potential accelerants.

FIEDLER V. USA

9

Plaintiffs sued the Government under the SIAA, alleging
that the Coast Guard was negligent in authorizing the
Conception to operate despite various purported safety
violations, including faulty electrical wiring, plastic trash
cans, and plastic chairs.
B. The Statutory and Regulatory Regime
One of the Coast Guard’s eleven missions is marine
safety. 6 U.S.C. § 468(a). To this end, the Coast Guard must
“promulgate and enforce regulations for the promotion of
safety of life and property” at sea. 14 U.S.C. § 102(3).
These regulations include vessel safety standards, id. § 503,
for “small passenger vessels,” otherwise known as “Tboats.”
46 U.S.C. § 3301(8); see also 46
C.F.R. §§ 175.100–185.910 (Subchapter T).
The Coast Guard inspects T-boats for “compliance with
the standards required by” Subchapter T. 1 46 C.F.R.
§ 176.800(a). Subchapter T mandates that all T-boats have
a Coast Guard Certificate of Inspection (“COI”) to carry
commercial passengers. Id. § 176.100(a); see also 46 U.S.C.
In 1996, the T-boat regulations were updated and modified. Vessels
built before March 10, 1996, are generally subject to old Subchapter T
regulations (“Old T Regulations”), except for some new Subchapter T
regulations (“New T Regulations”), which apply no matter when the
vessel was built. See, e.g., 46 C.F.R. § 177.115(b) (renewal of “outfit
items such as furnishings and mattresses” must comply with New T
Regulations); id. § 183.115(a)–(c) (navigation lights, portable lights, and
new installations of electrical equipment material and the repair or
replacement of wire and cable are subject to New T Regulations). The
Conception was an Old T vessel built in 1981, meaning it was generally
subject to the Old T Regulations. But the parties dispute whether some
of the New T Regulations apply. As discussed infra, this distinction does
not matter here, as neither set of regulations imposed mandatory duties
on how the Coast Guard should conduct its inspections.
1

10

FIEDLER V. USA

§ 3307 (requiring vessel inspections). To obtain a COI, a
vessel must undergo an initial inspection by the Coast Guard,
46 C.F.R. §§ 176.400–176.402, and after five years,
reinspection to renew its COI, id. § 176.404; 46 U.S.C.
§ 3307(2). T-boats must also undergo annual inspections.
46 C.F.R. § 176.500(b).
In conducting the inspections, the Coast Guard must
“consistently interpret regulations and standards . . . to avoid
disruption and undue expense to industry.” 46 U.S.C.
§ 3305(d)(1). The regulations themselves provide general
guidance for what to do during inspections. See, e.g., 46
C.F.R. § 176.402(b) (during the initial inspection, certain
aspects of the vessel “may be checked” to determine if the
vessel is satisfactory); id. § 176.404(a) (subsequent
inspections “normally include[]” certain items); id.
§ 176.800(b) (when applying inspection standards, “due
consideration must be given to the hazards involved in the
operation permitted by a vessel’s [COI]”).
C. The Coast Guard’s Inspections of the
Conception
The Conception had received its most recent COI in
November 2014. The Coast Guard performed its annual
inspection in February 2019 and deemed the vessel “fit for
route and service as specified on the current COI,” allowing
the Conception to continue operating. Neither during that
inspection, nor other annual inspections that preceded it, did
the Coast Guard identify electrical wires, plastic trashcans,
or plastic furnishings as safety hazards.
D. Procedural History
Plaintiffs sued the United States in September 2021 and
filed a First Amended Complaint in February 2022 for

FIEDLER V. USA

11

wrongful death, survival damages, and personal injury under
the SIAA, which has a waiver of sovereign immunity. 46
U.S.C. § 30903(a).
In May 2024, after a delay due to criminal charges
against the Conception’s captain, the Government filed a
motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction
under Rule 12(b)(1) based on the discretionary function
exception to the SIAA’s waiver of sovereign immunity. 2
Plaintiffs responded that the motion should be continued and
decided on a summary judgment standard and also
contended that the Government’s challenged conduct was
not discretionary.
In August 2024, the district court granted the
Government’s motion to dismiss under the discretionary
function exception. It explained that “the applicable statutes,
regulations, and policies governing the Coast Guard’s
inspection of passenger vessels vest both the Coast Guard
and the individual inspectors with the type of discretion that
satisfies the Supreme Court’s two-part test for application of
the discretionary function exception.”

The discretionary function exception is rooted in the Federal Tort
Claims Act (“FTCA”). “The FTCA waives sovereign immunity from
suits arising out of certain negligent acts of federal employees.” Chang
v. United States, 139 F.4th 1087, 1092 (9th Cir. 2025) (internal quotation
marks and citation omitted); see also 28 U.S.C. § 1346(b)(1). However,
under the FTCA, the discretionary function exception explicitly
reinstates the United States’ immunity for any claim “based upon the
exercise or performance or the failure to exercise or perform a
discretionary function or duty on the part of a federal agency or an
employee of the Government, whether or not the discretion involved be
abused.” 28 U.S.C. § 2680(a).

2

12

II.

FIEDLER V. USA

DISCUSSION
A. Standard of Review

We review de novo a dismissal for lack of subject matter
jurisdiction under the discretionary function exception.
Myers v. United States, 652 F.3d 1021, 1028 (9th Cir. 2011).
“The government bears the burden of proving that the
discretionary function exception applies.” Id. (citation
omitted). We review underlying factual findings for clear
error. Lam v. United States, 979 F.3d 665, 670 (9th Cir.
2020).
B. The Discretionary Function Exception Bars
the Instant Suit
1. The Discretionary Function Exception
Applies to the SIAA
Before determining whether the Coast Guard’s conduct
here fell within the discretionary function exception, we
must confirm if the exception applies to the SIAA’s
immunity waiver in the first place.
Over three decades ago, this court squarely addressed
this issue in Earles v. United States, holding that the
discretionary function exception to the FTCA also “applies
to the SIAA.” 935 F.2d 1028, 1032 (9th Cir. 1991). In
Earles, the plaintiffs sued the United States under the SIAA
for a boating accident arising from the Navy’s alleged
negligence in failing to illuminate a mooring buoy. Id. at
1029–30. Although “the SIAA does not expressly immunize
the government for the exercise of a discretionary function”
like the FTCA does, we nonetheless extended the
discretionary function exception to the SIAA. Id. at 1031.
Holding otherwise, we explained, “would subject all
administrative and legislative decisions concerning the

FIEDLER V. USA

13

public interest in maritime matters . . . to independent
judicial review” if “those policy judgments were to cause
private injuries.” Id. at 1032 (quoting In re Joint E. & S.
Dists. Asbestos Litig., 891 F.2d 31, 35 (2d. Cir. 1989)). And
every circuit to have considered the issue has agreed. 3 But
more recent events require us to examine whether Earles
remains good law.
Plaintiffs argue for the first time on appeal that Thacker
v. Tennessee Valley Authority, 587 U.S. 218, 223 (2019),
effectively overruled Earles. 4 In Thacker, the Supreme
Court considered whether the discretionary function
exception applied to the Tennessee Valley Authority
See, e.g., McMellon v. United States, 387 F.3d 329, 338 (4th Cir. 2004)
(en banc) (listing all ten circuits’ cases holding that the discretionary
function exception applies to the SIAA and becoming the last circuit to
join the other circuits); Canadian Transp. Co. v. United States, 663 F.2d
1081, 1086 (D.C. Cir. 1980); Gercy v. United States, 540 F.2d 536, 539
(1st Cir. 1976); In re Joint E. & S. Dists. Asbestos Litig., 891 F.2d at 35;
Sea-Land Serv., Inc. v. United States, 919 F.2d 888, 893 (3d Cir. 1990);
Wiggins v. United States, 799 F.2d 962, 966 (5th Cir. 1986); Gemp v.
United States, 684 F.2d 404, 408 (6th Cir. 1982); Bearce v. United
States, 614 F.2d 556, 559–60 (7th Cir. 1980); Tew v. United States, 86
F.3d 1003, 1005 (10th Cir. 1996); Williams v. United States, 747 F.2d
700, 700 (11th Cir. 1984) (per curiam).
3

The Government argues that Plaintiffs waived the Thacker issue, as
they neither raised it in the district court nor argued that the discretionary
function exception was inapplicable to the SIAA. But we nonetheless
consider this issue, as it is “purely one of law and the opposing party will
suffer no prejudice as a result of the failure to raise the issue in the trial
court.” Kaass L. v. Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., 799 F.3d 1290, 1293 (9th
Cir. 2015) (citation omitted). Furthermore, “because the applicability of
[the discretionary function exception] affects our jurisdiction, we must
consider it sua sponte,” regardless of whether a party had raised the issue.
Mirmehdi v. United States, 689 F.3d 975, 984 n.7 (9th Cir. 2012)
(citation omitted).

4

14

FIEDLER V. USA

(“TVA”), a public entity that supplies electric power to
millions of Americans in its region “[j]ust as . . . privately
owned power companies (e.g., Con Edison, Dominion
Energy) do so in theirs.” Id. at 221. The TVA Act waived
the TVA’s sovereign immunity, stating that it “[m]ay sue
and be sued in its corporate name.” Id. at 220 (citation
omitted).
The Court unanimously held that “the waiver of
sovereign immunity in TVA’s sue-and-be-sued clause is
[not] subject to a discretionary function exception, of the
kind in the FTCA.” Id. at 223. The TVA Act explicitly
provides that the TVA may be sued, and does not “expressly
recognize[] immunity for discretionary functions.” Id. And
while the TVA Act contains specific exceptions to the
waiver of sovereign immunity, it “contains no exceptions
relevant to tort claims, let alone one turning on whether the
challenged conduct is discretionary.” Id.
The Court also balked at the government’s suggestion
that the TVA Act universally imported an implied restriction
to the waiver of sovereign immunity for discretionary
functions. The Court acknowledged that Federal Housing
Administration v. Burr, 309 U.S. 242, 245 (1940), outlined
circumstances when “sue-and-be-sued” clauses can be
interpreted in a narrower sense: (1) when the “type[] of suit
[at issue is] not consistent with the statutory or constitutional
scheme,” or (2) the restriction is “necessary to avoid grave
interference with the performance of a governmental
function.” Thacker, 587 U.S. at 224 (alteration in original)
(quoting Burr, 309 U.S. at 245). But the Court rejected the
government’s separation of powers argument and noted that
Burr’s latter implied exception confers the “possibility of
immunity . . . only when a suit challenges governmental
activities—the kinds of functions private parties typically do

FIEDLER V. USA

15

not perform.” Id. at 228. “When the TVA or similar body
operates in the marketplace as private companies do, it is
liable as they are for choices and judgments.” Id. at 227–28.
Because of the TVA’s hybrid status, the Court left for the
lower courts to determine on remand whether the TVA was
immune from the case at bar, which meant first deciding
“whether the conduct alleged to be negligent [was]
governmental or commercial in nature.” Id. at 229.
Plaintiffs argue that Earles is “irreconcilable” with
Thacker. We disagree. 5 “Generally, a panel opinion is
binding on subsequent panels unless and until overruled by
an en banc decision of this circuit.” United States v. Eckford,
77 F.4th 1228, 1233 (9th Cir. 2023) (citation omitted). But
one exception to this rule is where “intervening Supreme
Court authority is clearly irreconcilable with our prior circuit
authority.” Miller, 335 F.3d at 900. “[T]he clearly
irreconcilable requirement is a high standard that demands
more than mere tension between the intervening higher
authority and prior circuit precedent.” Eckford, 77 F.4th at
1233 (alternation in original) (internal quotation marks and
citation omitted). Thus, “[i]f we can apply our precedent
consistently with that of the higher authority, we must do
so.” Id. (citation omitted).

The dissent argues that our court (like many others) erred in Earles by
extending the discretionary function exception to the SIAA. Yet our
inquiry today is a narrower one: it is whether Earles is “clearly
irreconcilable” with Thacker. Miller v. Gammie, 335 F.3d 889, 900 (9th
Cir. 2003) (en banc). And Thacker did not decide if the SIAA, a statute
distinct from the TVA Act, lacks a discretionary function exception. For
the reasons set forth in our opinion (reasons the dissent does not dispute),
we respectfully disagree that we can overrule Earles at this point.
5

16

FIEDLER V. USA

While Thacker brings Earles into question, we cannot
say this tension rises to the level of “clear irreconcilability.”
Close v. Sotheby’s, Inc., 894 F.3d 1061, 1074 (9th Cir. 2018)
(“Nothing short of ‘clear irreconcilability’ will do.”). We
acknowledge that neither the TVA Act nor the SIAA
“expressly recognize[] immunity for discretionary
functions.” Thacker, 587 U.S. at 223. But this shared
feature alone is not enough for Thacker to “undercut the
theory or reasoning underlying [Earles] in such a way that
the cases are clearly irreconcilable.” 6 Miller, 335 F.3d at
900. Indeed, none of the tenets undergirding Thacker clearly
undercut the reasoning behind Earles, as these cases differ
in two key respects.
First, unlike the TVA Act, the SIAA does not involve a
sue-and-be-sued clause. Instead, the SIAA’s waiver of
sovereign immunity is more conditional. It provides that
“[i]n a case in which, . . . if a private person or property were
involved, a civil action in admiralty could be maintained, a
civil action in admiralty in personam may be brought against
the United States or a federally-owned corporation.” 46
U.S.C. § 30903(a) (emphasis added).
This textual
The only other court to consider this question concluded that Thacker
did not overrule Eleventh Circuit precedent holding that the discretionary
function exception applies to the SIAA. See Jones v. United States, 664
F. Supp. 3d 1311, 1319–20 (N.D. Ala. 2023). Notably, however, Chief
Judge Pryor disagreed. In a statement respecting the denial of initial
hearing en banc, he wrote that the Eleventh Circuit’s case law importing
a discretionary function exception into the SIAA was “wrong the day
[the Eleventh Circuit] decided it,” and “[t]o the extent [its] error . . . was
not obvious before, the Supreme Court removed any doubt in Thacker.”
Jones v. United States, 155 F.4th 1270, 1270–71 (11th Cir. 2025) (Pryor,
C.J.) (a statement respecting the denial of initial hearing en banc). As
detailed infra, we respectfully disagree with Chief Judge Pryor’s
application of Thacker to preexisting SIAA case law.

6

FIEDLER V. USA

17

distinction matters because of the long line of cases
concerning “sue-and-be-sued” clauses that influenced the
Court in Thacker. For instance, the Thacker Court discussed
implied exceptions to the waiver of sovereign immunity in
part because of Burr, which also involved a sue-and-be-sued
clause. Thacker, 587 U.S. at 224. And taking note from
Burr, the Court emphasized that such clauses “should be
liberally construed.” Id. (quoting Burr, 309 U.S. at 245); see
also id. at 226–27 (noting that Burr and later decisions
containing sue-and-be-sued clauses have distinguished
between the governmental and the commercial).
Next, Thacker concerned a hybrid entity, which
“sometimes resemble[d] a government actor, sometimes a
commercial one.” Id. at 228. While the TVA could not
invoke sovereign immunity for its commercial conduct, the
possibility of “an implied limit on the [immunity waiver]
clause” for its governmental conduct remained. Id. at 229.
Unlike the TVA, the Navy in Earles and the Coast Guard
here are not mixed entities conducting private sector
business. Rather, they are both traditional government
actors performing traditional “governmental activities,” for
which the Thacker Court explicitly preserved the
“possibility of immunity.” Id. at 228; see also United States
v. Odneal, 565 F.2d 598, 600–01 (9th Cir. 1977) (noting that
the Coast Guard’s primary functions are to enforce federal
laws and regulations to promote the “safety of life and
property on the high seas”) (citing 14 U.S.C. § 102)).
Accordingly, we cannot say that Thacker, which
addressed a sue-and-be-sued clause and the hybrid TVA
structure, is “clearly irreconcilable” with Earles, which
involved different statutory language and a traditional
government actor. Thus, we must continue to treat Earles as
controlling precedent.

18

FIEDLER V. USA

2. The District Court Correctly Applied the
Discretionary Function Exception
We now consider whether the discretionary function
exception should apply here. Plaintiffs allege that the Coast
Guard had a duty to identify and compel correction of
alleged fire hazards, including improper electrical wiring,
plastic trash cans, and plastic chairs. A two-part test governs
the discretionary function exception’s application. Berkovitz
v. United States, 486 U.S. 531, 536 (1988). A court first asks
whether “the challenged actions involve an element of
judgment or choice.” Schurg v. United States, 63 F.4th 826,
831 (9th Cir. 2023) (internal quotation marks and citation
omitted). If so, the court then asks whether “the judgment is
of the kind that the discretionary function exception was
designed to shield.” Id. (citation omitted). Applying this
test, we conclude that the discretionary function exception
bars recovery here.
a. Element of Judgment or Choice
We begin by inquiring “whether a federal statute,
regulation, or policy mandated a specific course of action, or
whether the government actor retained an element of
judgment or choice with respect to carrying out the
challenged action.” Id. (citation omitted). Where a
government employee’s action is “specifically prescribed by
‘a federal statute, regulation, or policy,’” the action is
nondiscretionary. Id. (citation omitted). And importantly,
where a government employee’s action is discretionary,
“whether the discretion involved was abused makes no
difference; the government will still prevail.” Lam, 979 F.3d
at 673.
Here, Coast Guard inspectors were not mandated to
identify the electrical wires, plastic trash cans, and plastic

FIEDLER V. USA

19

chairs as fire hazards. While vessel inspections themselves
are mandatory, see 46 C.F.R. § 176.500(b), inspectors have
discretion in how to conduct such inspections. Namely, both
the Old and New T Regulations do not require inspectors to
identify and correct the particular fire hazards alleged here.
The Old T Regulations provide only that “the marine
inspector shall require that all observed unsafe practices and
hazardous situations be corrected,” but do not define what
constitutes “unsafe practices” or “hazardous situations.” Id.
§ 176.25-50(a) (1995); see also, e.g., Schurg, 63 F.4th at 833
(concluding that an instruction for the Forest Service to
consult authorities “if suppression activities have a high
probability of occurring on private lands” involved
discretion because it failed to define “suppression activities”
or “high probability”). The same is true for the New T
Regulations. 46 C.F.R. § 176.830(a) (stating only that “all
observed unsafe practices, fire hazards, and other hazardous
situations must be corrected”).
And to the extent the New T Regulations single out
plastic trash cans or chairs, there is still no duty for
inspectors to identify these as hazards. See, e.g., id.
§ 177.405(f) (noting that “waste receptacles must be
constructed of noncombustible materials,” “[u]nless other
means are provided to ensure that a potential waste
receptacle fire would be limited to the receptacle”); id.
§ 116.423(b) (specifying only “[p]assageways and stairway
enclosures” as requiring “fire resistant furnishings”).
Similarly, cable and wiring regulations do not require
inspectors to identify allegedly faulty wiring. See, e.g., id.
§ 176.806(a) (noting that vessels’ electrical equipment
inspections could include “[i]nspection of all cable as far as
practicable”); id. § 183.340(b)(1) (requiring cable and wire

20

FIEDLER V. USA

to “[h]ave stranded copper conductors with sufficient
carrying capacity”).
The regulations even preserve the Coast Guard’s
discretion in conducting inspections. Section 176.402
provides that the “initial inspection may include an
inspection” of items such as “[s]anitary conditions and fire
hazards.” Id. § 176.402(c) (emphasis added); see also id. at
§ 176.402(b). Another section notes that inspectors must
give “due consideration” “to the hazards involved in the
operation permitted by a vessel’s [COI].” Id. § 176.800(b).
And it clarifies that “the standards may vary in accordance
with the vessel’s area of operation or any other operational
restrictions or limitations.” Id.
Because no “federal statute, regulation, or policy
mandated” that Coast Guard inspectors identify and correct
the plastic trash cans and chairs or any improper electrical
wiring, the inspectors’ alleged misfeasance was
discretionary. Schurg, 63 F.4th at 831 (citation omitted).
b. Public Policy Considerations
The second step of the discretionary function test “asks
whether the discretionary decision challenged by the
plaintiff ‘is of the kind that the discretionary function
exception was designed to shield.’” Nanouk v. United
States, 974 F.3d 941, 945 (9th Cir. 2020) (quoting Berkovitz,
486 U.S. at 536). This inquiry “preclude[s] courts from
second guessing discretionary judgments ‘grounded in
social, economic, and political policy.’” Id. (quoting United
States v. S.A. Empresa de Viacao Aerea Rio Grandense
(Varig Airlines), 467 U.S. 797, 814 (1984)). And as the
Supreme Court emphasized in Varig Airlines, “whatever
else the discretionary function exception may include, it
plainly was intended to encompass the discretionary acts of

FIEDLER V. USA

21

the Government acting in its role as a regulator of the
conduct of private individuals.” 467 U.S. at 813–14.
Coast Guard inspections are textbook discretionary
judgments rooted in public policy considerations. Inspectors
are instructed to interpret regulations “to avoid disruption
and undue expense to industry.” 46 U.S.C. § 3305(d)(1).
The regulations themselves even permit “departures from
the specific requirements when unusual circumstances”
arise, 46 C.F.R. § 175.550, and acknowledge that inspection
“standards may vary in accordance with the vessel’s area of
operation or any other operational restrictions,” id.
§ 176.800(b).
By requiring inspectors to “balanc[e]
considerations of safety and economics with reference to the
needs and uses of the particular vessel being inspected,”
these judgments satisfy the public policy considerations
prong of the discretionary function exception test.
Cassens v. St. Louis River Cruise Lines, Inc., 44 F.3d 508,
514–15 (7th Cir. 1995) (concluding the discretionary
function exception covered Coast Guard inspectors’
allegedly negligent omission); see also Smith v. U.S. Coast
Guard, 220 F. Supp. 2d 275, 281 (S.D.N.Y. 2002) (noting
that inspectors’ “judgments implicated considerations of
public policy” and were thus “shielded by the discretionary
function exception”).
Finally, the fact that the Coast Guard handles ten other
missions—beyond just marine safety—further highlights
that its judgments with respect to inspections are grounded
in public policy considerations. See Tew, 86 F.3d at 1006
(noting that whether it would be “economically or
operationally feasible” to commit Coast Guard resources to
a particular mission is “a proper basis for the exercise of
discretion”); Compagnie Mar. Marfret v. San Juan Bay
Pilots Corp., 532 F. Supp. 2d 369, 382 (D.P.R. 2008)

22

FIEDLER V. USA

(balancing “the needs of society and maritime commerce”
with “the expenditure of federal funds” is inherently
“grounded in social and economic policy”).
Accordingly, the district court correctly dismissed
Plaintiffs’ suit for lack of subject matter jurisdiction, as the
Government’s actions fell within the discretionary function
exception to the SIAA’s waiver of immunity.
AFFIRMED. 7

We also reject Plaintiffs’ procedural challenges. The district court
correctly considered the Government’s argument under Rule 12(b)(1)
(motion to dismiss for lack of subject matter jurisdiction) rather than
Rule 56 (motion for summary judgment). “In resolving a factual attack
on jurisdiction, the district court may review evidence beyond the
complaint without converting the motion to dismiss into a motion for
summary judgment.” Safe Air for Everyone v. Meyer, 373 F.3d 1035,
1039 (9th Cir. 2004). In addition, the district court did not abuse its
discretion by denying Plaintiffs’ request to stay proceedings, pending
resolution of the criminal prosecution against the Conception’s captain.
Discovery in the criminal prosecution related to the cause and origin of
the fire, which is not essential to the discretionary function exception
issue. See Lam, 979 F.3d at 673 (“[C]ourts should put the negligence
issue aside on a [discretionary function exception]-based motion to
dismiss and focus its inquiry on whether the employee’s acts were
discretionary.”).

7

FIEDLER V. USA

23

BUMATAY, Circuit Judge, dissenting:
Thirty-three passengers and six crew members boarded
the Conception for a scuba trip. The top deck of the
Conception caught fire while they were sleeping. The
flames spiraled out of control, trapping the passengers and
one crew member below deck. In the end, thirty-four people
perished.
Now, Nancy Fiedler—a mother of one of victims of the
Conception fire—and others bring this wrongful-death
action against the United States. Their suit alleges that a
chain of negligent acts led to the tragedy, including faulty
safety inspections by the United States Coast Guard. They
claim the inadequate inspections led to the Conception
operating with “open and obvious” fire hazards, contributing
to the death of their family members.
The question on appeal is not about whether the United
States should be held liable for the Conception fire, but
simply whether Fiedler and the others should have their day
in court. The answer should be easy. The Suits in Admiralty
Act (“SIAA”) provides that “a civil action in admiralty in
personam may be brought against the United States[.]” 46
U.S.C § 30903(a). This text settles the question. It expressly
waives the United States’ sovereign immunity over
admiralty cases involving its vessels and personnel. And
SIAA’s text contains no other exceptions. So nothing bars
Fiedler’s suit against the United States.
The majority says otherwise. Relying on Earles v.
United States, 935 F.2d 1028 (9th Cir. 1991), it closes the
courthouse doors because the so-called “discretionaryfunction exception” bars SIAA’s waiver of sovereign
immunity. But that’s wrong. SIAA’s text contains no such

24

FIEDLER V. USA

exception. And nothing indicates that Congress intended for
sovereign immunity to be impliedly preserved for
discretionary functions in admiralty suits. By creating a
discretionary-function exception out of whole cloth, we
usurp the legislative role and upset separation-of-powers
principles.
And Earles shouldn’t stand in the way of a faithful
reading of SIAA. In incorporating the discretionaryfunction exception into SIAA, Earles ignored plain text and
privileged a policy-based rationale. See id at 1032.
Recently, the Supreme Court has expressly commanded that
waivers of sovereign immunity must be evaluated according
to their text. See Thacker v. Tennessee Valley Auth., 587
U.S. 218, 223–24 (2019). And importing an atextual
discretionary-function exception into waiver-of-sovereignimmunity statutes, the Court said, violates Congress’s intent
and undermines the separation of powers. Id. at 226. Given
these clear directives, Earles has been “effectively
overruled.” Langere v. Verizon Wireless Servs., LLC, 983
F.3d 1115, 1121 (9th Cir. 2020).
Because we should have interpreted SIAA according to
its plain text, overruled Earles, and allowed this suit to
proceed, I respectfully dissent.
I.
Sovereign Immunity & the Suits in Admiralty Act
It is bedrock that the United States is generally immune
from suit. Dep’t of Agric. Rural Dev. Rural Hous. Serv. v.
Kirtz, 601 U.S. 42, 48 (2024). This rule dates to the
beginning of the Republic, based on the idea that no court
could exercise jurisdiction over a sovereign without its
consent. Cohens v. Virginia, 19 U.S. (6 Wheat.) 264, 411–

FIEDLER V. USA

25

12 (1821) (Marshall, C.J.). So a plaintiff suing the United
States must point to a Congressional statute waiving
sovereign immunity. Kirtz, 601 U.S. at 48–49. This
requirement is jurisdictional, so immunity may not be
assumed away to reach the merits of a claim. See FDIC v.
Meyer, 510 U.S. 471, 475 (1994).
For just over half our history, claims by vessel owners
against the United States—for example, those arising from a
naval warship colliding with a privately owned civilian
boat—were handled directly by Congress with private bills.
Canadian Aviator v. United States, 324 U.S. 215, 218
(1945). But American shipping picked up considerably
during the First World War, including via merchant vessels
owned and operated by the United States. Note, John Grier
Bartol, Jr., Maritime Liability of the United States, 100 U.
Pa. L. Rev. 689, 691 (1952). The result was more frequent
accidents between the government’s merchant fleet and
private vessels. See Note, Donald S. Ingraham, The Suits in
Admiralty Act and the Implied Discretionary Function, 1982
Duke L.J. 146, 153.
So Congress enacted three statutes between 1916 and
1925 to replace the inefficient private-bill system that
previously addressed such instances. McMellon v. United
States, 387 F.3d 329, 334–35 (4th Cir. 2004) (en banc).
First, in 1916, Congress passed the Shipping Act, which
subjected the government’s merchant fleet “to all laws,
regulations, and liabilities governing merchant vessels.”
Pub. L. No. 64-260, 39 Stat. 728 § 9 (current version at 46
U.S.C. § 808(b)). But soon after, the Supreme Court
interpreted the Act to allow private parties to seize
government-owned merchant vessels in in rem actions. See
The Lake Monroe, 250 U.S. 246, 256 (1919); Ingraham,
1982 Duke L.J. at 154.

26

FIEDLER V. USA

Congress was unsatisfied with that outcome and
responded with the original version of SIAA, prohibiting
these seizures. Pub. L. No. 66-156, 41 Stat. 525, 525 § 1
(1920) (current version at 46 U.S.C § 30908); see also
Ingraham, 1982 Duke L.J. at 154. Instead, Congress waived
the United States’ sovereign immunity for in personam
actions for damages involving government-owned or
operated vessels that were “employed as a merchant vessel.”
Id. at 526–27, § 2 (current version at 46 U.S.C § 30903(a)).
And a few years later, Congress passed the Public Vessels
Act, extending the waiver of sovereign immunity to actions
for damages involving other non-merchant ships (such as
naval vessels or federal pilot boats). Pub. L. No. 68-546, 43
Stat. 1112, 1112 § 1 (1925) (current version at 46 U.S.C.
§ 781).
In 1960, Congress simplified this troika of statutes by
removing SIAA’s limitation to only “merchant vessels.”
Pub. L. No. 86–770, 74 Stat. 912, 912 § 3 (1960). The
amended text (operative today) allows “a civil action in
admiralty in personam . . . against the United States or a
federally-owned corporation” if a case could have been
maintained against a private person, vessel, or cargo. 46
U.S.C § 30903(a). This change expanded SIAA’s coverage
of maritime tort claims asserted against the government.
United States v. United Cont’l Tuna Corp., 425 U.S. 164,
176 n.14 (1976). If a plaintiff would have had a valid action
in admiralty for damages against a private party, SIAA
waives sovereign immunity when the defendant is the United
States.
Despite SIAA’s broad language, courts have narrowed
its waiver of sovereign immunity. They’ve done so based
on the so-called discretionary-function exception—an
exception that appears nowhere in SIAA’s text. Instead, the

FIEDLER V. USA

27

exception is rooted in an entirely different statute—the
Federal Tort Claims Act (“FTCA”). See 28 U.S.C.
§ 2680(a).
First enacted almost 15 years before SIAA, the FTCA
subjects the United States to suit for money damages for
injury, death, or loss of property, “caused by the negligent or
wrongful act or omission of any employee of the
Government while acting within the scope of his office or
employment[.]” Pub. L. No. 79-601, 60 Stat. 812, 842 tit.
IV, §§ 401–24 (1946) (codified at 28 U.S.C. §§ 1346(b),
2671–80). The FTCA, however, expressly exempts from
waiver any suit “based upon the exercise or performance or
the failure to exercise or perform a discretionary function or
duty[.]” 28 U.S.C. § 2680(a). The purpose of the FTCA’s
discretionary-function exception purpose is “to prevent
judicial ‘second-guessing’ of legislative and administrative
decisions grounded in social, economic, and political policy
through the medium of an action in tort.” United States v.
S.A. Empresa de Viacao Aerea Rio Grandense (Varig
Airlines), 467 U.S. 797, 814 (1984).
Over time, every circuit to have considered the issue
imported this discretionary-function exception into SIAA.
See McMellon, 387 F.3d at 338 (compiling cases). In doing
so, they often acknowledged the lack of any discretionaryfunction exception in SIAA’s text. See e.g., Earles, 935 F.2d
at 1031. But they justified creating one based on concerns
over judicial “second-guessing” of executive-branch policy
choices. See, e.g., Canadian Transp. Co. v. United States,
663 F.2d 1081, 1085 (D.C. Cir. 1980); see also, cf. Varig
Airlines, 467 U.S. at 814. So in nearly every circuit today,
suits involving discretionary functions are barred even when
such “a civil action in admiralty could [have] be[en]

28

FIEDLER V. USA

maintained” against similarly situated private parties. 46
U.S.C § 30903.
And in 1991, our circuit joined the chorus. Earles
involved a deadly speed-boat crash off Seal Beach,
California. 935 F.2d at 1029–30. The district court held that
the United States was comparatively negligent for failing to
light a buoy that contributed to the crash, and awarded
damages. Id. at 1030. The Ninth Circuit reversed. Id.
Although we acknowledged that SIAA “does not expressly
immunize the government for the exercise of a discretionary
function,” we nonetheless imported the FTCA’s exception.
Id. at 1031. We reasoned that the FTCA’s discretionaryfunction exception was merely a “clarifying amendment,”
and so Congress expected that claims covered by that
exception would be immunized by “judicial construction”
even in its absence. Id. (simplified). We concluded that the
lack of an express exception in SIAA’s text did not mean
none should exist. Id. We then relied on what we viewed as
an unacceptable policy outcome for incorporating the
exception: Without the exception, “we would subject all
administrative and legislative decisions concerning the
public interest in maritime matters . . . to independent
judicial review[.]” Id. (simplified). This was sufficient for
the panel to join other circuits in holding that SIAA includes
a discretionary-function exception. Id.
II.
SIAA Has No Discretionary-Function Exception
Despite this current trend, SIAA is a broad waiver of
sovereign immunity for admiralty cases. It contains no
express discretionary-function exception. And nothing in its
statutory scheme reveals any congressional intent to import

FIEDLER V. USA

29

the exception. That should’ve settled this question,
subjecting the United States to suit here.
A.
Begin with SIAA’s text. It starts with the title “Waiver
of immunity.” 46 U.S.C § 30903(a). So we know exactly
what Congress was doing in enacting SIAA: “waiv[ing]
immunity.” The statutory text then contains a broad waiver
of sovereign immunity:
In a case in which, if a vessel were privately
owned or operated, or if cargo were privately
owned or possessed, or if a private person or
property were involved, a civil action in
admiralty could be maintained, a civil action
in admiralty in personam may be brought
against the United States or a federallyowned corporation.
Id.
The statute is clear—if SIAA’s conditions are met, then
“a civil action in admiralty in personam may be brought
against the United States[.]” Id. And none of SIAA’s
conditions depend on whether the government acted within
its discretion. See id. While “Congress need not state its
intent [to waive sovereign immunity] in any particular way,”
Kirtz, 601 U.S. at 48, this text could not be clearer in waiving
sovereign immunity for all admiralty cases involving the
government’s vessels, cargo, or personnel when a similarly
situated private party would be subject to a civil suit. Thus,
Congress expressly limited immunities only to those
available to private parties and disclaimed any discretionaryfunction exception for SIAA suits.

30

FIEDLER V. USA

This should be the end of the story. See Delligatti v.
United States, 604 U.S. 423, 439 (2025) (Gorsuch, J.,
dissenting) (“When faced with a question of statutory
interpretation, the text is where we must begin (and often
end).”). As the Supreme Court has recently said, our job is
to read waiver-of-immunity statutes in “their usual and
ordinary sense” and give their full meaning “even if
inconvenient, costly, and inefficient.” Thacker, 587 U.S. at
224 (simplified) (rejecting a discretionary-function
exception for the Tennessee Valley Authority Act). The
Court cautioned that lower courts shouldn’t create waiver
exceptions when “[n]othing in the statute . . . expressly
recognizes immunity for discretionary functions.” Id. at
223.
Of course, we must also consider whether statutory text
invokes a term of art, which may contain “implied
exceptions.” Id. at 224 (examining whether the TVA Act’s
“sue-and-be-sued” clause might have implied exceptions).
But unlike the sue-and-be-sued clause in Thacker, which had
well-recognized implied exceptions, no one suggests that the
precise language of SIAA—“a civil action in admiralty in
personam may be brought against the United States”—has a
comparable history of exceptions. Indeed, SIAA’s text is
more straightforward than the TVA Act’s sue-and-be-sued
terminology.
Several other reasons support sticking with the plain text
of SIAA.
First, the interplay between the FTCA and SIAA shows
that the discretionary-function exception should not be
imported from one to the other. While the FTCA contains
an express discretionary-function exception, it explicitly
excludes from its scope “[a]ny claim for which a remedy is

FIEDLER V. USA

31

provided by [SIAA] relating to claims or suits in admiralty
against the United States.” 28 U.S.C. § 2680(d). Even more,
SIAA contains an exclusive-remedy provision that would
prohibit looking to FTCA remedies anyway. See 46 U.S.C.
§ 30904. That means that “Congress made a considered
decision not to apply the FTCA to” SIAA. See Thacker, 587
U.S. at 225.
Recognizing the discretionary-function
exception in SIAA then would “negate that legislative
choice” and “let the FTCA in through the back door, when
Congress has locked the front one.” Id. Indeed, if Congress
wanted to import the discretionary-function exception into
SIAA, Congress could have easily cross-referenced it in the
FTCA or SIAA. Instead, Congress did the opposite by
expressly disclaiming any connection. 28 U.S.C. § 2680(d);
46 U.S.C. § 30904. Simply, the FTCA and SIAA are
mutually exclusive waivers of immunity and so “the FTCA’s
discretionary function provision has no relevance” to SIAA
cases. See id. at 223.
Second, SIAA’s enactment history—“to the extent it
plays any role here”—supports such a plain-text reading.
See United States v. Miller, 604 U.S. 518, 535 (2025). SIAA
was first enacted because of the Supreme Court’s 1919
holding that the Shipping Act allowed private claimants to
seize government-owned merchant ships. See The Lake
Monroe, 250 U.S. at 256. Yet Congress’s response was
measured—the 1920 SIAA didn’t prohibit suits against the
United States entirely but allowed in personam suits for
money damages. See 41 Stat. 525, 525 § 1. In other words,
Congress expressly limited the remedies plaintiffs could
recover because of its concern for governmental maritime
operations, yet it did not limit the United States’ exposure to
suit out of the same concern. This counts against reading the
discretionary-function exception into SIAA because it

32

FIEDLER V. USA

would go further than Congress’s chosen path for avoiding
interference with government activities. See Thacker, 587
U.S. at 226.
Third, “[w]he[n] Congress knows how to say something
but chooses not to, its silence is controlling.” In re Griffith,
206 F.3d 1389, 1394 (11th Cir. 2000). Recall that Congress
first enacted the FTCA with its express discretionaryfunction exception in 1946. See Varig Airlines, 467 U.S. at
809 (describing the legislative history of the FTCA). Recall
too that Congress amended SIAA in 1960 to waive sovereign
immunity for in personam suits in admiralty. United Cont’l
Tuna Corp., 425 U.S. at 176 n.14. Congress thus had almost
fifteen years of experience with the FTCA’s enumerated
discretionary-function exception and didn’t import it into
SIAA. Because “[w]e assume that Congress is aware of
existing law when it passes legislation,” Atl. Sounding Co. v.
Townsend, 557 U.S. 404, 422 (2009), it’s fair to say that
Congress knew how to create an exception to SIAA’s waiver
of sovereign immunity and declined to do so. So it would
violate the separation of powers for us to judicially graft one
onto SIAA. Cf. Bostock v. Clayton Cty., 590 U.S. 644, 646–
47 (2020) (“[W]hen Congress chooses not to include any
exceptions to a broad rule, this Court applies the broad
rule.”).
In sum, nothing in the text, structure, or enactment
history of SIAA supports a discretionary-function exception.
Indeed, even the circuit courts that recognize the exception
concede that they “cannot conclude that Congress clearly
intended for the SIAA’s waiver of sovereign immunity to be
subject to an exception for discretionary functions, nor can
[they] reach that conclusion by resort to traditional tools of
statutory construction.” McMellon, 387 F.3d at 340. To me,
that should end the analysis.

FIEDLER V. USA

33

B.
In contrast, courts that have read a discretionary-function
exception into SIAA have largely relied on misguided
separation-of-powers principles. Take Earles. There, the
panel majority reasoned,
Were we to find the discretionary function
exception not to be applicable to the SIAA,
we would subject all administrative and
legislative decisions concerning the public
interest in maritime matters . . . to
independent judicial review in the not
unlikely event that the implementation of
those policy judgments were to cause private
injuries.
Earles, 935 F.2d at 1032 (simplified). In McMellon, the
Fourth Circuit even suggested that the lack of a
discretionary-function exception would be unconstitutional
because it would “substantially impair[]” “the executive
branch’s ability to ‘faithfully execute [ ]’ the law.” 387 F.3d
at 342 (citing U.S. Const., art. II § 3). In other words, these
courts decided that they needed to protect the political
branches from themselves. And so, in their wisdom, they
fixed SIAA to deny waiver where Congress granted it.
While I have my doubts that the Republic would crumble
if the United States were subject to money damages for
longstanding admiralty tort claims, this policy-based
analysis turns the separation of powers on its head. The
separation of powers means that we judges must stay in our
lane. The Constitution unquestionably confers on Congress
the task of deciding when to waive the government’s
immunity. As the Supreme Court has instructed us, “the

34

FIEDLER V. USA

power to waive the federal government’s immunity is
Congress’s prerogative, not ours[.]” Kirtz, 601 U.S. at 48.
That definitionally precludes us from second-guessing
Congress’s choice to waive immunity. “[W]e have no
business rewriting the statute to supply exceptions that
Congress did not provide.” Jones v. United States, 155 F.4th
1270, 1270–71 (11th Cir. 2025) (Pryor, C.J. respecting the
denial of initial hearing en banc) (simplified) (observing that
the Eleventh Circuit’s precedent holding that SIAA includes
a discretionary-function exception was “wrong the day [the
Eleventh Circuit] decided it”). Indeed, “judges engage in
activism, not ‘restraint,’ when they amend the statutes
Congress writes.” Id.
Instead, the separation of powers requires us to
acknowledge that—when it comes to sovereign-immunity
waivers—“[t]he right governmental actor (Congress) is
making a decision within its bailiwick (to waive immunity)
that authorizes an appropriate body (a court) to render a legal
judgment.” Thacker, at 226. While we “may question the
wisdom of holding federal agencies accountable for their
violations,” “Congress’s judgment commands our respect
and the law it has adopted speaks clearly.” Kirtz, 601 U.S.
at 64. Here, Congress has clearly spoken: “a civil action in
admiralty in personam may be brought against the United
States” when a claim could be brought against a private
person. 46 U.S.C § 30903(a). No ifs, ands, or buts.
Finally, courts importing the discretionary-function
exception into SIAA conjure a parade of horribles to justify
the judicial intrusion. For example, we’re told that “without
a discretionary function exception, the government could be
held liable for an initial decision to build a dam across a
particular navigable waterway or to otherwise change the
course of a navigable waterway,” the “government could be

FIEDLER V. USA

35

held liable for the Coast Guard’s drug-interdiction
activities,” or “the government could perhaps even be held
liable for an inaccurate weather forecast.” McMellon, 387
F.3d at 342. Whether these policy-based justifications make
sense, that’s for Congress to balance and weigh—not us.
After all, “Congress is ‘far more competent than the
Judiciary’ to weigh such policy considerations.” Egbert v.
Boule, 596 U.S. 482, 491 (2022) (simplified).
So unquestionably SIAA has no discretionary-function
exception as a matter of text or congressional intent,
meaning that this suit should have gone forward.
III.
Thacker is Clearly Irreconcilable with Earles
One question remains—what to do with Earles? Earles
incorporated the discretionary-function exception into
SIAA. Earles, 935 F.2d at 1031. Does that mean that this
panel was powerless to do anything about its contravention
of SIAA’s text? The answer is “no.”
A.
Ordinarily, a three-judge panel can’t overrule a
precedent from a previous three-judge panel. Miller v.
Gammie, 335 F.3d 889, 900 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc). But
our circuit’s rule gives way to the Supreme Court’s
commands. Id. If a later Supreme Court decision
“undercut[s] the theory or reasoning underlying the prior
circuit precedent in such a way that the cases are clearly
irreconcilable,” we “should consider [our]selves bound by”
the Supreme Court’s reasoning. Id. “After all, unless we
wish anarchy to prevail within the federal judicial system,
we are always required to follow the controlling opinions of
the Court.” Langere, 983 F.3d at 1121 (simplified).

36

FIEDLER V. USA

And we are bound by the Court’s “mode of analysis,” not
just its results. Miller, 335 F.3d at 900 (simplified). So we
don’t require “carbon cop[y]” issues; it’s enough that they
derive from the “same inquiry.” Langere, 983 F.3d at 1121.
“Sometimes . . . our precedent becomes effectively
overruled by a Supreme Court decision that is closely on
point, even if the decision does not do so expressly.”
Langere, 983 F.3d at 1121. True, mere tension with
Supreme Court authority isn’t enough. See Lair v. Bullock,
697 F.3d 1200, 1207 (9th Cir. 2012). But when “a rule
announced by this court and a rule later announced by the
Supreme Court cannot both be true at the same time . . . the
former must give way to the latter.” Langere, 983 F.3d at
1122.
Contrary to the majority’s view, Earles’s analysis of
SIAA is clearly irreconcilable with Thacker and so we
should not have followed it. Thacker dealt with the TVA
Act, which contained a clause allowing it to “sue and be sued
in its corporate name.” 587 U.S. at 220. This clause has
been interpreted as a “broad” waiver of sovereign immunity
and does not include an express discretionary-function
exception like the FTCA’s. Id. Despite the lack of a textual
basis, however, lower courts had imported the FTCA’s
discretionary-function exception wholesale into the TVA
Act. Id. A unanimous Court reversed. Id. at 223.
In doing so, the Court instructed how we should construe
waivers of sovereign immunity. First, the Court looked at
the text of the statute. The Court directed that the text be
given its “usual and ordinary sense.” Id. at 224 (simplified).
And “[n]othing in the statute . . . expressly recognize[d]
immunity for discretionary functions.” Id. at 223. While the
TVA Act was subject to certain exceptions, it “contain[ed
none] . . . turning on whether the challenged conduct is

FIEDLER V. USA

37

discretionary.” Id. This lack of an express discretionaryfunction exception was all but dispositive of the question.
Second, the FTCA’s express exclusion of TVA Act
claims was another reason to not import the FTCA’s
discretionary-function exception. “Congress made clear”
that the FTCA did “not apply to any claim arising from the
activities of the TVA.” Id. (simplified). “That mean[t] the
FTCA’s discretionary function provision ha[d] no
relevance” to TVA Act claims. To hold otherwise would
“let the FTCA in through the back door, when Congress has
locked the front one.” Id. at 225. To the Court, this was
nearly the “end of the story.” Id. at 224.
Third, the Court then analyzed the purported separationof-powers concerns with denying a discretionary-function
exception. Importantly, it did so only because the precise
language used in the TVA Act—the “sue-and-be-sued
clause”—had been interpreted in the past to contain “implied
exceptions.” Id. (quoting Fed. Housing Admin. v. Burr, 309
U.S. 242, 245 (1940)). Because precedent suggested sueand-be-sued clauses uniquely might contain implied
exceptions, the Court considered whether any such
exception was “necessary to avoid grave interference with
the performance of a governmental function.” Id. (quoting
Burr, 309 U.S. at 245). In any event, the Court easily
dismissed those concerns. The Court flatly stated that
Congress’s decision to waive immunity—even for the
government’s discretionary functions—does not “offend the
separation of powers.” Id. at 226. It is simply enough that
“[t]he right governmental actor (Congress) is making a
decision within its bailiwick (to waive immunity) that
authorizes an appropriate body (a court) to render a legal
judgment.” Id.

38

FIEDLER V. USA

Finally, the Court thought it an “overreach[]” to suggest
that allowing suits based on the government’s discretionary
conduct would “gravely interfere with governmental
functions.” Id. (simplified). While recognizing that some
governmental activity might justify retaining some
immunity, the Court still rejected “the wholesale
incorporation of the discretionary function exception.” Id.
at 227. Instead, “a far more refined analysis” was required.
Id. Even when governmental activity is involved, something
like a discretionary-function exception “might” be invoked
“only” when it is “clearly shown” that it is “necessary to
avoid grave interference with a governmental function’s
performance.” Id. at 228 (simplified). It then remanded to
the lower courts to figure out when this “high bar” is met.
Id.
B.
The unmistakable import of Thacker is that the text and
structure of the law governs whether an exception to the
waiver of sovereign immunity exists. See also Miller, 604
U.S. at 529 (examining “text and structure” to decide
whether sovereign-immunity was waived). And only when
“implied exceptions” to that text have been recognized do
we even consider whether “grave interference” with a
government function would require any exception to the
waiver. Thacker, 587 U.S. at 223. And even then, “the
wholesale incorporation of the discretionary function
exception” is never appropriate. Id. at 227. Earles failed to
follow any of this analysis, making it and Thacker “clearly
irreconcilable.” Miller, 335 F.3d at 900.
First, Earles purposefully disregarded SIAA’s plain text.
See Earles, 935 F.2d at 1031. It conceded that “the SIAA
does not expressly immunize the government for the

FIEDLER V. USA

39

exercise of a discretionary function.” Id. But unlike in
Thacker, a lack of text was no obstacle; Earles merely
proclaimed that “the omission of the Exception from the
SIAA does not necessarily mean that the SIAA is not subject
to it.” Id. So the text wasn’t that important to Earles. While
the majority downplays this incompatibility with Thacker, it
can’t ignore that plain-text analysis was central to the
Court’s reasoning in that case.
Second, rather than recognizing the FTCA’s express
inapplicability to SIAA claims, Earles imported wholesale
the FTCA’s textual discretionary-function exception into
SIAA. Unlike Thacker, Earles ignored that the FTCA
expressly excluded claims under SIAA from its scope. See
28 U.S.C. § 2680(d). Instead, Earles coupled the two
statutes together and ruled that “the Discretionary Function
Exception applies to SIAA as well as to the FTCA.” 935
F.2d at 1032. But this smuggles the FTCA into SIAA
against Congress’s express wishes and the Court’s
instruction in Thacker. See Thacker, 587 U.S. at 225
(warning against “let[ting] the FTCA in through the back
door, when Congress has locked the front one”).
Third, Earles shouldn’t have even considered
separation-of-powers concerns.
Again, Thacker only
analyzed that issue because the “sue-and-be-sued clause”
has been historically recognized to contain “implied
exceptions.” Id. at 224. We have no such language or terms
of art here. While the majority says Thacker is based on the
TVA Act’s “sue-and-be-sued” language, the Court’s textual
reasoning applies with even greater force here because no
one argues that SIAA’s straightforward language contains
similar established implied exceptions. Indeed, SIAA could
not be clearer: if its conditions are met, then “a civil action
in admiralty in personam may be brought against the United

40

FIEDLER V. USA

States.” 46 U.S.C. § 30903(a). And so the majority is
simply wrong to cast SIAA’s waiver as “more conditional”
than the TVA Act’s term-of-art phrase. So based on
Thacker’s reasoning, Earles should be overruled just by
looking at SIAA’s text.
Fourth, even if we should consider separation-of-powers
concerns, Earles got them exactly wrong. Earles believed
denying an exception would “subject all administrative and
legislative decisions concerning the public interest in
maritime matters . . . to independent judicial review[.]” 935
F.2d at 1031 (simplified). But this was precisely opposite to
what the Supreme Court said in Thacker: as long as the
“right governmental actor (Congress)” decides to
“authorize[] an appropriate body (a court) to render a legal
judgment,” then there are no “separation of powers
problems.” Id. at 226.
Finally, even if the discretionary-function exception has
any relevance in SIAA suits, Earles’s wholesale importation
of the FTCA exception violates Thacker’s teachings. Once
again, Thacker emphasized that recognizing any exception
to the waiver of immunity required “a far more refined
analysis” than “wholesale incorporation” of the exception.
Id. at 227. Any implied exception would apply only to a
narrow category of government conduct: when the
government “clearly show[s]” that it is “necessary to avoid
grave interference with a governmental function’s
performance.” Id. at 228 (simplified). Rather than clearing
this “high bar,” id., Earles granted the government immunity
in all admiralty cases involving any government discretion,
Earles, 935 F.2d at 1032.
In sum, the “mode of analysis” that Earles employed was
expressly rejected by Thacker in deciding a “closely on

FIEDLER V. USA

41

point” question of law. Langere, 983 F.3d at 1121. Thus,
Thacker “effectively overruled” Earles and this panel was
not bound to follow it. Id.
IV.
The Supreme Court has told us that when it comes to
sovereign immunity, text is supreme and Congress’s will
trumps our own. We should have listened to the Court’s
instructions and recognized that Earles has been effectively
overruled.
I respectfully dissent.

