FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LUIS CARDENAS-ORNELAS,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
CALVIN JOHNSON; HAROLD
WICKHAM; CHARLES DANIELS;
GARY PICCININI; TIMOTHY
STRUCK; ROBERT OWENS;
JESSIE BRIGHTWELL; MANUEL
PORTILLO; TIMOTHY JOHNSON,

No. 24-6755
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-00030ART-MDC

OPINION

Defendants - Appellants,
and
J. ALCOCK, JULIO CALDERIN,
Defendants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Anne R. Traum, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 9, 2025
Las Vegas, Nevada
Filed January 29, 2026

2

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

Before: Mark J. Bennett, Gabriel P. Sanchez, and Holly A.
Thomas, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bennett
SUMMARY *
Qualified Immunity
The panel affirmed in part and reversed in part the
district court’s denial, on summary judgment, of qualified
immunity to Warden Calvin Johnson in an action brought
pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and state law by Luis
Cardenas-Ornelas, a Nevada state prisoner, alleging
constitutional violations in connection with his quarantine
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Cardenas-Ornelas alleged that during the COVID-19
pandemic staff at High Desert State Prison denied him
outdoor exercise in violation of the Eighth Amendment,
despite ordering him to work and permitting yard time for
inmates in other units, and treated him and his unit
differently from others in violation of the Fourteenth
Amendment.
The panel held the district court properly denied Warden
Johnson qualified immunity on the Eighth Amendment
claim. At the time of the alleged deprivation, a prisoner’s
Eighth Amendment right to outdoor exercise or otherwise
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

3

meaningful opportunities for recreation was clearly
established. Viewing the evidence in the light most
favorable to Cardenas-Ornelas, he presented sufficient
evidence which raised triable issues of fact on both the
objective and subjective prongs of his Eighth Amendment
claim.
The panel reversed the district court’s denial of qualified
immunity to Warden Johnson on the Fourteenth Amendment
claim. Cardenas-Ornelas did not establish a genuine dispute
of material fact because he failed to introduce summary
judgment evidence that ruled out every conceivable basis
which might support the alleged differences in yard time
afforded Cardenas-Ornelas’s unit and other units, or
Cardenas-Ornelas and other inmates.
The panel addressed Warden Johnson’s remaining
arguments in a concurrently filed memorandum disposition.

COUNSEL
Allie Zenwirth (argued), Dylan Brenner, Nicholas
Castellano, and Sara Orton, Certified Law Students; Aaron
Littman, Supervising Attorney; UCLA School of Law, Los
Angeles, California; Samuel Weiss, Supervising Attorney,
Rights Behind Bars, Washington, D.C.; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Chris Davis (argued), Deputy Attorney General; Aaron D.
Ford, Nevada Attorney General; Office of the Nevada
Attorney General, Las Vegas, Nevada; for DefendantsAppellees.

4

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

OPINION
BENNETT, Circuit Judge:
Luis Cardenas-Ornelas, a prisoner in the custody of the
Nevada Department of Corrections (“NDOC”), brought this
action pursuant to 42 U.S.C. § 1983, alleging that staff at
High Desert State Prison (“HDSP”) denied him outdoor
exercise in violation of the Eighth Amendment and treated
him and his unit differently from others in violation of the
Fourteenth Amendment. Cardenas-Ornelas also brought
analogous claims under the Nevada Constitution. The
district court denied summary judgment on certain of these
claims against Warden Calvin Johnson, and Warden
Johnson appealed. 1 We affirm in part, reverse in part, and
remand. 2
I.
The focus of this appeal is Cardenas-Ornelas’s claim
that, during the COVID-19 pandemic, HDSP staff denied
him outdoor exercise—despite ordering him to work and
permitting yard time for inmates in other units. In early
2020, Cardenas-Ornelas was housed at HDSP and assigned
to Unit 9, a protective segregation unit. HDSP allowed
Unit 9 inmates to work in Prison Industries, where only
Unit 9 inmates worked. By working in Prison Industries,
eligible inmates could “earn wages and good time credits.”
The Notice of Appeal was filed by all Defendants. The opening brief
makes clear, however, that the only Appellant is Warden Calvin Johnson.

1

In this opinion, we review the district court’s denial of Warden
Johnson’s assertion of qualified immunity. In a concurrently filed
memorandum disposition, we address Warden Johnson’s remaining
arguments. In that disposition, we affirm in part and reverse in part.
2

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

5

Defendants assert that, during the COVID-19 pandemic, it
was possible to carry out social distancing and contact
tracing in the enclosed Prison Industries warehouse, but not
in the outdoor yard, where inmates from different units
mixed freely. Defendants also contend that they disinfected
the bays where inmates in Prison Industries worked. But
Cardenas-Ornelas claims that he and many other inmates
worked in very close quarters.
A.
In March 2020, Unit 9 was placed on quarantine after a
canteen staff member who had been in close contact with
Unit 9 inmates tested positive for COVID-19. After that
quarantine ended in April 2020, Unit 9 was sent back to
work in Prison Industries. Unit 9, however, continued to be
denied yard time.
In May 2020, after an inmate tested positive for COVID19, HDSP locked down. Defendants contend that “inmates
could still exercise in their cell.” After more inmates tested
positive, all were isolated for several weeks. While Unit 9
remained in quarantine without yard time, other units
regained yard time.
In December 2020, after some Unit 9 inmates tested
positive, Unit 9 was again placed on quarantine but, on
several days, was still ordered to work at Prison Industries.
Cardenas-Ornelas claims that this was despite HDSP staff’s
awareness that forty-eight Unit 9 inmates had just tested
positive for COVID-19 and that other Unit 9 inmates were
exhibiting symptoms.
Cardenas-Ornelas alleges that between March 2020 and
July 2021, he was denied almost all outdoor exercise, and

6

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

that this caused him anxiety, depression, muscle loss, and
joint pain.
B.
In June 2020, Cardenas-Ornelas filed an informal
grievance alleging the denial of his constitutional rights to
exercise and yard time. Sergeant Timothy Struck denied the
informal grievance because the lockdowns were needed to
protect “the health and safety of all inmates.”
In August 2020, Cardenas-Ornelas filed a first-level
grievance alleging that he was “confined to [his] cell for 23
to 23 1/2 hours a day except for when [he went] to work
which [was] for 8 to 9 hours in a crowded warehouse with
about 130 other inmates.” Warden Johnson denied the
grievance, explaining that “NDOC has not placed any
institution on lock-down but has quarantined in an effort to
adhere to important Center[s] for Disease Control and
prevention guidelines.” Addressing Cardenas-Ornelas’s
working conditions, Warden Johnson noted that “[a]fter
receiving medical clearance, Unit 9 inmate workers received
authorization to return to work as early as April 27, 2020,”
and that safety measures were in place to prevent COVID-19
spread in Prison Industries. Addressing the continued denial
of yard time, Warden Johnson explained that “[t]he
operations of inmates classified to Administrative and
Disciplinary segregation continued as normal as possible
because they [we]re equipped with the resources needed
(rec. cages, locked showers, phone access),” implying that
HDSP lacked the resources to provide protective segregation
inmates with yard time. Cardenas-Ornelas then filed a
second-level grievance, which was denied by Harold
Wickham, Deputy Director of Programs for NDOC.

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

7

C.
In January 2021, Cardenas-Ornelas filed a pro se
complaint under 42 U.S.C. § 1983 and Nevada state law
against various HDSP officials, seeking declaratory and
injunctive relief and monetary damages. The district court
screened the complaint and allowed Cardenas-Ornelas to
proceed on several claims, including claims alleging that
Defendants’ denial of outdoor exercise violated prohibitions
against cruel and unusual punishment under the Eighth
Amendment, guarantees of equal protection under the
Fourteenth Amendment, and analogous protections under
the Nevada Constitution.3
In October 2023, Defendants moved for summary
judgment. As relevant here, the district court denied Warden
Johnson summary judgment on Cardenas-Ornelas’s
outdoor-exercise claims alleging cruel and unusual
punishment and equal protection violations. 4 In so doing,
the district court denied Warden Johnson’s assertion of
qualified immunity on those claims. Warden Johnson timely
appealed.

The other claims that survived screening were: (1) an Eighth
Amendment claim based on an alleged policy that required officers to
come to work after they reported contact with COVID-19 infected
people, (2) a First Amendment claim alleging interference with mail,
(3) federal and state free speech claims based on the alleged extended
prohibition of all phone calls, and (4) federal and state equal protection
claims based on the alleged denial of all phone calls.
3

On these two claims, the district court granted summary judgment to
all Defendants other than Warden Johnson based on their lack of
personal participation in the alleged violations. On all other claims, the
district court granted summary judgment for Defendants.

4

8

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

II.
Cardenas-Ornelas contends that we lack jurisdiction
over this interlocutory appeal. But because the district court
rejected Warden Johnson’s assertion of qualified immunity,
we have jurisdiction under the collateral order doctrine. See
Johnson v. Myers, 129 F.4th 1189, 1193 (9th Cir. 2025). Our
jurisdiction, however, “does not extend to claims in which
the determination of qualified immunity depends on
disputed issues of material fact.” Jeffers v. Gomez, 267 F.3d
895, 903 (9th Cir. 2001) (per curiam). Thus, in reviewing
the district court’s denial of qualified immunity, we
“assum[e] that the version of the material facts asserted by
the non-moving party is correct.” Id.
We review de novo a district court’s grant or denial of
summary judgment, “including officers’ entitlement to
qualified immunity.” Jones v. City of North Las Vegas, 150
F.4th 1030, 1035 (9th Cir. 2025).
III.
Warden Johnson argues that he is entitled to qualified
immunity on the Eighth Amendment and Fourteenth
Amendment claims. We affirm the district court’s denial of
qualified immunity on the Eighth Amendment claim but
reverse the district court’s denial of qualified immunity on
the Fourteenth Amendment claim.
Qualified immunity shields government officials
performing discretionary functions “from liability for civil
damages” when “their conduct does not violate clearly
established statutory or constitutional rights of which a
reasonable person would have known.”
Harlow v.
Fitzgerald, 457 U.S. 800, 818 (1982). A right is clearly
established only when “[t]he contours of the right [are]

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

9

sufficiently clear [such] that a reasonable official would
understand that what he is doing violates that right.”
Anderson v. Creighton, 483 U.S. 635, 640 (1987). We
therefore must decide “whether ‘the officer’s conduct
violated a constitutional right’ and whether ‘the right was
clearly established’ at the time of the alleged misconduct.”
Alston v. Read, 663 F.3d 1094, 1098 (9th Cir. 2011) (quoting
Saucier v. Katz, 533 U.S. 194, 201 (2001), overruled in part
on other grounds by Pearson v. Callahan, 555 U.S. 223
(2009)). Our inquiry may proceed in any order. Id.
A.
On the Eighth Amendment claim, the district court
properly denied Warden Johnson qualified immunity. To
violate the Eighth Amendment, the prison official’s alleged
deprivation “must be, objectively, ‘sufficiently serious,’”
and the “prison official must have a ‘sufficiently culpable
state of mind.’” Farmer v. Brennan, 511 U.S. 825, 834
(1994) (quoting Wilson v. Seiter, 501 U.S. 294, 297–98
(1991)). “Some conditions of confinement may establish an
Eighth Amendment violation ‘in combination’ when each
would not do so alone, but only when they have a mutually
enforcing effect that produces the deprivation of a single,
identifiable human need such as food, warmth, or
exercise . . . .” Wilson, 501 U.S. at 304 (quoting Rhodes v.
Chapman, 452 U.S. 337, 347 (1981)).
We start our inquiry by considering whether, at the time
of the alleged deprivation, Cardenas-Ornelas had a clearly
established right to outdoor exercise under the Eighth
Amendment. By 2020, our case law had clearly established
a prisoner’s Eighth Amendment right to outdoor exercise or
otherwise meaningful opportunities for recreation. See
Shorter v. Baca, 895 F.3d 1176, 1185–86 (9th Cir. 2018)

10

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

(collecting cases). “Our case law uniformly stresse[d] the
vital importance of exercise for prisoners.” Thomas v.
Ponder, 611 F.3d 1144, 1152 (9th Cir. 2010). We had said
that exercise is “one of the basic human necessities protected
by the Eighth Amendment.” LeMaire v. Maass, 12 F.3d
1444, 1457 (9th Cir. 1993). And though on more severe
facts, we had held specifically that prisoners were
unconstitutionally denied outdoor exercise when they were
confined in small cells around the clock for more than four
years. Spain v. Procunier, 600 F.2d 189, 199–200 (9th Cir.
1979). We therefore hold that, at the time of the alleged
deprivation, Cardenas-Ornelas had a clearly established
right to outdoor exercise or meaningful opportunities for
recreation.
The next question is whether a reasonable jury could find
that Warden Johnson violated that clearly established right.
We hold that Cardenas-Ornelas presented sufficient
evidence which, viewed in the light most favorable to him at
summary judgment, raised triable issues on both prongs of
his Eighth Amendment claim against Warden Johnson. On
the objective prong, evidence supported Cardenas-Ornelas’s
claim that he was “confined to [his] cell for 23 to 23 1/2
hours a day” except for when he went to work in Prison
Industries. And Defendants failed to introduce evidence that
recreational opportunities had been afforded to Unit 9 in and
after June 2020, while other units were allowed to resume
yard time. On the subjective prong, Cardenas-Ornelas
introduced evidence supporting his claim that Warden
Johnson had a sufficiently culpable state of mind—namely,
“deliberate indifference.” Hallett v. Morgan, 296 F.3d 732,
744 (9th Cir. 2002) (quoting Wilson, 501 U.S. at 297). “A
prison official acts with ‘deliberate indifference only if the
prison official knows of and disregards an excessive risk to

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

11

inmate health and safety.’” Toguchi v. Chung, 391 F.3d
1051, 1057 (9th Cir. 2004) (alterations accepted) (quoting
Gibson v. County of Washoe, 290 F.3d 1175, 1187 (9th Cir.
2002), overruled in part on other grounds by Castro v.
County of Los Angeles, 833 F.3d 1060 (9th Cir. 2016) (en
banc)). Here, evidence supported the claim that Warden
Johnson was subjectively aware of the alleged risk because
Warden Johnson responded to Cardenas-Ornelas’s firstlevel grievance, which alleged that Cardenas-Ornelas was
being “confined to [his] cell for 23 to 23 1/2 hours a day
except for when [he] got to work.” 5 Moreover, Warden
Johnson ordered Unit 9 inmates to work even as he denied
them yard time.
Addressing the objective prong, Warden Johnson asserts
that “walking from Unit 9 to the Prison Industries
Warehouse” and “work[ing] for eight hours a day, two days
a week” constituted “otherwise meaningful recreation” for
Cardenas-Ornelas because Prison Industries provided
“affirmative programs of training or rehabilitation.” This
argument relies mainly on Norbert v. City & County of San
Francisco, 10 F.4th 918 (9th Cir. 2021). In Norbert, we
affirmed the district court’s finding that “inmates were given
constitutionally sufficient recreation time” when inmates
were “offered at least 30 minutes of exercise time in the
[indoor] gyms seven days a week,” and “general population
inmates c[ould] access the day room for 4.5 hours on
weekdays and 8 hours on weekend days.” Id. at 933. Here,
For this reason, Warden Johnson’s argument that he was not personally
involved in any constitutional violation lacks merit. “[T]his is not a case
where the defendants claim that they were unaware of either the
circumstances resulting in the alleged deprivation or the likelihood that
the deprivation would occur.” Allen v. Sakai, 48 F.3d 1082, 1088 (9th
Cir. 1994).

5

12

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

by contrast, there is no evidence that Unit 9 inmates had any
access to meaningful opportunities for exercise between
March 18, 2020, and July 27, 2021. Viewed in the light most
favorable to Cardenas-Ornelas, “sorting cards or hangers” in
Prison Industries did not constitute otherwise meaningful
recreation. Nor did in-cell exercise. Thus, there is a genuine
factual dispute whether the alleged deprivation of exercise
was, objectively, sufficiently serious.
Addressing the subjective prong, Warden Johnson
argues that he cannot be found to have been deliberately
indifferent because he was merely following, and was not
required to reexamine, the medical judgments
communicated through NDOC’s COVID-19 protocols. But
there is a factual dispute regarding whether NDOC’s
COVID-19 protocols required the denial of yard time for
Unit 9 inmates for over a year. Moreover, Warden Johnson
personally reviewed and denied Cardenas-Ornelas’s
first-level grievance, which alleged that Cardenas-Ornelas
was being confined in his cell “for 23 to 23 1/2 hours a day”
except for when he was called to work in Prison Industries.
Thus, Warden Johnson failed to show at the summary
judgment stage that he is entitled to qualified immunity as
an official who was unaware of the prisoner’s complaints
and merely following NDOC’s COVID-19 protocols.
To be sure, even when the alleged deprivation of exercise
was, objectively, sufficiently serious, a prison official may
still be entitled to qualified immunity under the subjective
prong in extraordinary circumstances. In LeMaire v. Maass,
for example, we held that an inmate failed to show the prison
official’s culpable state of mind when the inmate had been
denied opportunities for exercise based on the inmate’s own
misconduct, which had “raise[d] serious and legitimate
security concerns within the prison.” 12 F.3d at 1458. Here,

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

13

however, Warden Johnson’s proffered justification does not
rule out deliberate indifference. He claims that he restricted
yard time for Unit 9 inmates to prevent the spread of
COVID-19—a rational explanation. But viewed in the light
most favorable to Cardenas-Ornelas, the non-movant,
Warden Johnson’s justification does not rule out deliberate
indifference because there is conflicting evidence which
shows Warden Johnson ordered Unit 9 to work despite the
risk of COVID-19. Indeed, Cardenas-Ornelas presented
evidence that Warden Johnson ordered Unit 9 inmates to
work even when many Unit 9 inmates were symptomatic or
had tested positive for COVID-19. Thus, there is a triable
issue whether Warden Johnson acted with deliberate
indifference when denying Unit 9 inmates yard time.
We therefore conclude that the district court properly
denied qualified immunity on Cardenas-Ornelas’s Eighth
Amendment claim against Warden Johnson. Our holding,
however, does not foreclose the trier of fact from making
factual determinations which could result in the post-trial
grant of qualified immunity on this claim for Warden
Johnson.
B.
On the Fourteenth Amendment claim alleging a violation
of equal protection, we conclude that Warden Johnson is
entitled to qualified immunity. Because Cardenas-Ornelas
does not allege any “classification [that] implicates a suspect
class or infringes on a fundamental right,” we review under
the rational basis standard. Bottinelli v. Salazar, 929 F.3d
1196, 1201 (9th Cir. 2019). We consider whether “there is
any reasonably conceivable state of facts that could provide
a rational basis for the classification,” FCC v. Beach
Commc’ns, Inc., 508 U.S. 307, 313 (1993), including the

14

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

singling out of a “class of one,” Gerhart v. Lake County, 637
F.3d 1013, 1023 (9th Cir. 2011). Defendants “may not rely
on a classification whose relationship to an asserted goal is
so attenuated as to render the distinction arbitrary or
irrational.” City of Cleburne v. Cleburne Living Ctr., 473
U.S. 432, 446 (1985). Cardenas-Ornelas bears the burden
“to negative every conceivable basis which might support”
the classification. Beach Commc’ns, 508 U.S. at 315
(quoting Lehnhausen v. Lake Shore Auto Parts Co., 410 U.S.
356, 364 (1973)).
On this claim, Cardenas-Ornelas did not establish a
genuine dispute of material fact because he failed to
introduce summary judgment evidence which ruled out
every conceivable basis which might support the alleged
differences in yard time afforded Unit 9 and other units, or
Cardenas-Ornelas and other inmates. Namely, confirmed
and suspected cases of COVID-19 infection in Unit 9
provided a possible justification for continuing to deny yard
time for inmates in Unit 9 while reopening the yard to
inmates in other units. This justification was not “so
attenuated” from the goal of preventing the spread of
COVID-19 at HDSP “as to render the distinction arbitrary or
irrational.” City of Cleburne, 473 U.S. at 446.
In denying qualified immunity on this claim, the district
court erred by crediting allegations in the complaint which
were unsworn and unsupported by evidence in the record.
See Soto v. Sweetman, 882 F.3d 865, 872 (9th Cir. 2018)
(holding that parties, even pro se inmates, cannot rely on
“statements in [their] district court [briefing] as competent
summary judgment evidence”). “Although we do not
ordinarily have jurisdiction on an interlocutory appeal to
review a denial of qualified immunity based on the existence
of a disputed fact, ‘when there is an allegation about the

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

15

conduct part of the equation, but insufficient evidence of that
conduct to create a genuine issue of material fact, our cases
permit review.’” Foster v. City of Indio, 908 F.3d 1204,
1217 n.10 (9th Cir. 2018) (per curiam) (alteration accepted)
(quoting Jeffers, 267 F.3d at 907).
Cardenas-Ornelas alleged in his complaint that he heard
“a number of officers” say that “Warden Johnson does not
like protective segregation (‘P.S.’) inmates, and that this
allows him to lock down the P.S. units.” But that statement
was not “based on personal knowledge” and did not “set[]
forth the requisite facts with specificity,” and thus could not
“serve as an affidavit for purposes of summary judgment.”
Moran v. Selig, 447 F.3d 748, 759 n.16 (9th Cir. 2006).
Further, Cardenas-Ornelas failed to “identify or submit some
competent evidence,” Soto, 882 F.3d at 872, to support his
claim that Warden Johnson treated Unit 9 inmates
differently based on a personal dislike of protective
segregation inmates. Thus, the district court erred in
concluding that Cardenas-Ornelas’s “claims regarding
Warden Johnson’s dislike of protective segregation inmates
and Defendants’ failure to refute these claims” created a
genuine dispute of material fact which precluded summary
judgment. We accordingly reverse the district court’s denial
of qualified immunity to Warden Johnson on
Cardenas-Ornelas’s Fourteenth Amendment claim.
CONCLUSION
We affirm the district court’s denial of qualified
immunity on the Eighth Amendment claim, reverse the
district court’s denial of qualified immunity on the
Fourteenth Amendment claim, and we remand for further
proceedings consistent with this opinion and the
concurrently filed memorandum disposition.

16

CARDENAS-ORNELAS V. JOHNSON

AFFIRMED IN PART, REVERSED IN PART, and
REMANDED.

