FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
DAISEY TRUST, by and through its
trustee Eddie Haddad; CAPE
JASMINE CT. TRUST, by and
through its trustee, Eddie Haddad;
SATICOY BAY LLC, SERIES
10007 LIBERTY VIEW,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,

No. 24-6433
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00978APG-EJY

OPINION

v.
FEDERAL HOUSING FINANCE
AGENCY; WILLIAM J. PULTE, * in
his official capacity as the Director of
the Federal Housing Finance Agency,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Andrew P. Gordon, Chief District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 8, 2025
Las Vegas, Nevada
We have substituted William J. Pulte as Defendant-Appellee pursuant
to Federal Rule of Appellate Procedure 43(c).

*

2

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

Filed January 2, 2026
Before: Mark J. Bennett, Gabriel P. Sanchez, and Holly A.
Thomas, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge H.A. Thomas
SUMMARY **
Federal Housing Finance Agency
The panel affirmed the district court’s dismissal with
prejudice of plaintiffs’ amended complaint alleging that the
funding mechanism for the Federal Housing Finance
Agency (“FHFA”), as established by the Housing and
Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (“Recovery Act”), violates
the Appropriations Clause and the nondelegation doctrine.
Plaintiffs purchased properties in Nevada that were
encumbered by a deed of trust owned by the Federal
National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) or the
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie
Mac”). They sought to prevent the foreclosure of their
properties.
Congress enacted the Recovery Act in response to fears
that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac’s troubling financial
condition would imperil the national economy. The
Recovery Act created the FHFA, an independent agency
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

3

tasked with regulating Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. The
FHFA is not funded through the ordinary appropriations
process, but rather from the assessments it imposes on the
entities it regulates.
The panel rejected the FHFA’s argument that plaintiffs
lacked Article III standing to pursue their federal
claims. Plaintiffs plausibly alleged an injury in fact when
the FHFA, acting through Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac,
foreclosed upon their properties. Plaintiffs also plausibly
alleged that their injury is traceable to the FHFA’s
conduct. Finally, plaintiffs’ alleged injury is judicially
redressable.
Rejecting plaintiffs’ Appropriations Clause challenge,
the panel held that the funding mechanism for the FHFA, as
established by the Recovery Act, is consistent with the rule
articulated in Consumer Financial Protection Bureau v.
Community Financial Services Association of America,
Limited, 601 U.S. 416 (2024). The funding mechanism
identifies both a source of funds—the annual assessments
the FHFA imposed upon Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac—and
a purpose for the expenditure of those funds—reasonable
costs and expenses of the FHFA.
The panel also held that the FHFA’s funding mechanism
does not violate the nondelegation doctrine. The plain text
of the Recovery Act contains an intelligible principle that
governs the FHFA’s ability to collect assessments from the
regulated entities.

4

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

COUNSEL
Jordan T. Smith (argued) and Brianna Smith, Pisanelli Bice
PLLC, Las Vegas, Nevada, for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Michael A.F. Johnson (argued) and Dirk C. Phillips, Arnold
& Porter Kaye Scholer LLP, Washington, D.C.; Leslie B.
Hart, Fennemore Craig PC, Reno, Nevada; for DefendantsAppellees.

OPINION
H.A. THOMAS, Circuit Judge:
Plaintiffs Daisey Trust, Cape Jasmine Court Trust
(“Cape Jasmine”), and Saticoy Bay LLC, Series 10007
Liberty View (“Saticoy Bay”) sued the Federal Housing
Finance Agency (“FHFA”) and its Director, alleging that the
FHFA’s funding mechanism, as established by the Housing
and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 (“Recovery Act”),
violates the Appropriations Clause and the nondelegation
doctrine. The district court dismissed Plaintiffs’ amended
complaint with prejudice and without leave to amend, ruling
that the FHFA’s funding mechanism is constitutional. We
agree with the district court and affirm.
I.
A.
In 2012, Daisey Trust purchased a property located on
Newburg Avenue in North Las Vegas, Nevada. The same
year, Cape Jasmine purchased a property located on Desert
Pond Avenue in Henderson, Nevada. In 2013, Saticoy Bay

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

5

purchased a property located on Liberty View Way in Las
Vegas, Nevada. At the time of purchase, each of the
properties was encumbered by a deed of trust owned by the
Federal National Mortgage Association (“Fannie Mae”) or
the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (“Freddie
Mac”).
Daisey Trust, Cape Jasmine, and Saticoy Bay each sued
Fannie Mae’s or Freddie Mac’s loan servicer in state court,
seeking to extinguish the respective deed of trust and to quiet
title. Each Plaintiff ultimately lost. The Newburg Avenue,
Desert Pond Avenue, and Liberty View Way properties
continued to be encumbered by Fannie Mae’s or Freddie
Mac’s respective liens until deed-of-trust foreclosure
proceedings were held between 2022 and 2024.
B.
We pause here for a bit of background. “Congress
created the Federal National Mortgage Association (Fannie
Mae) in 1938 and the Federal Home Loan Mortgage
Corporation (Freddie Mac) in 1970 to support the Nation’s
home mortgage system.” Collins v. Yellen, 594 U.S. 220,
228 (2021). Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac “operate under
congressional charters as for-profit corporations owned by
private shareholders.” Id. “Their primary business is
purchasing mortgages, pooling them into mortgage-backed
securities, and selling them to investors.” Id.
In 2008, during the nation’s housing crisis, Congress
enacted the Recovery Act in response to fears that Fannie
Mae and Freddie Mac’s “troubling financial condition would
imperil the national economy.” Id. at 226; see also Housing
and Economic Recovery Act of 2008, Pub. L. No. 110-289,
122 Stat. 2654; 12 U.S.C. § 4501 et seq. The Recovery Act
“created the [FHFA], ‘an independent agency’ tasked with

6

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

regulating the companies and, if necessary, stepping in as
their conservator or receiver.” Collins, 594 U.S. at 226–27
(quoting 12 U.S.C. §§ 4511, 4617). “The Agency is tasked
with supervising nearly every aspect of the companies’
management and operations.” Id. at 230. Pursuant to these
powers, “[i]n September 2008, . . . [the] FHFA’s Director
placed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into conservatorship,”
where they remain today. Fed. Home Loan Mortg. Corp. v.
SFR Invs. Pool 1, LLC, 893 F.3d 1136, 1143 (9th Cir. 2018).
By placing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into
conservatorship, the FHFA succeeded their “rights, titles,
powers, and privileges . . . with respect to [their] assets.” 12
U.S.C. § 4617(b)(2)(A)(i).
“[T]he FHFA is not funded through the ordinary
appropriations process. Rather, the Agency’s budget comes
from the assessments it imposes on the entities it regulates
. . . .” Collins, 594 U.S. at 231. Pursuant to the Recovery Act,
“[t]he [FHFA’s] Director shall establish and collect from the
regulated entities annual assessments in an amount not
exceeding the amount sufficient to provide for reasonable
costs (including administrative costs) and expenses of the
Agency.” 12 U.S.C. § 4516(a). These assessments “shall not
exceed the amounts sufficient to provide for the costs and
expenses” of the four categories of expenses outlined in
subsection (a), id. § 4516(b)(2), which include expenses of
examinations, expenses of obtaining reviews and credit
assessments, and amounts necessary to maintain a working
capital fund, id. § 4516(a)(1)–(3). “[T]he Director shall
remit to each regulated entity any amount of assessment
collected from such regulated entity that . . . is in excess of
the amount the Director deems necessary to maintain a
working capital fund.” Id. § 4516(e).

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

7

The Recovery Act also imposes reporting and auditing
requirements on the FHFA. See id. § 4516(g)–(h). The
FHFA’s Director must provide to the Office of Management
and Budget “financial operating plans and forecasts” and
“quarterly reports of the Agency’s financial condition and
results of operations,” id. § 4516(g)(1), and to the
Comptroller General “an assertion as to the effectiveness of
the internal controls that apply to financial reporting by the
Agency,” id. § 4516(g)(4). The Director must also prepare
an annual statement of “assets and liabilities and surplus or
deficit;” “income and expenses;” and “sources and
application of funds.” Id. § 4516(g)(2). The Comptroller
General “shall annually audit the financial transactions of the
Agency” and “submit to the Congress a report of each annual
audit.” Id. § 4516(h)(1)–(2).
C.
Facing the prospect of Fannie Mae’s imminent
foreclosure upon the Newburg Avenue property, in June
2023, Daisey Trust sued the FHFA and its Director and filed
a motion for a temporary restraining order and a preliminary
injunction preventing the foreclosure. Daisey Trust also filed
an emergency motion to stay foreclosure in September 2023.
The district court denied Daisey Trust’s motions.
In November 2023, Cape Jasmine and Saticoy Bay were
added as plaintiffs to Daisey Trust’s lawsuit. That same
month, Plaintiffs filed their first amended complaint on
behalf of a putative class, alleging violations of the
Appropriations Clause and nondelegation doctrine, as well
as a state law wrongful foreclosure claim. They argued that
the FHFA lacked authority to foreclose on their properties
because the FHFA’s funding mechanism, as established by
the Recovery Act, violates the Appropriations Clause and

8

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

nondelegation doctrine. The FHFA moved to dismiss the suit
based on lack of standing, claim preclusion, lack of subject
matter jurisdiction, and failure to state a claim.
In September 2024, the district court granted the FHFA’s
motion to dismiss. See Daisey Tr. v. Fed. Hous. Fin. Agency,
No. 2:23-CV-00978-APG-EJY, 2024 WL 4267792, at *1–
12 (D. Nev. Sep. 20, 2024). The district court determined
that Plaintiffs had standing to pursue their claims against the
FHFA, but that Plaintiffs’ claims failed on the merits. See id.
at *4–11. As to the Appropriations Clause, the district court
determined that the Recovery Act met the requirements set
forth in the Supreme Court’s decision in Consumer
Financial Protection Bureau v. Community Financial
Services Association of America, Limited, 601 U.S. 416
(2024) (“CFSA”), because the Recovery Act identified the
funding source and purpose for the FHFA. See id. at *7–10.
As to the nondelegation doctrine, the district court
determined that the FHFA’s limitation to “reasonable costs”
in the amount of its assessments was an “intelligible
principle” and rejected Plaintiffs’ argument that the
Recovery Act grants the FHFA “standardless authority.” 1 Id.
at *10–11. The district court also denied Plaintiffs’ motion
for leave to amend on the ground that amendment would be
futile. See id. at *11. Plaintiffs timely appealed.
II.
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. “We
review a district court’s determination that a plaintiff has
standing de novo.” Am. Encore v. Fontes, 152 F.4th 1097,
The district court also determined that Plaintiffs’ wrongful foreclosure
claim under Nevada state law failed on the merits because it was
predicated on the constitutional violations alleged in Plaintiffs’ federal
claims. See id. at *11. Plaintiffs do not appeal this decision.

1

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

9

1109 (9th Cir. 2025). “We review dismissals for failure to
state a claim under Federal Rule of Civil Procedure 12(b)(6)
de novo and may affirm on any ground supported by the
record.” Sodha v. Golubowski, 154 F.4th 1019, 1032 (9th
Cir. 2025) (quoting Hansen v. Musk, 122 F.4th 1162, 1168
(9th Cir. 2024)). “We review the denial of leave to amend a
complaint for abuse of discretion, but review de novo the
futility of amendment.” Schwartz v. Miller, 153 F.4th 918,
926 (9th Cir. 2025).
III.
As a preliminary matter, we reject the FHFA’s argument
that Plaintiffs lack Article III standing to pursue their federal
claims. “[T]o satisfy Article III’s standing requirements, a
plaintiff must show (1) it has suffered an ‘injury in fact’ that
is (a) concrete and particularized and (b) actual or imminent,
not conjectural or hypothetical; (2) the injury is fairly
traceable to the challenged action of the defendant; and (3) it
is likely, as opposed to merely speculative, that the injury
will be redressed by a favorable decision.” Jones v. L.A.
Cent. Plaza LLC, 74 F.4th 1053, 1057 (9th Cir. 2023)
(alteration in original) (quoting Friends of the Earth, Inc. v.
Laidlaw Env’t Servs. (TOC), Inc., 528 U.S. 167, 180–81
(2000)). “Where, as here, a case is at the pleading stage, the
plaintiff must ‘clearly . . . allege facts demonstrating’ each
element.” Spokeo, Inc. v. Robins, 578 U.S. 330, 338 (2016)
(alteration in original) (quoting Warth v. Seldin, 422 U.S.
490, 518 (1975)).
Plaintiffs have plausibly alleged an injury in fact. The
FHFA, acting through one of its conservatees, Fannie Mae
or Freddie Mac, has foreclosed upon their properties. See,
e.g., FDA v. All. for Hippocratic Med., 602 U.S. 367, 381
(2024) (noting that an “injury in fact can be . . . a monetary

10

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

injury” or “an injury to one’s property”); Biden v. Nebraska,
600 U.S. 477, 489 (2023) (explaining that “the plaintiff must
have suffered an injury in fact—a concrete and imminent
harm to a legally protected interest, like property or
money”). Such foreclosures are “concrete and
particularized” and “actual or imminent” invasions of
Plaintiffs’ property interests. Spokeo, 578 U.S. at 339
(quoting Lujan v. Defs. of Wildlife, 504 U.S. 555, 560
(1992)). And, indeed, the FHFA does not meaningfully
dispute that Plaintiffs have plausibly alleged an injury in
fact.
Plaintiffs have also plausibly alleged that their injury is
traceable to the FHFA’s conduct. The FHFA argues that
Plaintiffs’ alleged injury is self-inflicted because Plaintiffs
decided “to purchase investment properties encumbered by
federally protected liens for pennies on the dollar and then
not to pay off the underlying defaulted loans while Plaintiffs
profited.” The FHFA claims that these actions—rather than
“any feature of [the] FHFA’s funding mechanism”—caused
any harm Plaintiffs experienced. The FHFA further argues
that Plaintiffs’ injury is not traceable to the FHFA’s actions
because, “irrespective even of [the] FHFA’s continued
existence,” Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, and their loan
servicers “would proceed with foreclosures on [Plaintiffs’]
properties.” The FHFA notes that Fannie Mae and Freddie
Mac—not the FHFA—operate “day-to-day foreclosure
activity” and fund that activity through revenues collected in
their own course of business.
The Supreme Court’s decision in Collins v. Yellen
forecloses the FHFA’s arguments. In Collins, the Supreme
Court made clear that “the relevant inquiry is whether the
plaintiffs’ injury can be traced to allegedly unlawful conduct
of the defendant, not to the provision of law that is

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

11

challenged.” 594 U.S. at 243 (quotations omitted). Here,
Plaintiffs allege that the FHFA has exercised unlawfully
delegated authority and expended unlawfully appropriated
funds to foreclose upon their properties. This allegation is
sufficient under Collins to establish traceability.
Finally, Plaintiffs’ alleged injury is judicially
redressable. “If a defendant’s action causes an injury,
enjoining the action or awarding damages for the action will
typically redress that injury.” All. for Hippocratic Med., 602
U.S. at 381. Plaintiffs’ request for declaratory, injunctive,
and compensatory relief is sufficient to meet that standard.
See Collins, 594 U.S. at 243.
IV.
A.
We turn next to the merits of Plaintiffs’ claims,
beginning with their Appropriations Clause challenge. The
Appropriations Clause provides that “[n]o Money shall be
drawn from the Treasury, but in Consequence of
Appropriations made by Law.” U.S. CONST. art. I, § 9, cl. 7.
“Under the Appropriations Clause, an appropriation is
simply a law that authorizes expenditures from a specified
source of public money for designated purposes.” CFSA, 601
U.S. at 424.
In CFSA, the Supreme Court considered a funding
mechanism for the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau
(“CFPB”) analogous to that at issue here. See id. at 421–23.
As with the FHFA, Congress “provide[d] the [CFPB] a
standing source of funding outside the ordinary annual
appropriations process.” Id. at 422. Specifically, “Congress
authorized the Bureau to draw from the Federal Reserve
System the amount its Director deems ‘reasonably necessary

12

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

to carry out’ the Bureau’s duties, subject only to an inflationadjusted cap.” Id. at 421 (quoting 12 U.S.C. § 5497(a)(1) and
also citing § 5497(a)(2)). The plaintiffs in CFSA argued that
this statute “usurp[ed] Congress’s role in the appropriation
of federal funds” by allowing the CFPB to take “federal
money without an appropriations act.” Id. at 424. They also
asserted that the statute “allow[ed] the agency to indefinitely
choose its own level of annual funding, subject only to an
illusory cap.” Id. at 426.
The Supreme Court rejected the plaintiffs’ arguments.
The Court held that “[b]ased on the Constitution’s text, the
history against which that text was enacted, and
congressional practice immediately following ratification,
. . . appropriations need only identify a source of public
funds and authorize the expenditure of those funds for
designated purposes to satisfy the Appropriations Clause.”
Id. The Court explained that: (1) “At the time the
Constitution was ratified, . . . at a minimum, appropriations
were understood as a legislative means of authorizing
expenditure from a source of public funds for designated
purposes,” id. at 427; (2) “the origins of the Appropriations
Clause confirm that appropriations needed to designate
particular revenues for identified purposes,” id. at 431; and
(3) early appropriations post-ratification “displayed
significant variety in their structure” but “adhered to the
minimum requirements of an identifiable source of public
funds and purpose,” id. at 434. The Court thus determined
that the CFPB’s “funding statute contains the requisite
features of a congressional appropriation” because it
“authorizes the Bureau to draw public funds from a
particular source” and “specifies the objects for which the
Bureau can use those funds.” Id. at 435.

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

13

The funding mechanism for the FHFA, as established by
the Recovery Act, is entirely consistent with the rule
articulated in CFSA. It identifies both a source of funds—the
annual assessments the FHFA imposes upon Fannie Mae and
Freddie Mac—and a purpose for the expenditure of those
funds—“reasonable costs (including administrative costs)
and expenses of the Agency.” 12 U.S.C. § 4516(a).
Plaintiffs nevertheless argue that the FHFA’s funding
mechanism violates the Appropriations Clause because the
Recovery Act sets “no cap or ascertainable limit on the
amount [the] FHFA can extract and spend from the regulated
entities.” They assert that an appropriation requires a certain
sum of money, and that the Supreme Court in CFSA
“stressed the importance of the statutory cap.” Plaintiffs are
incorrect.
It is true that the Court noted the existence of a funding
cap when describing the funding mechanisms for the CFPB
and the Post Office. See 601 U.S. at 434–35. It is also true
that—in rejecting the argument that the CFPB, “rather than
Congress, decides the amount of annual funding that it draws
from the Federal Reserve System”—the Court stated that
“[t]he only sense in which the Bureau decides its own
funding . . . is by exercising its discretion to draw less than
the statutory cap.” Id. at 436. The Court also observed that
“‘sums not exceeding’ appropriations . . . were
commonplace immediately after the founding.” Id.
But as the Supreme Court emphasized, the
Appropriations Clause grants Congress a “wide range of
discretion” to devise appropriations with “significant variety
in their structure.” Id. at 431, 434. The Court discussed two
founding-era appropriations—the Customs Service and the
Post Office—to illustrate those “flexible approaches to

14

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

appropriations.” Id. at 433. Congress, for example, “opted
for a fee-based model” to fund the Customs Service, in
which customs collectors were compensated from the fees
they collected and the duties they raised within their districts.
Id. Congress “adopted a similarly open-ended funding
scheme for the Post Office,” in which the Postmaster
General funded the Post Office through the Office’s own
revenues and compensated deputy postmasters “subject to an
upper limit.” Id. at 434.
The Court’s discussion in CFSA makes clear that, to
satisfy the Appropriations Clause, Congress need only
specify a source and purpose for the expenditure of funds.
The Court’s historical analysis supports that conclusion:
while “[e]arly appropriations displayed significant variety in
their structure[,] [e]ach . . . adhered to the minimum
requirements of an identifiable source of public funds and
purpose.” Id. The Court’s ultimate holding that the Bureau’s
funding statute satisfied the Appropriations Clause because
it “authorizes the Bureau to draw public funds from a
particular source” and “specifies the objects for which the
Bureau can use those funds” is also consistent with this
conclusion. Id. at 435. As the Court explained, “[a]lthough
there may be other constitutional checks on Congress’
authority to create and fund an administrative agency,
specifying the source and purpose is all the control the
Appropriations Clause requires.” Id. at 441. Nothing in the
Court’s decision suggests that we may expand upon these
requirements.
B.
We next consider Plaintiffs’ argument that the FHFA’s
funding mechanism violates the nondelegation doctrine. We
conclude that it does not. Congress “may confer substantial

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

15

discretion on executive agencies to implement and enforce
the laws.” Gundy v. United States, 588 U.S. 128, 135 (2019)
(plurality opinion). But the nondelegation doctrine “bars
Congress from transferring its legislative power to another
branch of Government.” Id. at 132. “The constitutional
question is whether Congress has supplied an intelligible
principle to guide the delegee’s use of discretion.” Id. at 135.
The plain text of the Recovery Act contains an
intelligible principle that governs the FHFA’s ability to
collect assessments from the regulated entities: an “amount
sufficient to provide for reasonable costs.” 12 U.S.C.
§ 4516(a). Although Plaintiffs argue that the Recovery Act
lacks any intelligible principle to justify the delegation of
authority to the FHFA, the Supreme Court has repeatedly
upheld similar statutes with “broad terms” against
constitutional challenges. United States v. Pheasant, 129
F.4th 576, 580 (9th Cir. 2025); see also, e.g., Sunshine
Anthracite Coal Co. v. Adkins, 310 U.S. 381, 398–99 (1940)
(“just and reasonable” rates); Nat’l Broad. Co. v. United
States, 319 U.S. 190, 216–17 (1943) (“public interest,
convenience, or necessity”); Yakus v. United States, 321
U.S. 414, 423, 427 (1944) (“fair and equitable” prices);
Whitman v. Am. Trucking Ass’ns, 531 U.S. 457, 472–76
(2001) (“requisite to protect the public health”). And we
have described “[t]he requirement that Congress set out an
‘intelligible principle’ to constrain executive discretion” as
“‘an exceedingly modest limitation.’” Pheasant, 129 F.4th
at 579 (quoting United States v. Melgar-Diaz, 2 F.4th 1263,
1266 (9th Cir. 2021)).
We also reject Plaintiffs’ argument that the FHFA’s
“Director has unfettered discretion to collect whatever
amounts she thinks are needed.” We recently considered—
and rejected—a similar claim in Pheasant, where we

16

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

reviewed a nondelegation challenge to Section 303(a) of the
Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976
(“FLPMA”). See id. Section 303(a) empowers the Secretary
of the Interior to “issue regulations necessary to implement
the provisions of [the FLPMA] with respect to the
management, use, and protection of the public lands,
including the property located thereon.” Id. (alteration in
original) (quoting 43 U.S.C. § 1733(a)). The plaintiffs in
Pheasant argued that “something more than an intelligible
principle is required because [the Bureau of Land
Management’s] mission provides no inherent limitation on
the scope of its regulations.” Id. at 582. But we held that
Section 303(a) “easily satisfies the ‘intelligible principle’
test” because the statute specifies the Secretary’s
responsibilities and does not permit “the Secretary to issue
any regulation he wishes with a colorable connection to the
use of public lands.” Id. at 580–81. The same is true of the
Recovery Act: far from conferring upon the FHFA the
plenary authority to take any actions it wishes, the Director
is constrained to collecting an “amount sufficient to provide
for reasonable costs.” 12 U.S.C. § 4516(a).
V.
“Leave to amend may be denied if the proposed
amendment is futile or would be subject to dismissal.”
Hunter v. U.S. Dep’t of Educ., 115 F.4th 955, 971 (9th Cir.
2024) (quoting Wheeler v. City of Santa Clara, 894 F.3d
1046, 1059 (9th Cir. 2018)). Plaintiffs argue that “the
mechanism by which [the] FHFA funds foreclosures is
unconstitutional and thus [Plaintiffs] can state a set of facts
entitling them to relief” should we decline to entirely reverse
the district court. But Plaintiffs have not stated a claim, and
the parties have already addressed the impact of CFSA—
which controls the Appropriations Clause issue—in

DAISEY TRUST V. FHFA

17

supplemental briefing before the district court. See Parents
for Priv. v. Barr, 949 F.3d 1210, 1239 (9th Cir. 2020)
(“[B]ecause Plaintiffs have not shown that any new factual
allegations could alter these conclusions based on settled
precedent, amendment would be futile.”). Our review today
only “confirms that the record clearly dictated the futility of
amendment and the district court’s decision.” Laws. for Fair
Reciprocal Admission v. United States, 141 F.4th 1056, 1074
(9th Cir. 2025) (quotations and alterations omitted).
VI.
For the reasons discussed above, Plaintiffs have failed to
state a claim upon which relief may be granted. As we have
also explained, amendment would be futile. The district
court’s judgment is therefore AFFIRMED.

