FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.

Nos. 24-3077
24-6045
D.C. No.
2:22-cr-00482GW-1

JERRY NEHL BOYLAN,
Defendant - Appellant.

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
George H. Wu, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted December 2, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed March 3, 2026
Before: Consuelo M. Callahan, John B. Owens, and Lucy
H. Koh, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Owens;
Concurrence by Judge Koh

2

USA V. BOYLAN

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed the conviction by jury trial of Jerry
Boylan, the former captain of the M.V. Conception, for
seaman’s manslaughter under 18 U.S.C. § 1115, arising
from a fire onboard that killed thirty-four people.
Boylan argued that the district court’s jury instruction on
§ 1115 misstated the law, as it provided that guilt could
follow if Boylan “engaged in misconduct and/or acted with
gross negligence.” According to Boylan, the term
“misconduct” permitted the jury to convict him of something
less that gross negligence, contrary to what § 1115
requires. Agreeing with the Fifth and Eleventh Circuits, the
panel held that § 1115 does not require gross negligence, but
merely negligence. The panel concluded that, to the extent
Boylan argued there was still error because the instruction
included the term “misconduct,” any error was harmless
because the jury instructions explicitly cautioned against
conviction based on a lower standard than negligence; in
framing the case, the district court repeatedly instructed the
jury that gross negligence was the required standard and the
government never argued that mere misconduct was
sufficient for conviction; and the overwhelming evidence
against Boylan established that the jury would have found
him guilty absent the error.
Concurring, Judge Koh wrote separately to disagree with
the majority opinion’s reliance on the district judge’s
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. BOYLAN

3

framing of the case and the prosecution’s closing arguments
to find harmless error in the jury instructions’ use of
“misconduct” to define the crime. As to these challenged
jury instructions, Judge Koh would find harmless error
solely based on the overwhelming evidence against Boylan.
The panel addressed other issues in a concurrently filed
memorandum disposition.

COUNSEL
Alexander P. Robbins (argued), Assistant United States
Attorney, Acting Chief, Criminal Appeals Section; Matthew
O'Brien and Juan M. Rodriguez, Attorneys; Mark A.
Williams and Brian R. Faerstein, Assistant United States
Attorneys; Christina T. Shay, Assistant United States
Attorney, Chief, Criminal Division; Bilal A. Essayli, United
States Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United
States Department of Justice, Los Angeles, California; for
Plaintiff-Appellee.
Hunter Haney (argued), Deputy Federal Public Defender;
Cuauhtemoc Ortega, Federal Public Defender; Office of the
Federal Public Defender, Los Angeles, California, for
Defendant-Appellant.

4

USA V. BOYLAN

OPINION
OWENS, Circuit Judge:
Jerry Boylan, the former captain of the M.V. Conception,
appeals from his conviction for seaman’s manslaughter
under 18 U.S.C. § 1115, arising from a fire onboard that
killed thirty-four people. Boylan challenges, among other
matters, the jury instructions’ culpability requirement under
§ 1115. 1 We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1291, and
we affirm.
I. BACKGROUND
A. The Conception
On August 31, 2019, the Conception—with Captain
Boylan, five crew members, and thirty-three passengers—
left port for three days of scuba diving near Santa Cruz
Island, part of the Channel Islands off the coast of Santa
Barbara, California. The Conception was a seventy-fivefoot dive boat with three decks: a lower deck with passenger
bunks, a main deck with a galley and dining area, and an
upper deck with the wheelhouse and crew bunks. One
stairway connected the upper deck with the main deck, with
another in the galley between the main and lower decks. The
lower deck bunk room also had an emergency escape hatch
to the main deck galley, but it was difficult to locate without
previous knowledge of its existence. While Captain Boylan
had more than thirty years’ experience, his five crew

Boylan also challenges the jury instructions’ causation requirement and
the admission of certain experts’ testimony. We address these claims in
a concurrently filed memorandum disposition, in which we affirm.

1

USA V. BOYLAN

5

members had little, ranging from almost two years at sea to
slightly more than a month.
Fires pose extreme dangers for ships, and the Conception
had multiple fire suppression components: a public address
system audible to everyone on board; six fire extinguishers
throughout the ship; a fire axe on the upper deck; and two
heavy-duty firefighting stations on the main deck, each with
a fifty-foot fire hose that could draw water from the ocean.
Federal regulations alert captains that they should have
roving patrols at night to detect fires onboard, 46 C.F.R.
§ 185.410, and should train crew on best practices if a fire
breaks out, id. § 185.524. The Conception’s “Certificate of
Inspection”—issued by the United States Coast Guard—
mandates that “[a] member of the vessel’s crew shall be
designated by the master as a roving patrol at all
times . . . when the passenger’s bunks are occupied.”
Despite the obvious dangers that fires pose on ships, Boylan
never trained his crew on what to do if one broke out. When
a crew member asked Boylan when they could discuss safety
procedures covered in his employee orientation packet,
Boylan “chuckled” and responded with words to the effect
of: “When we get to it.”
B. The Fire
On the early morning of September 2, Boylan and four
crew members slept on the main deck, while thirty-three
passengers and one crew member, Alexandra Kurtz, were in
their bunks below deck. Although no one was assigned to
be a roving patrol to detect fires—despite the regulation
requiring otherwise—one crew member happened to be
awake that morning to clean and prepare for the next day.
Shortly after that crew member settled into bed, he heard
noises from the main deck. He left his bunk to investigate,

6

USA V. BOYLAN

saw an ember glow from the back of the boat, and yelled
“Fire, Fire!” 2 He woke Boylan and the other crew members
up top and tried to combat the fire, but his lack of training
led him to unknowingly pass by the firefighting station
twice.
As his untrained crew scrambled around the vessel in
vain to stop the fire, Boylan remained in the wheelhouse. He
managed to call the Coast Guard, but never used the public
address system to warn the thirty-four people below deck
about the fire or instruct them how to escape through the
emergency hatch. He never passed the fire axe or
extinguisher to the crew, nor made any personal effort to
reach the crew and passengers below. Other than a “fivesecond little huddle up,” Boylan never instructed his crew to
use the fire suppression equipment on board. Instead, he
ordered his crew to abandon ship, and jumped overboard.
While the crew followed Boylan overboard, one of them
swam back to the Conception and tried to activate the fire
hose, but could not. That crew member then lowered the
skiff into the water, enabling Boylan and the four crew
members to depart to safety.
The thirty-four people trapped below deck—Carol Diana
Adamic, Juha-Pekka Ahopelto, Neal Gustav Baltz, Patricia
Ann Beitzinger, Vaidehi Devi Campbell Williams, Kendra
Moore Chan, Raymond Scott Chan, Adrian Danielle
Dahood-Fritz, Sanjeeri Satish Deopujari, Justin Carroll
Dignam, Berenice Felipe, Lisa Ann Fiedler, Kristina Oline
Although not part of the trial record, the National Transportation Safety
Board concluded that the fire likely arose from a combination of lithium
batteries, faulty wiring, smoking materials, and plastic trash cans.
National Transportation Safety Board, Marine Accident Report: Fire
Aboard Small Passenger Vessel Conception (Oct. 20, 2020), at 60–61.

2

USA V. BOYLAN

7

Finstad, Andrew Aaron Fritz, Daniel Garcia, Marybeth
Guiney, Yuko Hatano, Yulia Krashennaya, Alexandra Haley
Kurtz, Xiang Lin, Charles Spencer McIlvain, Caroline
Annette McLaughlin, Kaustubh Nirmal, Angela Rose
Solano Quitasol, EvanMichel Solano Quitasol, Michael
Storm Quitasol, Nicole Storm Solano Quitasol, Steven John
Salika, Tia Nicole Adamic Salika, Sunil Singh Sandhu,
Fernisa June Sison, Ted Stephen Strom, Kristian Marc
Takvam, and Wei Tan—were not so fortunate.
While they valiantly tried to escape the burning boat—
managing even to activate one of the fire extinguishers—
none survived, all dying of smoke inhalation and
asphyxiation. A brief video, recorded by one of the trapped
passengers, showed their struggle to stay alive three minutes
after Boylan called the Coast Guard and decided to jump
overboard.
C. The Indictment and Trial
A First Superseding Indictment charged Boylan with
seaman’s manslaughter in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1115,
which provides “[e]very captain . . . on any steamboat or
vessel, by whose misconduct, negligence, or inattention to
his duties on such vessel the life of any person is
destroyed, . . . shall be fined under this title or imprisoned
not more than ten years, or both.” The district court
dismissed that indictment, which largely tracked the
statutory language, because it failed to allege that Boylan
acted with gross negligence. The court concluded that
because the federal involuntary manslaughter statute, 18
U.S.C. § 1112, requires gross negligence, § 1115 must as
well. It also relied on cases that explored “common-law
understandings incorporat[ing]” gross negligence “into an
involuntary manslaughter charge under Section 1112,” like

8

USA V. BOYLAN

United States v. Keith, 605 F.2d 462 (9th Cir. 1979). The
district court recognized that “the only published federal
appellate decision directly on-point,” United States v.
O’Keefe, 426 F.3d 274 (5th Cir. 2005), explicitly held that
§ 1115 did not require gross negligence. But it was not
“convinc[ed]” of the Fifth Circuit’s decision in light of
§ 1112 and the common law involuntary manslaughter
cases. The government ultimately did not appeal that
decision, and instead obtained a Second Superseding
Indictment, which alleged gross negligence.
At trial, the government presented the testimony of the
surviving crew members, as well as expert testimony about
where the blaze began and a captain’s duty of care when it
comes to fire safety on board vessels like the Conception.
The jury instructions included that, to find Boylan guilty
under § 1115, the government must prove beyond a
reasonable doubt that he “engaged in misconduct and/or
acted with gross negligence.” After ten days of trial, the jury
returned a guilty verdict, and Boylan received a four-year
sentence.
II. DISCUSSION
A. Standard of Review
“We review de novo whether the district court’s jury
instructions misstated or omitted an element of the charged
offense.” 3 United States v. Chi Mak, 683 F.3d 1126, 1133
Boylan argues that because the district court had previously determined
that gross negligence was required under § 1115, the “law of the case”
doctrine and waiver preclude us from reviewing the issue. We reject
these arguments. “Under the law of the case doctrine, a court will
generally refuse to reconsider an issue that has already been decided by
the same court or a higher court in the same case.” Gonzalez v. Arizona,
677 F.3d 383, 389 n.4 (9th Cir. 2012) (en banc). And to the extent the

3

USA V. BOYLAN

9

(9th Cir. 2012). We “review the district court’s formulation
of the jury instructions for abuse of discretion.” Id. An
improper jury instruction does not require reversal if the
error is harmless—that is, if it is “clear beyond a reasonable
doubt that a rational jury would have found the defendant
guilty absent the error.” United States v. Garcia, 729 F.3d
1171, 1177–78 (9th Cir. 2013) (quoting Neder v. United
States, 527 U.S. 1, 18 (1999)).
B. Section 1115 Requires Negligence, Not Gross
Negligence
Boylan argues that the district court’s jury instruction on
§ 1115 misstated the law, as it provided that guilt could
follow if Boylan “engaged in misconduct and/or acted with
gross negligence.”
According to Boylan, the term
“misconduct” permitted the jury to convict Boylan of
something less than gross negligence, contrary to what
§ 1115 requires. The government offers many responses,
including that § 1115 does not require gross negligence, but
merely negligence. Hence, the government argues it actually
met a higher burden than the statute requires, and there was
ultimately no error requiring reversal.
We agree with the government that § 1115 does not
require gross negligence. Known as seaman’s manslaughter,
§ 1115 provides that “[e]very captain . . . by whose
misconduct, negligence, or inattention to his duties on [a]
vessel the life of any person is destroyed . . . shall
be . . . imprisoned not more than ten years.” 18 U.S.C.
§ 1115. Nowhere in the text is “gross negligence” required.
government did not interlocutorily appeal the district court’s decision
requiring gross negligence, we address the argument, as “we can affirm
on any ground supported in the record.” United States v. Job, 871 F.3d
852, 860 (9th Cir. 2017).

10

USA V. BOYLAN

See O’Keefe, 426 F.3d at 279 (holding that the statute’s
“terms are unambiguous and therefore must be given their
plain meaning”).
Boylan is correct that in the context of involuntary
manslaughter under § 1112, we have deemed “gross
negligence” to be an “essential element” for a conviction.
Keith, 605 F.2d at 464. Section 1112(a) provides that
involuntary manslaughter is “the commission of an unlawful
act not amounting to a felony, or in the commission in an
unlawful manner, or without due caution and
circumspection, of a lawful act which might produce death.”
18 U.S.C. § 1112(a). Although the statute does not contain
the term “gross negligence,” we concluded that this was
essential for criminal liability—“the phrase ‘without due
caution and circumspection’ . . . connote[d only] simple
negligence sufficient for civil liability.” Keith, 605 F.3d at
463; see also Garcia, 729 F.3d at 1175 (“We have
consistently held that involuntary manslaughter requires
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant acted
with gross negligence.”).
But the statute before us is not involuntary manslaughter;
it is seaman’s manslaughter. And just because we have
construed involuntary manslaughter to require gross
negligence does not mean that same principle extends to
seaman’s manslaughter, a distinct statutory offense with a
different text, history, and purpose.
As the Fifth Circuit observed when declining to import
“gross negligence” into § 1115—even though, like the Ninth
Circuit, it had done so for § 1112—involuntary
manslaughter and seaman’s manslaughter are “separate
crimes addressing different concerns with different
penalties.” O’Keefe, 426 F.3d at 278 n.1 (citation omitted).

USA V. BOYLAN

11

Whereas § 1112 applies indiscriminately “to all persons,
regardless of where the offense occurs or whether the
offender had any unique responsibility or fiduciary duty
towards the victim of the crime, . . . . § 1115 applies only to
commercial vessels[’] [ ] operators and owners.” 4 Id.; see
also United States v. Alvarez, 809 F. App’x 562, 569 (11th
Cir. 2020) (“In 18 U.S.C. § 1115, Congress affirmatively,
unambiguously, and expressly criminalized the act of
negligently causing a person’s death while operating a
vessel.”).
And this distinction is meaningful. Every day, vessel
masters “have the lives of thousands of helpless human
beings in their keeping, [and] should be held to the strictest
accountability and required to exercise the highest degree of
skill and care.” Van Schaick v. United States, 159 F. 847,
855 (2d Cir. 1908); see also The James Griffiths, 84 F.2d
785, 786 (9th Cir. 1936) (noting that a vessel master’s duty
“to exercise due diligence in making the vessel seaworthy as
to her personnel . . . is one of the owner’s highest
obligations”); Manley v. Nicodemisen, 147 F. Supp. 229, 231
(D. Mass. 1957) (“The relationship of a master to a ship is a
peculiarly close one. His duty has been described as
fiduciary. It includes doing, at all times, everything possible
to preserve the vessel.”). Given a captain’s heightened
obligations, an ordinary negligence standard is sensible in
the seaman’s manslaughter context.

4
In United States v. Kaluza, 780 F.3d 647 (5th Cir. 2015), the Fifth
Circuit revisited O’Keefe and the meaning of § 1115. Kaluza concerned
a different part of § 1115, but the court reiterated O’Keefe’s holding that
“the plain text of the phrase ‘misconduct, negligence, or inattention,’”
was unambiguous. Id. at 659–60.

12

USA V. BOYLAN

The legislative history of § 1115 supports this reading.
Section 1115’s predecessor originally appeared in 1838 as
part of legislation entitled “An Act to provide for the better
security of the lives of passengers on board of vessels
propelled in whole or in part by steam.” United States v.
McKee, 68 F.4th 1100, 1003–04 (8th Cir. 2023) (citing Act
of July 7, 1838, ch. 191, 5 Stat. 304); see also United States
v. Holtzhauer, 40 F. 76, 78 (C.C.D. N.J. 1889) (explaining
that Congress’ purpose in promulgating the 1838 Act was to
“establish a supervision over the conduct of the officers and
other persons employed on any steam-boat or vessel
navigating the waters of the United States”).
Section 12 of the 1838 Act maintained the same
culpability triad as what is now in § 1115: “misconduct,
negligence, or inattention.” Act of July 7, 1838, ch. 191,
§ 12, 5 Stat. 304, 306. And when the 1838 Act was reenacted
in its present form in 1909, there was no change to that
requirement. United States v. LaBrecque, 419 F. Supp. 430,
435 (D. N.J. 1976) (citing Act of Mar. 4, 1909, ch. 321,
§ 282, 35 Stat. 1088, 1144). Rather, the new statute was
“virtually identical to the prior statute, the one difference
being that vessels other than steamboats [we]re now
included within its ambit, . . . reflecting technological
developments.” Id.
Meanwhile, in other maritime statutes, Congress has
explicitly engrafted a gross negligence requirement. In
penalizing individuals who negligently operate vessels,
Congress imposes a civil penalty for “operating a vessel in a
negligent manner,” but makes it a misdemeanor to “operat[e]
a vessel in a grossly negligent manner.” 46 U.S.C.
§ 2302(a)–(b) (emphasis added).
That Congress
distinguished between the two forms of negligence in

USA V. BOYLAN

13

another maritime misconduct statute—but refused to do so
here—is telling of Congress’ intent.
Nineteenth-century cases interpreting the predecessor
statute to § 1115 are also in accord with an ordinary
negligence standard. 5 See United States v. Warner, 28 F.
Cas. 404, 407 (C.C.D. Ohio 1848) (“[A]ny act of
‘misconduct, negligence or inattention’” is enough for guilt,
and if Congress had intended for guilt to require “evidence
of a positive, malicious intent, the words used would
doubtless have been such as to have made that intention
clear.”); United States v. Farnham, 25 F. Cas. 1042, 1044
(C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1853) (“[I]t is no matter what may be the
degree of misconduct, whether it be slight or gross.”); United
States v. Collyer, 25 F. Cas. 554, 577 (C.C.S.D.N.Y. 1855)
(“It is not required of them to prove willful or intentional
mismanagement or misconduct on the part of the accused.”);
United States v. Keller, 19 F. 633, 637 (C.C.D.W. Va. 1884)
(defining “negligence” as “an omission to perform some
duty” or “a violation of some rule, which is made to govern
and control one in the discharge of some duty”); see also Van
Schaick, 159 F. at 850 (“Intent is not an element of the
offense, malice need not be proved.”). We decline to disrupt
this history by importing a new culpability standard into
§ 1115. Accordingly, we follow the Fifth and Eleventh
To the extent Boylan argues that cases such as Elonis v. United States,
575 U.S. 723 (2015), and Staples v. United States, 511 U.S. 600 (1994),
require imputing a gross negligence mens rea, we disagree. Those cases
concerned statutes silent on mental state. Elonis, 575 U.S. at 732 (noting
the statute “does not specify that the defendant must have any mental
state with respect to these elements”); Staples, 511 U.S. at 605 (noting
the statute “is silent concerning the mens rea required for a violation”).
But § 1115 is not silent; its text explicitly permits conviction based on
negligence.
5

14

USA V. BOYLAN

Circuits and hold that § 1115 does not require gross
negligence.
C.

Any Error with the Statutory
“Misconduct” was Harmless

Term

To the extent Boylan argues there is still error because
the instruction included the term “misconduct,” any error is
harmless. That is, “the omitted [or misstated] element was
uncontested and supported by overwhelming evidence, such
that the jury verdict would have been the same absent the
error.” United States v. Collazo, 984 F.3d 1308, 1336 (9th
Cir. 2021) (en banc) (citing Neder, 527 U.S. at 17 (alteration
in original)).
Specifically, Boylan argues that the statutory term
“misconduct” permitted liability based on regulatory
violations alone and conviction based on a lower standard
than negligence. To the first point, the jury instructions
explicitly cautioned against what Boylan alleges. Indeed,
the district court warned that “[t]he mere fact that [Boylan]
violated a regulation is not by itself sufficient to establish a
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1115. Rather, you must consider all
of the relevant evidence regarding the existence or nonexistence of gross negligence and the other elements of
Section 1115.”
To the second point, because this case was argued under
a gross negligence theory, any error with the misconduct
instruction is harmless. 6 In framing the case, the district
court repeatedly instructed the jury that gross negligence was
the required standard for culpability under § 1115. And the

We do not decide whether an indictment alleging only misconduct,
without any mention of negligence, would satisfy § 1115.

6

USA V. BOYLAN

15

court suggested that gross negligence was not an optional
element for proving § 1115.
In trying this case, the government never argued that
mere misconduct was sufficient for conviction. During the
government’s closing argument, the few times the term
“misconduct” was used, it was always tethered to “gross
negligence.” And when defining the phrase “Misconduct
and/or Gross Negligence,” the government relied on the
definition of gross negligence—“reckless disregard for
human life.” Thus, the jury could not have based its
conviction solely on misconduct.
Finally, the overwhelming evidence against Boylan—
never training his inexperienced staff on fire safety
procedures, failing to adhere to the regulatory requirement
to have a roving patrol, jumping overboard instead of
attempting to save any of the passengers trapped below deck,
and so on—establishes that the jury “would have found
[Boylan] guilty absent the error.” Garcia, 729 F.3d at 1177
(quoting Neder, 527 U.S. at 18).
Because the district court’s instruction held the
government to a higher standard than what § 1115 requires,
and the evidence of gross negligence was overwhelming,
there was no reversible error.
AFFIRMED.

16

USA V. BOYLAN

KOH, J., concurring:
I agree with my colleagues that any alleged error in the
jury instructions’ use of “misconduct” to define the crime
was harmless in light of “the overwhelming evidence against
Boylan.” 1 Op. at 15; see United States v. Collazo, 984 F.3d
1308, 1336 (9th Cir. 2021) (en banc); United States v.
Garcia, 729 F.3d 1171, 1177 (9th Cir. 2013); Neder v.
United States, 527 U.S. 1, 17 (1999). Under our precedent,
that is a sufficient basis to find harmless error, and the
majority opinion could—and should—have stopped there.
See Greater New Orleans Broad. Ass’n v. United States, 527
U.S. 173, 184 (1999) (“It is, however, an established part of
our constitutional jurisprudence that we do not ordinarily
reach out to make novel or unnecessarily broad
pronouncements on constitutional issues when a case can be
fully resolved on a narrower ground.”).
The majority opinion does not stop there. Instead, it also
decides that the alleged error was harmless because (1) the
district judge “fram[ed]” the case as one of gross negligence,
and (2) during the prosecution’s closing arguments, “the few
times the term ‘misconduct’ was used, it was always tethered
to ‘gross negligence.’” Op. at 14–15. I disagree with both of
these reasons.
In this case, the Introductory Instructions stated: “The
Government asserts that, as the captain of the Conception,
18 U.S.C. § 1115 states “Every captain, engineer, pilot, or other person
employed on any steamboat or vessel, by whose misconduct, negligence,
or inattention to his duties on such vessel the life of any person is
destroyed, and every owner, charterer, inspector, or other public officer,
through whose fraud, neglect, connivance, misconduct, or violation of
law the life of any person is destroyed, shall be fined under this title or
imprisoned not more than ten years, or both.”

1

USA V. BOYLAN

17

Defendant’s misconduct and/or gross negligence caused
those deaths. Among the alleged acts of misconduct and/or
gross negligence are…” (Emphasis added).
The “Instructions as to the Crime” stated: “The
Defendant is charged in the Indictment with a violation of 18
U.S.C. § 1115 which deals with misconduct and/or gross
negligence of ship officers which causes the death of a
person on navigable waters.” (Emphasis added). The
“Instructions as to the Crime” used the disjunctive phrase
“misconduct and/or gross negligence” three more times.
(Emphasis added).
The jury was also instructed that “you must base your
verdict only on the evidence received in the case and these
instructions,” that the jurors had a “duty to apply the law as
[given to them],” and that “arguments by the lawyers are not
evidence.”
It was the jury’s duty to follow these instructions, and we
must presume that they did so. CSX Transp., Inc. v. Hensley,
556 U.S. 838, 841 (2009); Sparf v. United States, 156 U.S.
51, 102 (1895). In fact, we presume that the jury “attend[ed]
closely [to] the particular language of the trial court’s
instructions.” Francis v. Franklin, 471 U.S. 307, 324 n.9
(1985). The majority’s reasoning effectively reads the
disjunctive “or” out of the instructions and assumes instead
that the jury followed the district judge’s framing of the case
and the prosecution’s closing arguments as to the applicable
legal standard.
The majority does not and cannot cite any authority
supporting the proposition that a jury instruction error may
be harmless because of the district judge’s framing of the
case or the prosecution’s closing arguments. The harmless
error cases the majority cites, Collazo, Garcia, and Neder,

18

USA V. BOYLAN

held that a jury instruction error may be harmless in light of
the “overwhelming evidence” supporting conviction or the
“totality of the instructions.” Collazo, 984 F.3d at 1336;
Garcia, 729 F.3d at 1178; Neder, 527 U.S. at 17. No case
holds that the district judge’s framing of the case or the
prosecution’s closing arguments are evidence or can
supplant the jury instructions.
The majority cites to one sentence defining “reckless
disregard for human life” in the ten paragraph long
“Instructions as to the Crime.” The cited sentence is in the
paragraph defining the crime’s mens rea, which stated:
Second, the Defendant engaged in
misconduct and/or acted with gross
negligence which means acting with wanton
or reckless disregard for human life. To
establish reckless disregard for human life, it
must be shown that (1) Defendant was aware
of the serious risk to human life which his
conduct created, or Defendant knew of facts
which, if considered and weighed in a
reasonable manner, indicate a substantial and
unjustifiable risk to human life; and (2) he
deliberately disregarded that substantial and
unjustifiable risk of creating potentially lifethreatening condition of which he was
aware[.]
It is at a minimum ambiguous whether the definition of
“reckless disregard for human life” applied to “gross
negligence” only, or to the whole phrase “misconduct and/or
gross negligence.” Moreover, the disjunctive misconduct
and/or gross negligence was in the first sentence of the above

USA V. BOYLAN

19

paragraph and appeared in the same Instruction three more
times:
The Defendant is charged in the Indictment
with a violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1115 which
deals with misconduct and/or gross
negligence of ship officers which causes the
death of a person on navigable waters.
Third, the Defendant’s misconduct and/or
gross negligence was the proximate cause of
the death of a person on board the vessel.
A proximate cause is one that played a
substantial part in bringing about the death,
so that the death was the direct result or a
reasonably probable consequence of the
Defendant’s misconduct and/or gross
negligence[.]
(Emphasis added). No amount of framing of the case by the
district judge or closing arguments by the prosecution can
negate these instructions.
We all agree that the alleged error of including
“misconduct” in the jury instructions was harmless because
the evidence in this case is overwhelming. See Collazo, 984
F.3d at 1336. That suffices, and we need not say more.

