FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
BO AVERY; PHOEBE ROGERS;
KRISTY CAMILLERI; JILL
UNVERFERTH,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
TEKSYSTEMS, INC.,

No. 24-5810
D.C. No.
3:22-cv-02733JSC

OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Jacqueline Scott Corley, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted August 13, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed January 28, 2026
Before: Johnnie B. Rawlinson and Lucy H. Koh, Circuit
Judges, and Sidney A. Fitzwater, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Koh
The Honorable Sidney A. Fitzwater, United States District Judge for
the Northern District of Texas, sitting by designation.
*

2

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

SUMMARY **
Arbitration / Class Action
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of a motion
to compel arbitration filed by Defendant TEKsystems, Inc.
(“TEK”) in a putative class action brought by Plaintiffs Bo
Avery, Jill Unverferth, Kristy Camilleri, and Phoebe Rogers
(collectively, “Plaintiffs”).
Over 22 months after the commencement of the
litigation, and after briefing on class certification had closed,
TEK rolled out a new, mandatory arbitration agreement (the
“Arbitration Agreement”) that automatically applied to
putative class members unless they quit their jobs or opted
out of the Arbitration Agreement. The district court granted
Plaintiffs’ motion for class certification, and the class notice
period began. Federal Rule of Civil Procedure (“FRCP”) 23
creates an opt-out requirement for class members because it
mandates that members of a certified class must be provided
with the “best notice that is practicable” and an opportunity
to request exclusion during the class notice period. If class
members do nothing, they are automatically members of the
class. On the other hand, under TEK’s Arbitration
Agreement, class members who do nothing automatically
opted out of the class. In order to remain in the class, class
members had to quit their jobs or affirmatively opt out of the
Arbitration Agreement. Thus, the district court found that
TEK subverted FRCP 23 by turning FRCP 23’s opt-out class
procedures into opt in class procedures. The district court
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

3

also concluded that TEK’s Arbitration Agreement roll out
communications threatened the fairness of the
litigation. These communications stated that class actions
are “wasteful,” “inefficient,” involve “exorbitant fees,”
“tend to enrich only attorneys,” and would “require” TEK
“to ignore individual employee issues and concerns”; were
sent and required action during the holidays; contained
inconsistent statements about how and when to opt out of the
Arbitration Agreement; and also implied that putative class
members must consult their own attorneys at their own
expense rather than class counsel. Thus, the district court
denied TEK’s motion to compel arbitration.
Following U.S. Supreme Court precedent giving district
courts the duty and broad authority to exercise control over
a class action under FRCP 23(d), the panel held that a district
court has the authority to decline to enforce a motion to
compel arbitration under FRCP 23(d) to ensure the fairness
of the class proceedings. The panel noted that its holding is
in accord with the Fourth Circuit, Sixth Circuit, and Eleventh
Circuit. The panel also held that TEK’s Arbitration
Agreement roll out communications were misleading and
threatened
the
fairness
of
the
class
action
proceedings. Additionally, the panel held that the
Arbitration Agreement’s delegation provision did not
prevent the district court from determining the enforceability
of the Arbitration Agreement. Thus, the panel affirmed the
district court’s decision to decline to enforce TEK’s motion
to compel arbitration.

4

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

COUNSEL
Shelby H. Leighton (argued) and Leah M. Nicholls, Public
Justice PC, Washington, D.C.; Sally J. Abrahamson,
Werman Salas PC, Washington, D.C.; Maureen A. Salas,
Anne Kramer, and Douglas M. Werman, Werman Salas PC,
Chicago, Illinois; Krysten L. Connon and Sarah R.
Schalman-Bergen, Lichten & Liss-Riordan PC, Boston,
Massachusetts; Rachel Bien, Olivier & Schreiber LLP,
Pasadena, California; for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Lennon B. Haas (argued) and Alexander W. Simon, Seyfarth
Shaw LLP, Atlanta, Georgia; Brian P. Long, Seyfarth Shaw
LLP, Los Angeles, California; Andrew Scroggins, Seyfarth
Shaw LLP, Chicago, Illinois; for Defendant-Appellant.

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

5

OPINION
KOH, Circuit Judge:
On January 28, 2022, Plaintiffs Bo Avery, Jill
Unverferth, Kristy Camilleri, and Phoebe Rogers
(“Plaintiffs”) filed a putative class action against Defendant
TEKsystems, Inc. (“TEK”) on behalf of former and current
recruiters, alleging various state wage and hour violations.
On December 19, 2023, after class certification briefing had
closed, TEK rolled out a new, mandatory arbitration
agreement (the “Agreement”) applicable to class members.
On June 10, 2024, after class certification and Plaintiffs filed
a motion for partial summary judgment, and five days before
the close of the class notice period, TEK moved to compel
arbitration against class members bound by the Agreement.
The district court concluded that TEK’s communications
rolling out the Agreement “threatened the fairness of the
litigation because the communications were misleading and
omitted key information,” and denied TEK’s motion under
Federal Rule of Civil Procedure (“FRCP”) 23(d). This
appeal concerns whether the district court properly denied
TEK’s motion to compel arbitration under FRCP 23(d). For
the reasons below, we hold that it did.
I. BACKGROUND
HISTORY

AND

PROCEDURAL

TEK is a professional staffing agency that places
external employees, which it calls consultants, on temporary
assignments with business clients to provide IT services.
Prior to this lawsuit, TEK had a longstanding policy
requiring its consultants to sign an arbitration agreement as
a condition of employment.

6

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

Plaintiffs are former TEK employees who worked as
recruiters. Plaintiffs allege that TEK misclassified its
recruiters as exempt from state overtime laws and failed to
pay them overtime or provide meal and rest breaks. On
January 28, 2022, Plaintiffs, on behalf of current and former
TEK recruiters in California, brought a class action
complaint in state court and alleged six causes of action
under California law concerning wage and hour violations.
TEK removed the case from state court to federal court
on May 6, 2022. On July 28, 2022, TEK moved to dismiss,
stay, or transfer the case to the Western District of
Pennsylvania. The district court denied TEK’s motion on
August 31, 2022. The parties then engaged in discovery for
over a year. In September 2023, TEK approved a plan to
expand its mandatory arbitration policy to include its internal
employees, including recruiters.
On October 6, 2023, Plaintiffs filed their motion for class
certification. On November 17, 2023, TEK filed its
opposition, and on December 14, 2023, Plaintiffs filed their
reply. On December 19, 2023, five days after class
certification briefing had closed, TEK rolled out its new,
mandatory Agreement, which is central to this appeal. For
relevant class members, TEK’s Agreement announcement
came in two stages.
First, on December 19, 2023, TEK sent an email to all
internal employees with the subject line “Mutual Arbitration
Agreement” (“Email 1”). Email 1 provided:
As you know from the email you received
earlier today, at this time of year we typically
review and update our company policies,
required trainings and employee information.

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

In 2024, TEKsystems is instituting a mutual
arbitration agreement for internal employees
in the U.S. Mutual arbitration agreements are
commonplace today. Most people have
signed them as part of cell phone contracts,
rental agreements, and credit card
agreements. They are increasingly common
with employers as they provide a mutually
agreeable way to settle disputes while
being more efficient and cost effective for
both employees and the company.
We value each employee and believe that
workplace concerns are best resolved through
open and candid discussions, and employees
are encouraged to raise and discuss any
concerns as soon as they arise. In the event
the issue or concern cannot be resolved
satisfactorily, or if an employee chooses not
to pursue these informal channels, employees
will be required to pursue covered claims
through mandatory arbitration as described in
the attached Agreement.
Attached is the Company’s Mutual
Arbitration Agreement (the “Agreement”).
Please review it carefully as it affects our
mutual right to litigate certain types of legal
claims in court, and also includes a waiver of
class and collective action claims. Under the
Agreement, both employees and the
Company would pursue any “covered
claims” through individual arbitration instead
of court litigation or class/collective actions.
In our experience, litigation in court –

7

8

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

particularly class and collective actions –
are wasteful, inefficient means for
resolving disputes, and tend to enrich only
attorneys rather than the individuals who
may have legitimate claims.
As part of this Agreement, the Company will
pay for the costs of arbitration, minus a small
“filing fee.” For pursuing individual claims,
the arbitration forum is similar to court, but
less formal. The same substantive laws apply
to your claim, and the arbitrator (whom you
would participate in selecting) would be
directed to reach a conclusion and can
provide the same remedies you could receive
in an individual lawsuit in court. Before
initiating arbitration, employees
are
encouraged, but not required, to come
forward with any concerns or issues they may
have through your HR employee relations
manager or leader.
All new and current employees will be
subject to this Agreement as a condition of
working for the Company. If you choose to
continue working here after December 31,
2023 you’ll be deemed to have accepted the
Agreement, and we are asking for your
signature to reflect that. Please review,
acknowledge and electronically “sign” the
agreement by clicking “I agree.” If you have
any questions regarding the Agreement,
please feel free to contact the HR team at
HR@teksystems.com.

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

9

You can find additional information and
FAQs here [link].
The Agreement, attached to Email 1, covered Plaintiffs’
claims in this lawsuit and provided, in part:
YOU WILL BE DEEMED AS HAVING
ACCEPTED THIS AGREEMENT IF
YOU REMAIN EMPLOYED BY
TEKSYSTEMS
ON
OR
AFTER
JANUARY 1, 2024.
…
•

Arbitration Procedures
The parties will use Judicial Arbitration and
Mediation Services (“JAMS”) subject to its
then-current employment arbitration rules
and procedures (and the then-existing
emergency relief procedures contained in the
JAMS comprehensive arbitration rules and
procedures if either party seeks emergency
relief prior to the appointment of an
Arbitrator), available at www.jamsadr.com,
unless those rules and/or procedures conflict
with any express term of this Agreement, in
which case this Agreement is controlling;

Relevant to this appeal, JAMS Rule 11(b) is a delegation
clause that provides “[j]urisdictional and arbitrability
disputes, including disputes over the formation, existence,
validity, interpretation or scope of the agreement under
which Arbitration is sought, and who are proper Parties to
the Arbitration, shall be submitted to and ruled on by the
Arbitrator.”

10

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

Email 1 contained a link to TEK’s accompanying FAQ
document, which provided additional commentary on class
actions, including:
Why is the Company implementing the
Agreement?
• The
Company
believes
that
arbitration provides a mutually
agreeable way to settle disputes while
being more efficient and cost
effective for both employees and the
Company.
• Arbitration is a forum for dispute
resolution where the dispute is
presented by each side to a neutral
decision-maker, an arbitrator, who then
makes a decision on the appropriate
outcome.
• In our experience, litigation in
court – particularly
class
and
collective actions – are wasteful,
inefficient means for resolving
disputes, and tend to enrich only
attorneys rather than the individuals
who may have legitimate claims.
...
Can I still get the same result that I would
have been able to get in court for my
individual claims?
• Yes. The arbitrator will have the same
authority to award all the same
remedies that would have been
available to you in court on an

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

11

individual claim. But you will not
have the right to proceed on a classwide claim (which generally tends to
enrich attorneys, not individual class
members).
...
Does this require us to waive class claims?
Why is that a requirement?
• Yes. To the extent you have one of
the covered claims, the Company
cares about resolving your claim
specifically and thoroughly. A class
claim requires the Company to
ignore individual employee issues
and
concerns.
Additionally,
attorneys, not employees, are often
the biggest winners in class actions,
often charging exorbitant fees to both
the class and the employer involved,
reducing the money actually received
by class members.
After Email 1 was sent, on the same day, TEK sent a
second email to all recruiters who were members of the
putative class with the subject line “Mutual Arbitration
Agreement and Current Class Action Suit” (“Email 2”).
Email 2 provided, in part:
As we’ve communicated, the company is
adopting a policy of requiring mutual
arbitration that will go into effect on
January 1, 2024.

12

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

A lawsuit has been filed which, if certified,
would include you as a class member. You
may opt out of the arbitration agreement
for the limited purpose of keeping your
ability to participate in that lawsuit by
signing and returning the attached
agreement by January 9, 2023. The
attached document provides more detail.
You can find a copy of Avery et al. v.
TEKsystems, Inc. here [link].
The document attached to Email 2 was titled “Notice of
Right to Opt-Out of Mutual Arbitration Agreement for
Limited Purpose” (the “Opt-Out”). The Opt-Out provided:
Like all other employees of TEKsystems,
you received from TEKsystems a Mutual
Arbitration Agreement (“Agreement”)
that will be effective as to all TEKsystems
employees beginning on January 1, 2024.
You are receiving this additional
communication because you are a putative
class member in the case captioned Avery, et
al. v. TEKsystems, Inc., Case No. 3:22-cv02733-JSC, that is pending before the United
States District Court for the Northern District
of California (“Avery”) and the Agreement
may affect your rights in that matter.
The main claim in Avery is that TEKsystems
allegedly misclassified Recruiters as exempt
from the overtime requirements under
California law and that, therefore,

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

TEKsystems owes Recruiters back overtime
pay and various penalties. TEKsystems
denies the substantive allegations in the case.
A motion for class certification has been
filed, which TEKsystems has opposed, and
the court has not issued a decision on it or on
the merits of the case. You may be able to
receive money if the court certifies a class
and if either the court ultimately rules in favor
of the class on the merits or if the parties
settle the case.
If you wish to view the operative complaint
in Avery, which contains contact information
for the attorneys who seek to represent a
class, you may do so by clicking the link in
the DocuSign email or typing in this URL
[link].
The Agreement contains a broad
definition of Covered Claims and does not
exclude the claims brought in Avery.
Accordingly, unless you separate from
your employment with TEKsystems
before January 1, 2024, or take action as
described below before January 9, 2024,
TEKsystems will take the position in Avery
that, if a class is certified, you could not be
a part of it and that you can bring claims
only in individual arbitration.
If you wish [to] remain a part of the
putative class in Avery in federal court, you
may opt out of the Mutual Arbitration
Agreement for the limited purpose of

13

14

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

remaining in the Avery putative class by
signing below and returning this form no
later than January 9, 2024.
You of course are free to consult your
attorney.
I wish to opt-out of the Mutual Arbitration
Agreement for the limited purpose of
remaining in the putative class in Avery, et al.
v. TEKsystems, Inc., Case No. 3:22-cv02733-JSC (N.D. Cal.).
Of the 164 employees that received Email 2 and the OptOut, 41 employees opted out to remain eligible class
members. 1 123 class members did not opt out of the
Agreement.
After TEK’s roll out of the Agreement, that same day,
TEK’s counsel notified Plaintiffs’ counsel of the Agreement.
After receiving copies of Emails 1 and 2, on December 22,
2023, Plaintiffs filed an emergency motion for a protective
order and asked the district court to invalidate the Agreement
and restrict TEK’s communications with class members. On
January 4, 2024, the district court held a hearing on
Plaintiffs’ emergency motion. The district court declined to
invalidate the Agreement and did not limit TEK’s
communications with the class, but did require TEK’s future
communications to be disclosed to Plaintiffs.
1
TEK states that 164 class members received Email 2 and the Opt-Out
and that 123 class members did not opt out of the Agreement. At the
same time, TEK also states that 191 class members received Email 1.
TEK does not explain this discrepancy. As TEK relies on the 164 class
members number for Email 2 for its arguments, we use that number as
well.

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

15

On February 1, 2024, the district court held a class
certification hearing, at which TEK did not raise the issue of
arbitration. The district court granted Plaintiffs’ motion for
class certification on February 13, 2024. Following class
certification, the parties engaged in briefing regarding the
content of the class notice. During the notice process, TEK
informed the district court on two occasions that TEK
intended to move to compel arbitration pursuant to the
Agreement within a week of the close of the class notice
period. At the case management conference on March 14,
2024, the district court stated it saw “no reason why the
motion to compel arbitration can’t be filed while notice is
going out,” and told TEK that TEK needed to start drafting
the motion to compel arbitration immediately, even if the
motion could not be decided until the notice period closed.
On April 9, 2024, the district court approved the class
notice, and the class notice was issued to class members on
April 16, 2024. Class members had until June 15, 2024, to
opt out of the class. After the class notice was approved, the
parties filed a joint case management conference statement
in which TEK again stated that it intended to move to compel
arbitration pursuant to the Agreement after the close of the
class notice period. On April 17, 2024, the district court held
a case management conference and set a briefing schedule
for Plaintiffs’ motion for summary judgment. On May 14,
2024, Plaintiffs filed their partial motion for summary
judgment. On June 10, 2024, five days before the class
notice period closed, TEK filed its motion to compel
arbitration against members of the putative class bound by
the Agreement.
On August 21, 2024, the district court denied TEK’s
motion to compel arbitration on two grounds. First, the
district court found that FRCP 23(d) gives district courts

16

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

broad authority to regulate the notice and opt-out process
and to impose limitations when a party’s conduct threatens
the fairness of the litigation. The district court noted that
courts routinely exercise this discretion to invalidate or
refuse to enforce arbitration agreements implemented during
a pending class action that interfere with class members’
rights. The district court then concluded that TEK’s
communications “threatened the fairness of the litigation
because the communications were misleading and omitted
key information.”
The district court noted that TEK made disparaging
comments regarding class actions multiple times, which
“appear designed to prevent putative class members from
opting into the lawsuit and opting out of the [Agreement].”
Further, the district court found the communications
misleading for many reasons: (1) a recipient may think they
personally have to pay “exorbitant fees” as a member of the
class; (2) TEK did not tell class members they could consult
with Plaintiffs’ counsel without paying out of pocket;
(3) TEK did not readily provide Plaintiffs’ counsel’s contact
information, but required them to click through multiple
links, and then locate the contact information on a copy of
the complaint; (4) TEK warned employees that they could
not share the emails with others; (5) TEK did not explain that
class certification had been briefed and was scheduled to be
decided early the next year; and (6) TEK did not provide a
copy of the class certification pleadings. The timing of these
communications was “especially concerning” as TEK’s
emails “were the first communication many putative class
members received about the case.”
Additionally, the district court found the two emails
contradictory. Email 1 purported to mandate arbitration if
an employee wanted to keep their job and “did not indicate

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

17

that there was any opt-out procedure.” Email 2 then
indicated an opt-out was possible for purposes of a litigation
“about which the putative class members had never before
been notified.” The district court noted “[t]he confusing
nature of the emails is heightened because the emails were
sent on December 19 – just before the Christmas holidays,
and during a time when many employees were likely on
vacation or otherwise engaged and thus unlikely to be able
to obtain advice.” Ultimately, the district court concluded
“TEK turned this Rule 23 opt-out class proceeding into an
opt-in proceeding, and to ensure as few current employee
class members as possible opted in, TEK disparaged class
actions and hid important information from the putative class
members.” As “[t]hese unilateral communications thus
threatened the fairness of the class action proceedings,” the
district court denied TEK’s motion to compel arbitration
under FRCP 23(d).
In the alternative, the district court also found that “TEK
waived its right to compel arbitration of the claims of
certified class members.” The district court concluded that
TEK had employed “wait and see conduct” during the
litigation that was “inconsistent with the right to arbitrate.”
Further, the district court found “TEK knew of its right to
impose a mandatory arbitration agreement even before it
removed the action” on May 6, 2022, but waited until 18
months into the litigation to impose arbitration on December
19, 2023.
TEK filed a timely interlocutory appeal on September
19, 2024.

18

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

II. JURISDICTION
REVIEW

AND

STANDARD

OF

“[9 U.S.C. § 16(a)] authorizes an interlocutory appeal
from the denial of a motion to compel arbitration.”
Coinbase, Inc. v. Bielski, 599 U.S. 736, 739 (2023).
“We review a district judge’s order to compel arbitration
de novo. We review factual findings for clear error, and the
interpretation and meaning of contract provisions de novo.”
Patrick v. Running Warehouse, LLC, 93 F.4th 468, 475 (9th
Cir. 2024) (citation modified). We review district court
orders under FRCP 23(d) for “an abuse of discretion.” Gulf
Oil Co. v. Bernard, 452 U.S. 89, 99, 103 (1981).
III. DISCUSSION
This case concerns whether the district court properly
denied TEK’s motion to compel arbitration based on FRCP
23(d). We hold that it did. First, we conclude that FRCP
23(d) authorizes district courts to refuse to enforce
arbitration agreements. Second, we conclude that the district
court correctly applied FRCP 23(d) in denying TEK’s
motion to compel arbitration. Finally, we conclude the
Agreement’s delegation provision did not prevent the district
court from determining the enforceability of the Agreement.
A. The FAA and FRCP 23(d)
Under the Federal Arbitration Act (“FAA”), “an
agreement in writing to submit to arbitration an existing
controversy . . . shall be valid, irrevocable, and enforceable,
save upon such grounds as exist at law or in equity for the
revocation of any contract.” 9 U.S.C. § 2. “The FAA
thereby places arbitration agreements on an equal footing
with other contracts, and requires courts to enforce them
according to their terms. Like other contracts, however, they

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

19

may be invalidated by generally applicable contract
defenses, such as fraud, duress, or unconscionability.” RentA-Ctr., W., Inc. v. Jackson, 561 U.S. 63, 67–68 (2010)
(citation modified).
FRCP 23(d) provides in part that “[i]n conducting an
action under this rule, the court may issue orders that . . .
(C) impose conditions on the representative parties or on
intervenors . . . or (E) deal with similar procedural matters.”
Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(d). Additionally, FRCP 83(b) states that
when there is no controlling law, “[a] judge may regulate
practice in any manner consistent with federal law, [federal
rules], and the district’s local rules.” Fed. R. Civ. P. 83(b).
The U.S. Supreme Court has interpreted these rules
broadly to hold that “a district court has both the duty and
the broad authority to exercise control over a class action and
to enter appropriate orders governing the conduct of counsel
and parties.” Gulf Oil, 452 U.S. at 100. This discretion is
not unlimited, and such an order “should be based on a clear
record and specific findings that reflect a weighing of the
need for a limitation and the potential interference with the
rights of the parties.” Id. at 101. “[S]uch a weighing –
identifying the potential abuses being addressed – should
result in a carefully drawn order that limits speech as little as
possible, consistent with the rights of the parties under the
circumstances.” Id. at 102.
Further, the U.S. Supreme Court has contemplated the
remedy of cancellation of improperly obtained contracts as
a logical extension of Gulf Oil’s broad authority to control
class actions under FRCP 23(d). In Hoffmann-La Roche Inc.
v. Sperling, 493 U.S. 165, 171 (1989), the Court “recognized
that a trial court has a substantial interest in communications
that are mailed for single actions involving multiple parties.”

20

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

The Court held that Gulf Oil’s broad authority under FRCP
23(d) applied to collective actions. Id. In doing so, the Court
reasoned that “[b]oth the parties and the court benefit from
settling disputes about the content of the notice before it is
distributed,” and that “[t]his procedure may avoid the need
to cancel consents obtained in an improper manner.” Id. at
172 (emphasis added).
Thus, we hold that FRCP 23(d) authorizes a district court
to refuse to enforce an arbitration agreement. Our holding
directly follows U.S. Supreme Court precedent interpreting
FRCP 23(d). Under FRCP 23, class actions are an opt-out
process in which class members are included within a
certified class unless class members “request[] exclusion”
from the class. Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(c). District courts have
broad authority under FRCP 23(d) to control the opt-out
process of class actions. As the U.S. Supreme Court has
explained, “[b]ecause of the potential for abuse, a district
court has both the duty and the broad authority to exercise
control over a class action and to enter appropriate orders
governing the conduct of counsel and parties.” Gulf Oil, 452
U.S. at 100.
Specifically, “[FRCP] 23(d) gives district courts the
power to regulate the notice and opt-out processes and to
impose limitations when a party engages in behavior that
threatens the fairness of the litigation.” Wang v. Chinese
Daily News, Inc., 623 F.3d 743, 756 (9th Cir. 2010), vacated
on other grounds, 565 U.S. 801 (2011). See also Fed. R.
Civ. P. 23(d) advisory committee’s note to 1966 amendment
(“Subdivision (d) is concerned with the fair and efficient
conduct of the action . . . .”). TEK’s actions fall within the
scope of this broad authority because TEK subverted FRCP
23 by turning this typical Rule 23 opt-out class proceeding
into an opt-in proceeding.

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

21

A contrary holding would be at odds with the “duty and
the broad authority” of district courts to control the class
action process under FRCP 23(d). Gulf Oil, 452 U.S. at 100.
If the district court had been aware of TEK’s arbitration
plans before the roll out, the district court could have
enjoined TEK’s communications under FRCP 23(d) for
being misleading and attempting to disrupt the opt-out
process. See Dominguez v. Better Mortg. Corp., 88 F.4th
782, 790–93 (9th Cir. 2023) (affirming a district court’s
communication restriction between the defendant and class
members under FRCP 23(d) because the defendant’s
communications were misleading and coercive).
Although TEK does not dispute the district court’s
authority to enjoin communications under FRCP 23(d), TEK
argues the district court has no authority under FRCP 23(d)
to invalidate its binding Agreement. However, there would
be no point to FRCP 23(d)’s broad authority to oversee class
action communications if the authority stopped when a
party’s misleading communications with class members
resulted in an agreement before the district court intervened.
Our holding today finds additional support from our
recent Dominguez case. In Dominguez, we faced a similar
issue where the district court issued orders under FRCP
23(d) restricting communications between the defendant and
class members, and “nullifying new employment
agreements and release agreements signed in response to the
employer’s communications that the court found to have
been misleading and coercive.” Id. at 793. We affirmed the
district court’s order enjoining the defendant’s
communications with class members because the defendant
engaged in misleading and coercive communications. See
id. at 792–93. As to the district court’s order invalidating
the employment and release agreements obtained through

22

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

the defendant’s misleading and coercive communications,
we acknowledged that the “appellate challenge raises a
question that has arisen in a number of district courts in this
circuit: when can a district court void a settlement or opt-out
agreement obtained through misleading or coercive
communications?” Id. at 793.
Dominguez “recognize[d] the potential benefit of
providing guidance to district courts in this circuit on [this]
question[],” but held that there was not appellate jurisdiction
in that case to answer the question. Id. at 794. Nevertheless,
Dominguez suggested the same conclusion we reach here.
Dominguez noted that in Wang, 623 F.3d at 757, “[w]e
approved a similar order [under FRCP 23(d)] nullifying class
opt-outs obtained by coercion.” Dominguez, 88 F.4th at 793.
Further, Dominguez noted that the Fourth Circuit, Sixth
Circuit, and Eleventh Circuit had confronted similar issues,
and “[t]hose circuits have reasoned, consistent with the
relevant portion of Wang, that district courts have the power
to remedy misleading and coercive communications used to
obtain agreements from prospective plaintiffs that affect
their participation in the pending lawsuit.” Id.
In Degidio v. Crazy Horse Saloon & Restaurant Inc, 880
F.3d 135, 138 (4th Cir. 2018), the plaintiffs filed a class and
collective action alleging wage and hour violations under
federal and state law due to the defendant misclassifying the
plaintiffs as independent contractors. At the end of
discovery, the defendant “began entering arbitration
agreements with entertainers who had worked at the club.”
Id. The arbitration agreements contained class action
waivers and were required for entertainers to perform at the
club. See id. The district court declined to enforce the
arbitration agreements because the defendant “had obtained
the arbitration agreements through a unilateral,

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

23

unsupervised, and misleading pattern of communication
with absent class members initiated more than a year after
the pendency of this case.” Id. at 140. The Fourth Circuit
affirmed the district court’s refusal to enforce the arbitration
agreements in part because the “sham agreements” were
misleading and obtained in a situation “ripe for duress.” Id.
at 144.
In Fox v. Saginaw County, Michigan, 35 F.4th 1042,
1045 (6th Cir. 2022), the plaintiffs were property owners
who had failed to pay property taxes and had their properties
foreclosed upon by the county defendants. The county
defendants sold the plaintiffs’ properties and kept all the sale
proceeds, even if the proceeds exceeded the amount of taxes
a plaintiff owed. See id. The plaintiffs then brought a class
action against the county defendants seeking to recover the
excess proceeds. See id. Upon learning of the lawsuit, a
company solicited class members, reached agreement with
some class members to be appointed their fiduciary, and
opted out of the certified class for those members. See id. at
1045–46. The district court held, under FRCP 23(d), that the
company’s clients could rescind their agreements. See id. at
1046. The Sixth Circuit affirmed the district court’s decision
under FRCP 23(d) and held “[t]his remedy is not
extraordinary in the class-action context. And it falls within
the district court’s broad authority to manage class-action
litigation to protect against coercive communications and
further the administration of justice generally.” Id. at 1050
(citation modified).
In Billingsley v. Citi Trends, Inc., 560 F. App’x 914, 915
(11th Cir. 2014), the plaintiffs filed a collective action
alleging federal wage and hour violations due to the
defendant misclassifying the plaintiffs as exempt employees.
During the litigation, the defendant rolled out a new,

24

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

mandatory arbitration agreement under the guise of a new
employee handbook only to potential class members. See id.
at 918. The district court denied the defendant’s motion to
compel arbitration because “the rollout was replete with
deceit and designed to be intimidating and coercive,” and
“the purpose and effect of the arbitration agreement was to
protect [the defendant] in this lawsuit” and reduce class
members. Id. at 919 (citation modified). The Eleventh
Circuit affirmed the district court’s denial of a motion to
compel arbitration because the defendant’s actions were
“confusing, misleading, coercive, and clearly designed to
thwart unfairly the right of [the plaintiffs] to make an
informed choice as to whether to participate in this []
collective action.” Id. at 922.
TEK offers various arguments as to why FRCP 23(d)
cannot authorize a district court to decline to enforce a valid
arbitration agreement. None are persuasive. First, TEK
claims that FRCP 23(d)’s plain text does not authorize courts
to ignore valid arbitration agreements because FRCP
23(d)(1)(C) limits the courts’ ability to “impose conditions
on the representative parties or on intervenors,” not
defendants. Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(d)(1)(C). However, FRCP
23(d)(1)(E) provides district courts with the authority to
issue orders that “deal with similar procedural matters,”
which would include imposing conditions on defendants.
Fed. R. Civ. P. 23(d)(1)(E). Additionally, FRCP 83(b) states
that when there is no controlling law, “[a] judge may
regulate practice in any manner consistent with federal law,
[federal rules], and the district’s local rules.” Fed. R. Civ. P.
83(b). Read in tandem, the U.S. Supreme Court has held that
FRCP 23(d) gives a district court “the broad authority to
exercise control over a class action and to enter appropriate

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

25

orders governing the conduct of counsel and parties.” Gulf
Oil, 452 U.S. at 100 (emphasis added).
Next, TEK argues that under the FAA, arbitration
agreements are valid and enforceable, “save upon such
grounds as exist at law or in equity for the revocation of any
contract.” 9 U.S.C. § 2. TEK claims that FRCP 23(d) does
not qualify because it is only a procedural rule and is not a
substantive mechanism rooted in state or common law for
defeating contracts. However, arbitration agreements can be
invalidated based on federal procedural rules. In Morgan v.
Sundance, Inc., 596 U.S. 411, 417 (2022), the U.S. Supreme
Court held that federal courts cannot “create arbitrationspecific variants of federal procedural rules, like those
concerning waiver, based on the FAA’s ‘policy favoring
arbitration.’” Id. (citation omitted). However, “[i]f an
ordinary procedural rule—whether of waiver or forfeiture or
what-have-you—would counsel against enforcement of an
arbitration contract, then so be it. The federal policy is about
treating arbitration contracts like all others, not about
fostering arbitration.”
Id. at 418 (citation omitted).
Following Morgan, FRCP 23(d) serves as an ordinary
federal procedural rule that treats arbitration contracts like
other contracts and permits district courts to invalidate any
contracts that disrupt the class action process. See 3
Newberg and Rubenstein on Class Actions § 9:7 (6th ed.)
(comparing “the insertion of arbitration clauses in contracts
of adhesion after the commencement of litigation” to
“misleading settlement attempts,” and noting “courts have
similarly refused to compel arbitration where defendants
communicated with class members so as to limit rights to
participate in class actions or [] collective actions after the
commencement of the action”).

26

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

Finally, TEK argues that FRCP 23(d) cannot override the
FAA because there is no inference of a contrary
congressional command as FRCP 23(d) and the FAA do not
conflict. However, there does appear to be an inherent
conflict between the FAA and FRCP 23 in this case. FRCP
23 establishes an opt-out process for class actions. See Fed.
R. Civ. P. 23(c). The district court has broad authority under
FRCP 23(d) to control the opt-out process. See Gulf Oil, 452
U.S. at 100. TEK’s actions ultimately sought to interfere
with FRCP 23’s fundamental opt-out procedures by
changing it from an opt-out process to an opt-in process
through the Agreement.
In sum, we hold that a district court’s “broad authority”
under FRCP 23(d) “to exercise control over a class action
and to enter appropriate orders governing the conduct of
counsel and parties” includes the authority to decline to
enforce an arbitration agreement. Id.
B. FRCP 23(d) Application
In evaluating the district court’s denial of a motion to
compel arbitration under FRCP 23(d), there are two
applicable standards of review. FRCP 23(d) orders are
reviewed for “an abuse of discretion.” Gulf Oil, 452 U.S. at
99, 103. However, denials of motions to compel arbitration
are reviewed “de novo,” with “factual findings [reviewed]
for clear error, and the interpretation and meaning of contract
provisions [reviewed] de novo.” Patrick, 93 F.4th at 475
(citation modified). Even if we review the district court’s
decision de novo rather than for abuse of discretion, we hold
that TEK’s communications were misleading and threatened
the fairness of the class action proceedings. We thus decline
to enforce the Agreement under FRCP 23(d).

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

27

A careful examination of the content of TEK’s
communications clearly demonstrates the misleading nature
of TEK’s communications and its harmful impact on
potential class members. TEK repeatedly disparaged the
efficacy of class actions and misleadingly claimed that class
actions are “wasteful, inefficient means for resolving
disputes” that “tend to enrich only attorneys rather than the
individuals who may have legitimate claims.” Further, TEK
inaccurately stated that a class action “requires [TEK] to
ignore individual employee issues and concerns.” TEK’s
disparaging and inaccurate framing of class actions was
particularly significant because TEK’s communications
“were the first communication many putative class members
received about the case.” TEK’s attempt to couch this
repeated language as its own opinion does not cure its
obvious impact, or that these disparaging comments “appear
designed to prevent putative class members from opting into
the lawsuit and opting out of the [Agreement].”
Additionally, TEK’s arbitration roll out was internally
inconsistent and thus confusing. Email 1 stated that if class
members “choose to continue working [at TEK] after
December 31, 2023 you’ll be deemed to have accepted the
Agreement, and we are asking for your signature to reflect
that.” Thus, in Email 1, TEK requested a signature, but that
signature had no real effect. However, in Email 2, class
members were presented with the opposite procedure where
the request for a signature to opt-out of the Agreement was
imperative. Class members could have easily been confused
because of the inconsistent actions required in Email 1 as
opposed to Email 2.
The staggered nature of the deadlines for Email 1 and
Email 2 also created the confusing situation where Email 1
told class members they would be bound by the Agreement

28

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

on January 1, 2024, if they did not quit their jobs by
December 31, 2023. At the same time, Email 2 told class
members that they had until January 9, 2024, to opt out of
the Agreement. Further, TEK’s communications were
inconsistent regarding the year of the Opt-Out deadline. In
Email 2, TEK said that class members could opt out of the
Agreement “by signing and returning the attached agreement
by January 9, 2023.” However, in the Opt-Out, TEK stated
that in order to opt out, class members must “sign[] and
return[] this form no later than January 9, 2024.”
Similarly, TEK’s communications regarding attorneys’
fees and contact information were misleading. In the OptOut, TEK stated that class members “are free to consult
[their] attorney.” However, Email 1 and Email 2 instructed
class members not to “share this email.” Class members thus
received conflicting information regarding what they could
share with a lawyer. Moreover, TEK telling class members
that they are free to consult their attorney implies that class
members would need to hire their own attorneys and pay out
of pocket to obtain legal advice regarding the Opt-Out.
Although TEK provided class members with Plaintiffs’
counsel’s contact information by linking to the complaint,
TEK did not clearly indicate that Plaintiffs’ counsel could
provide legal advice to class members regarding the OptOut. Further, TEK did not disclose that class members could
consult with Plaintiffs’ counsel without paying out of
pocket, important information that can impact whether a
class member would engage Plaintiffs’ counsel. Rather,
TEK stated that class counsel “often charg[e] exorbitant
fees.” This would mislead a class member, receiving this
information for the first time, about whether they could
obtain legal advice from Plaintiffs’ counsel regarding the
Opt-Out without paying the fees out of pocket.

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

29

Moreover, the timing of TEK’s roll out added to the
confusion. TEK rolled out its plans on December 19, 2023,
and the Agreement became effective on January 1, 2024.
This 13-day period occurred during the holiday season when
employees are less likely to be paying close attention to
email, or able to obtain and/or consult with counsel
regarding their options.
TEK’s defenses of its communications are unpersuasive.
Principally, TEK argues that specific findings supported by
the record cannot be made if the record contains only copies
of TEK’s communications and is devoid of testimony or
other evidence showing actual employee confusion.
However, in Dominguez, we affirmed the district court’s
order under FRCP 23(d) restricting the defendant’s
communications with collective employees based only on a
careful examination of the defendant’s communications and
not on any additional evidence. 88 F.4th at 791–92. Next,
although TEK is correct that Plaintiffs’ counsel’s contact
information was available to class members through one
click and not multiple clicks, that correction does not cure
the primary issue with TEK’s communications, which is that
TEK omitted that class members could consult with
Plaintiffs’ counsel without paying out of pocket.
TEK also points to the 23% opt-out rate of class
members that received Email 2 as evidence its
communications were widespread, fair, and effective.
Although a 23% opt-out rate may be evidence that TEK’s
communications were potentially widespread, it offers no
evidence that its communications were fair and not
misleading. It would be equally fair to assume that TEK’s
communications were misleading and confusing given 77%
of class member recipients chose not to opt out of the
Agreement.

30

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

Finally, TEK argues that the district court erred because
it ordered the broadest relief available, invalidating the
arbitration agreements, when a simple corrective notice
would have sufficed. TEK’s argument is unavailing. A
corrective notice alone would not provide adequate relief to
class members because they entered into the Agreement
based on misleading communications. It would not be an
adequate remedy to acknowledge and correct TEK’s
misleading communications, but continue to bind class
members to the Agreement they entered into as a result of
TEK’s misleading communications. Here, TEK’s actions
upended FRCP 23(d) by turning the opt-out process into an
opt-in process. Although we must consider “the narrowest
possible relief which would protect the respective parties,”
that relief must still be “consistent with the policies of
[FRCP] 23.” Gulf Oil, 452 U.S. at 102 (citation omitted).
Invalidating the Agreement is necessary to be consistent
with FRCP 23 as it restores the opt-out process as the default.
C. Delegation Provision
Although the Agreement incorporated a delegation
provision covering arbitrability disputes, the district court
properly ruled on the enforceability of the Agreement
instead of delegating that issue to the arbitrator.
Here, the Agreement’s delegation provision states that
“[t]he parties will use [JAMS] subject to its then-current
employment arbitration rules and procedures.” JAMS Rule
11(b) is a delegation clause that provides “[j]urisdictional
and arbitrability disputes, including disputes over the
formation, existence, validity, interpretation or scope of the
agreement . . . shall be submitted to and ruled on by the
Arbitrator.” TEK correctly notes that we have previously
held that “an arbitration provision that incorporates JAMS

AVERY V. TEKSYSTEMS, INC.

31

Rules, and particularly in light of the language of JAMS
Rule 11(b)” “clearly and unmistakably delegated the
question of arbitrability to JAMS.” Patrick, 93 F.4th at 481.
However, “[i]f a party challenges the validity . . . of the
precise agreement to arbitrate at issue, the federal court must
consider the challenge before ordering compliance with that
agreement.” Rent-A-Ctr., 561 U.S. at 71. Here, Plaintiffs
did challenge the validity of the delegation provision at issue
through their challenge to the entire Agreement under FRCP
23(d). “[W]here a challenge applies equally to the whole
contract and to an arbitration or delegation provision, a court
must address that challenge.” Coinbase, Inc. v. Suski, 602
U.S. 143, 151 (2024) (internal quotation marks omitted).
Thus, the district court did not err in deciding Plaintiffs’
challenge to the Agreement and not delegating the issue to
the arbitrator.
IV. CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we affirm the district court’s
order denying TEK’s motion to compel arbitration under
FRCP 23(d). 2
AFFIRMED.

As we affirm the district court’s order denying TEK’s motion to compel
arbitration under FRCP 23(d), we decline to reach the district court’s
alternative holding that TEK waived its right to arbitrate.

2

