FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.

No. 25-2897
D.C. No.
3:22-cr-02548JLS-1

CRUZ TORRES-GONZALEZ,

OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Southern District of California
Janis L. Sammartino, District Judge, Presiding
Submitted December 9, 2025 *
Pasadena, California
Filed March 16, 2026
Before: Milan D. Smith, Jr., Morgan B. Christen, and
Danielle J. Forrest, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Christen

The panel unanimously concludes this case is suitable for decision
without oral argument. See Fed. R. App. P. 34(a)(2).

*

2

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

SUMMARY **
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed the sentence imposed on Cruz
Torres-Gonzalez for his 2024 conviction for illegal reentry
into the United States in violation of 8 U.S.C. § 1326.
Torres-Gonzalez had previously been convicted, in
2014, of illegal reentry in violation of § 1326 and making
false statements to the federal officers who arrested him in
violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. He was sentenced to
concurrent 35-month terms on each count in the same
proceeding.
At sentencing for the 2024 conviction, the district court
applied two enhancements pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2
(2024). At issue in this appeal was the enhancement directed
by U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3), which provides a specific
offense-level enhancement based upon the length of the
sentence imposed for Torres-Gonzalez’s prior non-reentry
conviction that occurred after he was first ordered removed
from the United States.
Torres-Gonzalez argued that the district court erred by
applying an eight-level enhancement based on his prior
false-statement conviction. He reasoned that the 35-month
sentence he received in 2014 for making a false statement
was determined by his § 1326 felony illegal reentry
conviction because the charges were grouped and the § 1326
charge carried the highest offense level. Thus, according to
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

3

Torres-Gonzalez, the 35-month sentence he received for the
false-statement offense was “controlled” or even “replaced”
by the sentence imposed for his 2014 illegal-reentry
conviction, making it impossible for the district court to
determine the sentence he would have received for the falsestatement offense if he had been sentenced for it
independently. Torres-Gonzalez urged this court to direct
the district court to apply on remand the residual four-level
enhancement, U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3)(D), because that
enhancement is not determined by the length of a prior
sentence.
The panel rejected this argument, discerning no error in
the district court’s reading of the Guidelines’ text. TorresGonzalez’s sentence for the false-statement conviction was
not “replaced” by the sentence for the reentry offense; rather
the charges were grouped consistent with Guidelines. The
history and purpose of § 2L1.2 further support the district
court’s approach. The panel also rejected TorresGonzalez’s argument that the correct application of
§ 2L1.2(b)(3) to his case is ambiguous. The panel therefore
did not defer to the Sentencing Commission’s commentary
but noted that consideration of the commentary would lead
to the same result. Because there is no ambiguity, the rule
of lenity likewise has no role to play.

COUNSEL
D. Benjamin Holley, Lawrence Casper, and Evangeline
Dech, Assistant United States Attorneys; Daniel E. Zipp,
Assistant United States Attorney, Chief, Appellate Section;
Criminal Division; Adam Gordon, United States Attorney;

4

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, San Diego, California; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Martin G. Molina, Law Office of Martin G. Molina, San
Diego, California, for Defendant-Appellant.

OPINION
CHRISTEN, Circuit Judge:
In 2014, Cruz Torres-Gonzalez was convicted of illegal
reentry into the United States in violation of 8 U.S.C. § 1326
and of making false statements to the federal officers who
arrested him in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1001. He was
sentenced to 35 months on each count in the same
proceeding. The sentences ran concurrently.
In 2024, Torres-Gonzalez was convicted once again of
illegal reentry. At his sentencing, the district court applied
two offense-level enhancements pursuant to § 2L1.2 of the
Sentencing Guidelines. U.S. Sent’g Guidelines Manual
§ 2L1.2 (U.S. Sent’g Comm’n 2024) (U.S.S.G.). At issue in
this appeal is the enhancement directed by U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3), which provides a specific offense-level
enhancement based upon the length of the sentence imposed
for Torres-Gonzalez’s prior non-reentry conviction that
occurred after he was first ordered removed from the United
States.
Torres-Gonzalez argues that the district court erred by
applying an eight-level enhancement based on his prior
false-statement conviction. He does not dispute that an
eight-level enhancement is triggered by a sentence of two

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

5

years or more for prior non-reentry convictions, U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3)(B), but he argues that the length of the
sentence for his false-statement offense was actually
determined by the sentence he received for his 2014 reentry
conviction. We conclude that the district court properly
interpreted the Sentencing Guidelines when it determined
the enhancements applicable at Torres-Gonzalez’s 2024
sentencing. Accordingly, we affirm the sentence imposed
by the district court.
BACKGROUND
In 2012, Torres-Gonzalez was arrested while entering
the United States without authorization. He provided a false
name to the agents who detained him. After a jury trial in
2014, he was convicted of illegal reentry under 8 U.S.C.
§ 1326 and making false statements to a federal officer under
18 U.S.C. § 1001. Torres-Gonzalez had been deported on
multiple prior occasions. The parties agree that both of the
2014 convictions constitute felonies and that TorresGonzalez was sentenced to 35 months in prison for each
offense, to be served concurrently. The court calculated the
Guidelines range as 33 to 41 months and acknowledged that
Torres-Gonzalez had requested a variance to 24 months.
The court concluded that a 35-month sentence was
appropriate even though the offense did not involve drugs or
violence because Torres-Gonzalez’s repeated contact with
immigration authorities indicated that deterrence was a
relevant policy goal and the 27-month sentence he received
for his prior illegal reentry conviction had evidently failed to
deter him.
In 2024, Torres-Gonzalez was again convicted of illegal
reentry. The district court imposed a 51-month sentence for
that offense, and it is the sentence that is the subject of this

6

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

appeal. The district court adopted the recommendations in
the presentence report and applied a four-level enhancement
based on Torres-Gonzalez’s 2014 felony conviction for
illegal reentry, U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(1)(A), and an eightlevel enhancement based on the 35-month sentence he
received for making a false statement, U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3)(B).
Torres-Gonzalez
objected
to
the
eight-level
enhancement. He argued that the length of the sentence he
received for his prior false-statement conviction was higher
than it would have been if he had not been simultaneously
convicted and sentenced for the 2014 illegal-reentry offense.
For this reason, he contended that the court should not have
imposed the eight-level enhancement.
The district court agreed that Torres-Gonzalez would
have received a lower sentence for his false-statement
conviction if he had not been sentenced at the same time for
illegal reentry. Nonetheless, the court determined that the
eight-level enhancement was “technically correct” pursuant
to the text of the Sentencing Guidelines. The enhancements
resulted in an offense level of 22. Along with TorresGonzalez’s criminal history category of V, this yielded a 77to 96-month Guidelines sentencing range. The court
departed downward four offense levels, partially because the
court viewed the application of the eight-level enhancement
as harsh and partially because the court agreed with defense
counsel’s observation that Torres-Gonzalez’s prior
convictions were non-violent in nature. The court declined
to depart further because it agreed with the prosecutor that
Torres-Gonzalez had treated the border as a “revolving
door.” The final Guidelines range was 51–63 months. After
considering the 18 U.S.C. § 3553(a) factors, the court

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

7

imposed a sentence of 51 months in custody and three years
of supervised release. Torres-Gonzalez appeals.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review a district court’s interpretation of the
Sentencing Guidelines de novo. See United States v.
Castillo, 69 F.4th 648, 652 (9th Cir. 2023).
DISCUSSION
It is undisputed that the sentence Torres-Gonzalez
received for the false-statement offense in 2014 was due to
the operation of the Guidelines’ “grouping” rules. Where a
defendant has been convicted of multiple counts, U.S.S.G.
§ 3D1.1, the Guidelines direct that counts that are “closely
related” because they “involv[e] substantially the same
harm” should be “grouped.” U.S.S.G. § 3D1.2. Generally,
the count with the highest offense level is the offense level
for the group, U.S.S.G. § 3D1.3(a), and the offense level
applicable to the grouped offenses is used to determine the
appropriate sentence. U.S.S.G. § 3D1.5. The “total
punishment” applies concurrently to each count in a group.
U.S.S.G. § 5G1.2(b) & cmt. n.1. 1
Section 2L1.2 of the Guidelines directs how to determine
the sentencing range for an illegal reentry conviction. For
defendants with prior illegal reentry convictions, the court
adds four offense levels. U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(1)(A). The
Guidelines also call for a separate enhancement under
subsection (b)(3) for prior convictions other than illegal
reentry offenses that occur after a defendant is ordered
deported or removed from the United States for the
Here, we provide only a general statement regarding operation of the
grouping rules because Torres-Gonzalez does not argue that his prior
convictions were improperly grouped at his 2014 sentencing.

1

8

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

first time. U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3). Subsections (b)(3)(A)–
(D) provide for enhancements of four to ten offense
levels depending on the length of the sentence actually
imposed for the prior non-reentry felony offense. 2 U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3)(A)–(D). In Torres-Gonzalez’s case, the court
applied an eight-level enhancement under subsection
(b)(3)(B) for his prior false-statement conviction because he
received a sentence of more than two years for that charge.
The commentary to U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 provides:
There may be cases in which the sentences
for an illegal reentry offense and another
felony offense were imposed at the same time
and treated as a single sentence for purposes
of calculating the criminal history score . . . .
In such a case, use the illegal reentry offense
in determining the appropriate enhancement
under subsection (b)(1), if it independently
would have received criminal history points.
In addition, use the prior sentence for the
other felony offense in determining the
appropriate enhancement under subsection
(b)(2) or (b)(3), as appropriate, if it

Specifically, the enhancements are as follows: (A) ten levels for a
sentence of five years or more; (B) eight levels for a sentence of two
years or more; (C) six levels for a sentence exceeding one year and one
month; and (D) four levels for “any other prior felony conviction,” which
covers sentences of one year and one month or less. U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3)(E) is the one exception to enhancements based on sentence
lengths. It provides a two-level enhancement for three or more
misdemeanor convictions that are crimes of violence or drug trafficking
offenses.

2

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

9

independently would have received criminal
history points.
U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 cmt. n.4. Criminal history points are based
on a defendant’s prior convictions and determine the
“criminal history category” component of a defendant’s
Sentencing Guidelines calculation. See U.S.S.G. § 4A1.1.
Prior sentences that have not aged out or been otherwise
excluded are counted in a defendant’s criminal history. See
U.S.S.G. § 4A1.2(e). Torres-Gonzalez does not dispute that
both of his 2014 convictions would have received criminal
history points.
In notes accompanying amendments to U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2, the Sentencing Commission explained that it
sought to ensure that “illegal reentry offenses and other types
of offenses . . . are separately accounted for under the
applicable specific offense characteristics, even if they might
otherwise constitute a ‘single sentence’ under
§ 4A1.2(a)(2).” U.S.S.G. Supp. to app. C, amend. 802, at
150 (Nov. 1, 2024) (Amendment 802). Thus, the notes
explain that “when a defendant was simultaneously
sentenced for an illegal reentry offense and another federal
felony offense . . . , the illegal reentry offense counts towards
subsection (b)(1), while the other felony offense counts
towards subsection (b)(3).” Id. The notes also explain that
for two policy reasons, the Sentencing Commission
expressly adopted a rule that pegs the § 2L1.2(b)(3)
enhancements to the sentence imposed for the prior nonillegal reentry conviction.
First, sentence-based
enhancements are simpler to apply than the categorical
approach that was previously used; second, the length of a
prior sentence typically reflects the seriousness of a prior
offense. Id. at 146, 148.

10

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

On appeal, Torres-Gonzalez again argues that imposition
of the eight-level enhancement was erroneous. He reasons
that the 35-month sentence he received in 2014 for making
a false statement was determined by his § 1326 felony illegal
reentry conviction because the charges were grouped and the
§ 1326 charge carried the highest offense level. He
characterizes § 1326 as “the type of offense excepted from”
the U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3) enhancement provision because
the Guidelines specify a four-level enhancement for prior
§ 1326 convictions and a sliding-scale enhancement in
subsection (b)(3) only for other felony convictions entered
after an initial § 1326 conviction. Thus, according to TorresGonzalez, the 35-month sentence he received for making a
false statement was actually predicated upon the § 1326
conviction, and that offense should not be used to determine
the appropriate enhancement added pursuant to U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3). Torres-Gonzalez urges us to direct the
district court to apply the residual four-level enhancement,
U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3)(D), on remand because that
enhancement is not determined by the length of a prior
sentence.
We begin by examining the text and structure of the
Guidelines and determine whether this inquiry provides an
unambiguous answer to the issue on appeal. If a specific
guideline is not genuinely ambiguous, we do not defer to the
Sentencing Commission’s commentary and our inquiry
ends. See Castillo, 69 F.4th at 655 (applying Kisor v. Wilkie,
588 U.S. 558 (2019), to interpretation of Sentencing
Guidelines); see also United States v. Cuevas-Lopez, 934
F.3d 1056, 1061 (9th Cir. 2019) (“We interpret the
Sentencing Guidelines using the ordinary tools of statutory
interpretation.” (quoting United States v. Martinez, 870 F.3d
1163, 1166 (9th Cir. 2017))). We “carefully consider the

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

11

text, structure, history, and purpose of a regulation” before
deferring to the agency’s interpretation. Kisor, 588 U.S. at
575 (citation modified).
U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3) directs an increase in the
defendant’s offense level “[i]f, after [being] . . . ordered
deported or ordered removed from the United States for the
first time, the defendant engaged in criminal conduct”
resulting in a conviction. If the criminal conduct resulted in
“a conviction for a felony offense (other than an illegal
reentry offense) for which the sentence imposed was two
years or more,” the increase must be eight levels. Id.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3)(B). Accordingly, the district court first
assessed whether Torres-Gonzalez had incurred a conviction
for a felony offense other than illegal reentry after being
ordered removed. The record established that TorresGonzalez had incurred a felony conviction for providing a
false statement under 18 U.S.C. § 1001. The next step was
for the sentencing court to determine the length of the
sentence imposed for the prior non-reentry conviction and to
apply the relevant offense-level enhancement. U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3). The district court correctly determined that
Torres-Gonzalez’s 35-month sentence for the false
statement offense triggered an eight-level enhancement
under U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3)(B).
Torres-Gonzalez argues that the Guidelines cannot be
applied to his case in a straightforward manner because, due
to the operation of the Guidelines’ grouping rules, the
sentence he received for the false-statement offense was
“controlled” or even “replaced” by the sentence imposed for
his 2014 illegal-reentry conviction. He contends that the
grouping rules made it impossible for the district court to
determine the sentence he would have received for the falsestatement offense if he had been sentenced for it

12

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

independently, and therefore impossible to determine that an
eight-level enhancement should apply.
We agree with the district court that this argument fails.
As the district court recognized, the sentence for TorresGonzalez’s non-reentry offense was likely higher than it
would have been if he had been sentenced solely for making
a false statement to a federal officer because the 2014
sentencing court was persuaded that a 35-month sentence
was needed to deter him from continuing to enter the country
illegally. Nevertheless, Torres-Gonzalez received a 35month sentence for the false-statement conviction, and the
district court faithfully applied the eight-level enhancement
pursuant to U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3)(B). Contrary to TorresGonzalez’s suggestion, his sentence for the false-statement
conviction was not “replaced” by the sentence for the reentry
offense; rather, the charges were grouped consistent with the
Guidelines. We discern no error in the district court’s
reading of the Guidelines’ text.
The history and purpose of U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 further
support the district court’s approach. When the U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2 enhancements were amended in 2016, the
Sentencing Commission explained that the length of prior
sentences is the simplest way to determine an appropriate
enhancement because “the length of sentence imposed by a
sentencing court is a strong indicator of the court’s
assessment of the seriousness of the predicate offense at the
time,” and “more serious types of offenses, such as drugtrafficking offenses, crimes of violence, and sex offenses,
tend[] to receive sentences of imprisonment of two years or
more.” Amendment 802 at 148. Torres-Gonzalez argues the
35-month sentence he received in 2014 for the § 1001 falsestatement offense “was a reflection of the seriousness of the
prior § 1326,” not the § 1001, offense, and the eight-level

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

13

enhancement therefore did not serve its intended purpose of
reflecting the seriousness of his conviction for making a
false statement. We are not persuaded.
In some instances, a prior sentence may not perfectly
reflect the seriousness of a prior conviction. But the
Sentencing Commission did not indicate that the length of
the sentence imposed would always be an exact fit, only that
it would be a useful measure in a typical case. For this
reason, the length of the prior sentence is the yardstick used
to determine the sliding-scale enhancements imposed under
U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3). This sentence-based approach to
determining the appropriate enhancement was deemed
preferable for an additional reason: prior to the 2016
amendments to the Guidelines, judges were required to
undertake categorical analyses of prior felony offenses to
determine the applicable enhancement. The Sentencing
Commission deemed that method “overly complex and
resource-intensive” and one that “often l[ed] to litigation and
uncertainty.” Amendment 802 at 146 (explaining that the
amendment was the result of multi-year research and
“extensive public testimony and public comment”). The
Sentencing
Commission
concluded
that
“tiered
enhancements based on the length of the [prior] sentence
imposed . . . would greatly simplify application of the
guideline.” Id. at 148. Torres-Gonzalez’s suggestion that
we peer behind the reasoning for a prior sentence or
determine what the sentence may have been absent its
grouping with an illegal-reentry offense runs counter to the
Sentencing Guidelines’ goal of simplifying the process for
imposing this enhancement.
Torres-Gonzalez alternatively argues that the correct
application of U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3) to his case is
ambiguous, and that this should have prompted the district

14

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

court to delve into the history of the Guidelines’
amendments.
First, we reject the premise that the
application of U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3) to Torres-Gonzalez’s
situation is ambiguous. The district court’s observation that
the application of the enhancement was a “very tough call”
did not signal textual ambiguity; rather, it shows the district
court considered the outcome harsh and reveals the
rationale for the court’s decision to exercise its discretion
and apply a downward departure. 3 That decision accords
with the Sentencing Commission’s guidance in commentary
to U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2, which recognizes that “[t]here may be
cases in which the offense level provided by an enhancement
in subsection (b)(2) or (b)(3) substantially understates or
overstates the seriousness of the conduct underlying the prior
offense” because the length of the sentence imposed for that
prior offense does not reflect its seriousness, and in such a
case “a departure may be warranted.” U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 cmt.
n.6.
Torres-Gonzalez also quotes Kisor’s discussion of Auer
deference in the context of Department of Veterans Affairs
regulations and implies that ambiguity may arise when an
agency “could not have reasonably foreseen” an individual’s
particular situation. 4 See Kisor, 588 U.S. at 566 (citation
modified). This analogy is inapt because the Sentencing
Commission’s commentary addressing its grouping rules
and the unlawful-reentry guideline leaves little doubt that it
The judge expressed that the effect of the prior concurrent sentences
“bother[ed] [her] because if he had just had that [§] 1001 [false statement
conviction], there is no way it would have been scored that way.”

3

Auer deference refers to the practice of deferring to “agencies’
reasonable readings of genuinely ambiguous regulations.” See Kisor,
588 U.S. at 563; Auer v. Robbins, 519 U.S. 452 (1997).

4

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

15

was fully aware of how those rules would apply to
defendants sentenced in illegal reentry cases. In fact,
Application Note 2 to U.S.S.G. § 3D1.2 contains an example
of counts that are substantially similar to those in the present
case—unlawful entry and possession of fraudulent evidence
of citizenship—that are grouped because those charges bear
on similar immigration-related societal interests. The
commentary in U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 further evinces the
Sentencing Commission’s awareness that illegal reentry and
other offense convictions would be grouped in some
sentencing proceedings. U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 cmt. n.4 (“There
may be cases in which the sentences for an illegal reentry
offense and another felony offense were imposed at the same
time . . . .”). The Sentencing Commission acknowledged
that while the resulting sentence may be “treated as a single
sentence for purposes of calculating the criminal history
score under” U.S.S.G. § 4A1.1, courts should ensure that
each conviction receives a separate enhancement under
U.S.S.G § 2L1.2.
See U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 cmt n.4;
Amendment 802 at 150 (explaining that U.S.S.G.
§ 2L1.2(b)(3) operates to ensure an enhancement is applied
even where a defendant is sentenced simultaneously on
reentry and non-reentry felonies).
Because we conclude that U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 is clear, we
do not defer to the Sentencing Commission’s commentary,
but we do note that consideration of the commentary would
lead to the same result. Torres-Gonzalez reads Application
Note 4 to U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 as directing courts considering
prior convictions for reentry and non-reentry felonies to treat
the predicate offense as if its sentence had been imposed
separate from any other offense. He maintains that the
Sentencing Commission’s articulated goal of “ensur[ing]
that such convictions are separately accounted for under the

16

USA V. TORRES-GONZALEZ

applicable specific offense characteristics” supports his
view, see Amendment 802 at 150, because there was “no
articulable sentence” that could be ascribed independently to
his false-statement offense. In our view, Torres-Gonzalez
misreads the commentary and amendment history.
Application Note 4 and the notes accompanying
Amendment 802 strongly indicate that the court’s inquiry
into the sentence imposed for a prior non-reentry felony is
limited to whether the prior non-reentry conviction would
have independently scored criminal history points. This
means only that a court must determine whether the prior
non-reentry offense involved a stale conviction or otherwise
would have been excluded, not whether the sentence for the
non-reentry offense was affected by the sentence for the
§ 1326 conviction. Amendment 802 at 149 (explaining that
the amendment “addresses concerns” about an “unduly
severe enhancement based on a single offense so old it did
not receive criminal history points”).
Finally, Torres-Gonzalez argues that the district court
should have imposed the lower four-level enhancement in
U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2(b)(3)(D) pursuant to the rule of lenity. The
district court correctly declined this suggestion. The rule of
lenity “only applies where there is grievous ambiguity or
uncertainty in the [G]uidelines.” United States v. D.M., 869
F.3d 1133, 1144 (9th Cir. 2017). Here, because there is no
ambiguity in the text of the relevant Guidelines or in the
interplay between the Guidelines and the commentary, the
rule of lenity has no role to play. U.S.S.G. § 2L1.2 traces a
straightforward approach to offense-level enhancements,
which the district court correctly applied.
For the foregoing reasons, we AFFIRM the sentence
imposed by the district court.

