FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
NEVADA RESORT
ASSOCIATIONINTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF
THEATRICAL STAGE
EMPLOYEES AND MOVING
PICTURE MACHINE
OPERATORS OF THE US AND
CANADA LOCAL 720 PENSION
TRUST,

Nos.

24-2791
24-3047

D.C. No.
2:19-cv-00499JAD-VCF

OPINION

Plaintiff – Appellee /
Cross Appellant,
v.
JB VIVA VEGAS, LP,
Defendant – Appellant /
Cross Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Jennifer A. Dorsey, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 5, 2025
Las Vegas, Nevada

2

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

Filed January 6, 2026
Before: Johnnie B. Rawlinson, Eric D. Miller, and Roopali
H. Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Desai
SUMMARY *
Multiemployer Pension Plan Amendments Act
The panel reversed the district court’s grant of summary
judgment in favor of the Nevada Resort AssociationInternational Alliance of Theatrical Stage Employees and
Moving Picture Machine Operators of the United States and
Canada Local 720 Pension Trust, and remanded, in an action
brought by JB Viva Vegas, L.P., to challenge withdrawal
liability under the Multiemployer Pension Plan
Amendments Act.
The MPPAA amended the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act to impose liability on employers, like JB, that
withdraw from multiemployer pension plans, such as the
plan administered by the Trust. But an exemption from
withdrawal liability exists for employers contributing to
plans that primarily cover “employees in the entertainment
industry.” The panel held that, under the plain text of the
statute, there is no minimum amount of entertainment work
required for an individual to be an employee in the
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

3

entertainment industry under the MPPAA. And even if the
text were ambiguous, the best reading of the exception is that
“employees in the entertainment industry” are individuals
performing
any
amount
of
entertainment
work. Accordingly, the panel held that the Trust’s plan
primarily covered “employees in the entertainment industry”
because there is no minimum entertainment-work
requirement, and the majority of employees covered by the
plan perform some entertainment work.

COUNSEL
Christopher M. Humes (argued), Adam P. Segal, and
William D. Nobriga, Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck LLP,
Las Vegas, Nevada, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Eric D. Field (argued), Littler Mendelson PC, Washington,
D.C.; Kelsey Stegall, Littler Mendelson PC, Las Vegas,
Nevada; for Defendant-Appellant.

4

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
JB Viva Vegas, L.P. (“JB”) sued the Nevada Resort
Association-International Alliance of Theatrical Stage
Employees and Moving Picture Machine Operators of the
United States and Canada Local 720 Pension Trust (“Trust”)
to challenge withdrawal liability under the Multiemployer
Pension Plan Amendments Act (“MPPAA”). JB argues that
the Trust primarily covers “employees in the entertainment
industry,” and thus JB qualifies for the entertainment
exception to withdrawal liability. The district court granted
summary judgment in the Trust’s favor, and JB appealed.
We hold that there is no minimum amount of entertainment
work required for an individual to be an “employee[] in the
entertainment industry” under the MPPAA. We reverse and
remand.
BACKGROUND
The MPPAA amended the Employee Retirement Income
Security Act (“ERISA”) to impose liability on employers
that withdraw from multiemployer pension plans. 29 U.S.C.
§ 1381(a). But an exemption from withdrawal liability exists
for employers contributing to plans that primarily cover
“employees in the entertainment industry.” 29 U.S.C.
§ 1383(c)(1). The parties dispute whether individuals who
perform any amount of work in the entertainment industry
qualify as “employees in the entertainment industry” under
the MPPAA.
The Trust administers a multiemployer pension benefit
plan that covers employees performing convention and/or
entertainment work in southern Nevada. The MPPAA

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

5

defines the “entertainment industry” to include theater,
motion picture, radio, television, sound or visual recording,
music, and dance productions. 29 U.S.C. § 1383(c)(2)(A).
Work performed for conventions and trade shows falls
outside the definition of the entertainment industry. For
example, a stagehand might construct stages for both
conventions and theatrical productions, but only the latter is
considered work in the entertainment industry under the
MPPAA. See id.
For many years, employees covered by the Trust’s
pension plan primarily performed entertainment work.
However, in recent years, hotels and other Las Vegas venues
shifted to hosting more conventions and trade shows than
traditional entertainment productions, so employees covered
by the plan started to earn more of their wages through
convention work. For instance, in 2016, while the majority
of plan employees earned some of their wages through
entertainment work, only 35 percent earned more than half
of their wages through entertainment work. After an audit
revealed this trend towards convention work, the Trust
amended its plan restatement in 2013 to state that it “is not
an Entertainment Plan under ERISA.”
From 2008 to 2016, JB contributed to the Trust’s plan on
behalf of the stagehands for its theatrical production of
Jersey Boys. In September 2016, the musical closed, and JB
stopped contributing to the plan. The Trust sent JB a letter,
asserting that it owed $913,315 in withdrawal liability. JB
requested review of the Trust’s assessment, but the Trust
never responded.
JB initiated arbitration, asserting that it qualifies for the
entertainment exception to withdrawal liability. The
arbitrator entered an award in favor of JB, ordering the Trust

6

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

to rescind its withdrawal liability assessment. The arbitrator
found that (1) the plan was an entertainment plan in 2008,
when JB first joined; (2) the Trust failed to provide updated
data proving that it is no longer an entertainment plan; and
(3) the Trust improperly amended its plan in violation of
ERISA.
The Trust filed suit to vacate or modify the arbitration
award in the district court. The district court found that the
arbitrator improperly shifted the burden of proof to the Trust
and should have determined the plan’s status as an
entertainment plan based on the year that JB withdrew from
the plan, rather than the year it joined. The district court thus
vacated the award and remanded to the arbitrator.
On remand, the arbitrator granted summary judgment in
the Trust’s favor and ordered JB to pay withdrawal liability.
The arbitrator concluded that the MPPAA is ambiguous
because it does not specify the amount of entertainment
work an employee must perform to qualify as an
entertainment employee. Moreover, the arbitrator held that
the Trust reasonably determined that its plan does not
“primarily cover[] employees in the entertainment industry”
because less than half of its employees earned more than half
of their wages from entertainment work. 29 U.S.C.
§ 1383(c)(1).
JB brought an action in the district court to vacate or
modify the arbitration award. Both parties moved for
summary judgment. The district court granted summary
judgment to the Trust. It affirmed the arbitrator’s award,
finding that the plan does not primarily cover entertainment
employees because fewer than half of its employees earned
the majority of their wages from entertainment work. JB

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

7

appealed the district court’s grant of summary judgment, and
the Trust cross-appealed. 1
STANDARD OF REVIEW
“We review de novo the district court’s grant of
summary judgment.” Penn Cent. Corp. v. W. Conf. of
Teamsters Pension Tr. Fund, 75 F.3d 529, 533 (9th Cir.
1996). We also review de novo questions of law, including
questions of statutory interpretation. Trs. of Amalgamated
Ins. Fund v. Geltman Indus., Inc., 784 F.2d 926, 929 (9th
Cir. 1986). “Whether a withdrawal within the meaning of the
statute has occurred presents a mixed question of law and
fact,” Penn Cent., 75 F.3d at 533, which we review de novo,
Carpenters Pension Tr. Fund for N. Cal. v. Underground
Constr. Co., 31 F.3d 776, 778 (9th Cir. 1994); Resilient
Floor Covering Pension Tr. Fund Bd. of Trs. v. Michael’s
Floor Covering, Inc., 801 F.3d 1079, 1088 (9th Cir. 2015).
ANALYSIS
Congress enacted the MPPAA because ERISA “did not
adequately protect multiemployer pension plans from the
adverse consequences that resulted when individual
employers terminated their participation in, or withdrew
from, multiemployer plans.” Resilient Floor, 801 F.3d at
1088 (citation modified); accord H.C. Elliott, Inc. v.
Carpenters Pension Tr. Fund for N. Cal., 859 F.2d 808, 811
(9th Cir. 1988). “[A] significant number of multiemployer
plans were experiencing extreme financial hardship as a
In addition to the minimum entertainment-work requirement, JB
appeals other issues that the district court did not address. On crossappeal, the Trust also urges us to decide certain issues that the district
court did not reach. We decline to decide them in the first instance. See
Singleton v. Wulff, 428 U.S. 106, 120 (1976).

1

8

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

result of individual employer withdrawals from the plans,
which saddled the remaining employers with increased
funding obligations.” Resilient Floor, 801 F.3d at 1088
(citation modified). Under the MPPAA, an employer that
withdraws from a multiemployer pension plan is liable for
its share of the plan’s unfunded vested benefits. Resilient
Floor, 801 F.3d at 1089 (citing 29 U.S.C. § 1381(a)).
Generally, an employer withdraws, and thus owes
withdrawal liability, if it “permanently ceases” its work in
the plan’s jurisdiction. 29 U.S.C. § 1383(a).
The MPPAA provides an exception for employers
operating and contributing to plans in the entertainment
industry. The entertainment exception exempts an employer
from paying withdrawal liability if (1) the employer
contributes to the plan “for work performed in the
entertainment industry, primarily on a temporary or projectby-project basis,” (2) “the plan primarily covers employees
in the entertainment industry,” and (3) the employer ends its
entertainment work in the jurisdiction and does not resume
the work within five years. 29 U.S.C. § 1383(c)(1),
(b)(2)(B)(ii) (as interpreted in Resilient Floor, 801 F.3d at
1089).
Here, the parties agree that a pension plan “primarily”
covers entertainment employees if more than half of the
covered individuals are employees in the entertainment
industry. But they disagree about whether there is a similar
requirement for the minimum amount of entertainment work
that an individual must perform to qualify as an “employee[]
in the entertainment industry.” The Trust argues that over 50
percent of an individual’s work must be in the entertainment
industry for the individual to be an “employee[] in the
entertainment industry.” JB counters that the statute imposes
no minimum entertainment-work requirement.

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

9

Whether the Trust’s plan “primarily covers employees in
the entertainment industry” turns on the answer to this
question. 29 U.S.C. § 1383(c)(1). If there is no minimum
requirement, the plan “primarily covers employees in the
entertainment industry” because more than half of the
covered employees performed some entertainment work. 2
But if individuals must earn more than 50 percent of their
wages from entertainment work to be “employees in the
entertainment industry,” the plan does not “primarily cover
employees in the entertainment industry” because less than
half of the covered employees performed the majority of
their work in the entertainment industry.
Because this is an issue of first impression, we first
examine the MPPAA’s text to determine if its meaning is
plain and unambiguous. Ileto v. Glock, Inc., 565 F.3d 1126,
1133 (9th Cir. 2009). A statutory term is ambiguous “only if
it is ‘susceptible to more than one reasonable
interpretation.’” J.B. v. United States, 916 F.3d 1161, 1167
(9th Cir. 2019) (quoting Guido v. Mount Lemmon Fire Dist.,
859 F.3d 1168, 1173 (9th Cir. 2017)). If the text is
ambiguous, “we may use canons of construction, legislative
history, and the statute’s overall purpose to illuminate
Congress’s intent.” Ileto, 565 F.3d at 1133 (quoting Jonah
R. v. Carmona, 446 F.3d 1000, 1005 (9th Cir. 2006)). But if
the text is clear, the statutory “language must ordinarily be
regarded as conclusive.” Consumer Prod. Safety Comm’n v.
GTE Sylvania, Inc., 447 U.S. 102, 108 (1980).
2
The parties dispute whether the relevant year for determining if the
Trust’s plan qualifies as an entertainment plan is 2008, when JB joined
the plan, or 2016, when JB withdrew from the plan. Because it does not
affect our decision, we assume without deciding that 2016 is the relevant
year.

10

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

A. The plain text of the entertainment exception
unambiguously covers individuals performing
any amount of entertainment work.
For the entertainment exception to apply under the
MPPAA, a pension plan must primarily cover “employees in
the entertainment industry.” 29 U.S.C. § 1383(c)(1). Under
a plain reading of the text, an individual who performs work
in the entertainment industry is an “employee[] in the
entertainment industry.” Id. That is all that is required. The
text does not say that an individual’s work must be
“substantially” or “primarily” in the entertainment industry
to qualify—any amount of entertainment work suffices. See
Guido, 859 F.3d at 1172–74 (finding that the absence of
limiting language in a statute unambiguously establishes that
the statute is not so limited). The plain text of the exception
is thus unambiguous and covers employees working in the
entertainment industry without restriction. See id.
The Trust argues that the statute is ambiguous because it
provides “no instruction on how to determine if an employee
should qualify as in the entertainment industry.” But such
instructions are unnecessary if the text is plain on its face: an
individual qualifies if they work in the entertainment
industry. The Trust also argues that JB implicitly conceded
that the statute is ambiguous because it proposed several
different interpretations of the statute before the district court
and it could not offer alternative interpretations if the text is
unambiguous. But we need only look to the text to determine
if the statute is ambiguous; it is irrelevant that JB argued
alternative interpretations before the district court. See id. at
1173 (explaining that a statute is unambiguous even though
one party proposed an alternative interpretation because
“declaring that multiple reasonable interpretations exist does
not make it so”). Based on the unambiguous text, we decline

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

11

the Trust’s invitation to read in a minimum entertainmentwork requirement.
The Trust argues that, even if the text of the statute is
unambiguous, we should nevertheless impose a minimum
entertainment-work requirement to avoid creating absurd
results. See United States v. Torres, 995 F.3d 695, 705 (9th
Cir. 2021) (“If the plain language of a statute renders its
meaning reasonably clear, we will not investigate further
unless its application leads to unreasonable or impracticable
results.” (quoting United States v. Gallegos, 613 F.3d 1211,
1214 (9th Cir. 2010)) (citation modified)). Specifically, the
Trust argues that it makes little sense to classify someone as
an “employee[] in the entertainment industry” when the
person performs a minimal amount of entertainment work.
Further, the Trust contends that it is absurd to apply the
entertainment exception to a pension plan that covers
employees performing little entertainment work.
But we may override the plain meaning of a statute only
when “it is quite impossible that Congress could have
intended the result . . . and where the alleged absurdity is so
clear as to be obvious to most anyone.” Id. (quoting In re
Hokulani Square, Inc., 776 F.3d 1083, 1088 (9th Cir. 2015)).
The Trust’s arguments do not meet this “extremely high
bar.” Id. Given the part-time nature of most entertainment
work, it is possible that Congress intended “employees in the
entertainment industry” to include individuals who work
multiple jobs or projects, some of which involve
entertainment work and some of which do not. See 29 U.S.C.
§ 1383(c)(1) (describing covered entertainment work as
“primarily on a temporary or project-by-project basis”
(emphasis added)). After all, if the statute imposed a
minimum entertainment-work requirement, individuals who
perform thousands of hours of entertainment work, but

12

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

slightly more non-entertainment work, would not be
considered “employees in the entertainment industry.” Thus,
it is not impossible that Congress intended this outcome.
Moreover, following the text’s plain meaning does not
absurdly expand the scope of the entertainment exception.
The requirement that the plan primarily cover employees in
the entertainment industry is only one of several conditions
necessary for an employer to qualify for the entertainment
exception. For example, an employer may claim the
exception only if its contributions are “for work performed
in the entertainment industry.” 29 U.S.C. § 1383(c)(1).
Thus, employers that contribute to a plan on behalf of
employees performing non-entertainment work are unable to
claim the entertainment exception, and that remains
unchanged.
Ultimately, the Trust provides no evidence “to make
plain the intent of Congress that the letter of the statute is not
to prevail.” Torres, 995 F.3d at 705 (quoting Crooks v.
Harrelson, 282 U.S. 55, 60 (1930)). “Congress may enact
legislation that turns out to be mischievous, absurd, or
otherwise objectionable. But in such case the remedy lies
with the lawmaking authority, and not with the courts.”
United States v. Paulson, 68 F.4th 528, 542 (9th Cir. 2023)
(citation modified). Because the entertainment exception is
unambiguous, we must enforce its clear meaning and refrain
from writing in limitations that do not exist.
B. Even if the text were ambiguous, the best reading
of the exception is that “employees in the
entertainment
industry”
are
individuals
performing any amount of entertainment work.
Canons of statutory construction confirm that our
interpretation is the best reading of the statute. “Where

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

13

Congress includes particular language in one section of a
statute but omits it in another section of the same Act, it is
generally presumed that Congress acts intentionally and
purposely in the disparate inclusion or exclusion.” Russello
v. United States, 464 U.S. 16, 23 (1983) (citation modified).
More specifically, when one part of a statute contains
limiting language and another part does not, we read the
latter’s omission as “evidence of Congress’s expressed
intent not to impose” any limitation. United States v.
Youssef, 547 F.3d 1090, 1094 (9th Cir. 2008) (per curiam);
see also Hardt v. Reliance Standard Life Ins. Co., 560 U.S.
242, 252 (2010) (reasoning that “[t]he contrast between . . .
two paragraphs makes clear that Congress kn[ew] how to
impose express limits” in one paragraph and declined to do
so in the other).
Here, Congress knew how to impose quantitative limits
on who qualifies as an “employee[] in the entertainment
industry,” but it did not do so. In other parts of the MPPAA,
Congress inserted language like “insubstantial portion,”
“substantially all,” or “primarily” to limit the applicability of
withdrawal exceptions to employers and plans conducting a
certain amount of work in the relevant industry. See 29
U.S.C. § 1383(b)(1)(A)–(B) (construction exception applies
only if “substantially all” of an employer’s employees work
in the construction industry and the plan “primarily” covers
employees in the industry); id. § 1383(d)(2) (trucking
exception applies only if “substantially all” of the
contributions to the plan are made by employers “primarily”
working in the trucking industry); id. § 1388(d)(1)
(construction employer is liable for partial withdrawal if the
employer continues an “insubstantial portion” of its
construction work).

14

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

In contrast, the phrase “employees in the entertainment
industry” does not include any limiting language. The
exception requires that a plan “primarily” cover employees
in the entertainment industry, but it does not require that
employees “primarily” work in the entertainment industry.
29 U.S.C. § 1383(c)(1). In other words, the exception uses
limiting language in other places, but it does not limit who
qualifies as an entertainment employee. The existence of
limiting language elsewhere in the MPPAA indicates that
Congress intentionally excluded it here, intending for the
entertainment exception to apply to employers who
contribute to plans that cover individuals performing any
amount of entertainment work. 3 See Russello, 464 U.S. at
23.
The Trust argues that the entertainment exception must
be read narrowly to impose some minimum amount of
entertainment work, otherwise our reading would undermine
the purpose of the MPPAA and the exception. To be sure,
when a statute is “qualified by an exception, we usually read
the exception narrowly in order to preserve the primary
operation of the provision.” Comm’r of Internal Revenue v.
3
The Trust points out that Congress also omitted language describing
how to measure the amount of an employee’s entertainment work, yet
JB agrees that a proper unit of measurement is an employee’s wages, as
used in other parts of the statute. See 29 U.S.C. § 1399(c)(1)(C)(i)(I)
(calculating withdrawal payments based on contribution base units, or
employees’ wages). The Trust thus contends that the inclusion of
language in one part of the MPPAA does not preclude us from reading
that language into another part of the statute. But the omission of a unit
of measurement in the entertainment exception is consistent with our
interpretation. If Congress did not intend to define “employees in the
entertainment industry” based on the amount of entertainment work they
perform, then including a unit of measurement in the exception would be
unnecessary.

NV RESORT ASS’N-INT’L ALL. V. JB VIVA VEGAS

15

Clark, 489 U.S. 726, 739 (1989). But this general
presumption cannot override a “fair reading” of the statutory
exception. Food Mktg. Inst. v. Argus Leader Media, 588 U.S.
427, 439 (2019) (quoting Encino Motorcars, LLC v.
Navarro, 584 U.S. 79, 89 (2018)). “[J]ust as we cannot
properly expand [an exception] beyond what its terms
permit, we cannot arbitrarily constrict it either by adding
limitations found nowhere in its terms.” Id. (citation
omitted). And, as already explained, our reading of the text
does not undermine the purpose of the MPPAA or the
entertainment exception because an employer can claim the
exception only if its contributions are primarily for
temporary entertainment work. 29 U.S.C. § 1383(c)(1).
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that the Trust’s plan
primarily covers “employees in the entertainment industry”
because there is no minimum entertainment-work
requirement and the majority of employees covered by the
plan perform some entertainment work.
REVERSED and REMANDED.

