FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
PAUL ENGSTROM,

No. 24-1878
D.C. No.
2:21-cr-00190ART-EJY-1
OPINION

Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Anne R. Traum, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted September 17, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed February 5, 2026
Before: David F. Hamilton, Ryan D. Nelson, and Patrick J.
Bumatay, Circuit Judges. *
Opinion by Judge R. Nelson

The Honorable David F. Hamilton, United States Circuit Judge for the
Court of Appeals, 7th Circuit, sitting by designation.

*

2

USA V. ENGSTROM

SUMMARY **
Criminal Law
The panel reversed the district court’s decision that Paul
Engstrom was eligible for safety valve relief under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(f), vacated the sentence imposed below the statutory
minimum, and remanded for resentencing in a case in which
Engstrom pleaded guilty to drug-related crimes.
The district court imposed the below-minimum sentence
after holding a resentencing hearing under Fed. R. Crim. P.
35. Rejecting Engstrom’s argument that this court could not
review the district court’s decision to hold the Rule 35
resentencing hearing, the panel reviewed that decision for
plain error, and held that because the district court identified
a clear error of a “technical” kind in the original sentencing
hearing, the district court’s choice to conduct the Rule 35
hearing was not plain error.
The panel held that Engstrom is not eligible for safety
valve relief for two reasons.
First, Engstrom failed to provide a complete debrief to
the government before sentencing, as required by 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(f)(5). The panel rejected the district court’s
approach which proceeded as if virtually any truthful
statement given upon arrest, a truthful guilty plea allocution,
or additional statements may be enough. Engstrom did not
provide a complete disclosure. The district court never
asked him whether he had given all the information about
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

USA V. ENGSTROM

3

the crime to the government, nor did the record support the
existence of such disclosure. Engstrom never claimed that
such disclosure occurred. Given these circumstances,
Engstrom could not qualify for safety valve relief.
Second, Pulsifer v. United States, 601 U.S. 124 (2024),
forecloses safety valve relief. In Pulsifer, which was issued
during this appeal, the Supreme Court adopted a disjunctive
reading of 18 U.S.C. § 3553(f)(1), holding that if a defendant
has even one of the three listed offenses, then that defendant
becomes ineligible for safety valve relief. Because
Engstrom had a prior 3-point offense for conspiracy to
distribute a controlled substance, Engstrom is categorically
ineligible. The panel rejected Engstrom’s arguments (1) that
it violates his due process right to fair notice to apply
Pulsifer on direct appeal akin to an impermissible ex post
facto law; and (2) that even if Pulsifer applies on direct
appeal, the government cannot satisfy the third and fourth
prongs of plain error review.

COUNSEL
Mina Chang (argued), Peter H. Walkingshaw, and Daniel D.
Hollingsworth, Assistant United States Attorneys; Adam M.
Flake, Appellate Chief; Sigal Chattah and Jason M. Frierson,
United States Attorneys; Office of the United States
Attorney, United States Department of Justice, Las Vegas,
Nevada; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Houston Goddard (argued), Goddard Pope PLLC, Nashville,
Tennessee; Kristi A. Hughes, Law Office of Kristi A.
Hughes, Cardiff, California; for Defendant-Appellee.

4

USA V. ENGSTROM

OPINION
R. NELSON, Circuit Judge:
The government appeals the district court’s order
sentencing Paul Engstrom to 46 months’ imprisonment for
drug-related crimes. The district court sentenced him below
the statutory minimum, granting him safety valve relief
under 18 U.S.C. § 3553(f). But Engstrom was ineligible for
safety valve relief since he failed to provide a complete
debrief to the government before sentencing. He is also
ineligible under Pulsifer v. United States, 601 U.S. 124
(2024), which applies to cases pending on direct appeal. We
therefore reverse and remand to the district court for
resentencing.
I
Paul Engstrom pleaded guilty to two criminal counts—
Conspiracy to Distribute a Controlled Substance and Money
Laundering Conspiracy.
Under the plea agreement,
Engstrom specified that he and his coconspirators agreed to
distribute 500 grams or more of cocaine, triggering a
five-year mandatory-minimum sentence under 21 U.S.C.
§§ 846, 841(a)(1), and (b)(1)(B)(ii). Engstrom agreed that
he did not qualify for safety valve relief under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3553(f) and would not request such relief to avoid the
mandatory minimum.
In 2024, the district court held a sentencing hearing. It
calculated that under the sentencing guidelines, Engstrom
fell within Criminal History Category III and that his total
offense level was 33. The parties had agreed to recommend
a combined six-level downward variance, which brought

USA V. ENGSTROM

5

Engstrom’s offense level to 27, with a recommended
sentence range of 87 to 108 months.
The government recommended that the district court
apply the requested variance and sentence Engstrom at the
bottom of that reduced range. Engstrom urged the court to
sentence him to the mandatory minimum of 60 months. The
district court then asked Engstrom’s probation officer why
Engstrom was not eligible for safety valve relief. The officer
explained that Engstrom could not receive safety valve relief
as he had not met the statutory requirement under
§ 3553(f)(5) for debriefing the government.
The district court imposed a sentence of 70 months of
detention, granting Engstrom a variance beyond the
government’s recommendation. The court granted this
lower sentence considering the difficult pre-trial detention
Engstrom faced during the COVID-19 pandemic and
mitigating evidence. The district court explained that it had
given two coconspirators a two-level downward variance. In
so doing, the district court attempted to give those
defendants relief akin to the safety valve despite their being
ineligible for such relief. The district court justified
Engstrom’s additional downward variance by sentencing
him similarly to his coconspirators, stating that it intended to
give him the benefit of the safety valve.
Soon after, the district court scheduled a hearing under
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 35, which provides that
a district court may, “[w]ithin 14 days after sentencing . . .
correct a sentence that resulted from arithmetical, technical,
or other clear error.” At the Rule 35 resentencing hearing,
the district court explained that in the original hearing, it
deducted two points under the § 3553(a) factors to give
Engstrom the benefit of the safety valve; but the district court

6

USA V. ENGSTROM

gave Engstrom a sentence above the mandatory minimum
along with a supervised release term set at the mandatory
minimum.
The district court once again asked the probation officer
why Engstrom was not eligible for safety valve relief. The
probation officer again explained that Engstrom had not met
the statutory debrief requirement and had stipulated in his
plea agreement that he was ineligible. The district court
asked Engstrom whether he had met with the government.
Engstrom responded that he had not; he understood the plea
agreement to mean he was not to seek safety valve relief.
The district court asked the government what was
required to satisfy the statutory debrief requirement. The
government responded that a defendant typically meets a
prosecutor and shares information about the case.
The district court explained that while the plea
agreement bound Engstrom and the government, the court
was not so bound; it needed to make an independent
assessment whether Engstrom was safety valve eligible. In
the district court’s view, the statute “does not specify a form,
place, or manner of disclosure,” so a statement upon arrest
or allocution could be enough if the defendant provided
“truthful and complete information in good faith.” The
district court concluded that Engstrom was eligible for the
safety valve since he truthfully “said the most in open court”
about the conspiracy among his codefendants.
The
government objected to the safety valve relief.
The district court revisited “the other aspects” of
Engstrom’s sentence (by considering the § 3553 factors
afresh) and recalculated it under § 3553(a). Engstrom’s
recalculated offense level was 25. The government
requested a sentence of 70 months’ imprisonment, the low

USA V. ENGSTROM

7

end of the sentencing guideline range. The district court
imposed a 46-month sentence, followed by two years of
supervised release to run on concurrent counts. The district
court noted that this sentence was a variance below the
mandatory minimum as permitted by the applicable safety
valve provision.
The government moved for reconsideration, arguing that
the district court had erred in applying the safety valve
because Engstrom had not met the debrief requirement.
While that motion was pending, the permissible time to
correct the resentencing error lapsed. See FED. R. CRIM. P.
35. The Supreme Court also decided Pulsifer v. United
States, which held that to be eligible for safety valve relief
under § 3553(f)(1), a defendant must satisfy all three
statutory criminal history requirements. 601 U.S. 124, 153
(2024). In other words, a defendant could not have more
than four criminal history points, or a prior three-point
offense, or a prior two-point violent offense. Id. This
decision abrogated our decision in United States v. Lopez,
which held that a defendant was eligible for safety valve
relief unless all three of the criminal history requirements
applied to that defendant, rather than just one. 998 F.3d 431,
444 (9th Cir. 2021); see also United States v. Lopez, 58 F.4th
1108 (9th Cir. 2023) (R. Nelson, J., statement regarding
denial of rehearing en banc). The government also argued
that under Pulsifer, Engstrom’s prior undisputed three-point
conviction for conspiracy to distribute controlled substances
in 2017 disqualified him for safety valve relief. The
government appealed.
II
The district court had jurisdiction under 18 U.S.C.
§ 3231. We have appellate jurisdiction under 18 U.S.C.

8

USA V. ENGSTROM

§ 3742 and 28 U.S.C. § 1291. Engstrom’s motion for
judicial notice (Dkt. No. 64) stating that he was housed at a
residential reentry center with a release date of December
20, 2025, is granted. Engstrom’s release from incarceration
does not moot this case for two reasons. First, Engstrom
remains on supervised release, meaning a live case or
controversy continues despite any release. United States v.
Verdin, 243 F.3d 1174, 1178 (9th Cir. 2001). Second, our
decision to vacate and remand could (and here will) result in
Engstrom being resentenced and sent back to prison,
ensuring a live case or controversy. See Eagles v. United
States ex rel. Samuels, 329 U.S. 304, 307–08 (1946); see
Garcia v. Lawn, 805 F.2d 1400, 1402 (9th Cir. 1986); United
States v. Lira–Barraza, 941 F.2d 745, 746 n.1 (9th Cir. 1991)
(en banc).
The parties dispute whether we can review the district
court’s order holding a Rule 35 resentencing hearing. The
government argues that it only forfeited its argument by not
objecting. Thus, it asserts we should review for plain error.
United States v. Valencia-Barragan, 608 F.3d 1103, 1108
(9th Cir. 2010). But Engstrom argues that the government
waived this challenge by not objecting, thus precluding our
review.
No waiver occurred. “[F]orfeiture is the failure to make
a timely assertion of a right, whereas waiver is the
intentional relinquishment or abandonment of a known
right.” United States v. Perez, 116 F.3d 840, 845 (9th Cir.
1997) (cleaned up). “Forfeited rights are reviewable for
plain error, while waived rights are not.” Id. If a party
“invite[s] the error, and relinquishe[s] a known right, then
the error is waived and therefore unreviewable.” Id.

USA V. ENGSTROM

9

The government did not object to the district court’s Rule
35 hearing. But failing to object to a district court’s
sentencing decision—or even affirmatively endorsing it—is
not waiver. United States v. Depue, 912 F.3d 1227, 1233
(9th Cir. 2019). Waiver occurs only if “there [is] evidence
indicating the [parties] knew of their rights and chose to
relinquish them anyway.” Id.; see also Perez, 116 F.3d at
845 (collecting cases showing knowing relinquishment of
right).
The district court called the Rule 35 hearing to correct “a
possible clear error” in its sentencing. The district court did
not permit the government a reasonable chance to object to
the Rule 35 hearing and just asked the government whether
Engstrom was safety valve eligible.
Engstrom characterizes these events as the government
tactically choosing not to object to the Rule 35 hearing. But
nothing suggests that the government knowingly chose not
to object. See Depue, 912 F.3d at 1233. Rather, the district
court quickly turned to the safety valve issue without
discussing the appropriateness of resentencing. While the
government ideally should have interrupted to object,
forfeiture rather than waiver occurred, and plain error review
applies. See United States v. Grant, 727 F.3d 928, 933 (9th
Cir. 2013); Perez, 116 F.3d at 845.
We review the district court’s statutory interpretation of
the safety valve provision de novo and its factual
determination that the defendant is eligible for relief for clear
error. United States v. Mejia-Pimental, 477 F.3d 1100, 1103
(9th Cir. 2007). This standard of review applies both to the
statutory debrief requirement issue and the Pulsifer issue.

10

USA V. ENGSTROM

III
The district court’s choice to hold a Rule 35 resentencing
hearing is not plain error. Plain error requires: “(1) there is
an error; (2) the error is clear or obvious, rather than subject
to reasonable dispute; (3) the error affected [appellant’s]
substantial rights, which in the ordinary case means it
affected the outcome of the district-court proceedings; and
(4) the error seriously affected the fairness, integrity or
public reputation of judicial proceedings.” United States v.
Walter-Eze, 869 F.3d 891, 911 (9th Cir. 2017) (cleaned up).
The government’s argument falls at the threshold prong.
A district court “may not modify a term of imprisonment
once it has been imposed” except in several enumerated
circumstances. 18 U.S.C. § 3582(c). Among them, a district
court “may modify an imposed term of imprisonment to the
extent otherwise expressly permitted by statute or by Rule
35 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.”
Id. § 3582(c)(1)(B). Rule 35 states that “[w]ithin 14 days
after sentencing, the court may correct a sentence that
resulted from arithmetical, technical, or other clear error.”
FED. R. CRIM. P. 35(a).
The district court did not err when it concluded that it
needed to resentence Engstrom. Under the safety valve
provision, “a court is to sentence a defendant without regard
to any statutory minimum if it finds that” the five statutory
criteria in § 3553(f) are met. Pulsifer, 601 U.S. at 128
(cleaned up). The district court has an independent duty to
determine whether the safety valve applies and, if so, it then
sentences the defendant without regard to the statutory
minimum for a particular offense. Id.
When the district court originally sentenced Engstrom, it
stated that two of his codefendants fully benefited from the

USA V. ENGSTROM

11

safety valve, and the court wanted to “give that benefit to
[Engstrom] as well.” The district court then applied a
downward variance on the calculated guidelines range to
sentence Engstrom to 70 months of imprisonment rather than
87 (the low end of the guidelines range). A sentence of 70
months, however, exceeded the applicable mandatory
minimum of 60 months. See 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(B).
The district court’s actions were clear error of a
“technical” kind under Rule 35(a). See Technical, OXFORD
ENGLISH DICTIONARY (online ed. 2009) (sense 2.d)
(involving “strict legal interpretation”); United States v. M.
M., 23 F.4th 216, 221 (3d Cir. 2021) (“arithmetical and
technical errors” are “easily identifiable and readily
ascertained from the sentencing proceeding and judgment,”
akin to misapplying “mandatory” sentencing conditions).
The district court thought that it erred by considering the
mandatory minimum once it made clear that it was giving
Engstrom the benefit of the safety valve. See United States
v. Mejia-Pimental, 477 F.3d 1100, 1109 (9th Cir. 2007).
In such a situation, a district court has the latitude to
conduct a Rule 35 rehearing to correct the technical error. If
the district court wanted to “give [the benefit of the safety
valve] to Engstrom,” then it needed to sentence him without
regard to the mandatory minimum. Whether the district
court was correct that Engstrom should have received the
benefit of the safety valve (it was not), it had the latitude
under Rule 35 to correct its perceived technical error of
considering a mandatory minimum sentence for a defendant
it thought should benefit from safety valve relief. Since the
district court identified a clear error in the original
sentencing hearing, conducting a Rule 35 rehearing was not
error. The government’s argument thus fails on the first step
of plain error review. See Walter-Eze, 869 F.3d at 911

12

USA V. ENGSTROM

(reversal for plain error is appropriate where “(1) there is an
error”).
IV
Engstrom is not eligible for safety valve relief for two
reasons. First, Engstrom did not satisfy the statutory debrief
requirement in § 3553(f)(5). Second, Pulsifer also precludes
Engstrom from safety valve relief.
A
1
The district court failed to abide by the three “basic rules
of statutory interpretation”: “(1) Read the statute; (2) read
the statute; (3) read the statute!” JUSTICE AMY CONEY
BARRETT, LISTENING TO THE LAW: REFLECTIONS ON THE
COURT AND CONSTITUTION 212 (2025) (quoting HENRY J.
FRIENDLY, Mr. Justice Frankfurter and the Reading of
Statutes, in BENCHMARKS 196, 202 (1967)). Under the
statute, a defendant is eligible for safety valve relief only if
“not later than the time of the sentencing hearing, the
defendant has truthfully provided to the government all
information and evidence the defendant has concerning the
offense or offenses that were part of the same course of
conduct or of a common scheme or plan.” § 3553(f)(5)
(emphasis added). But “the fact that the defendant has no
relevant or useful other information to provide or that the
Government is already aware of the information shall not
preclude a determination by the court that the defendant has
complied with this requirement.” Id.
To satisfy the debrief requirement, Engstrom therefore
should have provided “all the information available to him,
regardless of whether it was useful or already known to the
government.” United States v. Real-Hernandez, 90 F.3d 356,

USA V. ENGSTROM

13

361 (9th Cir. 1996). A defendant seeking safety valve relief
need not provide such information to every prosecutor who
interacted with him. Providing such information to any
prosecutor attributes the information to the government. Id.
But the debrief requirement mandates that a defendant
affirmatively discloses everything he knows about the
relevant crimes to a prosecutor or law enforcement officer
“not later than the time of the sentencing hearing.” Id.;
§ 3553(f)(5).
And this must be a complete, rather than a partial,
debrief. The district court concluded that, under United
States v. Schreiber, 191 F.3d 103 (2d Cir. 1999), disclosure
directed towards the court or partial disclosure of relevant
information to the government suffices. In Schreiber, the
Second Circuit held that the “safety valve statute does not
specify the form, place, or manner of disclosure[,]” and that
a “defendant may comply with the safety valve without ever
submitting to a debriefing.” Id. at 108. According to the
district court, Mejia-Pimental, 477 F.3d 1100, adopted this
principle. There, we held that “as long as a defendant’s
ultimate proffer is truthful and complete, he has satisfied the
fifth safety valve criterion, regardless of timing or
motivations.” Id. at 1106.
The district court extended Mejia-Pimental, which
requires a complete proffer, too far. There, Mejia-Pimental
had three sentencing hearings due to intervening factors in
the lead case. Id. at 1102. On his third sentencing hearing,
he contacted the government to provide a safety valve
proffer. Id. at 1103. The government refused, and instead
Mejia-Pimental wrote and mailed the government a
comprehensive letter detailing all his involvement, and his
knowledge of others in the charged offense. Id. We held that
this satisfied § 3553(f)(5) as the defendant “fully disclos[ed]

14

USA V. ENGSTROM

his knowledge of the charged offense conduct.” Id. at 1106.
Critical to this analysis, however, was that Mejia-Pimental
affirmatively reached out to prosecutors by letter to provide
this information, and the information was neither “false [nor]
incomplete.” Id. at 1103. Accordingly, Mejia-Pimental
shows only that a defendant can affirmatively meet the
requirement—at least when the government refuses a
meeting—without a formal debrief.
But the statute still requires a defendant to affirmatively
provide “all information and evidence the defendant has
concerning the offense” to the government not later than the
time of the sentencing hearing. § 3553(f)(5) (emphasis
added). The district court read this requirement out of the
statute, characterizing it as “no requirement at all,”
proceeding as if virtually any truthful statement “given upon
arrest,” a truthful “guilty plea allocution,” or “[a]dditional
statements” may be enough.
We reject this approach. The statute requires that, “not
later than the time of the sentencing hearing, the defendant
has [to] truthfully provide[] to the Government all
information and evidence the defendant has concerning the
offense or offenses.” § 3553(f)(5). And a district court must
meaningfully check that a defendant “provides truthful,
complete information before sentencing” to the government
when determining safety valve eligibility. Mejia-Pimental,
477 F.3d at 1105. The statutory disclosure required is a “tell
all you can tell requirement.” United States v. Shrestha, 86
F.3d 935, 939 (9th Cir. 1996) (cleaned up). At minimum,
“this information includes details concerning other parties to
the crime, such as the source who provided defendant with
the drugs and other persons in the chain of distribution, if
known.” Id. If “the defendant does not possess such
information,” he must still “communicate that fact to the

USA V. ENGSTROM

government in order to qualify for the reduction.”
(cleaned up).

15

Id.

2
Engstrom thus did not meet the safety valve requirement.
He did not provide a complete disclosure. The district court
never asked him whether he had given all the information
about the crime to the government, nor did the record
support the existence of such disclosure. Engstrom never
claimed that such disclosure occurred. Given these
circumstances, Engstrom could not qualify for safety valve
relief.
B
Engstrom cannot benefit from the safety valve for an
additional reason. The Supreme Court’s decision in Pulsifer
v. United States, 601 U.S. 124 (2024), forecloses such relief.
1
The Supreme Court decided Pulsifer in March 2024,
shortly after Engstrom’s resentencing hearing, to resolve a
long-standing circuit split interpreting § 3553(f)(1). Under
this provision, a defendant can only be eligible for safety
valve relief if
(1) the defendant does not have—
(A) more than 4 criminal history points,
excluding any criminal history points
resulting from a 1-point offense, as
determined
under
the
sentencing
guidelines;
(B) a prior 3-point offense, as determined under
the sentencing guidelines; and

16

USA V. ENGSTROM

(C) a prior 2-point violent offense, as
determined
under
the
sentencing
guidelines.
§ 3553(f)(1) (emphasis added).
Pulsifer addressed whether courts should read the word
“and” in this provision conjunctively or disjunctively. 601
U.S. at 127. If read conjunctively, a defendant would be
safety valve ineligible only if he had all three listed types of
offenses in §§ 3553(f)(1)(A), (B), and (C). If read
disjunctively, a defendant would be safety valve ineligible if
he had any one of the three listed types of offenses.
In Pulsifer, the Supreme Court adopted the disjunctive
view, holding that if a defendant has even one of the three
offenses listed in § 3553(f)(1) then that defendant becomes
ineligible for safety valve relief. 601 U.S. at 153. Pulsifer
abrogated the Ninth Circuit’s prior decision in Lopez, 998
F.3d 431, in which we had adopted the conjunctive reading.
See United States v. Hernandez, 105 F.4th 1234, 1237 n.1
(9th Cir. 2024); Salas v. United States, 116 F.4th 830, 843
(9th Cir. 2024) (both stating that Pulsifer abrogated Lopez).
While § 3553(f)(1) did not disqualify Engstrom from
safety valve relief under Lopez, it does under Pulsifer.
Engstrom had a prior 3-point offense for conspiracy to
distribute a controlled substance (but neither of the other two
disqualifying offenses).
Therefore, under Pulsifer,
Engstrom is categorically ineligible for safety valve relief.
The district court rendered its sentence before the
Supreme Court issued Pulsifer. But ordinarily “an error is
plain if it is contrary to the law at the time of appeal.” United
States v. Macias, 789 F.3d 1011, 1019 n.4 (9th Cir. 2015)
(emphasis added); see Henderson v. United States, 568 U.S.

USA V. ENGSTROM

17

266, 269 (2013) (“as long as the error was plain as of that
later time—the time of appellate review—the error is ‘plain’
within the meaning of the Rule”). Because Pulsifer was
issued during this appeal, it applies and means that the
district court’s conclusion that Engstrom qualified for safety
valve relief is plain error.
2
Engstrom argues that Pulsifer should not apply. First, he
contends that it violates his due process right to fair notice to
apply Pulsifer on direct appeal akin to an impermissible ex
post facto law. Second, he argues that even if Pulsifer
applies on direct appeal, the district court did not plainly err
since the government cannot satisfy the third and fourth
prongs. Both arguments fail.
a
The due process right to fair notice, while housed within
the Due Process Clause, bears close relation to the
Constitution’s prohibition on ex post facto laws. The
Constitution states that “No Bill of Attainder or ex post facto
Law shall be passed.” U.S. Const. art. I, § 9, cl. 3; see also
U.S. Const. art. I, § 10, cl. 1. “As the text of the Clause
makes clear, it is a limitation upon the powers of the
Legislature and does not of its own force apply to the
Judicial Branch of the government.” Rogers v. Tennessee,
532 U.S. 451, 456 (2001) (cleaned up; applying parallel limit
on state ex post facto laws). Even so, “limitations on ex post
facto judicial decisionmaking are inherent in the notion of
due process.” Id. Unpacking the historical origins of this
principle illustrates why Engstrom’s argument proves
unavailing. The due process right to fair notice evolved from
the constitution’s more general prohibition on ex post facto
laws. And that history supports applying Pulsifer.

18

USA V. ENGSTROM

The impetus for both the Constitution’s ex post facto
prohibition, and the Constitution’s prohibitions on Bills of
Attainder stems from English practices during the reign of
the Stuart monarchs. See U.S. Const. art. I, § 9, cl. 3; U.S.
Const. art. I, § 10, cl. 1. During this era, Parliament regularly
criminalized previously legal behavior retroactively. The
most prominent example arose during the prelude to the
English Civil War—the impeachment trial of Thomas
Wentworth, the 1st Earl of Strafford in 1641. See PETER
ACKROYD, REBELLION: THE HISTORY OF ENGLAND FROM
JAMES I TO THE GLORIOUS REVOLUTION 209 (2015). English
Parliament tried to impeach Strafford on flimsy charges to
remove one of King Charles I’s primary allies from office.
Id. When it was clear the impeachment charges would fail,
Parliament instead passed a Bill of Attainder declaring
Strafford’s actions retroactively illegal and sentenced him to
death. Id. at 210–14. Strafford was executed. Id. at 213–
14.
The events surrounding the English Civil War greatly
influenced the Founders in constitutional drafting. For
example, Alexander Hamilton, writing as Publius, explained
that “[t]he creation of crimes after the commission of the
fact, or, in other words, the subjecting of men to punishment
for things which, when they were done, were breaches of no
law, and the practice of arbitrary imprisonments, have been,
in all ages, the favorite and most formidable instruments of
tyranny.” THE FEDERALIST NO. 84 (Alexander Hamilton).
Quoting Sir William Blackstone, Hamilton explained that
retroactively punishing previously licit behavior is “a more
dangerous engine of arbitrary government” than any other
“notorious an act of despotism.” Id. (cleaned up) (citation
omitted). Certain types of retroactive action by the
government are thus anathema to the Constitution. Id.

USA V. ENGSTROM

19

But the Constitution does not deal with this problem by
circumscribing all retroactive action by the government.
The Constitution’s restricts retroactive legislative and
executive action but treats judicial action differently.
Ordinarily, the legislative power is “the power to adopt
generally applicable rules of conduct governing future
actions by private persons—the power to prescribe the rules
by which the duties and rights of every citizen are to be
regulated, or the power to prescribe general rules for the
government of society.” Gundy v. United States, 588 U.S.
128, 153 (2019) (Gorsuch, J., dissenting) (cleaned up). So
the legislative power is ordinarily prospective. Id. And the
executive power is “essentially a grant of the power to
execute the laws,” meaning it too is ordinarily prospective
since it bootstraps itself to the legislative power. Buckley v.
Valeo, 424 U.S. 1, 135 (1976). By contrast, the judicial
power is the power “to say what the law is,” meaning it is
ordinarily retroactive as it only interprets statutory or
Constitutional text as it exists rather than creating new law.
See Marbury v. Madison, 5 U.S. 137, 177 (1803).
When analyzing retroactivity, courts must thus carefully
consider which clause of the constitution that protects
against retroactive effects is implicated, and what type of
action—legislative, executive, or judicial—is creating such
a retroactive effect. This analysis requires considering the
history of the clauses of the Constitution that protect against
retroactivity.
The most obvious source of constitutional protection
against retroactivity is the Ex Post Facto Clause. See U.S.
Const. art I., § 9, cl. 3. During the Constitutional
Convention, the Framers debated the scope of that clause
(i.e., whether it would apply to government action outside of
retroactive criminal laws passed by Congress). See Daniel

20

USA V. ENGSTROM

Troy, Ex Post Facto, in THE HERITAGE GUIDE TO THE
CONSTITUTION 204 (2d ed. 2014).
The Supreme Court clarified the scope of the Ex Post
Facto Clause in one of its earliest cases—Calder v. Bull, 3
U.S. 386, 390 (1798). 1 Justice Samuel Chase, writing for the
Court, explained that the clause covered only four scenarios:
First, “Every law that makes an action, done before the
passing of the law and which was innocent when done,
criminal; and punishes such action.” Id. Second, “Every law
that aggravates a crime, or makes it greater than it was, when
committed.” Id. Third, “Every law that changes the
punishment, and inflicts a greater punishment, than the law
annexed to the crime, when committed.” Id. Fourth, “Every
law that alters the legal rules of evidence, and receives less,
or different, testimony, than the law required at the time of
commission of the offence, in order to convict the offender.”
Id. So the Ex Post Facto Clause does not protect against
government action that is not a law (i.e., a judicial decision),
nor does it protect against Congress enacting retroactive civil
laws, or even retroactive criminal laws outside Calder’s four
enumerated categories. Id. at 390–91.
Justice Thomas has questioned whether Calder was rightly decided.
See E. Enters. v. Apfel, 524 U.S. 498, 538–39 (1998) (Thomas, J.,
concurring). He has also argued that cases subsequent to Calder have
misinterpreted it. See Ellingburg v. United States, No. 24-482, 2026 WL
135982, at *4 (U.S. Jan. 20, 2026) (Thomas, J., concurring). Under
Justice Thomas’s proposed approach, the Ex Post Facto Clause is
implicated under Calder anytime a law or agency action involves a
“public wrong” (i.e. creates an injury against the sovereign as opposed
to individuals in their private capacity) whether the law was criminal or
civil. Id. at 8–12. But as a lower court, we faithfully apply Calder and
its progeny, see Mallory v. Norfolk S. Ry. Co., 600 U.S. 122, 136 (2023),
and even under Justice Thomas’s views, the clause would extend only to
laws passed by Congress and agency action, not judicial action.
1

USA V. ENGSTROM

21

But the Founders also realized that our legal system
needed to protect against retroactivity when the Ex Post
Facto Clause was not implicated to protect behavior vast
swathes of society had understood as legal, relied upon, and
had no notice prior to retroactive state action. For example,
Thomas Jefferson explained that the Ex Post Facto Clause
bars retroactive application “in criminal cases only” even
though ex post facto laws “are equally unjust in civil as in
criminal cases and the omission of a caution which would
have been right, does not justify the doing [of] what is
wrong.” Thomas Jefferson, Thomas Jefferson to Isaac
McPherson, FOUNDERS ONLINE (Aug. 13, 1813), https://fo
unders.archives.gov/documents/Jefferson/03-06-02-0322.
Courts have heeded Jefferson’s warning and crafted
constitutional doctrines to protect against retroactivity
outside the formal protection of the Ex Post Facto Clause
through the due process clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth
Amendments. Rogers, 532 U.S. at 456–57; U.S. Const.
amend. V; U.S. Const. amend. XIV, § 1. And that protects
against retroactivity in two ways. First, when Congress
passes laws, or the executive enacts executive orders,
“prospectivity remains the appropriate default rule.”
Landgraf v. USI Film Prods., 511 U.S. 244, 272 (1994). And
even when that default rule cannot be applied, the “Due
Process Clause also protects the interests in fair notice and
repose that may be compromised by retroactive legislation,”
executive orders, or even judicial action. Id. at 266. “[A]
justification sufficient to validate . . . prospective application
under the Clause may not suffice to warrant [] retroactive
application.” Id. (cleaned up). But “[t]he Constitution’s
restrictions, of course, are of limited scope[,]” meaning
“[a]bsent a violation of [the due process right to fair notice],
the potential unfairness of retroactive [government action] is

22

USA V. ENGSTROM

not a sufficient reason for a court to fail” to apply changes in
precedent in cases on direct appeal. Id. at 267 (cleaned up).
At its core, the due process right to fair notice addresses
“the unfairness of imposing new burdens on persons after the
fact.” Id. at 270. It ensures that the government is not “free
to change the law retroactively based on shifting political
winds, [because] it could use that power to punish politically
disfavored groups or individuals for conduct they can no
longer alter.” Gutierrez-Brizuela v. Lynch, 834 F.3d 1142,
1146 (10th Cir. 2016) (Opinion of Gorsuch, J.). But absent
any such concerns—as in this case—a federal court has an
unflagging obligation to exercise the judicial power in its
normal mode (i.e., retroactively). Cf. Marbury, 5 U.S. at 177
(the judiciary is required “to say what the law is[,]” implying
it doesn’t ordinarily create new law moving forward); see
also Jonathan F. Mitchell, The Writ-of-Erasure Fallacy, 104
VA. L. REV. 933, 996 (2018) (explaining how judicial
decisionmaking is, by its nature, retroactive).
Engstrom’s case falls far outside the ambit of protection
under first principles that led federal courts to cognize a due
process right to fair notice. And our precedent confirms that.
b
Applying Pulsifer here does not violate Engstrom’s due
process right. The application of subsequent judicial
decisions on direct appeal does not violate a defendant’s due
process when, as here, Pulsifer’s interpretation of
§ 3553(f)(1) was foreseeable. Engstrom argues that under
Bouie v. City of Columbia, 378 U.S. 347 (1964), and its
progeny, applying Pulsifer would violate his due process
right. Engstrom is wrong.

USA V. ENGSTROM

23

Bouie reviewed the South Carolina Supreme Court’s
decision to retroactively apply its state’s criminal trespass
statute to its petitioners. Id. at 348–50. That trespass statute
prohibited “entry upon the lands of another . . . after notice
from the owner or tenant prohibiting such entry.” Id. at 349.
The South Carolina Supreme Court had construed the
statute to extend to patrons of a drug store who had been
given no notice barring them from entering the store but
refused to leave when asked. 2 Id. at 349–50. Prior to Bouie,
“cases construing the statute had uniformly held that
conviction under the statute required proof of notice before
entry.” Rogers, 532 U.S. at 457 (discussing Bouie). No case
before Bouie gave “the slightest indication that [the statute’s]
requirement could be satisfied by proof of the different act
of remaining on the land after being told to leave.” 378 U.S.
at 357.
The Supreme Court held that “the South Carolina
Supreme Court, in applying its new construction of the
statute . . . deprived petitioners of rights guaranteed to them
by the Due Process Clause.” Id. at 362. The Court explained
that “an unforeseeable judicial enlargement of a criminal
statute, applied retroactively, operates precisely like an ex
post facto law” and thus violates a petitioner’s due process
right to fair notice. Id. at 353.
Bouie does not apply here. It applies only when
subsequent judicial interpretations of a statute are truly
unforeseeable by the parties. No court had reached or
applied the statutory construction the South Carolina
Bouie arose out of a sit-in demonstration where the store’s restaurant
was segregated and the trespass statute was used against African
Americans denied service. 378 U.S. at 361.
2

24

USA V. ENGSTROM

Supreme Court did, and that result was truly unexpected.
See id. at 357. “[D]ue process bars courts from applying a
novel construction of a criminal statute to conduct that
neither the statute nor any prior judicial decision has fairly
disclosed to be within its scope.” United States v. Lanier,
520 U.S. 259, 266 (1997). And where other “jurisdictions
had already reasonably construed identical statutory
language to apply [to a defendant’s act],” those decisions
gave a defendant fair notice that his behavior would be
criminalized under the statute. Rose v. Locke, 423 U.S. 48,
53 (1975).
When Engstrom was sentenced, and Pulsifer decided
soon after, the Ninth Circuit’s abrogated position in Lopez
was already a minority position. See Lopez, 58 F.4th 1108.
This is a far cry from Bouie where no court had ever adopted
the novel statutory construction (and had in fact rejected it
in every case before Bouie). 378 U.S. at 357. Here the Fifth,
Sixth, Seventh and Eighth Circuits all rendered opinions that
gave Engstrom notice that the disjunctive construction of the
provision may have been correct two years prior to his
sentencing hearing. See United States v. Pulsifer, 39 F.4th
1018 (8th Cir. 2022); United States v. Palomares, 52 F.4th
640 (5th Cir. 2022); United States v. Haynes, 55 F.4th 1075
(6th Cir. 2022); United States v. Pace, 48 F.4th 741 (7th
Cir. 2022). Thus, applying Pulsifer does not defy Bouie. See
United States v. Newman, 203 F.3d 700, 702–03 (9th Cir.
2000) (explaining that a circuit split renders the alternate
interpretation “reasonably foreseeable”).
Further, Bouie does not apply to cases that do not enlarge
the scope of criminal liability. Where “the judicial decision
at issue” (i.e., Pulsifer) “does not enlarge the scope of
criminal liability[,]” but rather “interprets a federal statute
concerning the calculation of the length of a term of

USA V. ENGSTROM

25

imprisonment without reference to the issue of the
defendant’s criminal liability[,]” “the due process concerns
raised by Bouie are inapplicable.” Newman, 203 F.3d at
702–03; see also United States v. Ruiz, 935 F.2d 1033, 1035–
36 (9th Cir. 1991); United States v. Ricardo, 78 F.3d 1411,
1417 (9th Cir. 1996).
We thus properly consider Pulsifer when reviewing the
district court’s order. See Macias, 789 F.3d at 1019 n.4;
Henderson, 568 U.S. at 269. And under Pulsifer, Engstrom
is ineligible for safety valve relief. 601 U.S. at 153.
c
Finally, Engstrom argues that even if Pulsifer applies, the
government cannot satisfy its burden to show that this error
warrants reversal under the third and fourth prongs of plain
error review. These arguments lack merit.
Plain error review does not solely protect the substantial
rights of a criminal defendant, it also protects the
government. “The government’s substantial rights may be
affected when a defendant receives an inappropriate
sentence,” and all the government must show is “a
reasonable probability that [the defendant] would have
received a different sentence but for the district court’s
error.” United States v. Gonzalez-Zotelo, 556 F.3d 736, 741
(9th Cir. 2009).
The government meets that test. But for the error created
by not applying Pulsifer to this case, Engstrom would not
have been safety valve eligible. He would have received a
sentence at or above the statutory mandatory minimum of 60
months. Instead, Engstrom only received a sentence of 46
months—well below the mandatory minimum. Thus, the
government satisfies the third prong of plain error review.

26

USA V. ENGSTROM

The government also satisfies the fourth prong. It has
shown that “the error seriously affected the fairness,
integrity, or public reputation of judicial proceedings.”
Walter-Eze, 869 F.3d at 911. The type of sentencing
disparity seen here automatically satisfies this prong.
When a “district judge would have given a different
sentence but for [his] error,” such a situation intrinsically
“undermine[s] the fairness and integrity of judicial
proceedings.” Gonzalez-Zotelo, 556 F.3d at 741. In those
cases, the third and fourth prongs of plain error review
collapse into one. If the government meets its burden under
the third prong, it simultaneously demonstrates that the
sentencing error undermines “the fairness and integrity of
[the] judicial proceedings.” Id. Thus, the government has
met its burden under plain error review.
V
The district court erred by concluding that Engstrom was
eligible for safety valve relief under § 3553(f). The
“appropriate remedy for a sentence imposed in excess of the
sentencing court’s authority is to vacate the entire sentence
and remand for resentencing.” United States v. Blue
Mountain Bottling Co. of Walla Walla, 929 F.2d 526, 529
(9th Cir. 1991). Thus, we reverse the district court, vacate
Engstrom’s sentence, and remand to the district court for
resentencing consistent with this opinion.
REVERSED, VACATED, AND REMANDED.

