FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
TAMARA YVONNE MOTLEY,
AKA Tamara Ogembe, AKA Tamara
Motley-Ogembe,

No. 23-3971
D.C. No.
2:17-cr-00774FMO-1

OPINION

Defendant - Appellant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Stanley Blumenfeld, Jr., District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted September 17, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed February 24, 2026
Before: Richard R. Clifton, Jay S. Bybee, and Kenneth K.
Lee, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bybee

2

USA V. MOTLEY

SUMMARY*
Criminal Law
The panel vacated a portion of Tamara Motley’s
sentence and remanded for resentencing in a case in which a
jury convicted Motley of defrauding Medicare by submitting
millions of dollars in false and fraudulent claims for durable
medical equipment and related services.
Motley’s underlying healthcare fraud was not in
dispute. The sole question was whether Motley also
committed aggravated identity theft under 18 U.S.C.
§ 1028A(a)(1) because the companies Motley used to submit
the false claims were enrolled in Medicare under her
relatives’ names, not her own. Aggravated identity theft
carries a mandatory, consecutive two-year prison term if
“during and in relation to” a predicate offense, a defendant
“uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of
another person.”
On the eve of trial, the Supreme Court decided Dubin v.
United States, 599 U.S. 110 (2023). Dubin significantly
narrowed § 1028A(a)(1) by holding that a “defendant’s
misuse of another person’s means of identification” must be
“at the crux of what makes the underlying offense criminal,
rather than merely an ancillary feature of a billing
method.” The panel held that Motley’s § 1028A(a)(1)
conviction cannot stand because the government failed to
advance a theory at trial that the use of her relatives’ names

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

USA V. MOTLEY

3

was “critical to the success” of the scheme and that the use
itself was fraudulent or deceitful.

COUNSEL
Kristen A. Williams (argued), Assistant United States
Attorney, Chief, Major Frauds Section; Julian L. Andre,
David H. Chao, Assistant United States Attorneys; Lindsey
G. Dotson, Assistant United States Attorney, Chief,
Criminal Division; Joseph T. McNally, Acting United States
Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney, United States
Department of Justice, Los Angeles, California; for PlaintiffAppellee.
Ellis M. Johnston III (argued), Clarke Johnston Thorp &
Rice PC, San Diego, California, for Defendant-Appellant.

4

USA V. MOTLEY

OPINION
BYBEE, Circuit Judge:
Appellant Tamara Motley was convicted after a jury trial
for defrauding Medicare by submitting millions of dollars in
false and fraudulent claims for durable medical equipment
and related services. Motley’s underlying healthcare fraud
is not in dispute. The sole question is whether Motley also
committed aggravated identity theft under 18 U.S.C.
§ 1028A(a)(1) because the companies Motley used to submit
the false claims were enrolled in Medicare under her
relatives’ names, not her own. Aggravated identity theft
carries a mandatory, consecutive two-year prison term if
“during and in relation to” a predicate offense, a defendant
“uses, without lawful authority, a means of identification of
another person.” 18 U.S.C. § 1028A(a)(1). On the eve of
trial, the Supreme Court decided Dubin v. United States, 599
U.S. 110 (2023).
Dubin significantly narrowed
§ 1028A(a)(1) by holding that a “defendant’s misuse of
another person’s means of identification” must be “at the
crux of what makes the underlying offense criminal, rather
than merely an ancillary feature of a billing method.” Id. at
114. We hold that Motley’s § 1028A(a)(1) conviction
cannot stand because the government failed to advance a
theory at trial that the use of her relatives’ names was
“critical to the success” of the scheme and that the use itself
was fraudulent or deceitful. United States v. Parviz, 131
F.4th 966, 972 (9th Cir. 2025). We vacate that portion of her
sentence and remand to the district court for resentencing.

USA V. MOTLEY

5

I. BACKGROUND
A. Factual Background
Tamara Motley operated Action Medical Equipment and
Supply, Inc. (Action) and Kaja Medical Equipment &
Supply, Inc. (Kaja), two durable medical equipment (DME)
companies enrolled as Medicare providers. Action was
incorporated in the name of her mother, Beverly Muntz,
while Kaja was incorporated in the name of her nephew,
Bryant Brown. Neither played an active role in the
management of the companies, nor was either implicated in
the fraudulent scheme we describe below.
Medicare permits DME supply companies, physicians,
and other healthcare providers to seek reimbursement for
covered services provided to eligible beneficiaries, typically
individuals aged 65 or older or those with disabilities. To
receive reimbursement, a DME supplier must enroll in
Medicare and certify that it will comply with all rules and
regulations, including not submitting false or fraudulent
claims. Once enrolled, Electronic Data Interchange (EDI)
and Electronic Funds Transfer (EFT) agreements allow
suppliers to submit claims electronically and to receive
payment directly to their business bank account. Electronic
claims include, among other things, the beneficiary’s name
and identifier, the billed item or service, the date of service,
and the supplier’s identifying numbers.
With the help of co-defendants Cynthia Marquez, the
office manager, and Juan Murillo, a repair technician,
Motley orchestrated a scheme to exploit the reimbursement
system. The gist of the scheme was simple: Use patient
information to submit claims for DME and related services
for patients who did not need those items and services and
often did not even receive them.

6

USA V. MOTLEY

The scheme worked as follows. Motley recruited and
paid illegal kickbacks to marketers who brought in patients.
Using lists of eligible Medicare beneficiaries, marketers
solicited patients, referred them to Action and Kaja, and
collected their patient information.
Many of these
beneficiaries were elderly or non-English speakers. The
marketers transported beneficiaries not to their regular
physicians, but to complicit physicians who, after cursory
examinations, would write prescriptions for medically
unnecessary DME, including power wheelchairs and
orthotics. At times, the physicians prescribed DME without
even examining the beneficiaries; at other times, they simply
wrote and signed blank prescriptions to be filled in later by
Motley and others. The schemers would then deliver the
medically unnecessary DME, whose value was often falsely
inflated on delivery tickets and claims, to beneficiaries’
homes, where it would collect dust. If no DME was
delivered, delivery tickets were created out of whole cloth.
Motley and others, acting at her direction, would pick up
these prescriptions from the physicians or marketers and,
along with fake delivery tickets they generated, create
documentation supporting the medical necessity and billing
of the DME. Motley then directed Action and Kaja
employees to bill Medicare for the medically unnecessary or
wholly unprovided DME, and to “max out” the amount
Medicare would cover.
When
Medicare
switched
from
lump-sum
reimbursements for power wheelchairs to a less lucrative
monthly rental model in 2011, Motley adjusted her scheme.
She transitioned to billing for unnecessary repair and
replacement services. Drawing on the ready-made patient
base, Action and Kaja employees cold-called prior recipients
of wheelchairs, offered free maintenance or equipment, and

USA V. MOTLEY

7

persuaded beneficiaries to undergo unnecessary repairs or
replacements for their power wheelchairs. To the extent that
any services were provided, Action and Kaja technicians
made only brief house calls, typically doing little or no work
beyond replacing a battery. During the house calls, it was
evident that many beneficiaries did not use the wheelchairs
or kept them outside their homes or in the garage. Even so,
the beneficiaries would sign documents—often in English,
despite speaking only Spanish—falsely stating that
additional repair and replacement services had been
performed. Using this documentation and beneficiary
information, the schemers fabricated documentation to make
it appear as if the services had been requested, were
necessary, and had been performed.
The cash poured in. In total, Action and Kaja submitted
more than $24 million in Medicare claims between
November 2006 and November 2016. Medicare paid about
$13.1 million. To cash out, Motley wrote checks from the
Action and Kaja bank accounts, payable to Marquez,
Murillo, and others, with false memo lines purporting to
cover legitimate business expenses.
B. Indictment
For this scheme, the government charged Motley,
Marquez, and Murillo with one count of conspiracy to
launder monetary instruments, 18 U.S.C. § 1956, and twenty
counts of healthcare fraud, id. § 1347. The healthcare fraud
counts corresponded to distinct fraudulent claims submitted
by Action between February 2013 and July 2014 or by Kaja
between March 2014 and May 2016. Motley and Marquez
were also charged with two counts of aggravated identity
theft, id. § 1028A, based on the use of the names of Beverly
Muntz and Bryant Brown—the owners of Action and Kaja,

8

USA V. MOTLEY

respectively—“during and in relation to” the healthcare
fraud. Both co-defendants pled guilty before Motley’s trial;
Marquez’s plea deal excluded the aggravated identity theft
charge.1 Motley’s first trial ended in a mistrial;2 the second
trial, at issue on appeal, began on June 20, 2023.
C. Trial
During a five-day trial, the government called twentyeight witnesses, including investigators, former Action and
Kaja employees, Medicare patients and their physicians, and
members of the Medicare Compliance Team.
The
government also introduced documentary evidence,
including Action’s and Kaja’s Medicare enrollment
applications, EFT agreements, incorporation documents,
claims records, financial records, and patient files.
Extensive former employee testimony established that
Motley was the effective manager and CEO at Action and
Kaja, responsible for spearheading the fraud scheme. Four
Medicare patients, one patient’s relative, and five physicians
testified that the DME provided was not medically
necessary, and that any repairs or replacement parts provided
years later were likewise unnecessary. For example, one
beneficiary testified that after receiving a power wheelchair
he never used and did not need, two repairmen arrived

1

Marquez pleaded guilty to a two-count superseding indictment, which
charged her with two counts of false statements affecting health care
programs in violation of 18 U.S.C. § 1035(a)(2). Murillo pleaded guilty
to conspiracy to launder monetary instruments in violation of 18 U.S.C.
§ 1956(h).
2

A jury trial was held from February 7 to February 16, 2023. Due to a
dangerous and uncooperative juror, a hung jury resulted, and the district
court declared a mistrial.

USA V. MOTLEY

9

unannounced, and he signed several forms he did not
understand.
The evidence of the underlying fraud scheme and
Motley’s central role in it is not disputed on appeal. At trial,
the government sought to support the § 1028A(a)(1) charge
through Motley’s use of the names of Muntz, her mother,
and Brown, her nephew.
A Medicare expert testified that to obtain a Medicare
provider number and submit claims, the named owners must
agree to comply with Medicare rules and regulations. The
named owners—here, Muntz and Brown—certified, among
other things, that they would “not submit claims for payment
to Medicare knowing they were false or fraudulent or with
deliberate ignorance or reckless disregard of their truth or
falsity.” The expert further explained that Medicare operates
largely on an “honor system” and relies on provider numbers
to match claims with registered providers.
Although Motley effectively managed Action and Kaja,
and Muntz and Brown had minimal involvement, the
Medicare enrollment paperwork listed only Muntz and
Brown as having any official ownership or managerial roles
in the companies. Neither enrollment application identified
Motley, nor did she appear in any supplemental applications
updating ownership and managerial information.
Documentary evidence established that Muntz
incorporated Action in April 2006, and Brown incorporated
Kaja in March 2011. Both Muntz and Brown had signed
EFT authorization agreements, directing Medicare’s
reimbursements to business bank accounts, both of which
listed Motley as an authorized signatory. Finally, powers of
attorney showed that Muntz and Brown had granted Motley
full authority to run the companies.

10

USA V. MOTLEY

In short, the government’s trial evidence supporting the
aggravated identity theft count rested on the fact that
although Action and Kaja were legally owned, incorporated
by, and enrolled in Medicare through Muntz and Brown,
Motley effectively ran the companies. The government also
emphasized that both powers of attorney and Medicare
enrollment agreements require lawful use. There was no
evidence before the jury, however, that Motley lacked
permission or authorization from Muntz or Brown to submit
claims or operate the companies; no evidence that Motley,
rather than Muntz or Brown, was responsible for enrollment;
no evidence as to why the companies were enrolled under
her relatives’ names; and no evidence that Motley could not
have enrolled in her own name or needed their names to
submit claims.
D. Jury Verdict and Sentence
The jury convicted Motley on all counts. The district
court sentenced Motley to 180 months in custody, including
24 consecutive months, the statutory minimum, on the
aggravated identity theft counts. The court also ordered
Motley to pay restitution of $13,097,237.10 to Medicare and
$10,185.70 to Medi-Cal. Motley timely appealed her
convictions on the aggravated identity theft counts only.
II. DISCUSSION
Motley submits that the government presented
insufficient evidence to show that the use of her relatives’
names was at the “crux” of the underlying healthcare fraud.
We agree.
A. Standard of Review
The parties dispute the standard of review for this appeal.
A Rule 29 sufficiency-of-the-evidence claim is typically

USA V. MOTLEY

11

reviewed de novo. United States v. Grovo, 826 F.3d 1207,
1213 (9th Cir. 2016); United States v. Sullivan, 522 F.3d
967, 974 (9th Cir. 2008) (per curiam). But a Rule 29 motion
that is not made or not properly preserved is reviewed for
plain error. United States v. Pelisamen, 641 F.3d 399, 409
& n.6 (9th Cir. 2011). Generally, a Rule 29 motion made at
the close of the government’s evidence must be renewed if
the defense presents additional evidence, or else plain-error
review applies. Id. at 409 n.6. But we have also applied de
novo review where the defendant moves for acquittal at the
close of the government’s evidence and does not renew the
motion after presenting additional evidence. United States
v. Stewart, 420 F.3d 1007, 1012, 1014 (9th Cir. 2005);
United States v. Carranza, 289 F.3d 634, 641 (9th Cir.
2002). In United States v. Esquivel-Ortega, 484 F.3d 1221
(9th Cir. 2007), we established a futility exception to the
renewal requirement. There, after moving for judgment of
acquittal at the close of the government’s case, the defendant
introduced minimal additional evidence, including a voice
exemplar and an audio tape, which were played for the jury.
Id. at 1224. The defense did not then renew the motion at
the close of all evidence; even so, we applied de novo review
because: “Given the nature of the evidence, and the fact that
the court had denied Esquivel’s motion for acquittal only a
few moments earlier, requiring Esquivel to renew his motion
at that point would have been ‘an empty ritual.’” Id. at 1225
(citation omitted).
Here, after the government rested its case on the final day
of trial, defense counsel moved for a judgment of acquittal
and confirmed that the record reflected the Rule 29 motion.
Defense counsel then presented a final witness related to
handwriting analysis. Defense counsel did not renew its
motion for judgment of acquittal after its last witness. A

12

USA V. MOTLEY

renewed motion would have been the better practice,
eliminating any question whether the motion was preserved.
Nonetheless, as in Esquivel-Ortega, we think Motley did
enough to preserve her objection. After making the Rule 29
motion, the defense’s additional evidence was minor and
almost certainly would not have altered the district court’s
assessment of the sufficiency of the evidence. Because “it
would have been futile for” Motley “to renew h[er] motion
following” the final testimony, we review de novo. Id. “In
any event, the distinction is largely academic, given that,
whether review is de novo or for plain error, we must give
great deference to the jury verdict and ‘must affirm if any
rational trier of fact could have found the evidence
sufficient.’” Pelisamen, 641 F.3d 409 n.6 (citation omitted).
In this context, plain error review is only “theoretically more
stringent than the standard for a preserved claim.” United
States v. Flyer, 633 F.3d 911, 917 (9th Cir. 2011) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
Review of a sufficiency-of-the-evidence challenge
requires us “to determine whether ‘after viewing the
evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, any
rational trier of fact could have found the essential elements
of the crime beyond a reasonable doubt.’” United States v.
Nevils, 598 F.3d 1158, 1163–64 (9th Cir. 2010) (en banc)
(quoting Jackson v. Virginia, 443 U.S. 307, 319 (1979)). To
the extent any questions of statutory interpretation are
disguised as sufficiency-of-the-evidence arguments, we
review them de novo. United States v. Hong, 938 F.3d 1040,
1050 (9th Cir. 2019); United States v. Osuna-Alvarez, 788
F.3d 1183, 1185 (9th Cir. 2015) (per curiam).

USA V. MOTLEY

13

B. Section 1028A(a)(1) and Dubin’s Crux Test
The aggravated identity theft statute provides that
“[w]hoever, during and in relation to” certain enumerated
felonies, “knowingly transfers, possesses, or uses, without
lawful authority, a means of identification of another person
shall, in addition to the punishment provided for such felony,
be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of 2 years.” 18
U.S.C. § 1028A(a)(1). Healthcare fraud—for which Motley
was convicted—is a qualifying predicate felony. See id.
§ 1028A(c)(4). The only element of the § 1028A(a)(1)
offense challenged on appeal is whether, in light of Dubin,
Motley “use[d]” her relatives’ names (a means of
identification) “during and in relation to” her healthcare
fraud.
The Supreme Court in Dubin established a new operative
test for § 1028A(a)(1). 599 U.S. at 114. Recognizing that
§ 1028A(a)(1)’s broad statutory language could sweep in
“virtually all cases where a defendant employs a means of
identification to facilitate a crime,” the Supreme Court
sought to cabin such expansive readings. Id. at 127. The
defendant, David Dubin, submitted falsely elevated claims
for reimbursement to Medicaid by overstating the
qualifications of an employee who performed psychological
testing on patients. Id. at 114. The government charged
Dubin not only with healthcare fraud, 18 U.S.C. § 1347, but
also with aggravated identity theft, § 1028A(a)(1), because
the fraudulent bills included patients’ names and Medicaid
reimbursement numbers. Id. at 114–15. The issue before
the Court was whether Dubin “used” his patients’ means of
identification “during and in relation to” his healthcare
fraud. Id. at 116–17.

14

USA V. MOTLEY

1. Dubin’s Statutory and Contextual Analysis
Dubin started with the statute’s text. Recognizing the
elasticity of the terms “use” and “in relation to,” the Court
noted that “[r]esort to context” would be “especially
necessary” to determine their proper scope. Id. at 119. The
Court first looked to the statute’s title: “Aggravated identity
theft.” Id. at 120. The title, the Court observed, was not only
“far more targeted” than neighboring statutes but was also
set apart from the “identity fraud” statute. Id. at 121. From
these contextual clues, the Court concluded that § 1028A
must be “focused on identity theft specifically, rather than
all fraud involving means of identification.” Id. The
ordinary understanding of “identity theft,” not “gardenvariety overbilling,” lies “at the core of § 1028A.” Id. at 122.
The Court then applied the interpretative canon noscitur
a sociis to § 1028A(a)(1)’s trio of operative verbs—
“transfers,” “possesses,” and “uses.” See id. at 126.
“Because ‘transfer’ and ‘possess’ channel ordinary identity
theft . . . ‘uses’ should be read in a similar manner . . . .” Id.
Drawing from dictionaries, the Court observed that “identity
theft covers both when ‘someone steals personal information
about and belonging to another . . . and uses the information
to deceive others.’” Id. (second emphasis added) (quoting
Identity theft, Black’s Law Dictionary 894 (11th ed. 2019)).
The three verbs “capture various aspects of ‘classic identity
theft.’” Id. (citation omitted). “Possess” and “transfer”
connote theft, while “use” captures a different aspect of
classic identity theft: that “involving fraud or deceit about
identity.” Id.
Finally, the Court sought guidance from § 1028A(a)(1)’s
list of predicate offenses. Id. at 127–29. Some predicate
crimes lack any statutory minimum, whereas § 1028A(a)(1)

USA V. MOTLEY

15

carries a particularly harsh two-year minimum. Id. at 127.
The government’s “boundless reading” risked “collaps[ing]
the enhancement into the enhanced.” Id. at 128. Because
almost any healthcare fraud involves some form of using
another’s name, the Court cautioned against sweeping all
these into § 1028A(a)(1) “independent of whether the name
itself had anything to do with the fraudulent aspect of the
offense.” Id. Instead, § 1028A(a)(1) “targets situations
where the means of identification itself plays a key role—
one that warrants a 2-year mandatory minimum.” Id. at 129
(emphasis added).
Based on its contextual and statutory analysis, the Court
concluded that to “use” another person’s means of
identification “during and in relation to” a predicate offense
under § 1028A(a)(1), a “defendant’s misuse of another
person’s means of identification” must be “at the crux of
what makes the underlying offense criminal, rather than
merely an ancillary feature of a billing method.” Id. at 114.
Dubin failed to meet this bar through the inclusion of a
patient’s name on a Medicare reimbursement claim because
that use “was not at the crux of what made the underlying
overbilling fraudulent.” Id. at 132. Instead, “[t]he crux of
the healthcare fraud was a misrepresentation about the
qualifications of petitioner’s employee” and “[t]he patient’s
name was an ancillary feature of the billing method
employed.” Id.
Two requirements animate Dubin’s crux test. First,
Dubin equates the statutory term “use” with “misuse.” Id. at
114. This captures the Court’s repeated requirement that the
“use” itself be “fraudulent” or “deceitful.” See, e.g., id. at
123, 126, 132. “When the underlying crime involves fraud
or deceit,” the Court specified, the means of identification
must be used “specifically in a fraudulent or deceitful

16

USA V. MOTLEY

manner.” Id. at 117 (summarizing the petitioner’s “more
targeted reading”). The Court likewise maintained that
“identity theft is committed when a defendant uses the
means of identification itself to defraud or deceive.” Id. at
123 (emphasis added). Read together, the Court’s warning
against collapsing § 1028A(a)(1)’s enhancement into the
predicate offense and its insistence that the use itself be
fraudulent or deceitful make clear that the fraudulent or
deceitful aspect of the identity use must be distinct from—
and not duplicative of—the fraud in the underlying
healthcare crime. The use of identifiers, in other words,
must stand on its own as fraudulent or deceitful; it cannot be
so considered simply because it is part of a broader
fraudulent scheme. Otherwise, the enhancement would fail
to meaningfully distinguish the aggravated-identity-theft
charge.
Second, for this misuse to be “at the crux of the
criminality,” the means of identification specifically must be
a “key mover” that carries out the fraud. Id. at 123. In causal
terms, there must be “more than a causal relationship, such
as ‘facilitation’ of the offense or being a but-for cause of its
‘success.’” Id. at 131 (citation omitted). Although the Court
did not explicitly state how strong of a causal nexus is
required for § 1028A(a)(1) liability to attach, we have
acknowledged that the misuse of identity must be “critical to
the success” of the underlying fraud. Parviz, 131 F.4th at
972.
2. Caselaw Pre-Dubin
Before Dubin, our caselaw interpreting § 1028A(a)(1)
pulled in two directions; Dubin disapproved of one in favor
of the other. We first addressed the term “use” in
§ 1028A(a)(1) in United States v. Hong, 938 F.3d 1040 (9th

USA V. MOTLEY

17

Cir. 2019). There, the defendant falsely claimed his massage
treatments as Medicare-eligible physical therapy. Id. at
1043. We adopted the First and Sixth Circuit’s “narrow[]
constru[ction]” of “use” in United States v. Berroa, 856 F.3d
141 (1st Cir. 2017) and United States v. Medlock, 792 F.3d
700 (6th Cir. 2015). Hong, 938 F.3d at 1050. In Berroa, the
First Circuit held that physicians with fraudulent licenses
who filled prescriptions had not “used” the patients’
identities under § 1028A(a)(1) because they had not
“attempt[ed] to pass themselves off as the patients.” Berroa,
856 F.3d at 156. In Medlock, the Sixth Circuit established a
similar rule. An ambulance service mischaracterized the
medical necessity of stretchers on Medicare claims to obtain
reimbursement. 792 F.3d at 703–04. The Sixth Circuit
reversed the § 1028A(a)(1) convictions, finding that the
defendants had not “use[d]” the names and Medicare
identification numbers of beneficiaries by including them on
the fraudulent claims. Id. at 708, 712. The defendants did
not “attempt to pass themselves off as anyone other than
themselves” and had only “misrepresented how and why the
beneficiaries were transported.” Id. at 707.
Hong drew from the First Circuit’s legislative-history
analysis showing that identity theft always “involved the
defendant’s use of personal information to pass him or
herself off as another person, or the transfer of such
information to a third party for use in a similar manner.” 938
F.3d at 1051 (quoting Berroa, 856 F.3d at 156). We then
adopted the First Circuit’s rule that “use” under
§ 1028A(a)(1) “require[s] that the defendant attempt to pass
him or herself off as another person or purport to take some
other action on another person’s behalf.” Hong, 938 F.3d at
1051 (quoting Berroa, 856 F.3d at 156). Applying that rule
to the facts in Hong, we held that because “[n]either Hong

18

USA V. MOTLEY

nor the physical therapists ‘attempt[ed] to pass themselves
off as the patients,’” “Hong did not ‘use’ the patients’
identities within the meaning of the aggravated identity theft
statute.” 938 F.3d at 1051 (quoting Berroa, 856 F.3d at
156); see also id. at 1051 n.8 (noting that our sister circuits
have affirmed § 1028A(a)(1) convictions of defendants that
“purport[ed] to take some other action on another person’s
behalf through impersonation or forgery” (alteration in
original) (quotation marks and citations omitted)).
Later that term, we applied Hong’s newly articulated
standard in United States v. Gagarin, 950 F.3d 596 (9th Cir.
2020). The defendant had “purported to take action on
behalf of her cousin” by forging her cousin’s signature to
open a fraudulent life insurance policy as part of a scheme to
collect advances. Id. at 603. We upheld the § 1028A(a)(1)
conviction and distinguished the facts from Hong: By
submitting the insurance application in her cousin’s name,
the defendant had “‘attempt[ed] to pass [herself] off’ as her
cousin through forgery and impersonation.” Id. at 604
(alteration in original) (quoting Hong, 938 F.3d at 1051).
The defendant’s use of the signature “obscure[ed] her own
role in the fraudulent application” and “was thus central to
the fraud.” Id.
Finally, in yet a third case that term, we confronted facts
between Hong and Gagarin; the middle path we carved
broadened Hong’s targeted rule. United States v. Harris,
983 F.3d 1125 (9th Cir. 2020). In Harris, the defendant
submitted fraudulent claims to TRICARE. Id. at 1126. The
defendant signed the claims in her own name but listed a
speech pathologist as the provider even though no services
were performed, and the pathologist had not authorized her
to do so. Id. We found that neither Hong nor Gagarin
“directly control[led] the outcome here”; instead, we

USA V. MOTLEY

19

concluded that the defendant’s actions fell within the ambit
of § 1028A(a)(1) even though she “did not try to pass herself
off as [the speech pathologist] through forgery or
impersonation.” Id. at 1127. To reach beyond Hong’s rule,
we reasoned that “the statutory text does not suggest that
‘use’ ‘refers only to assuming an identity or passing oneself
off as a particular person.’” Id. at 1128 (quoting United
States v. Michael, 882 F.3d 624, 627 (6th Cir. 2018)).
Instead, “[t]he salient point is whether the defendant used the
means of identification to further or facilitate the health care
fraud.” Id. (quoting Michael, 882 F.3d at 628) (internal
quotation marks omitted).
The broadened standard that Harris adopted—that to
“use” means to “further or facilitate the health care fraud”—
was the government’s position that the Supreme Court
rejected in Dubin. See Dubin, 599 U.S. at 117, 131 (noting
the government’s position as “use of [a] means of
identification [that] ‘facilitates or furthers’ the predicate
offense in some way” and holding that “being at the crux of
the criminality requires more than . . . ‘facilitation’ of the
offense”); see also id. at 118 (characterizing the
government’s reading as “near limitless” and announcing “a
narrower reading”). Thus, Dubin requires us to abandon the
more sweeping standard we relied on in Harris.
At the same time that Dubin rejected the broad
furthering-or-facilitating standard, it approved of “more
restrained readings” and cited our decision in Hong as one
example. See id. at 116 & n.2. Thus, Hong’s original rule—
that “use” entails purporting “to pass [oneself] off as another
person” or “tak[ing] some other action on another person’s
behalf through impersonation or forgery”—still stands.
Hong, 938 F.3d at 1051 & n.8 (quotation marks and citation
omitted). We will therefore rely on Hong rather than Harris.

20

USA V. MOTLEY

3. Caselaw Post-Dubin
We have interpreted and applied Dubin’s test in two
published decisions. First, in United States v. Ovsepian, 113
F.4th 1193 (9th Cir. 2024), we applied Dubin’s “crux” test
to a “possession” theory § 1028A charge. Id. at 1208. The
defendant engaged in a “prescription mill” conspiracy that
generated thousands of prescriptions for expensive antipsychotic medications. Id. at 1197. With the help of
complicit doctors and pharmacists writing and filling scripts,
conspirators billed Medi-Cal and Medicare for fraudulent
prescriptions before diverting the drugs to the black market
for resale to the pharmacies. Id. at 1197–98. The
government’s narrow argument on appeal was that
§ 1028A(a)(1) liability attached because the defendant had
retained and possessed a patient’s file onsite at the clinic “so
that they would appear to be compliant with the rules” in
case of an audit. Id. at 1207. We held that although
possessing the patient’s means of identification might have
facilitated the scheme by giving the medical clinic an “air of
legitimacy” sufficient to pass an audit, under Dubin’s “crux”
test, “merely facilitating a predicate offense is not enough.”
Id. at 1207–08; see also id. at 1208 (observing that retaining
a “patient file to protect against a possible audit did not play
a ‘key’ or ‘integral’ role in the conspiracy to commit
healthcare fraud”).
We then addressed a § 1028A(a)(1) “use” theory in
Parviz, 131 F.4th 966. The defendant was convicted of
passport fraud and aggravated identity theft after she
submitted a fraudulent passport application on behalf of her
minor daughter, over whom she had no parental rights. Id.
at 968–70. To circumvent the requirement that her daughter
appear in person for the application, the defendant submitted
a false letter with a forged signature from a nurse practitioner

USA V. MOTLEY

21

describing the need for a medical exemption. Id. at 968.
We upheld the conviction on appeal, finding that the
defendant’s actions constituted an “impersonating use” of
the identifying information and “involved fraud as to ‘who’
was making the false representations in the letter.” Id. at
972. We also held that a rational juror could find that the use
of the nurse’s name, registered nursing number, and
signature on the letter “was central to the fraudulent letter’s
objective of establishing a medical excuse,” which was in
turn “critical to the success of the fraudulent passport
application.” Id. at 971–72. Thus, the misuse of the nurse
practitioner’s identity lay at the crux because the defendant
could not otherwise have presented a successful medical
exemption, which was necessary for her fraudulent scheme.
***
The throughline that emerges is that when the predicate
offense involves fraud or deceit, Dubin requires that the
manner through which the underlying offense is carried out
also involve the “fraudulent or deceitful” use of another’s
means of identification. Dubin held that the “fraudulent or
deceitful” use of another’s identification must be in addition
to, and not duplicative of, the fraud or deception of the
underlying crime; the use of another’s identity cannot just
form part of (or be used in) the scheme, as this is inevitable
in almost all healthcare fraud. Instead, a “fraudulent or
deceitful” use requires the means of identification itself to be
used as the vehicle of misrepresentation in the predicate
offense. After all, Dubin directed courts to focus on
“offenses built around what the defendant does with the
means of identification in particular.” 599 U.S. at 122.
We will observe here that it is easy to conflate the fraud
and deception in the underlying scheme with the fraudulent

22

USA V. MOTLEY

and deceitful misuse of another’s identity.
So a
counterfactual may help us separate the strands of ordinary
fraud from a fraudulent use of another’s identity: If, after
removing the underlying predicate criminal behavior from
the equation, the use of the means of identification is still
considered fraudulent or deceitful, then the use stands on its
own as a fraudulent or deceitful use. If, however, the use of
the means of identification, considered apart from the
predicate offense, is no longer fraudulent or deceptive, then
the use falls outside the ambit of § 1028A(a)(1) because any
fraud or deceit was merely residual to the fraud and deceit
inherent in the predicate crime.
Let’s consider how this mode of analysis worked in
Dubin and our pre- and post-Dubin cases. In Dubin, without
the predicate criminal conduct of inflating Medicare claims
by misrepresenting the psychologist’s qualifications, there is
nothing wrong with using real patients’ identifiers on claims;
the overall scheme is Medicare fraud, but there has been no
fraudulent use of the patients’ names. Similarly, in
Ovsepian, absent the fraudulent prescription mill, keeping a
patient’s records in an onsite file in case of an audit is not
fraudulent or deceitful. The same is true in Hong: without
the fraud of the predicate healthcare offense—
misrepresenting massages as medically necessary physical
therapy—the inclusion of a patient’s identifiers on Medicare
claims is not fraudulent or deceitful. In Dubin, Ovsepian,
and Hong, the Supreme Court and we reversed the
aggravated identity theft enhancement. By contrast, in
Parviz, apart from the criminal act of applying for a
fraudulent passport, forging a medical professional’s
signature on a false letter is still a fraudulent and deceptive
use of another’s identity. Likewise, in Gagarin, even apart
from the criminal scheme to receive bonuses on fraudulent

USA V. MOTLEY

23

life insurance policies, the defendant pretended to be her
cousin by forging her signature and submitting a life
insurance policy application in her name, which constitutes
a separate form of fraud. In both of these cases, we affirmed
the aggravated identity theft enhancement.
In short, the predicate offense must be accomplished
through the deployment of a fraudulent or deceptive use of
means of identification—most often by impersonating or
passing oneself off as someone else. And the fraudulent
aspect of using the means of identification must stand on its
own, separate from the fraud of the underlying crime.
We turn to whether the government presented sufficient
evidence here.
C. The Government’s Theories
At trial, the government presented several theories as to
how Motley’s use of her relatives’ names was at the crux of
the underlying healthcare fraud. We address each in turn.
1. Enablement Theory
The government’s first theory is that Motley’s use of her
relatives’ names was at the crux because it enabled her to bill
Medicare and receive payments.
According to the
government, Medicare “trusted” in the representations from
Muntz and Brown “about who owned and controlled the
companies and in the certifications those individuals
purportedly made.”
To support this theory, the government presented
testimony from a Medicare expert that the owner of a
medical supply company must be listed on its enrollment
application.
The enrollment applications request
information about anyone with ownership or management

24

USA V. MOTLEY

interests in the company and require an authorized official to
certify compliance with Medicare regulations.
The
government then introduced Action’s and Kaja’s Medicare
enrollment applications. Action’s application, dated July 10,
2006, listed Muntz as the owner and authorized official.
Kaja’s application, dated November 7, 2012, listed Brown
as the owner, CEO, and authorized official. Muntz and
Brown also signed the applications, indicating their intent to
ensure that the provider complies with “all applicable
statutes, regulations, and program instructions.” 42 C.F.R.
§ 424.510(d)(3). Neither application identified Motley.
But this evidence, even viewed in the light most
favorable to the prosecution, fails to establish § 1028A(a)(1)
liability under Dubin. First, the government did not present
evidence that this omission somehow enabled the fraud.
Nothing was offered at trial to suggest that Motley was
ineligible to register as a provider. To be sure, the claims
were approved because they came from providers enrolled
in Medicare, but the government failed to show that Muntz’s
and Brown’s specific identities had any bearing on the
scheme, much less that they were used in a fraudulent or
deceitful manner. In other words, Motley could have signed
the enrollment forms herself and still “successfully”
completed the fraud scheme.
No evidence showed that Muntz’s and Brown’s names
on the enrollment applications played any role in convincing
Medicare to accept the fraudulent claims. In fact, the
electronic claims in evidence include only the provider
numbers linked to Action and Kaja, not the names of Muntz
or Brown. The government offered no evidence at trial that
Motley would have been unable to obtain a provider number

USA V. MOTLEY

25

on her own or that Medicare would have rejected the claims
if the companies had been enrolled under Motley’s name. 3
Parviz is an illustrative comparison. 131 F.4th 966. As
Parviz was not a medical professional, she could not have
written the fraudulent medical excuse without using
someone else’s means of identification. Id. at 972 (noting
that Parviz “attach[ed] his name and medical position to the
particular false assertions that were critical to the success of
the fraudulent passport application”). A government
employee testified that he approved the passport application
specifically because he believed the note was written by a
licensed medical professional on the letterhead of a
legitimate medical facility. Id. at 971. In stark contrast, the
jury in this case heard nothing suggesting that Motley
needed to operate through companies incorporated and
enrolled in someone else’s name to carry out the fraud.
Furthermore, in Parviz, the government showed that the
particular identity used—a licensed medical professional
with no relation to the child—was both a key mover and
critical to the crime’s success. Here, by contrast, no
government witness testified that Motley’s claims were
accepted because of the enroller’s identity—specifically,
that it was Muntz’s and Brown’s names and not Motley’s on
the forms that opened the door for the claims’ approval. And
because the jury was not presented with any evidence about
how Medicare would have reacted had Motley’s name been
3

In its answering brief on appeal, the government contends that Motley
may have been ineligible to enroll the companies as Medicare providers
herself due to her criminal record. But these past convictions were not
presented at trial, and it is unclear whether they would have barred
Motley from applying herself. On appeal, we cannot affirm a criminal
conviction on the basis of a theory not presented to the jury. Chiarella
v. United States, 445 U.S. 222, 236 (1980).

26

USA V. MOTLEY

on the enrollment documents instead, the government did
not show that the use of Muntz’s and Brown’s names was
“critical to the success.” Id. at 972.
The Medicare expert added that providers must submit
supplemental enrollment applications whenever there is new
“information about who owns or controls or manages the
business.”
Given Motley’s managerial role in the
companies, it may have violated Medicare regulations to
omit her, but this does not establish a fraudulent or deceitful
“use” under Dubin. The government presented no evidence
that the omission was purposeful or fraudulent or that it
played a critical role in the fraud. Thus, even with the
omission, Motley could have run Action and Kaja in an
honest fashion; any misdirection in who ran Action and Kaja
was not integral to the fraudulent scheme she perpetrated on
Medicare. Further, even if we thought the omission was
relevant, as the original enrollers and authorized officials, it
was Muntz and Brown—not Motley—who were responsible
for updating the enrollment applications. See 42 C.F.R.
§ 424.510(d)(3)(ii) (“[T]he only acceptable signature on the
enrollment application to report updates or changes to the
enrollment information is that of the authorized official
currently on file with Medicare.”).
2. Concealment Theory
The government’s next theory at trial was that the use of
her relatives’ names was at the crux of the fraud by allowing
Motley to conceal her involvement. In closing argument to
the jury, the prosecutor stated: “[Motley] hid behind her
relatives on the Medicare enrollment documentation from
the very start. She tried to put them out front as the
responsible parties, the ones that Medicare would come
looking for if it had any question about what was going or

USA V. MOTLEY

27

any problems with what was going on at Action and
Kaja . . . .” But this theory fails on multiple fronts.
There was no evidence before the jury that Motley’s use
of her relatives’ names concealed her role or that she
intended it to. First, it was no secret that Motley controlled
the companies. Multiple government witnesses, including
investigators, testified that Motley would hold herself out as
the “manager in charge” or the “owner.” At trial, Special
Agent Rochelle Wong testified that she had never
interviewed Muntz and had no intention to do so, as it was
apparent who was in charge. The jury saw a business
agreement between Kaja and Motley, as well as
organizational charts listing Motley as holding various
officer positions. In short, if Motley sought to conceal her
ties to the companies, she failed, and she did not do so by
using her relatives’ names.
The strongest trial evidence for the concealment theory
was a former employee’s testimony that during a 2015 audit
of Kaja, co-schemer Marquez instructed her to characterize
both Motley and her as “consultants.” But even viewing this
evidence in the light most favorable to the prosecution, it
merely reveals that Marquez—not Motley—wanted to
minimize their roles. More importantly, because the
employee was not instructed to shift blame to Muntz and
Brown, any attempted concealment was unrelated to the use
of their names. Therefore, no rational juror could find that
the fact that Motley ran Action and Kaja was at the crux of
the fraud.
The government also contended that Motley’s use of her
relatives’ names concealed that the same person controlled
both companies. But this theory also fails. First, it is unclear
how or why hiding the two companies’ joint operation had

28

USA V. MOTLEY

anything to do with enabling the ongoing fraud. Second,
trial evidence shows that this joint ownership was no secret.
At trial, Agent Wong testified that she knew that “some
of . . . the employees were shared between Action and Kaja.”
Even if the government showed that the use concealed
Motley’s role from the government, the concealment theory
fails for a more fundamental reason: Motley’s use of
Muntz’s and Brown’s names was not itself deceptive toward
Medicare. The government’s trial evidence—Action’s and
Kaja’s enrollment applications and incorporation
documents—do not support the claim that Motley’s use was
“in a manner that is fraudulent or deceptive.” Dubin, 599
U.S. at 132. First, although the Medicare enrollment
applications and supplemental enrollment forms listed only
Muntz and Brown, the articles of incorporation showed that
Action and Kaja were incorporated by, and legally owned
by, Muntz and Brown, not by Motley. As the legal owners,
Muntz and Brown—not Motley—were required to be listed
on the enrollment applications.
See 42 C.F.R.
§ 424.510(d)(3)(ii). And given that ownership, it is not
unusual that they certified compliance with Medicare’s
rules. It is also not unusual—and certainly not illegal—that
Motley ran a company owned by a relative.
Second, the government introduced only the enrollment
applications; it offered no evidence that Motley personally
submitted or signed them on behalf of Muntz or Brown.
Without evidence that Motley, rather than Muntz and
Brown, incorporated the companies or enrolled them in
Medicare, Motley’s “use” cannot be premised on the
enrollment paperwork and extends, at most, to the
submission of fraudulent claims through the companies. But
Muntz’s and Brown’s names do not even appear on the

USA V. MOTLEY

29

fraudulent claims; only Action’s and Kaja’s provider
numbers do.
Third, the fact that Motley submitted claims on behalf of
the companies, when viewed in isolation, was not deceptive.
Medicare does not require the person who enrolls the
provider to be the person who submits electronic claims.
The jury saw the Medicare EDI enrollment agreements
signed by Brown and Muntz stating that the provider “will
be responsible for all Medicare claims submitted . . . by
itself, its employees, or its agents.” (emphasis added). As
an employee of Action and Kaja, Motley was authorized to
submit claims on behalf of the companies, even if her name
was not on the enrollment application. Because it was
perfectly lawful, ordinary, and expected that she, as an
employee, submit claims for the companies, Motley did not
“purport[] to take some . . . action on another person’s behalf
through impersonation or forgery.” Hong, 938 F.3d at 1051
& n.8 (citation and quotation marks omitted). Thus,
Motley’s use of her relatives’ names in conjunction with the
submission of claims did not stand on its own as fraudulent
or deceptive toward Medicare. The claims themselves were,
of course, fraudulent or deceptive, but the fraud had nothing
to do with Brown’s and Muntz’s names.
The government also failed to show that Motley’s use of
her relatives’ identities was fraudulent or deceptive toward
Muntz and Brown. No evidence was presented that Motley
had stolen or taken them without permission, or that she was
“concealing” the use of her relatives’ identities from them.
In fact, the trial evidence suggested that Muntz and Brown
knew that Motley was operating the companies in their
names: Both had executed powers of attorney authorizing
Motley to act on their behalf. Indeed, the government’s
theory at trial was that the fraudulent or deceitful aspect of

30

USA V. MOTLEY

Motley’s use derived from a use within an unlawful scheme,
not that it was unauthorized by Muntz or Brown. The
prosecutor stated to the jury that the powers of attorney
“permit[] defendant to participate in any legal business of
any sort. But, . . . this business was anything but legal.”
Motley certainly used Muntz’s and Brown’s companies to
facilitate illegal Medicare fraud, but she did not steal their
identities or use them without permission. As explained
above, mere use of another’s identity within an unlawful
scheme—without more—is not a use “in a manner that is
fraudulent or deceptive” under Dubin. 599 U.S. at 132. By
failing to show that the use “involv[ed] fraud or deceit about
identity,” id. at 126, independent of the underlying scheme,
the government’s theory “collapses the enhancement into the
enhanced,” id. at 128. The government’s theory in this case
would permit a nearly “limitless” reading of § 1028A, which
is precisely the reading the Supreme Court rejected in Dubin.
See id. at 118.
And even if Muntz and Brown were unaware of Motley’s
criminal use of their companies, their grievance would be
that she betrayed their trust and their companies, not that she
stole their identities. The Supreme Court cautioned that the
two-year mandatory sentence is meant for a “particularly
serious form of identity theft” and that § 1028A(a)(1) should
not be read in a manner that turns the “core” of this serious
identity theft offense “into something the ordinary user of
the English language would not consider identity theft at
all.” Id. at 124. On these facts, a reasonable person may find
it unseemly that Motley mismanaged her relatives’
companies, but they would not label Motley’s conduct as
“identity theft.” This is especially true considering Muntz
and Brown had executed powers of attorney to Motley. The
government’s theory to the contrary would turn nearly every

USA V. MOTLEY

31

employee who commits fraud in the course of their
employment into an aggravated identity thief. The Supreme
Court plainly rejected “such a boundless interpretation.” Id.
at 114.
3. Audit Theory
Finally, the government’s “audit” theory fares no better.
As the government sees it, Medicare conducts regular
unannounced visits to the facilities of enrolled providers, and
having Action and Kaja enrolled in another’s name
permitted Motley to pass these inspections and continue the
fraud. At closing, the prosecutor contended that the use of
Muntz’s and Brown’s names played “a central role in
passing inspections that let the defendant’s companies keep
billing and getting paid.”
But this theory is unsupported by the evidence and
foreclosed by the law. On this record, no rational juror could
find that Motley fraudulently or deceptively used her
relatives’ names to pass inspections. At trial, the compliance
officers testified to receiving and reviewing documents,
personnel charts, and training materials during visits. When
compliance officers or other investigators visited Action and
Kaja, Motley conducted the exit interviews, signed the
compliance forms, and provided the records. During these
visits, Motley was perfectly honest regarding the
absenteeism of owners Muntz and Brown. For example, on
one occasion, she told a compliance officer that although she
was the manager in charge, her nephew was the owner but
“travels and does not come into the business during the
week.”
There was no evidence that this ownership structure
allowed, or even facilitated, Action and Kaja to pass
inspections. To the contrary, the record suggests that

32

USA V. MOTLEY

Motley’s transparency about the idiosyncratic bipartite
ownership–control structure and the titular owners’ minimal
involvement and absence during inspections only raised
suspicions, contributing to Kaja’s failing score in 2016.
Motley indeed deceived compliance officers into giving
passing scores in 2010 and 2012, but this had nothing to do
with the use of Muntz’s and Brown’s names. Instead, the
record suggests the fraud went undetected for as long as it
did due to the elaborate ghost apparatus, including a
compliant procedures and policies manual; patient and
personnel files; delivery logs maintained and provided to
compliance officers; and even employees pretending to be
patients on follow-up phone calls to compliance officers.
Even if a rational juror could find that Motley’s use of
her relatives’ names helped pass inspections, that theory is
foreclosed by the law. In Ovsepian, we rejected a nearly
identical legal argument from the government. There, the
defendant maintained a copy of a patient’s identifying
information without authorization in a “patient file onsite so
that they would appear to be compliant with the rules in the
event [the company] was audited.” 113 F.4th at 1207. We
held that even though keeping the patient’s file “could have,
and perhaps did, allow the conspiracy to continue
undetected,” it was not “at the ‘crux’ of the conspiracy to
commit healthcare fraud.” Id. at 1207–08. We found that
possessing the file “onsite may have lent” “the air of
legitimacy” and helped “to survive an audit,” but it was
ancillary to the healthcare fraud conspiracy because it
“merely facilitated its commission.” Id. at 1208. Motley’s
case is even weaker because there is no evidence that
identifying Brown and Muntz on the enrollment forms
helped the companies pass inspections.

USA V. MOTLEY

33

D. The Trial Record Fails to Establish that Motley’s Use
Was at the Crux.
On this record, no rational juror could find that Motley’s
use of Muntz’s and Brown’s names was “at the crux” of the
healthcare fraud. Viewed in the light most favorable to the
prosecution, the evidence presented at trial was insufficient
to allow any rational juror to find, beyond a reasonable
doubt, that Motley’s use of her relatives’ names was the
“specifically . . . fraudulent or deceitful manner” through
which the scheme was carried out, such that it went to “the
crux” of the healthcare fraud. Dubin, 599 U.S. at 117. The
crux of the underlying healthcare fraud was billing for
medically unnecessary DME and for repairs that never took
place. The fact that the companies were incorporated and
enrolled in Medicare under names other than that of the
defendant was “merely an ancillary feature of a billing
method.” Id. at 114.
The government failed to present a theory at trial
showing that Motley “use[d] the means of identification
itself to defraud or deceive,” id. at 123 (emphasis added), and
did so “in a manner that is fraudulent or deceptive,” id. at
132. Although the government showed that Motley’s use
occurred within an unlawful and fraudulent scheme, it did
not show that the use itself was fraudulent or deceptive,
either toward the identity holders or toward Medicare.
Motley did not steal or use the means of identification
without permission, nor did the use induce Medicare to pay
claims it otherwise would have denied, nor did it shift
apparent responsibility from Motley to Muntz and Brown.
This is further illustrated by the fact that when
considered in isolation, there is nothing deceptive or
fraudulent about Motley’s use of Muntz’s and Brown’s

34

USA V. MOTLEY

names. Without the scheme submitting fraudulent claims for
unprovided or unnecessary services, Motley’s claims
submissions on behalf of Action and Kaja were perfectly
lawful. Medicare does not require the individual who enrolls
the supplier to be the same person who submits electronic
claims. Action and Kaja were enrolled in Medicare, and, as
a lawful employee of those companies, Motley was
authorized to submit claims on their behalf, even if her name
was not on the enrollment forms. Thus, in vacuo, Motley’s
use of her relatives’ names was not fraudulent or deceptive.
The government also failed to show that the appearance
of Muntz’s and Brown’s names on the enrollment and
supplemental applications was “a key mover,” id. at 123, or
“critical to the success” of the fraud, Parviz, 131 F.4th at
972. The Supreme Court in Dubin wanted “[t]o be clear”
that “being at the crux of the criminality requires more than
a causal relationship, such as . . . being a but-for cause of its
‘success.’” 599 U.S. at 131 (emphasis added). Here, the
government has failed to demonstrate that Motley would
have been unable to successfully submit claims and
complete the fraud without using her relatives’ names.
Motley could have signed the paperwork herself; the
companies could have been incorporated in Motley’s name;
the applications could have listed Motley. Thus, the
government did not show that, absent the use of the relatives’
names on the Medicare enrollment and supplemental
applications, the scheme’s intended outcome would have
changed.
To further illustrate the lack of a viable claim linking
Motley’s use of her relatives’ names to the crux of what
made the underlying scheme criminal, consider Motley’s
underlying offense. The healthcare fraud for which Motley
was convicted criminalizes, in relevant part, “obtain[ing], by

USA V. MOTLEY

35

means of false or fraudulent pretenses, representations, or
promises, . . . money or property . . . of[] any health care
benefit program.” 18 U.S.C. § 1347(a)(2). As charged in
the indictment and as presented at trial, the healthcare fraud
involved obtaining payments from Medicare, a healthcare
benefit program, by falsely billing for DME and services that
were not medically necessary and for power wheelchair
repairs and supplies that were not provided. The deceit thus
lay in misrepresenting the medical necessity of, or the
performance of, services and supplies on Action’s and
Kaja’s claims. The use of her relatives’ names on the
Medicare enrollment applications may have facilitated the
fraud, but it was too attenuated from the falsification to be
“at the crux.” The crux of her crime was falsifying the
services and supplies. Put differently, the fraud was a lie
about what services were performed, not about who received
or provided them. See Dubin, 599 U.S. at 131–32 (endorsing
a Sixth Circuit heuristic that asks whether the fraud or deceit
about identity “go[es] to ‘who’ is involved” rather than
“misrepresenting how and when services were provided”
(first emphasis added)).
Thus, on this record, no rational juror could find that the
use of Muntz’s and Brown’s names on the Medicare
enrollment applications was at the crux of the fraudulent
claims’ objective of obtaining payments from Medicare for
services and DME that were either not provided or medically
unnecessary.
III. CONCLUSION
Although we do not lightly set aside a jury’s verdict, the
record here leaves us with no choice. No evidence showed
that Motley’s use of her relatives’ names was “critical to the
success” of the scheme and that the use itself was fraudulent

36

USA V. MOTLEY

or deceitful—only that the names were part of a broader
scheme to defraud, for which Motley will serve her time.
Because the government failed to show that Motley’s use
of her mother’s and nephew’s names was “specifically in a
fraudulent or deceitful manner” and “at the crux” of the
criminality of the underlying fraudulent billing, we vacate
her § 1028A(a)(1) sentence and remand to the district court
for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
SENTENCE VACATED AND REMANDED.

