FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY LLC;
SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY
(THAILAND) LTD.; SEAGATE
SINGAPORE INTERNATIONAL
HEADQUARTERS PTE, LTD;
SEAGATE TECHNOLOGY
INTERNATIONAL,

No. 24-4470
D.C. No.
3:19-md-02918MMC
OPINION

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
NHK SPRING CO., LTD.; NHK
INTERNATIONAL
CORPORATION; NHK SPRING
(THAILAND) CO., LTD.; NAT
PERIPHERAL (DONG GUAN) CO.,
LTD.; NAT PERIPHERAL (H.K.)
CO., LTD.,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
Maxine M. Chesney, District Judge, Presiding

2

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

Argued and Submitted June 6, 2025
San Francisco, California
Filed January 8, 2026
Before: Consuelo M. Callahan and Kenneth K. Lee, Circuit
Judges, and Scott H. Rash, District Judge. *
Opinion by Judge Lee
SUMMARY **
Antitrust
The panel vacated the district court’s partial summary
judgment in favor of defendants NHK Spring Co., Ltd., et al.
and remanded for further proceedings in an antitrust action
brought under the Sherman Act by Seagate Technology
LLC, an American company, and two Seagate foreign
entities.
The Seagate plaintiffs sought to bring antitrust claims
against Japanese-owned NHK for unlawful price-fixing. In
a separate federal criminal proceeding, NHK pleaded guilty
to conspiring with its competitors to fix the price of
suspension assemblies sold in the United States and
elsewhere in the world. Seagate’s foreign entities bought
The Honorable Scott H. Rash, United States District Judge for the
District of Arizona, sitting by designation.

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
**

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

3

those price-fixed suspension assemblies, which were
incorporated into Seagate’s hard drives, outside the United
States. The district court ruled that the Sherman Act did not
extend to such foreign injury.
The panel held that Seagate alleged a viable theory of
extraterritorial reach under the Foreign Trade Antitrust
Improvements Act, which provides that U.S. antitrust laws
can apply, even if an injury occurs beyond U.S. borders, if
the anticompetitive conduct (1) involves goods imported
into the United States that Americans buy (the “import
commerce” exclusion) or (2) has a direct effect on domestic
commerce that in turn causes the foreign antitrust injury to
the plaintiff (the “domestic effects” exception). The panel
held that the import commerce exclusion did not apply
because the suspension assemblies were not directly
imported into the U.S. But under the domestic effects
exception, Seagate sufficiently alleged that NHK’s pricefixing in the U.S., as reflected in a master product supply
agreement negotiated in the U.S., led to the domestic harm
of higher prices for the suspension assemblies in the U.S.,
and that effect also directly caused an antitrust injury abroad
because Seagate’s foreign entities overpaid for the
suspension assemblies based on the inflated U.S. price.
The panel remanded to the district court to determine
whether Seagate adduced sufficient evidence of proximate
cause to survive summary judgment.

4

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

COUNSEL
Eamon P. Joyce (argued), Sidley Austin LLP, New York,
New York; David R. Carpenter and Nicole M. Baade, Sidley
Austin LLP, Los Angeles, California; Jeremy Rozansky,
Sidley Austin LLP, Washington, D.C.; Robert N. Hochman
and Shirin Mahkamova, Sidley Austin LLP, Chicago,
Illinois; Steffen N. Johnson and John B. Kenney, Wilson
Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Washington, D.C.; Mikaela E.
Evans-Aziz,
Kenneth
R.
O'Rourke,
and
Jeff
VanHooreweghe, Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, San
Francisco, California; Michael W. McConnell, Wilson
Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, Palo Alto, California; for
Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Michael F. Murray (argued), Craig Y. Lee, Carter C.
Simpson, and Alexandra Glazer, Paul Hastings LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Navi S. Dhillon, Paul Hastings LLP, San
Francisco, California; for Defendants-Appellees.
Aaron D. Van Oort, Kevin P. Wagner, and Kirsten L.
Elfstrand, Faegre Drinker Biddle & Reath LLP,
Minneapolis, Minnesota; Paul J. Riehle, Faegre Drinker
Biddle & Reath LLP, San Francisco, California; for Amicus
Curiae Professor Kenneth G. Elzinga.
Kathleen W. Bradish and Randy Stutz, American Antitrust
Institute, Washington, D.C., for Amicus Curiae American
Antitrust Institute.
Jennifer L. Williams and Megan A. Maitia, Summa LLP,
Los Angeles, California, for Amicus Curiae Professor
Cedric Ryngaert.

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

5

OPINION
LEE, Circuit Judge:
American antitrust laws broadly prohibit anticompetitive
conduct and authorize private parties to seek treble damages.
Congress, however, largely closed our courthouse doors to
antitrust claims based on injuries outside the United States.
But it carved out two narrow exceptions under the Foreign
Trade Antitrust Improvements Act (FTAIA). 15 U.S.C.
§ 6a. U.S. antitrust laws can still apply—even if the injury
occurs beyond our borders—if the anticompetitive conduct
(1) involves goods imported into the United States that
Americans buy (the “import commerce” exclusion) or
(2) has a direct effect on domestic commerce that in turn
causes the foreign antitrust injury to the plaintiff (the
“domestic effects” exception).
In an increasingly globalized economy, it can sometimes
be thorny, as in this case, to tease out when these narrow
statutory provisions allow extraterritorial reach of our
antitrust laws. Seagate Technology LLC (an American
company based in California) and two Seagate foreign
entities (Seagate Thailand and Seagate Singapore) argue that
they can bring antitrust claims against Japanese-owned NHK
Spring Co., Ltd. for unlawful price-fixing. In a separate
federal criminal proceeding, NHK pleaded guilty to
conspiring with its competitors to fix the price of
“suspension assemblies” sold in the United States and
elsewhere in the world. But Seagate’s foreign entities
bought those price-fixed suspension assemblies—which are
incorporated into Seagate’s hard drives—outside the United
States. The district court thus granted partial summary

6

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

judgment for NHK, ruling that the Sherman Act did not
extend to such foreign injury.
We vacate the district court’s order because Seagate 1 has
alleged a viable theory of extraterritorial reach under the
FTAIA. According to Seagate’s complaint, NHK’s pricefixing scheme was reflected in a master product supply
agreement negotiated in the United States with Seagate
Technology LLC. That agreement reflected an artificially
high price for suspension assemblies. Then this NHKSeagate Technology LLC agreement in turn allegedly set the
pricing parameters for Seagate’s foreign entities because
they were obligated to accept those (fixed) prices in the
agreement. Put another way, NHK’s price-fixing in the U.S.
led to domestic harm (i.e., higher prices for the suspension
assemblies in the United States), and that effect also directly
caused an antitrust injury abroad (because Seagate’s foreign
entities overpaid for the suspension assemblies based on the
inflated U.S. price). We, however, remand for the district
court to determine whether Seagate has adduced sufficient
evidence of proximate cause to survive summary judgment.
BACKGROUND
I. Factual Background
A. Seagate foreign entities buy SAs from NHK and
other suppliers.
Nearly every consumer electronic device needs a way to
store data. Many devices—such as computers, gaming
consoles, and servers—rely on hard disk drives (HDDs) for
We will use the term “Seagate” to refer to Seagate Technology LLC,
Seagate Thailand, and Seagate Singapore collectively. But we will refer
to each Seagate entity by its individual name if that distinction is relevant
to our discussion.

1

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

7

bulk storage. Hard disk drives resemble electro-magnetic
“filing cabinets” containing several drawers (or “platters”)
with millions of folders (or “sectors”) storing electronic data.
Seagate Technology LLC, a California-based company,
is a leading manufacturer of hard disk drives. But Seagate
Technology LLC does not produce all the key components
that go into a hard disk drive, including a part called the
“suspension assembly” (sometimes called “SA”). Each
platter in a hard drive constantly spins to allow the user to
access all the data sectors on that platter. A suspension
assembly holds a recording head 12 nanometers above a
platter turning at 150–170 miles per hour, requiring
precision like “a 747 aircraft flying full speed l/l6th of an
inch above a [jagged] desert surface.”
Reflecting the global nature of commerce today, a
Seagate hard disk drive is built with parts bought and
assembled across the world by various Seagate foreign
entities. Most of Seagate’s suspension assemblies are
bought in Thailand by the Thai entity, Seagate Technology
(Thailand) Ltd (“Seagate Thailand”). There, the suspension
assemblies are incorporated into another part called a head
gimbal assembly. Next, Seagate incorporates the head
gimbal assembly into yet another part called a head stack
assembly either in Thailand or China. The head stack
assemblies are then incorporated into finished hard disk
drives in Thailand, China, or Singapore, and all the hard disk
drives are shipped to Seagate Singapore International
Headquarters Pte. Ltd. (“Seagate Singapore”) for
distribution. Seagate Singapore either sells the hard disk
drives directly or distributes them to other Seagate entities to
sell, such as Seagate Technology LLC in California. In other

8

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

words, only the finished hard disk drives are directly
imported into the United States. 2
Seagate buys its suspension assemblies from a few
suppliers. Since the 1980s, the suspension assembly
manufacturing industry has consolidated greatly and only
two main players remain. One of those is NHK Spring Co.,
Ltd., a leading Japanese manufacturer of springs and other
engineered components like suspension assemblies. During
the relevant period, NHK often received “the majority of the
Seagate business” for suspension assembly projects, despite
being the highest-priced bidder on Seagate’s proposals.
B. NHK rigs suspension assembly prices based on a
U.S. agreement.
In July 2019, NHK pleaded guilty to criminal pricefixing under the Sherman Antitrust Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1. From
before June 2008 to at least April 2016, NHK engaged in a
global conspiracy with another competitor to fix the price of
suspension assemblies in the United States and elsewhere.
NHK’s officers and employees held meetings with another
competitor in which they agreed “to refrain from competing
on prices for, fix the prices of, and allocate their respective
market shares for[] HDD suspension assemblies.” As part
of NHK’s plea agreement, the U.S. Department of Justice
sought a criminal fine of $28.5 million dollars, which was
approved by the U.S. District Court for the Eastern District
of Michigan. But the government did not seek restitution “in
light of the availability of civil causes of action.” See United
States v. NHK Spring Co. Ltd., ECF 25 at 8, No. 2:19-cr20503 (E.D. Mich. Jan. 31, 2020).
A few SAs are directly imported for testing and product development
purposes; these parts are not at issue in this appeal.

2

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

9

NHK’s plea agreement explains that suspension
assembly suppliers “exchanged . . . pricing information,
including anticipated pricing quotes,” “and used the
exchanged pricing information to inform their negotiations
with U.S. and foreign customers that purchased” those parts.
The “primary purpose” of this conspiracy was to “fix the
prices of [hard disk drive] suspension assemblies sold in the
United States and elsewhere.” These centralized “pricing
quotes” apparently were at the heart of how Seagate sourced
suspension assemblies: Importantly for our case, although
nearly all of Seagate’s suspension assemblies were
purchased by its foreign entities abroad, these foreign
entities apparently lacked any authority to decide on any
terms of purchase, whether price, quantity, or even the
timing of their orders. Such parameters all were determined
centrally by Seagate Technology LLC’s Commodities
Management Team (“CMT”) in Minnesota. The foreign
companies—primarily Seagate Thailand—simply entered
orders into their purchase order systems at precisely the
times, rates, and prices that CMT instructed them to enter.
Pricing was negotiated by Seagate CMT with suppliers
quarterly. Although the master Product Supply Agreements
between Seagate Technology LLC and each supplier
contained some pricing terms (such as price floors, ceilings,
or most-favored-nation provisions), these were average or
expected prices—not actual transaction prices. Actual
transaction prices were finalized by Seagate’s CMT unit
each quarter through bidding on an RFQ, or “Request for
Quotation.” First, Seagate Technology LLC would send a
complex, custom grid to each supplier like NHK. The
supplier placed its bids across several dimensions, such as
prototypes, mass-production price, model, volume band, and
program. These RFQ “responses” from suppliers were then

10

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

negotiated by Seagate Technology LLC’s CMT on U.S. soil,
along with the purchase volumes “allocated” to each
supplier. Finally, the agreed-upon prices and volumes were
sent by Seagate CMT to Seagate Thailand and Singapore to
use to purchase suspension assemblies at the appropriate
time.
These RFQ responses, called “anticipated pricing
quotes” in NHK’s plea agreement, also were the chief
instrument that NHK would use to fix prices. First, NHK’s
head of American SA sales would discuss specific proposed
RFQ responses for a given Seagate product with his
competitors. Next, he would relay the contents of these
discussions to top NHK executives in Yokohama, one of
whom was later indicted for his role in the conspiracy, and
another who candidly explained that NHK would use
competitor pricing information “as reference” for its own
RFQ responses. Finally, to entrench this process, NHK’s
head of American SA sales even tried to make a job posting
for a position for NHK in Minnesota that included the
requirement, “Find out competitor’s information, pricing
information”—because he “underst[oo]d that collecting
competitor pricing information” simply was part of the job.
When NHK executives in Yokohama caught wind of this,
one of them advised, “Just scratch pricing information on
competitors. That you can verbally tell once we hire.”
II. Procedural History
Shortly after NHK was sentenced in its criminal case,
Seagate sued in the Northern District of California, alleging
violations of the Sherman Act, violations of antitrust statutes
in Minnesota and California, and common-law breach of
contract. Seagate sought treble damages under Section 4 of
the Clayton Act, 15 U.S.C. § 15(a), among other relief.

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

11

Seagate amended its complaint twice, in October 2020 and
in April 2021.
While discovery was ongoing, NHK moved for Partial
Summary Judgment Regarding Foreign Commerce. NHK
alleged that Seagate’s “direct purchaser claims arising from
component sales that took place outside the U.S.”—in other
words, claims “based on sales of [suspension assemblies]
billed and shipped to Seagate Thailand and Singapore”—
were barred by the FTAIA. 15 U.S.C. § 6a. The FTAIA
bars Sherman Act claims based on conduct involving “trade
or commerce with foreign nations,” unless that conduct
(1) involves imported goods that Americans buy or (2) “has
a direct, substantial, and reasonably foreseeable effect” on
U.S. domestic commerce or certain exports and “such effect
gives rise to” an independent Sherman Act claim. Id. NHK
essentially argued that, for example, if a suspension
assembly was bought by a Thai subsidiary in Thailand, this
qualified as wholly foreign commerce ineligible for
Sherman Act relief.
The district court at first agreed with NHK in part. In its
May 15, 2023 order, the court found that most of the
suspension assemblies purchased by Seagate Thailand and
Seagate Singapore never entered the United States at any
point. These were indeed “wholly foreign transactions,” the
court ruled, ineligible for Sherman Act relief. In re Hard
Disk Drive Suspension Assemblies Antitrust Litig. (“In re
HDD”), No. 19-md-02918, 2023 WL 3483242, at *8 (N.D.
Cal. May 15, 2023). But about one-third of Seagate’s
foreign suspension assembly purchases did eventually enter
the U.S. as part of finished hard drives. True, these parts
first were integrated into the hard drives overseas, and the
FTAIA’s import exclusion only covers conduct involving
“import trade or import commerce.” 15 U.S.C. § 6a. But the

12

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

court held that “the import . . . exclusion can be established
without a showing that the defendants themselves shipped
price-fixed goods into” the U.S. and thus denied summary
judgment in part. Id. at *6 (emphasis added).
The district court changed direction when asked by NHK
to reconsider. First, the court held that the defendant did
have to directly ship the price-fixed goods into the United
States for the import exclusion to apply, and no suspension
assemblies were directly shipped to the U.S. here. In re
HDD, 2023 WL 8007985, at *3 (Nov. 17, 2023 order). Next,
the court held that Seagate also could not establish an
“effect” on domestic trade or commerce “giv[ing] rise to” an
independent Sherman Act claim. Id. at *5. Despite the
collusive “agreements in the United States . . . whereby the
prices for SAs . . . were set,” it was “‘the overall price-fixing
conspiracy [that] proximately caused the effect abroad,’” the
court held, and not those collusive agreements. Id. at *4
(quoting In re Dynamic Random Access Memory (DRAM)
Antitrust Litig., 546 F.3d 981, 988 (9th Cir. 2008) (“In re
DRAM”)). The district court thus granted NHK’s partial
summary judgment motion in full.
Finally, the court found Seagate’s Second Amended
Complaint did not include any “factual allegations that any
Seagate Plaintiff indirectly purchased an SA or a product
containing an SA.” Id. at *5. The court denied leave to
amend to add any such “indirect purchaser” claims, id. at *6,
and it certified the May 15, 2023 and November 17, 2023
orders for interlocutory appeal.
Seagate advances several positions on appeal: (1) that
the FTAIA does not apply to any of its claims, (2) that the
domestic effects of NHK’s price-fixing proximately caused
Seagate’s antitrust injuries abroad, and (3) that at least a

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

13

subset of its claims qualify as “import trade or commerce.”
See 15 U.S.C. § 6a. Seagate also argues that Seagate
Technology LLC—rather than Seagate Thailand or Seagate
Singapore—was the “direct purchaser” of all the suspension
assemblies.
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1292(b), and we hold that Seagate’s theory of domestic
effects might be viable. We thus vacate the district court’s
orders and remand the case.
DISCUSSION
“We review the district court’s grant of summary
judgment de novo.” Desire, LLC v. Manna Textiles, Inc.,
986 F.3d 1253, 1259 (9th Cir. 2021) (citation omitted). We
ask, “viewing the evidence in the light most favorable to the
nonmoving party, whether there are any genuine issues of
material fact and whether the district court correctly applied
the relevant substantive law.” Delta Sav. Bank v. United
States, 265 F.3d 1017, 1021 (9th Cir. 2001) (citation
omitted). We may address “any issue fairly included” within
an order certified for appeal, “because it is the order that is
appealable, and not the controlling question identified by the
district court.” Rivera v. NIBCO, Inc., 364 F.3d 1057, 1063
(9th Cir. 2004) (citations omitted).
I. The FTAIA places geographic limits on the reach of
U.S. antitrust law.
Congress enacted the FTAIA in 1982 in part to clarify
United States antitrust jurisdiction over international
transactions—a question that had vexed our courts. See
Hartford Fire Ins. Co. v. California, 509 U.S. 764, 796 n.23
(1993); United States v. LSL Biotechnologies, 379 F.3d 672,

14

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

677–78 (9th Cir. 2004).
Sherman Act:

The statute provides that the

shall not apply to conduct involving trade or
commerce (other than import trade or import
commerce) with foreign nations unless—
(1) such conduct has a direct, substantial,
and reasonably foreseeable effect—
(A) on trade or commerce which is
not trade or commerce with foreign
nations, or on import trade or import
commerce with foreign nations; or
(B) on export trade or export
commerce with foreign nations, of a
person engaged in such trade or
commerce in the United States; and
(2) such effect gives rise to a claim under
the [Sherman Act].
15 U.S.C. § 6a. In other words, the statute generally bars the
Sherman Act from reaching foreign commercial activity, but
then adds a caveat allowing jurisdiction for foreign
commerce if the anticompetitive conduct (1) involves
“import trade or . . . commerce” (i.e., goods imported into
the United States and bought by Americans) or
(2) sufficiently affects American domestic or (certain)
export commerce that in turn proximately causes an antitrust
injury. In re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 985. These limits ensure
that the Sherman Act protects “American consumers and
American exporters, not foreign consumers or producers,”
and does not overly burden U.S. companies’ conduct
overseas. Id. at 986 (citation omitted).

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

15

The phrasing of the FTAIA has been called confusing at
times, but the general thrust of the statute is clear. It
underscores that American courts generally are not open to
antitrust injuries occurring overseas, no matter how those
injuries arise: “American exporters” and “firms doing
business abroad” may “enter[] into business arrangements,”
no matter how “anticompetitive, as long as those
arrangements adversely affect only foreign markets.” F.
Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd. v. Empagran S.A., 542 U.S. 155,
161 (2004) (citing House Report). If a foreign country does
not forbid certain anticompetitive conduct, then American
companies doing business there can engage in such conduct,
even if it would be unlawful here. Otherwise, we would be
disadvantaging American companies competing in foreign
markets.
Congress thus did not expand the purview of our antitrust
laws to reach “foreign conduct that causes independent
foreign harm,” except “where that conduct also causes
domestic harm.” Id. at 166. As this court has noted, a
“transaction between two foreign firms, even if Americanowned, should not, merely by virtue of the American
ownership, come within the reach of our antitrust laws,”
unless specifically provided for by the FTAIA. United
States v. Hui Hsiung, 778 F.3d 738, 754 (9th Cir. 2015)
(quoting House Report).
Indeed, there is good reason to be circumspect when it
comes to the Sherman Act’s territorial scope. Beyond
merely supporting American firms’ competitiveness abroad,
the Supreme Court has highlighted international comity and
refraining from interfering in other countries’ regulation of
their own economies, at least where no Americans are
harmed. See, e.g., Empagran, 542 U.S. at 164–68. Even
where it is an American-owned company that suffers

16

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

antitrust injury abroad, so long as that company chose to
incorporate overseas, it must take the good with the bad
when it comes to that country’s legal regime. As the Seventh
Circuit noted, a company cannot “pick and choose from the
benefits . . . of [U.S.] corporate citizenship” by availing itself
of the Sherman and Clayton Acts while avoiding compliance
with United States tax, labor, and environmental
requirements by choosing to do business through foreign
entities. Motorola Mobility LLC v. AU Optronics Corp., 775
F.3d 816, 822, 827 (7th Cir. 2015); see also Empagran, 542
U.S. at 166.
In short, American antitrust protections apply only when
there is a direct and proximate link to U.S. harm. Congress
provided a few ways to establish that link even where the
ultimate antitrust injury occurs overseas.
First, “import trade” and “import commerce” are
excluded from the FTAIA’s ban on extraterritorial reach
(i.e., the Sherman Act applies). See 15 U.S.C. § 6a; Hui
Hsiung, 778 F.3d at 754. For example, if Japanese
carmakers fix prices of their cars in Japan but import them
into the United States, then American antitrust laws would
cover such conduct under the FTAIA’s “import commerce”
exclusion.
Second, the Sherman Act also applies to anticompetitive
conduct (a) that has a harmful effect on domestic or (certain)
export trade or commerce, and (b) such effect “gives rise to”
an independent Sherman Act claim. 15 U.S.C. § 6a(1)–(2);
see Empagran, 542 U.S. at 174. This is sometimes called
the FTAIA’s “domestic effects” exception.

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

17

We next turn to whether Seagate meets either the “import
commerce” exclusion or the “domestic effects” exception
under the FTAIA. 3
II. The FTAIA’s “import commerce” exclusion does
not apply because the SAs were not directly
imported into the United States.
Seagate Thailand and Seagate Singapore bought pricefixed suspension assemblies outside the United States. One
way these foreign entities could bring a Sherman Act claim
for their purchases is if the suspension assemblies were
directly imported into this country. NHK’s price-fixing
conduct would then be “conduct involving . . . import trade
or . . . commerce,” and would be exempt from the FTAIA’s
ban on extraterritorial application of U.S. antitrust law. 15
U.S.C. § 6a.
But NHK’s price-fixing conduct did not involve “import
trade or . . . commerce” because the suspension assemblies
by themselves were not imported into the United States.
Only the finished hard disk drives were imported into the
United States. Any trade or commerce involving suspension
assemblies was thus not “import trade or . . . commerce,” but
merely “trade or commerce . . . with foreign nations.” Id.
A few factual clarifications may be helpful. First,
Seagate does not dispute that none of the suspension
assemblies at issue were directly sent to the United States
Seagate argues that the FTAIA is not relevant here because this case
involves price-fixing conduct that took place in the United States, while
the FTAIA only covers “wholly foreign” commerce. Not so. The
Supreme Court held that the FTAIA applied in Empagran even though
“some of the anticompetitive price-fixing conduct alleged . . . took place
in America,” 542 U.S. at 163, 165, and we did the same in Hui Hsiung,
778 F.3d at 743, 753.
3

18

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

after Seagate bought them. They were first incorporated into
hard disk drive components and hard disk drives, which were
later imported to the U.S. Second, Seagate also concedes
that it does not sell suspension assemblies—indeed, there is
no consumer market for them, only for finished hard disk
drives.
Seagate mainly relies on two related arguments to argue
that the “import exclusion” applies: (1) that a qualifying
import need not be a direct import but may come through
intermediate steps in “the supply chain,” and (2) that the
FTAIA exempts not only import trade and commerce but
also “conduct involving . . . import commerce,” which,
again, includes the broader “supply chain.” Seagate thus
argues that the one-third of suspension assemblies that later
entered the U.S. as part of finished hard disk drives qualify
as imports under the FTAIA, and that NHK’s price-fixing
activity constitutes conduct involving import trade.
These arguments are unconvincing. For starters, we
usually interpret words as “understood in their ordinary,
everyday meanings.” Antonin Scalia & Bryan A. Garner,
READING LAW: THE INTERPRETATION OF LEGAL TEXTS 69
(2012). And we have never defined “import trade or
commerce” so broadly as to encompass parts incorporated
into the imported goods. Rather, we usually refer to the final
end-product, not specific parts within it, when we talk about
an imported good. Take smartphones made by the South
Korean company Samsung. Many of its phones use batteries
or other parts made in third countries such as China or
Vietnam. We would normally describe Samsung phones as
imported goods from South Korea, despite some internal
parts being made elsewhere.

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

19

In Hui Hsiung, we strongly suggested that the “import
trade or commerce” exception in the FTAIA applies only to
the final imported end-product. That case dealt with TFT–
LCD liquid crystal display panels found in many computer
screens. While the case involved both panels that were
directly sold into the United States and panels first
incorporated into computers abroad and then sold here, 778
F.3d at 753, we considered only panels that came directly to
the U.S. (as panels) in analyzing “import trade,” see id. at
755.
We repeatedly emphasized that the defendant
manufacturers sold panels “to customers in the United
States.” Id. And most of all, we explained that even though
the defendants “did not manufacture any consumer products
for importation into the United States,” they “negotiated
with United States companies in the United States to sell
TFT–LCD panels at [fixed] prices . . . . [and] [i]mportation
of this critical component of various electronic devices is
surely ‘import trade or import commerce.’” Id. at 756
(emphasis added). In other words, the display panels by
themselves were imported as components in Hui Hsiung.
We thus held that “transactions . . . directly between the U.S.
plaintiff purchasers and the defendant cartel members are
. . . import commerce,” and “goods manufactured abroad
and sold in the United States [are] import commerce.” Id. at
755 (citations omitted). In contrast here, the suspension
assemblies were neither purchased by buyers in the United
States nor “sold” in (or into) the United States. In short,
mere parts in the international supply chain lack sufficient
U.S. nexus to justify the extraterritorial reach of American
antitrust laws.
True, Hui Hsiung dealt with the sufficiency of an
indictment and of evidence to support a jury verdict and thus
did not define the outer limits of import trade. See id. at 755–

20

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

56 & n.8. But nothing in the case suggests that it would
include activities “up and down the supply chain,” as
Seagate suggests. It is also true that suspension assemblies
“have no use other than as a hard-drive component,” as
Seagate notes. But Seagate fails to explain why this should
work in its favor. No circuit authority suggests that every
foreign component cartel must have redressability under the
FTAIA’s import exclusion, seeing as relief may still be
available under the statute’s effects exceptions. See, e.g.,
Hui Hsiung, 778 F.3d at 760.
In sum, Seagate was harmed not in the import trade but
several steps up in its manufacturing supply chain—and a
“transaction between two foreign firms” typically must seek
relief not through the FTAIA’s import commerce exclusion
but through the domestic effects exception. Id. at 754. We
turn to that next.
III. The FTAIA’s “domestic effects” exception might
apply and allow Seagate to pursue its antitrust
claims against NHK.
The FTAIA has another exception—“domestic
effects”—that allows extraterritorial application of
American antitrust law. Foreign non-import commerce can
fall within the Sherman Act if the anti-competitive conduct
(1) has a “direct, substantial, and reasonably foreseeable
effect” on certain U.S.-based commerce, and (2) that effect
“gives rise to” an antitrust claim. See 15 U.S.C. § 6a. As
the Supreme Court stated in Empagran, “there should be no
American antitrust jurisdiction absent a direct, substantial
and reasonably foreseeable effect on domestic commerce or
a domestic competitor.” 542 U.S. at 163 (quoting House
Report); accord Hui Hsiung, 778 F.3d at 754.

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

21

The two requirements above are strict by design. A
“direct” effect on U.S.-based commerce means the effect
must “follow[] as an immediate consequence of the
defendant’s activity.” LSL, 379 F.3d at 680; see Hui Hsiung,
778 F.3d at 758 & n.9. An “effect cannot be ‘direct’ where
it depends on . . . uncertain intervening developments.” LSL,
379 F.3d at 681. And to “give[] rise to” a Sherman Act claim
means the effect (on U.S. commerce) must proximately
cause the antitrust injury. In re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 988.
“‘[B]ut for’ causation cannot suffice for the FTAIA,” such
as where intervening forces may have caused the ultimate
antitrust injury. Id. at 987; see Hui Hsiung, 778 F.3d at 758.
Together, these requirements ensure there is a sufficient
nexus to the United States such that we open our courts
despite the foreign elements. They require a tight causal link
between the defendant’s anticompetitive conduct, the effect
on U.S. commerce, and the ultimate antitrust injury. There
must be a direct impact in the United States tethered to a
Sherman Act violation. Put differently, U.S. courts are only
open to foreign antitrust injuries that arise through harm to
U.S. commerce. See Empagran, 542 U.S. at 174.
A. NHK’s price-fixing had a harmful effect on U.S.
domestic commerce.
We address the first prong of the domestic effects
exception: Seagate must show that NHK’s conduct caused
an immediate harm to U.S. domestic commerce. See id.
(requiring an adverse effect). Seagate asserts that “NHK
colluded to rig bids in the United States, and the domestic
effects of that conduct [were] distorted bidding, suppressed
competition, and binding agreements incorporating pricefixed terms.”

22

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

These facts are largely undisputed. NHK admits in its
plea deal with the United States government that it agreed
with another competitor “to refrain from competing on
prices for, fix the prices of, and allocate their respective
market shares for, HDD suspension assemblies to be sold in
the United States and elsewhere.” It further admits it
“exchanged [suspension assembly] pricing information,
including anticipated pricing quotes,” with its competitor
and “used the exchanged information to inform their
negotiations with U.S. and foreign customers that purchased
HDD suspension assemblies.” The parties in their briefing
have not identified how many of NHK’s price-fixed SAs
were sold within the United States or to American
companies but NHK sold them to a wide range of
companies, including Seagate, Toshiba, Western Digital,
Quantum, IBM, Fujitsu, Samsung, and Hitachi, during the
relevant period. While we do not know the dollar value of
the price-fixed SAs sold in the United States, NHK in its plea
deal conceded that “[d]uring the relevant period, the
conspiracy . . . had a direct, substantial, and reasonably
foreseeable effect on interstate and import trade []
commerce.” So NHK’s plea agreement alone appears to
confirm the first prong of the domestic effects exception:
NHK admits to fixing prices of suspension assemblies sold
in the United States (as well as around the world), and
NHK’s actions apparently had a direct, substantial, and
reasonably foreseeable effect on U.S. commerce. See 15
U.S.C. § 6a(1). 4
NHK’s argument that a corrupt U.S. bidding process can only
constitute “conduct” under the FTAIA—and not an “effect” of conduct—
betrays its plea deal that “the conspiracy involved and had a direct,
substantial, and reasonably foreseeable effect on” interstate commerce.
While the actual “stuff” of NHK’s conspiracy (illicit meetings, illegal

4

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

23

To be sure, the domestic effect from NHK’s
anticompetitive conduct did not directly injure Seagate
Technology LLC because it did not buy the suspension
assemblies here—its foreign entities did abroad. But the first
prong of the domestic effects exception still has been met
because NHK admitted in its plea deal that it “fix[ed] the
prices” of “suspension assemblies to be sold in the United
States and elsewhere.” (emphasis added). In other words,
NHK’s price-fixing apparently had a significant and direct
impact on domestic commerce because companies (other
than Seagate Technology LLC) overpaid for the suspension
assemblies bought here in the states.
The FTAIA’s statutory language does not require more
than that to satisfy the first prong: The anticompetitive
conduct must have “a direct, substantial, and reasonably
effect on trade or commerce which is not trade or commerce
with foreign nations [i.e., domestic commerce] or on import
trade or import commerce with foreign nations.” 15 U.S.C.
§ 6a. Unlike the second prong (which refers to a Sherman
Act “claim” by the plaintiff), the first prong makes no
mention of “claim” or “injury” by the plaintiff—it just
requires a direct and substantial “effect” on the American
economy. Stated differently, the first prong does not require
the plaintiff to have suffered an injury in the United States in
addition to outside of it; indeed, if it did suffer harm in the
United States, the FTAIA may not even apply. We
recognized this point in In re DRAM: The plaintiff there was
a “foreign consumer that made its purchases entirely outside
bids, and so on) count as conduct, “higher U.S. prices” can be a
“domestic effect.” In re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 984, 988; see also
Empagran, 542 U.S. at 175 (calling “higher prices in the United States”
an “adverse domestic effect”); 15 U.S.C. § 1 (prohibiting conduct with
the effect of restraining trade).

24

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

of the United States,” but we assumed that the first prong of
the domestic effects exception had been met because the
conspiracy had “raise[ed] the price of DRAM to customers
in both the United States and foreign countries.” 546 F.3d
at 989, 984. The plaintiff’s claim in In re DRAM, however,
failed because it could not meet the second prong that the
domestic effect of higher U.S. prices proximately caused its
foreign injury. Id. The D.C. Circuit appears to share our
view of the first prong requirement of the domestic effects
exception. See Empagran S.A. v. F. Hoffman-LaRoche Ltd.,
417 F.3d 1267, 1269 (D.C. Cir. 2005) (plaintiffs “need only
demonstrate therefore that the U.S. effects of the
[defendants’] allegedly anti-competitive conduct ‘[g]ave rise
to’ their claims” because the statutory text looks at the “situs
of the effects of the allegedly anti-competitive conduct,” not
the “situs of the . . . resulting injuries”) (emphasis added).
Similarly here, Seagate need not show that it was injured
directly from the domestic effect of NHK’s anticompetitive
conduct here in America under the first prong of the
domestic effects exception. It is enough to show that NHK’s
actions had a direct, substantial, and reasonably foreseeable
effect on domestic commerce by fixing prices of suspension
assemblies sold here. But that is not the end of the matter.
Under the second prong, Seagate must show that this
domestic effect gave “rise to a claim under the [Sherman
Act].” Id. We address that next.
B. The tainted RFQ prices potentially gave rise to
Seagate’s antitrust claims.
To meet the second prong of the domestic effects
exception, Seagate must show that the harm of NHK’s
conduct on U.S. domestic commerce directly caused Seagate
Thailand’s and Seagate Singapore’s respective overcharge

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

25

claims. See 15 U.S.C. § 6a(2). In other words, we ask
whether “[o]ther actors or forces may have affected the
foreign prices”—if so, then the plaintiff has not met the
second prong. In re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 988.
Most foreign injury claims fail at this step because it is
often difficult to show that the harmful effect on U.S.
domestic commerce proximately caused the foreign antitrust
injury. Too often the link is too speculative or attenuated.
Seagate’s claim, however, appears to be viable because of
the unique nature of how the master Product Supply
Agreement and the quarterly RFQs—all negotiated in the
United States by Seagate Technology LLC—set the U.S.
prices for suspension assemblies, which in turn set the prices
of the foreign suspension assembly purchases. As discussed,
Seagate has provided evidence that its foreign subsidiaries
lacked any authority over the price, quantity, or timing of
their orders. They had to follow the lead of U.S.-based
Seagate Technology LLC and entered orders at the (inflated)
prices negotiated by Seagate Technology LLC’s CMT unit.
At oral argument, NHK admitted that suspension assembly
prices were negotiated not per transaction but “quarterly”—
i.e., through the RFQ process. Thus, the higher U.S. prices
for suspension assemblies resulting from NHK’s pricefixing would have directly caused Seagate’s foreign
subsidiaries to overpay. Or as Seagate would have it, there
only was one price, the U.S. and foreign prices being “one
and the same.”
The district court credited this evidence in its May 15
order, finding that Seagate Technology LLC’s U.S.-based
“agreement[s] governed the sales when ‘purchase orders’ for
SAs were placed by Seagate Thailand” including as to price.
The court in its November 17 order also acknowledged
Seagate’s theory that “the prices for SAs to be charged to

26

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

Seagate entities located outside the United States were set”
directly by the tainted “agreements in the [U.S.].” Yet the
district court called this theory “essentially the same” as In
re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 988–89. The court observed, “[T]hat
the conspiracy had effects in the United States and abroad,
does not show that the effect in the United States, rather than
the overall price-fixing conspiracy itself, proximately caused
the effect abroad.” In re HDD, 2023 WL 8007985, at *4
(quoting In re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 988).
We believe the district court erred in reading In re DRAM
as categorically holding that rigged U.S. prices cannot
proximately cause injuries abroad. In that case, we rejected
the tenuous theory that higher U.S. prices for computer
memory chips (i.e., the domestic effect) proximately caused
higher global pricing (i.e., the foreign injury) because the
plaintiff relied on the interconnected nature of the computer
memory chip market and the leading role of U.S. buyers.
546 F.3d at 984. Relying on a chain of inferences about
global pricing of memory chips, the plaintiff in In re DRAM
did “not sufficiently allege a theory that the higher U.S.
prices proximately caused [the plaintiff’s] foreign injury of
having to pay higher prices outside the United States.” Id.
at 989. In short, there were links missing in the chain:
“Other actors or forces may have affected the foreign
prices.” Id. at 988.
Seagate’s theory, in contrast, is rooted in the certainty of
binding pricing contracts—not the complex vagaries of the
global pricing market. It does not rely on the alleged
equivalence of prices across global trading markets that
many courts have rejected. See id; see also Empagran, 542

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

27

U.S. at 175. 5 Rather, Seagate explains exactly how
“[d]efendants’ activities resulted in the U.S. prices directly
setting the worldwide price” and thus causing the foreign
antitrust injury: NHK and a competitor conspired to fix
prices, setting inflated U.S. prices (i.e., the domestic effect)
that Seagate’s foreign entities then accepted as a matter of
company policy and contractual requirements (i.e., the
foreign injury). In re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 989.
We acknowledge, however, that factual questions exist
about whether the post-RFQ prices truly set and limited what
the foreign subsidiaries could pay. For example, was
Seagate Singapore controlled just as Seagate Thailand was
for suspension assembly purchases, and did they always use
the same price? These would be best for the district court to
consider: While we suspect Seagate has adduced enough
evidence of a direct, proximate relationship to pass summary
judgment, see 15 U.S.C. § 6a(2), we remand to assess this
issue.
C. Foreign antitrust injury is only eligible for relief when
U.S. commerce is first harmed.
We conclude with a few remarks on why this case is
different from other cases involving foreign antitrust
injuries. Opening our federal courts to an injury like this one
may seem extraordinary at first blush: After all, a foreign
In Empagran, the Court held that the “domestic effect” exception did
not apply because it “assumed that the anticompetitive conduct here
independently caused foreign injury; that is, the conduct’s domestic
effects did not help to bring about that foreign injury.” 542 U.S. at 175
(emphasis added). The Court used the word “independent” 35 times in
the opinion, underscoring that the domestic effect must cause the foreign
injury. Here, Seagate appears to have adduced evidence that its foreign
injuries are not independent of the conspiracy’s domestic effects.

5

28

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

company bought a price-fixed good from another foreign
company abroad. Why should that foreign company have
access to our courts based on our laws? Indeed, the Seventh
Circuit’s decision in Motorola, 775 F.3d 816, offers valid
reasons to tread cautiously in the realm of extraterritorial
jurisdiction. Although that case ultimately was decided
based on standing rather than the FTAIA, see Hui Hsiung,
778 F.3d at 760, it flagged the practical problems of
redressing wholly foreign injuries in American courts.
“[T]he immediate victims of the price fixing
were [Motorola’s] foreign subsidiaries,
and . . . U.S. antitrust laws are not to be used
for injury to foreign customers.” Motorola,
775 F.3d at 820. “Companies operate
overseas . . . to take advantage of many legal
provisions of that country: labor law,
environmental law, and tax law.” Id. at 827.
“The mind boggles at the . . . number of
antitrust suits that major American
corporations could file against the
multitudinous suppliers of their prolific
foreign subsidiaries if Motorola had its way.”
Id. at 826 (all citations omitted).
The court thus held that Motorola’s parent entity—Motorola
Mobility LLC—could not sue on its subsidiaries’ behalf for
the injuries the subsidiaries suffered abroad. Id. at 820, 825
(declining “to give Motorola rights to take the place of its
foreign companies and sue on their behalf under U.S.
antitrust law”).
These appear valid points, but the facts and context of
our case are significantly different. If we look deeper, our

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

29

holding is consistent with the Supreme Court’s rule in
Empagran, considerations of judicial policy, and the
decisions of our sister circuits.
First off, the Seventh Circuit in Motorola did not
substantially grapple with the FTAIA’s language or the case
law construing that statutory text, and instead only
glancingly referenced them—perhaps because its holding
was based on standing for a derivative buyer, not the FTAIA.
As a policy matter, the Seventh Circuit advocated a brightline rule that American courts should not entertain Sherman
Act claims based on foreign injuries because the harmed
parties could seek relief under the laws of the foreign
country. Motorola, 775 F.3d at 820. But the parties here
(correctly) agree that the FTAIA does not bar foreign
injuries from relief under that statute so long as the required
domestic effect and proximate cause are shown. As the
Supreme Court has noted, “Congress [did not] place the
relevant words ‘gives rise to a claim’ in the FTAIA to
suggest any geographical limitation.” Empagran, 542 U.S.
at 174 (citing 15 U.S.C. § 6a); see also Empagran, 417 F.3d
at 1269 (“FTAIA’s ‘domestic effects’ requirement ‘does not
exclude all persons abroad from recovering under the
antitrust laws of the United States’”) (citation omitted). And
as we explained earlier, the domestic effect of higher U.S.
prices gave rise to the foreign injury suffered by Seagate
Thailand and Seagate Singapore because they adopted those
rigged U.S. pricing in buying the suspension assemblies.
Second, we are not confronted with a typical foreign
injury here but rather a case suffused with domestic
elements. Seagate Singapore and Seagate Thailand suffered
injuries because of the price-fixing first inflicted on U.S. soil
and suffered by Americans. NHK admitted it entered into a
conspiracy to “fix the prices of . . . suspension assemblies to

30

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

be sold in the United States and elsewhere.” Nearly all the
misconduct in this case—whether bid rigging, illegal job
posts, and so on—either targeted or centered on the United
States because fixing U.S. commercial activity meant
inflating the price of suspension assemblies everywhere.
According to Empagran, the Sherman Act very much was
intended to cover harm like this. 542 U.S. at 163. Put
another way, if a claim for foreign injury passes the FTAIA’s
proximate cause test, then such foreign harm no longer is
“independent” of the domestic harm that is properly the
province of our courts—the harms are “intertwined.” Id. at
166. Simply put, Americans too were harmed by NHK’s
price-fixing, even if foreign companies are the ones suing
based on their injuries suffered abroad. 6 In such a unique
scenario, we can and must allow civil claimants to claim
damages, especially given the government’s decision not to
seek restitution in its criminal prosecution because of its
assumption that civil remedies would be available to private
parties.
And because the FTAIA imposes very stringent “direct
effect” and proximate cause requirements, it ensures that any
foreign injuries covered by the Sherman Act are the direct
result of harm to United States commerce—just as Congress
intended. See Empagran, 542 U.S. at 163 (citing House
Report). Tenuous or speculative injuries will not pass this
test. See, e.g., In re DRAM, 546 F.3d at 989–90 (dismissing
theory of causation that was too vague, speculative, and
could not be explained by counsel at oral argument). Nor
will indirect or modest effect on domestic commerce—it
To be fair, Americans will not directly reap the benefits of any damages
award in this case. But the deterrent effect on future anticompetitive
behavior will still benefit the United States.

6

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

31

must be “direct” and “substantial.” We thus do not see our
decision as opening U.S. courts to a flood of lawsuits from
suppliers overseas.
Finally, the international comity concerns raised in
Motorola are addressed (or perhaps outweighed) by the
price-fixing’s substantial impact on United States
commerce. See 775 F.3d at 824. As the Court noted in
Empagran, we “have long held that application of our
antitrust laws to foreign anticompetitive conduct is . . .
consistent with principles of prescriptive comity[] insofar as
they reflect a legislative effort to redress domestic” harm.
542 U.S. at 165. International comity may have to be cast
aside when foreign misconduct harms Americans. When
foreigners engage in unlawful behavior in the United States
that harms Americans, we need not reflexively close our
courthouse doors just because another foreign company
takes the lead against such illegal conduct.
* * * *
Finally, we affirm the district court’s determination that
Seagate Thailand was not a mere purchasing agent for
Seagate Technology LLC because it did not purchase the
suspension assemblies “for” Seagate LLC but bought them
for its own purposes. But the district court’s statement that
Seagate’s Second Amended Complaint “includes no factual
allegations that any Seagate Plaintiff indirectly purchased an
SA or a product containing an SA” appears to be incorrect.
While indirect purchases are not the focus of the Second
Amended Complaint, it repeatedly alleges that Seagate
Technology LLC bought suspension assemblies; these
purchases necessarily were indirect. Moreover, Seagate’s
Sherman Act claim alleges that NHK “[sold] suspension
assemblies to customers in the U.S. or elsewhere for

32

SEAGATE TECH. LLC V. NHK SPRING CO. LTD.

incorporation into products sold in the U.S. at
supracompetitive prices”—which appears to state a pass-on
theory of harm.
Because an allegation under FED. R. CIV. PROC. 8 does
not require any magic words but only a short and plain
statement of the claim, Seagate Technology LLC may be
entitled to test whether its alleged high degree of control over
Seagate Thailand and Seagate Singapore gives it standing to
sue as an indirect purchaser of price-fixed suspension
assemblies. See Ill. Brick Co. v. Illinois, 431 U.S. 720, 736
n.16 (1977); Del. Valley Surgical Supply Inc. v. Johnson &
Johnson, 523 F.3d 1116, 1123 n.1 (9th Cir. 2008)
(recognizing “standing for an indirect purchaser if . . . the
direct purchaser is owned or controlled by the indirect
purchaser”); see also In re ATM Fee Antitrust Litig., 686
F.3d 741, 749 (9th Cir. 2012) (“[I]ndirect purchasers may
sue when customers of the direct purchaser own or control
the direct purchaser . . . .”). We leave it to the district court
in the first instance to determine whether Seagate
Technology LLC has a viable indirect purchaser claim under
Illinois Brick.
CONCLUSION
We vacate the district court’s May 15, 2023 and
November 17, 2023 orders granting partial summary
judgment for NHK and remand for further proceedings
consistent with this opinion.
VACATED AND REMANDED.

