FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
IN RE: PARKS DIVERSIFIED, L.P.,
DEBTOR
TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS
INC.; NORTH VALLEY MALL II,
LLC; NORTH VALLEY
REGIONAL CENTER LLC; PARKS
DIVERSIFIED, LP; RICHARD
PARKS, individually and as trustee
of the Parks Family Trust; LUCIA
PARKS, individually and as trustee
of the Parks Family Trust,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
MARC FORSYTHE, an individual;
GOE FORSYTHE & HODGES,
LLP, a limited liability partnership,
Defendants - Appellees,
and
KIMURA LONDON AND WHITE,
LLP, a California limited liability
partnership, LINDA WONG, an

No. 24-5516
D.C. No.
8:24-cv-00227SVW
OPINION

2

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

individual, MICHAEL S. LEBOFF,
an individual, WILLIAM LONDON,
an individual, DAVID KLEIN, an
individual, DARRELL P. WHITE, an
individual, KLEIN & WILSON, an
entity of form unknown, MAXX
SHARP, an individual, TODD B.
BECKER, an individual,
Defendants.
IN RE: PARKS DIVERSIFIED, L.P.,
DEBTOR
TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS
INC.; NORTH VALLEY MALL II,
LLC; NORTH VALLEY
REGIONAL CENTER LLC; PARKS
DIVERSIFIED, LP; RICHARD
PARKS, individually and as trustee
of the Parks Family Trust; LUCIA
PARKS, individually and as trustee
of the Parks Family Trust,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
DAVID KLEIN; MARC
FORSYTHE, an individual; GOE
FORSYTHE & HODGES, LLP, a
limited liability

No. 24-5517
D.C. No.
8:23-cv-02230SVW

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

partnership;MICHAEL S. LEBOFF,
an individual; KLEIN & WILSON,
an entity of form unknown;
DARRELL P. WHITE, an individual;
WILLIAM LONDON, an individual;
MAXX SHARP, an individual;
KIMURA LONDON AND WHITE,
LLP, a California limited liability
partnership; LINDA WONG, an
individual; TODD B. BECKER, an
individual,
Defendants - Appellees.
TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS
INC.; NORTH VALLEY MALL II,
LLC; NORTH VALLEY
REGIONAL CENTER LLC; PARKS
DIVERSIFIED, LP; RICHARD
PARKS; LUCIA PARKS,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
DAVID KLEIN,
Defendant - Appellant,
and
MARC FORSYTHE, GOE

No. 24-5911
D.C. No.
8:23-cv-02230SVW

3

4

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

FORSYTHE & HODGES, LLP,
MICHAEL S. LEBOFF, KLEIN &
WILSON, DARRELL P. WHITE,
WILLIAM LONDON, MAXX
SHARP, KIMURA LONDON AND
WHITE, LLP, LINDA WONG,
TODD B. BECKER,
Defendants.
TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS
INC.; NORTH VALLEY MALL II,
LLC; NORTH VALLEY
REGIONAL CENTER LLC; PARKS
DIVERSIFIED, LP; RICHARD
PARKS; LUCIA PARKS,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
DARRELL P. WHITE; WILLIAM
LONDON; MAXX SHARP;
KIMURA LONDON AND WHITE,
LLP,
Defendants - Appellants,
and
DAVID KLEIN, MARC
FORSYTHE, GOE FORSYTHE &

No. 24-5918
D.C. No.
8:23-cv-02230SVW

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

HODGES, LLP, MICHAEL S.
LEBOFF, KLEIN & WILSON,
LINDA WONG, TODD B.
BECKER,
Defendants.
TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS
INC.; NORTH VALLEY MALL II,
LLC; NORTH VALLEY
REGIONAL CENTER LLC; PARKS
DIVERSIFIED, LP; RICHARD
PARKS; LUCIA PARKS,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
TODD B. BECKER,
Defendant - Appellant,
and
DAVID KLEIN, MARC
FORSYTHE, GOE FORSYTHE &
HODGES, LLP, MICHAEL S.
LEBOFF, KLEIN & WILSON,
DARRELL P. WHITE, WILLIAM
LONDON, MAXX SHARP,
KIMURA LONDON AND WHITE,
LLP, LINDA WONG,

No. 24-5920
D.C. No.
8:23-cv-02230SVW

5

6

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

Defendants.
TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS
INC.; NORTH VALLEY MALL II,
LLC; NORTH VALLEY
REGIONAL CENTER LLC; PARKS
DIVERSIFIED, LP; RICHARD
PARKS, individually and as trustee
of the Parks Family Trust; LUCIA
PARKS, individually and as trustee
of the Parks Family Trust,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
DAVID KLEIN, an individual;
MARC FORSYTHE, an individual;
GOE FORSYTHE & HODGES,
LLP, a limited liability partnership;
MICHAEL S. LEBOFF, an
individual; KLEIN & WILSON, an
entity of form unknown; DARRELL
P. WHITE, an individual; WILLIAM
LONDON, an individual; MAXX
SHARP, an individual; KIMURA
LONDON AND WHITE, LLP, a
California limited liability
partnership; LINDA WONG, an
individual; TODD B. BECKER, an
individual,

No. 24-6314
D.C. No.
8:23-cv-02230SVW

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

Defendants - Appellees.
IN RE: PARKS, DIVERSIFIED,
L.P., DEBTOR
TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS
INC.; NORTH VALLEY MALL II,
LLC; NORTH VALLEY
REGIONAL CENTER LLC; PARKS
DIVERSIFIED, LP; RICHARD
PARKS; LUCIA PARKS,

No. 24-6638
D.C. No.
8:24-cv-00228SVW

Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
DAVID KLEIN; MARC
FORSYTHE; GOE FORSYTHE &
HODGES, LLP; MICHAEL S.
LEBOFF; KLEIN & WILSON;
DARRELL P. WHITE; WILLIAM
LONDON; MAXX SHARP;
KIMURA LONDON AND WHITE,
LLP; LINDA WONG; TODD B.
BECKER,
Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Stephen V. Wilson, District Judge, Presiding

7

8

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

Argued and Submitted February 9, 2026
Pasadena, California
Filed March 3, 2026
Before: John B. Owens, Lawrence VanDyke, and Holly A.
Thomas, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge VanDyke
SUMMARY *
Bankruptcy
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment
affirming in part the bankruptcy court’s dismissal of an
adversary proceeding brought by Richard and Lucia Parks,
their family real-estate business Parks Diversified, L.P., and
several related entities against the Parkses’ son David Klein
and other defendants.
Klein, through the law firm Goe Forsythe & Hodges
LLP, filed a voluntary chapter 11 bankruptcy petition on
behalf of Parks Diversified. The Parkses contended that the
petition was filed improperly without their consent, but,
under a stipulation, the parties agreed to dismissal of the
bankruptcy case in exchange for the Parkses’ waiver of
certain claims. The Parkses, however, along with Parks
Diversified and related entitles, later filed a state court
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

9

complaint against Klein and others. At defendant Goe
Forsythe’s request, the bankruptcy court reopened the Parks
Diversified bankruptcy case, and Goe Forsythe removed the
state-court complaint to the bankruptcy court. The
bankruptcy court granted defendants’ motions to dismiss for
failure to state a claim and their special motions to
strike. Plaintiffs appealed to the district court, which held
that the bankruptcy court had subject-matter jurisdiction
over the bankruptcy case because corporate authority to file
a bankruptcy is not a question of subject-matter
jurisdiction. The district court held that the bankruptcy court
therefore had subject-matter jurisdiction to approve the
stipulation and to enforce that stipulation by dismissing
claims in the removed proceeding. The district court
remanded the case to the bankruptcy court to vacate any
orders that the bankruptcy court lacked jurisdiction to enter
and to remand to state court claims over which the
bankruptcy court lacked jurisdiction.
The panel concluded that the Court of Appeals had
jurisdiction because the district court’s order was final under
the four-factor test from In re Emery. The need to avoid
piecemeal litigation and judicial efficiency favored
jurisdiction. The need to avoid piecemeal litigation and
judicial efficiency favored jurisdiction. The systemic
interest in preserving the bankruptcy court’s role as a finder
of fact was preserved by exercising jurisdiction because the
panel’s analysis of the merits of this appeal required no
factfinding. Although the parties did not show that delaying
review would cause irreparable harm, the factors as a whole
favored the conclusion that the district court’s jurisdictional
order was “final” under the pragmatic In re Emery approach.
Agreeing with the Second and Third Circuits, the panel
held that if an individual files a voluntary chapter 11

10

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

bankruptcy petition purportedly on behalf of an entity but
lacks the requisite authority to do so, the bankruptcy court is
not deprived of subject-matter jurisdiction over the
bankruptcy case. Corporate authority to file for bankruptcy,
while important and mandatory, is not jurisdictional. The
panel concluded that Price v. Gurney, 324 U.S. 100 (1945),
which held that if a district court determines that a
bankruptcy petition was filed without corporate authority, it
must dismiss the petition, did not provide a rule of subjectmatter jurisdiction. The panel therefore affirmed the district
court’s conclusion that the bankruptcy court had subjectmatter jurisdiction notwithstanding Klein’s authority to file
the bankruptcy petition.
The panel stated that it would decide other issues raised
by the parties in a subsequent disposition.

COUNSEL
Michael G. Dawe (argued), Vincent S. Choi, and Tom R.
Normandin, Prenovost Normandin Dawe & Rocha, Santa
Ana, California, for Plaintiffs-Appellants.
Ethan T. Boyer (argued), James R. Lance, and Genevieve M.
Sauter, Noonan Lance Boyer & Banach LLP, San Diego,
California; Gregory B. Emdee (argued) and James J. Kjar,
Kjar McKenna & Stockalper LLP, El Segundo, California;
Paul A. Grammatico (argued), Grammatico Law Firm,
Glendale, California; Jeffrey D. Cawdrey, Andrea K.
Williams, and Kathryn M.S. Catherwood, Gordon Rees
Skully Mansukhani LLP, San Diego, California; David
Klein, Pro Se, San Juan Capistrano, California; Kyra E.
Andrassy, Raines Feldman Littrell LLP, Newport Beach,

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

11

California; John J. Immordino, Wilson Elser Moskowitz
Edelman & Dicker LLP, Los Angeles, California; for
Defendants-Appellees.

OPINION
VANDYKE, Circuit Judge:
There’s an old proverb that “blood runs thicker than
water.” Perhaps. But this case illustrates that, at least
sometimes, money trumps both.
Family bonds
notwithstanding, when greed, money, and power get in the
way—as they did here—the most bitter forms of discord and
resentment can result.
This case involves a yearslong family feud between
Appellants Richard and Lucia Parks (“the Parkses”) and
their son, Appellee/Cross-Appellant David Klein (“Klein”),
over control of a family real-estate business, Appellant Parks
Diversified, L.P. (“Parks Diversified”), and several related
entities. It ostensibly all started in bankruptcy court, when
Klein—purportedly on behalf of Parks Diversified—filed a
chapter 11 bankruptcy petition. But the Parkses claimed that
they were the only general partners of Parks Diversified, that
Klein had no authority to file the bankruptcy petition, and
that Klein filed the petition as part of a fraudulent scheme to
divest his parents of their real-estate interests. The petition
stayed mostly still in bankruptcy court for months until the
parties agreed to dismiss it, with the question of Klein’s
authority—or lack thereof—still unresolved.
Today, we’re not tasked with deciding the central issue
of who owns what. Instead, we must answer a narrower,

12

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

more esoteric question: if an individual files a voluntary
chapter 11 bankruptcy petition purportedly on behalf of an
entity but lacks the requisite authority to do so, does the
bankruptcy court lack subject-matter jurisdiction over the
bankruptcy case? The bankruptcy court and district court
both said “no.” Joining the reasoning of two other circuits,1
and declining to create a circuit split, we agree. Corporate
authority to file for bankruptcy—while important and
mandatory—is not jurisdictional. We affirm the conclusion
of the district court that the bankruptcy court had
subject-matter jurisdiction notwithstanding Klein’s
authority to file the bankruptcy petition. 2
I. Background
A. Act I: 3 Parks Diversified files for bankruptcy—or
does it?
The curtain of this case rose on June 22, 2021, when
Klein, through the law firm of Goe Forsythe & Hodges LLP
(“Goe Forsythe”), filed a voluntary chapter 11 bankruptcy
petition on behalf of Parks Diversified in the United States
Bankruptcy Court for the Central District of California. The
bankruptcy-petition form required “[a]n individual who is
authorized to act on behalf of” Parks Diversified to sign.
Klein signed, purportedly in his capacity as a “General
See New Haven Radio, Inc. v. Meister (In re Martin-Trigona), 760 F.2d
1334, 1340 (2d Cir. 1985); Protopapas v. Brenntag AG (In re Whittaker
Clark & Daniels Inc.), 152 F.4th 432, 443 (3d Cir. 2025).

1

The parties raise several other issues on appeal. We will decide those
issues in a subsequent disposition.

2

Though some readers might find The Tale of the Parks Diversified
Bankruptcy to be slightly less absorbing than a Shakespearean drama,
the district court and the parties referred to the various stages of this case
in thespian terms. For consistency, we do the same.

3

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

13

Partner” of Parks Diversified. A week after the petition was
filed, Parks Diversified moved to employ Goe Forsythe as
General Counsel.
Klein signed the corresponding
application on behalf of Parks Diversified, once again as
General Partner. The Parkses opposed the motion, arguing
that “[c]ounsel should not be employed … because [the]
bankruptcy case was not authorized to be filed.” The
Parkses contended that they were “the co-founders and 97%
interest-holders” of Parks Diversified and that the
bankruptcy petition “was filed without [their] consent and
approval … in bad faith as an improper litigation tactic.”
Parks Diversified also moved (again, via Klein, as
“General Partner”) to appoint the law firm Klein & Wilson
(“K&W”) as special litigation counsel. The Parkses opposed
this motion too—they argued, once again, that both the
bankruptcy filing and the motion were unauthorized. They
also argued that K&W would have a conflict of interest
because it represented Klein in then-pending state-court
litigation. Before the motion was granted, K&W filed, on
Parks Diversified’s behalf, an adversary complaint against
the Parkses alleging, among other things, that the Parkses
had “improperly siphoned off a substantial amount of money
from [Parks Diversified], which was improperly classified as
‘loans’ to [the Parkses],” in violation of the partnership
agreement.
Before the bankruptcy court ruled on the motions to
appoint counsel, the Parkses moved to dismiss the
bankruptcy case, or convert it to a chapter 7 case, for cause
under 11 U.S.C. § 1112(b). The Parkses raised a multitude
of arguments in their motion, including that “[t]he
bankruptcy case was filed without authorization from the
partners of” Parks Diversified and “[was] therefore a legal
nullity[] and a fraud on the Court.” The Parkses didn’t

14

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

explicitly argue that the court lacked subject-matter
jurisdiction—just that the case should be dismissed for
cause, or alternatively, converted to chapter 7.
The bankruptcy court denied the motion “insofar as it
request[ed] dismissal of the case,” but the denial was
“expressly without prejudice.” The court then granted the
motions to employ Goe Forsythe as general counsel and
K&W as special litigation counsel.
The Parkses once again moved to dismiss for cause.
Once again, the Parkses raised a host of arguments in support
of dismissal, including that “the petition was unauthorized.”
But before the bankruptcy court could rule on the motion or
otherwise decide whether the bankruptcy petition was
unauthorized, the Parkses got the dismissal that they wished
for. Only it came at a cost: under a stipulation, the parties
(including the Parkses) agreed to dismiss the case in
exchange for the Parkses’ waiver of claims against Goe
Forsythe and K&W. The bankruptcy court approved the
stipulation and dismissed the case.
B. Act II: The Parkses strike back, in state court, until
the case is removed back to bankruptcy court and
dismissed.
But it appears that the Parkses experienced buyer’s
remorse over the stipulation. Eleven months after the
Parkses seemingly agreed to a ceasefire, they, along with
Parks Diversified and related entities, filed a complaint in
California Superior Court. The defendants of the sprawling
state-court complaint included Klein, Goe Forsythe, K&W,
and others. The complaint accused Klein of orchestrating a
scheme (with help from the other defendants) to strip the
Parkses of their interest in Parks Diversified and the other
plaintiff entities by hijacking Parks Diversified and, among

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

15

other things, filing the bankruptcy petition without authority.
The complaint enumerated claims for declaratory relief,
breach of fiduciary duty, legal malpractice, breach of
contract, conversion, elder abuse, and intentional infliction
of emotional distress.
At Goe Forsythe’s request, the bankruptcy court
reopened the Parks Diversified bankruptcy case. The next
day, Goe Forsythe removed the state-court complaint to the
bankruptcy court. Ten days after that, the bankruptcy court
scheduled a hearing and ordered counsel to appear and
“show cause why the Court should not abstain and remand
the case.” At the hearing, Plaintiffs’ counsel argued that the
bankruptcy court “never had jurisdiction over any
bankruptcy of Parks Diversified” because Klein lacked the
authority to file the petition. The bankruptcy court rejected
that argument, reasoning that the authority issue was a
“nuanced question,” but not a “jurisdictional question.” The
court declined to remand the case.
Goe Forsythe, K&W, and Klein all moved to dismiss the
claims against them for failure to state a claim, and they also
filed special motions to strike under California’s
anti-SLAPP statute. In response, Plaintiffs moved to remand
the case to state court.
The court held a hearing on the motions. At the hearing,
Plaintiffs’ counsel raised the authority issue again and
contended that “whether Mr. Klein had authority” was a key
question in determining whether the court had subject-matter
jurisdiction. The bankruptcy court asked Plaintiffs’ counsel
whether the bankruptcy court was required to determine the
authority issue before approving the Act I stipulation. “No,”
Plaintiffs’ counsel answered, “I think the Court did what that
stipulation would have mandated.”

16

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

The bankruptcy court proceeded to deny the motion to
remand and to grant, without leave to amend, the motions to
dismiss and special motions to strike filed by Goe Forsythe,
K&W, and Klein. Plaintiffs appealed to the district court,
and the Act II curtain fell.
C. Act III: The district court rejects Appellants’
argument that the authority issue is jurisdictional.
On appeal to the district court, Appellants challenged the
bankruptcy-court orders granting the defendants’ motions to
dismiss and special motions to strike. The district court held
that the bankruptcy court had overstepped the bounds of its
“core” jurisdiction and ancillary jurisdiction when it
resolved the Act II claims against Klein and other defendants
who were not signatories to the Act I dismissal. But the
court held that the bankruptcy court did have subject-matter
jurisdiction over the Act I bankruptcy case because
“[c]orporate authority to file a bankruptcy is not a question
of subject matter jurisdiction.” From that conclusion, the
court determined that the bankruptcy court possessed
subject-matter jurisdiction to approve the Act I stipulation
and to enforce that stipulation by dismissing the Act II
claims against Goe Forsythe and K&W. The district court
remanded the case to the bankruptcy court with instructions
to vacate any orders that the bankruptcy court lacked
jurisdiction to enter (as determined by the district court) and
to remand claims over which the bankruptcy court lacked
jurisdiction to state court. The Parkses, Parks Diversified,
and the related entities appealed.
And now, Act IV.

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

17

II. Jurisdiction
We have “an independent duty to examine our [own]
subject matter jurisdiction,” even if the parties don’t raise the
issue. In re Emery, 317 F.3d 1064, 1068 (9th Cir. 2003) (per
curiam). We have jurisdiction to determine whether we have
jurisdiction, and we review our own jurisdiction de novo.
See Hernandez v. Ashcroft, 345 F.3d 824, 833 n.5 (9th Cir.
2003); Silver Sage Partners, Ltd. v. City of Desert Hot
Springs (In re City of Desert Hot Springs), 339 F.3d 782, 787
(9th Cir. 2003).
We have “jurisdiction of appeals from all final decisions,
judgments, orders, and decrees entered” by a district court
on an appeal from a bankruptcy judge’s decision. 28 U.S.C.
§ 158(d)(1); see also 28 U.S.C. § 158(a). Ninth Circuit cases
have established two different tests for whether a
district-court order resolving an appeal from a bankruptcy
court is final. Under the test from SS Farms, LLC v. Sharp
(In re SK Foods, L.P.), the finality of the district-court order
hinges on the finality of the underlying bankruptcy-court
order. 676 F.3d 798, 801–02 (9th Cir. 2012). In contrast,
the test from In re Emery takes a “pragmatic approach to
finality” by “balanc[ing] several policies”: “(1) the need to
avoid piecemeal litigation; (2) judicial efficiency; (3) the
systematic interest in preserving the bankruptcy court’s role
as a finder of fact; and (4) whether delaying review would
cause irreparable harm.” 317 F.3d at 1068 (citing Scovis v.
Henrichsen (In re Scovis), 249 F.3d 975, 980 (9th Cir.
2001)). Where, as here, the district court remands the case
to the bankruptcy court, we apply the four-factor test from
In re Emery. See Gugliuzza v. Fed. Trade Comm’n (In re
Gugliuzza), 852 F.3d 884, 894 (9th Cir. 2017).

18

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

A. The first In re Emery factor
Analysis of the first In re Emery factor largely depends
on the task charged to the bankruptcy court on remand from
the district court. When the district court remands to the
bankruptcy court “to engage in ‘further fact-finding’” before
entering judgment, then the first factor disfavors jurisdiction
in this court. Sahagun v. Landmark Fence Co., Inc. (In re
Landmark Fence Co., Inc.), 801 F.3d 1099, 1103 (9th Cir.
2015). But “if all that remains to do on remand is a purely
mechanical or computational task such that the proceedings
on remand are highly unlikely to generate a new appeal or to
affect the issue that the disappointed party wants to raise on
appeal, then immediately deciding the issue will save time
without raising the spectre of piecemeal appeals.” Saxman
v. Educ. Credit Mgmt. Corp. (In re Saxman), 325 F.3d 1168,
1172 (9th Cir. 2003) (citation modified); see also Scholz v.
United States Tr. (In re Scholz), 699 F.3d 1167, 1171 (9th
Cir. 2012) (finding that the first factor favored appellate
jurisdiction where “the bankruptcy court’s task on remand
would have been primarily a computational one”).
Here, the district court charged the bankruptcy court with
a “purely mechanical” task on remand: vacate any orders
that the bankruptcy court lacked jurisdiction to enter
(consistent with the district court’s jurisdictional analysis),
and remand any remaining claims to state court. In re
Saxman, 325 F.3d at 1172. Nothing in the district-court
order requires the bankruptcy court to engage in any further
fact finding. Cf. In re Gugliuzza, 852 F.3d at 898
(dismissing for lack of jurisdiction where “the district court
remanded the case to the bankruptcy court for fact-finding
on a central issue”); In re Landmark Fence, 801 F.3d at
1103. All the bankruptcy court would need to do is apply
the district-court order, which clearly and definitively

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

19

delineated the scope of the bankruptcy court’s ancillary
jurisdiction, to each order that fell outside the scope of that
jurisdiction.
For the same reason, it is “highly unlikely” that the
proceedings on remand to the bankruptcy court would
“generate a new appeal” or affect the issue of whether the
bankruptcy court lacked subject-matter jurisdiction over the
Act I case. In re Saxman, 325 F.3d at 1172. Remand to state
court is the only thing that the bankruptcy court would do on
remand if we declined to exercise jurisdiction, so a new
appeal likely wouldn’t raise any issues not already raised
here. Thus, the need-to-avoid-piecemeal-litigation factor
favors jurisdiction.
B. The second In re Emery factor
Our jurisprudence is unclear on the role of the second In
re Emery factor in the appellate-jurisdiction analysis. In
2015, the Supreme Court decided Bullard v. Blue Hills Bank,
575 U.S. 496 (2015), and ruled that a bankruptcy-court order
denying confirmation of a Chapter 13 plan is not “final” and
thus not immediately appealable. Two years later, a panel of
our court drew the following inference from Bullard:
[A]lthough the Supreme Court gave weight
to considerations regarding the efficiency of
the judicial process, it chose not to adopt a
case-by-case approach to this issue. Rather
than evaluate whether the appeal of a specific
ruling would be efficient in a particular case,
the Court adopted the general principle that
only decisions that alter the status quo or fix
the parties’ rights and obligations could be
appealed. The Court focused on ensuring “a

20

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

meaningful constraint on the availability of
appellate review” as opposed to expanding
the universe of appealable interlocutory
orders.
In re Gugliuzza, 852 F.3d at 897 (footnote and citations
omitted); but see State Bar of Nev. v. Wike (In re Wike), 145
F.4th 1221, 1226 (9th Cir. 2025) (finding appellate
jurisdiction in part because “it would be far more efficient”
for the court to resolve the appeal immediately). We need
not resolve this apparent tension, because judicial efficiency
and Gugliuzza’s “general principle” both favor appellate
jurisdiction here.
To the extent that judicial efficiency matters, it is served
by exercising jurisdiction in this case for the same reasons
that the first Emery factor favors jurisdiction—the risk of
piecemeal litigation would be greater if we were to decline
to exercise jurisdiction, and piecemeal litigation is generally
inefficient. See, e.g., Ocwen Loan Servicing, LLC v. Marino
(In re Marino), 949 F.3d 483, 487 (9th Cir. 2020)
(addressing the first two Emery factors simultaneously).
To the extent that case-by-case judicial efficiency is
irrelevant, the district court’s order satisfies the alternative
standard that In re Gugliuzza articulated. Indeed, the district
court’s rejection of the appellants’ jurisdictional arguments
“fix[ed] the parties’ rights and obligations” by effectively
blessing the Act I stipulation and the Act III dismissal,
without leave to amend, of the claims against Goe Forsythe
and K&W. In re Gugliuzza, 852 F.3d at 897. Either way,
the judicial-efficiency factor favors jurisdiction.

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

21

C. The third and fourth In re Emery factors
Our analysis of the merits of this appeal requires no
fact-finding, so the “systematic interest in preserving the
bankruptcy court’s role as a finder of fact” is preserved by
exercising jurisdiction. In re Emery, 317 F.3d at 1068. And
although the parties fail to identify any “irreparable harm”
that “delaying review would cause,” the factors as a whole
favor the conclusion that the district court’s jurisdictional
order is “final” under the pragmatic approach. Id. We thus
proceed to the merits of the issue before us. 4
III. Standard of Review
We review the scope of the bankruptcy court’s
subject-matter jurisdiction de novo. See Piombo Corp. v.
Castlerock Props. (In re Castlerock Props.), 781 F.2d 159,
161 (9th Cir. 1986).
IV. Discussion
“In determining the scope of a bankruptcy court’s
jurisdiction, our analysis begins with the statutory scheme
because the ‘jurisdiction of the bankruptcy courts, like that
of other federal courts, is grounded in, and limited by,
statute.’” Battle Ground Plaza, LLC v. Ray (In re Ray), 624
F.3d 1124, 1130 (9th Cir. 2010) (quoting Celotex Corp. v.
Edwards, 514 U.S. 300, 307 (1995)). Federal law gives
“original and exclusive jurisdiction of all cases under title
11” and “original but not exclusive jurisdiction of all civil
proceedings arising under title 11, or arising in or related to
cases under title 11” to “the district courts.” 28 U.S.C.
§ 1334(a), (b). But the “district court may provide that any
We do not decide whether we have jurisdiction over any of the other
remaining issues on appeal that will be addressed in a subsequent
disposition.
4

22

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

or all” of these cases or proceedings “be referred to the
bankruptcy judges for the district.” 28 U.S.C. § 157(a). The
United States District Court for the Central District of
California has referred cases and proceedings to the
bankruptcy judges for the district to the fullest extent
allowed under section 157. See In the Matter of Reference
of Cases and Proceedings to the Bankruptcy Judges of the
Central District of California, and Reference of Appeals to
the Bankruptcy Appellate Panel, Gen. Order No. 13-05, at 1
(C.D. Cal. July 1, 2013).
Appellants propose that there is another limit on
bankruptcy jurisdiction—one outside the statutory
framework. They argue that the Supreme Court’s decision
in Price v. Gurney, 324 U.S. 100 (1945), not only “limits
Bankruptcy Court authority over an unauthorized
bankruptcy filing to the dismissal of the bankruptcy” but that
that limit is grounded in subject-matter jurisdiction. We
disagree that Price provides a rule of subject-matter
jurisdiction. And although the Price rule is mandatory, it
doesn’t provide a basis for reversing or vacating any of the
orders below, even if we assume, without deciding, that
Klein filed the chapter 11 petition without the authority of
Parks Diversified.
A. Price does not provide a rule of subject-matter
jurisdiction.
In Price, the Supreme Court expounded on the principle
that “the initiation of [bankruptcy] proceedings, like the run
of corporate activities, is left to the corporation itself, i.e. to
those who have the power of management.” 324 U.S. at 104.
In that case, Western Tool & Manufacturing Co., a
corporation with over 1,000 shares of stock, defaulted on
interest payments on bonds, so the bondholders effectively

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

23

controlled the company. Id. at 101. The bondholders also
had a lien on the company’s property. Id. They petitioned,
in state court, to foreclose on the lien, and they obtained a
six-figure judgment. Id. James Gurney, who owned seven
shares of stock and represented other stockholders, filed, in
federal district court, a petition for bankruptcy relief in the
company’s name. 5 Id. at 102. Gurney argued that the
company’s liabilities exceeded its assets and that
reorganization was necessary to preserve the stockholders’
equity in the company, and he alleged that he had attempted
to convince the company’s management to file the
bankruptcy petition to no avail. Id. The bondholders and
corporation moved to dismiss the bankruptcy petition as
unauthorized, and the district court granted the motion. Id.
at 103. The court of appeals reversed. Id.
The Supreme Court reversed the court of appeals. Id. at
107. First, the Court explained that the petition didn’t
qualify as an involuntary petition—which, at the time, could
be filed by “three or more creditors who [had] claims … in
the aggregate” of at least $5,000—because stocks didn’t
count as “claims.” Id. at 103. Next, the Court turned to
Gurney’s argument that the bankruptcy was necessary to
overcome the company management’s breach of trust
against the stockholders and that the bankruptcy could
proceed “under the familiar rules governing derivative
actions.” Id. at 104. The bankruptcy case was not a
derivative action, the Court explained, because it was “not a
suit to enforce or protect a corporate right” or “to protect the
interests of [the stockholders] as stockholders.” Id. at 105.
Congress didn’t establish bankruptcy courts until 1978, over thirty
years after Price was decided. See N. Pipeline Constr. Co. v. Marathon
Pipe Line Co., 458 U.S. 50, 52–53 (1982).
5

24

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

The Court held that the district court could not entertain
Gurney’s claims because if the district court determined that
a bankruptcy petition was filed without corporate authority,
“it ha[d] no alternative but to dismiss the petition.” Id. at
105–06.
The Court couched its ruling in jurisdictional terms,
using language that Appellants repeatedly emphasize in their
opening brief. The Court stated that there was “no … basis
of federal jurisdiction” and that “under the Bankruptcy Act
the power of the court to shift the management of a
corporation from one group to another, to settle
intracorporate disputes, and to adjust intracorporate claims
is strictly limited to those situations where a petition has
been approved.” Id. at 105–06. It further explained that
“nowhere is there any indication that Congress bestowed on
the bankruptcy court jurisdiction to determine that those who
in fact do not have the authority to speak for the corporation
as a matter of local law are entitled to be given such authority
and therefore should be empowered to file a petition on
behalf of the corporation.” Id. at 107. At bottom, the Court
stated:
[A]ny such enlargement of the jurisdiction of
the bankruptcy courts is for Congress. It has
chosen to withhold from stockholders the
right[] to institute these bankruptcy
proceedings.
In absence of federal
incorporation, intracorporate disputes of the
character presented here are, as we have said,
governed by state law. The creation of a new
basis of federal jurisdiction to hear them, pass

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

25

on their merits, and adjudicate them is a
legislative act.
Id.
On its surface, this language may sound like the Price
Court made a jurisdictional ruling. But there are at least two
compelling reasons why the rule announced by the Supreme
Court in Price shouldn’t be considered jurisdictional.
First, more recent Supreme Court jurisprudence has
walked back so-called “jurisdictional” decisions like Price,
and that jurisprudence cuts against the theory that Price is
jurisdictional. “‘Jurisdiction,’ it has been observed, ‘is a
word of many, too many, meanings.’” Steel Co. v. Citizens
for a Better Env’t, 523 U.S. 83, 90 (1998) (quoting United
States v. Vanness, 85 F.3d 661, 663 n.2 (D.C. Cir. 1996)).
“Courts, including [the Supreme Court], ... have been less
than meticulous” in the use of that word—they have often
referenced requirements as “jurisdictional” when those
requirements lack the potency of a rule of subject-matter
jurisdiction and are more properly characterized as
claims-processing rules or elements of causes of action.
Kontrick v. Ryan, 540 U.S. 443, 454 (2004); see also
Arbaugh v. Y&H Corp., 546 U.S. 500, 511 (2006) (“Subject
matter jurisdiction in federal-question cases is sometimes
erroneously conflated with a plaintiff’s need and ability to
prove the defendant bound by the federal law asserted as the
predicate for relief—a merits-related determination.”
(citation omitted)).
Over the last four decades, the Court has consistently
explained that many of its prior passing references to
“jurisdiction” do not, in fact, mean “subject matter
jurisdiction.” See, e.g., Arbaugh, 546 U.S. at 511; Kontrick,
540 U.S. at 454; Henderson ex rel. Henderson v. Shinseki,

26

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

562 U.S. 428, 435 (2011); Reed Elsevier, Inc. v. Muchnick,
559 U.S. 154, 161 (2010); Boechler, P.C. v. Comm’r, 596
U.S. 199, 203–04 (2022); Zipes v. Trans World Airlines,
Inc., 455 U.S. 385, 395–97 (1982); Wilkins v. United States,
598 U.S. 152, 156–57 (2023); Steel Co., 523 U.S. at 90–91.
It has also more clearly articulated a standard for whether a
rule really is “jurisdictional”: it is “jurisdictional only if
Congress ‘clearly states’ that it is.” Boechler, 596 U.S. at
203 (quoting Arbaugh, 546 U.S. at 515). “Congress need
not ‘incant magic words,’ but the ‘traditional tools of
statutory construction must plainly show that Congress
imbued a procedural bar with jurisdictional consequences.’”
Id. (first quoting Sebelius v. Auburn Reg’l Med. Ctr., 568
U.S. 145, 153 (2013); and then quoting United States v. Kwai
Fun Wong, 575 U.S. 402, 410 (2015)).
Arbaugh provides particularly helpful instruction here.
There, the Court decided whether the requirement in Title
VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 that an employer have
“fifteen or more employees” to be an “employer” under the
statute, 42 U.S.C. § 2000e(b), is: (a) a rule of subject-matter
jurisdiction, or (b), “a substantive ingredient of a Title VII
claim,” Arbaugh, 546 U.S. at 503. The Court determined
that the latter is correct.
Id. at 504.
Although
federal-question jurisdiction requires that a case “aris[e]”
under a federal law (and Title VII doesn’t apply if the
employee-numerosity requirement is unsatisfied), id. at 513
(quoting 28 U.S.C. § 1331), the Court explained that
“[n]othing in the text of Title VII indicates that Congress
intended courts, on their own motion, to assure that the
employee-numerosity requirement is met,” id. at 514.
Here, Appellants’ arguments run counter to Arbaugh’s
reasoning.
Appellants argue that “an unauthorized
bankruptcy petition fails as a matter of law to create a federal

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

27

question because no voluntary debtor nor any bankruptcy
estate has been submitted to the jurisdiction of the court.”
That’s no different than the losing argument in Arbaugh:
(1) Title VII is the law that provides the sole basis for
federal-question jurisdiction; (2) but Title VII doesn’t apply
to employers with fewer than fifteen employees;
(3) therefore, the case doesn’t “aris[e]” under Title VII; and
(4) therefore, there is no federal-question jurisdiction. See
id. at 504, 511.
The Arbaugh Court rejected that reasoning, see id. at
504, 514–516, and we reject it here, too. Section 301 of the
Bankruptcy Code says that “[a] voluntary case under a
chapter of this title is commenced by the filing with the
bankruptcy court of a petition under such chapter by an
entity that may be a debtor under such chapter.” 11 U.S.C.
§ 301(a). Although the bankruptcy case commences only
when the petition is filed “by an entity that may be a debtor,”
id., “[n]othing in the text of [the statute] indicates that
Congress intended courts, on their own motion, to assure
that” the petition is filed by an authorized agent of the debtor,
Arbaugh, 546 U.S. at 514.
Second, other principles cut against the theory that Price
is jurisdictional. “[S]ubject-matter jurisdiction, because it
involves a court’s power to hear a case, can never be
forfeited or waived.” Id. (quoting United States v. Cotton,
535 U.S. 625, 630 (2002)). Treating the authority-to-file
issue as jurisdictional is incompatible with that fundamental
rule. Under California law, for instance, “[a]n agency may
be created, and an authority may be conferred, by a
precedent authorization or a subsequent ratification.” Cal.
Civ. Code § 2307 (emphasis added). And, in general, “the
effect of a ratification is that the authority which is given to
the purported agent relates back to the time when he

28

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

performed the act.” Rakestraw v. Rodrigues, 500 P.2d 1401,
1405 (Cal. 1972). If an unauthorized person filed a
voluntary bankruptcy petition purportedly on behalf of a
corporation, the corporation could ratify the filing, and the
authority would be treated as having existed at the time of
the filing. But that effectively amounts to a waiver of the
Price rule, which further evinces that the rule is not
jurisdictional.
Appellants argue that, if we decide the Price rule is not
jurisdictional, then a single shareholder of a public
corporation like Apple, Inc. could subject all the property of
the corporation to the “jurisdiction of [a] Bankruptcy Court”
by simply filing a bankruptcy petition. Aside from
conflating the concepts of in rem jurisdiction and
subject-matter jurisdiction, this hypothetical ignores reality.
First, a single shareholder cannot file a corporate bankruptcy
petition on his own—he’d need to hire counsel to file the
petition on the corporation’s behalf. See, e.g., Rowland v.
Cal. Men’s Colony, Unit II Men’s Advisory Council, 506
U.S. 194, 201–02 (1993) (“It has been the law for the better
part of two centuries … that a corporation may appear in the
federal courts only through licensed counsel.” (citation
omitted)); Licht v. Am. W. Airlines (In re Am. W. Airlines),
40 F.3d 1058, 1059 (9th Cir. 1994) (per curiam). So, before
the petition could even be filed, a shareholder would need to
find an attorney (who would be subject to all applicable rules
of professional conduct, including Federal Rule of Civil
Procedure 11 and Federal Rule of Bankruptcy Procedure
9011) and convince him to file a meritless bankruptcy
petition on behalf of a corporation that he has no authority to
represent. Even if the shareholder got this far, his lack of
authority would be obvious early in the bankruptcy
proceedings, and the bankruptcy court would be required to

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

29

dismiss the case as unauthorized under Price (unless the
shareholder voluntarily dismissed his case first, which is
precisely what happened here).
Our reasoning comports with the conclusions of two
other circuits. See In re Martin-Trigona, 760 F.2d at 1340
(“Although the debtor casts this issue as one of subject
matter jurisdiction, it is not; the bankruptcy court acquired
subject matter jurisdiction over this bankruptcy proceeding
when the petition was filed.”); In re Whittaker Clark &
Daniels, 152 F.4th at 443 (“The statutes granting federal
courts jurisdiction over bankruptcy cases do not attach
jurisdictional significance to the propriety of a debtor’s
petition.”). Aware of no other circuit that has reached a
contrary result, we decline to create a circuit split.
B. Price does not provide a basis for reversal or vacatur
of any of the bankruptcy court’s Act I orders.
As an alternative to their jurisdictional argument,
Appellants argue that the Price rule embodies “a compulsory
legal principle that … the Bankruptcy Court … must
determine the filing is authorized before issuing any order
which presupposes its subject matter jurisdiction over the
putative ‘voluntary’ debtor and the putative ‘bankruptcy
estate.’” Axiomatically, Price’s core holding—that a court
“has no alternative but to dismiss” an unauthorized
petition—is binding. 324 U.S. at 106. Even more
axiomatically, the bankruptcy court had jurisdiction to
decide the Price issue itself. Gonzales v. Parks, 830 F.2d
1033, 1035 (9th Cir. 1987) (“Filings of bankruptcy petitions
are a matter of exclusive federal jurisdiction.”).
But here, the bankruptcy court hadn’t even reached the
Price issue before the parties agreed to the stipulation, which
the bankruptcy court approved to dismiss the Act I

30

TALON DIVERSIFIED HOLDINGS INC. V. FORSYTHE

bankruptcy. Appellants concede (as they must) that the
bankruptcy court would have been able to dismiss the Act I
bankruptcy pursuant to Price. By the same token, the
bankruptcy court did not err by dismissing the case pursuant
to the stipulation without resolving the Price issue. 6
In their opening brief, Appellants don’t challenge any of
the other orders that the bankruptcy court issued in Act I
before the stipulation. So the Price rule—even though it is
mandatory, and even if it must be applied somewhat early in
the grand scheme of the bankruptcy proceedings—doesn’t
provide a basis for reversing or vacating any orders here. 7
V. Conclusion
Joining two of our sister circuits, the bankruptcy court,
and the district court, we hold that corporate authority to file
a bankruptcy petition—while necessary—does not impact a
bankruptcy court’s subject-matter jurisdiction. 8
AFFIRMED.

Appellants conceded as much during an Act II hearing, when
Appellants’ counsel agreed that the bankruptcy court did not need to
answer the authority question before approving the stipulation and
dismissing the case.
6

We do not decide here whether the bankruptcy court had jurisdiction
over the removed Act II case or whether the bankruptcy court’s dismissal
of the Act II claims was proper. All we decide is that any jurisdictional
defect in the Act II case (assuming without deciding that one existed)
was independent of Price.
7

8

Appellants’ request for judicial notice (Dkt. No. 64) is denied.

