FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
AMERICAN FEDERATION OF
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES,
AFL-CIO; NATIONAL NURSES
ORGANIZING COMMITTEE NATIONAL NURSES UNITED;
SERVICE EMPLOYEES
INTERNATIONAL UNION;
NATIONAL ASSOCIATION OF
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES,
INC.; NATIONAL FEDERATION
OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES, IAM,
AFL-CIO; AMERICAN
FEDERATION OF STATE,
COUNTY & MUNICIPAL
EMPLOYEES, AFL-CIO,
Plaintiffs - Appellees,
v.
DONALD J. TRUMP, in his official
capacity as President of the United
States; UNITED STATES OFFICE
OF PERSONNEL MANAGEMENT;
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT
OF AGRICULTURE; BROOKE
ROLLINS, in her official capacity as
Secretary of Agriculture; UNITED

No. 25-4014
D.C. No.
3:25-cv-03070-JD

OPINION

2

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

STATES DEPARTMENT OF
DEFENSE; PETER HEGSETH, in
his official capacity as U.S. Secretary
of Defense; UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY;
CHRIS WRIGHT, in his official
capacity as Secretary of Energy;
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT
OF HEALTH AND HUMAN
SERVICES; ROBERT F. KENNEDY,
Jr., in his official capacity as
Secretary of Health and Human
Services; UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND
SECURITY; KRISTI NOEM, in her
official capacity as Secretary of
Homeland Security; UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF
HOUSING AND URBAN
DEVELOPMENT; SCOTT
TURNER, in his official capacity as
Secretary of the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development;
DOJ - UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE;
PAMELA BONDI, Attorney General,
in her official capacity as U.S.
Attorney General; UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF THE
INTERIOR; DOUG BURGUM, in
his official capacity as Secretary of
the Interior; LORI CHAVEZDEREMER, in her official capacity

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

as Secretary of Labor; MARCO
RUBIO, in his official capacities as
U.S. Secretary of State and Acting
Administrator for the U.S. Agency
for International Development;
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT
OF THE TREASURY; SCOTT
BESSENT, in his official capacity as
U.S. Secretary of the Treasury;
UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION; SEAN
DUFFY, in his official capacity as
Secretary of Transportation; UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF
VETERANS AFFAIRS; DOUG
COLLINS, in his official capacity as
U.S. Secretary of Veterans Affairs;
UNITED STATES
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
AGENCY; LEE ZELDIN, in his
official capacity as Administrator of
the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency; UNITED STATES
GENERAL SERVICES
ADMINISTRATION; STEPHEN
EHIKIAN, in his official capacity as
Acting Administrator of the General
Services Administration; NATIONAL
SCIENCE FOUNDATION; SOCIAL
SECURITY ADMINISTRATION;
CHARLES EZELL, in his official
capacity as Acting Director of the
U.S. Office of Personnel

3

4

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

Management; UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF STATE;
UNITED STATES AGENCY FOR
INTERNATIONAL
DEVELOPMENT; SETHURAMAN
PANCHANATHAN, in his official
capacity as Director of the U.S.
National Science Foundation; U.S.
INTERNATIONAL TRADE
COMMISSION; AMY A. KARPEL,
in her official capacity as Chair of the
U.S. International Trade
Commission; LELAND DUDEK,
Acting Commissioner of Social
Security, in his official capacity as
Acting Commissioner of the Social
Security Administration; UNITED
STATES DEPARTMENT OF
EDUCATION; LINDA MCMAHON,
in her official capacity as Secretary of
Education,
Defendants - Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Northern District of California
James Donato, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted January 12, 2026
Pasadena, California
Filed February 26, 2026

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

5

Before: John B. Owens, Bridget S. Bade, and Daniel A.
Bress, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Bress;
Concurrence by Judge Owens
SUMMARY*
Preliminary Injunction / Labor Law
The panel vacated the district court’s preliminary
injunction enjoining President Trump’s Executive Order
14,251, which excludes certain federal agencies and
subdivisions from collective bargaining requirements under
the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute
(FSLMRS) based on national security concerns.
The FSLMRS protects the rights of federal employees to
join labor unions, but exempts several federal agencies from
coverage and authorizes the President to exclude other
agencies and subdivisions from coverage based on national
security considerations. Invoking 5 U.S.C. § 7103(b)(1), the
President determined that certain agencies “have as a
primary
function
intelligence,
counterintelligence,
investigative, or national security work,” and that the
FSLMRS “cannot be applied to these agencies and agency
subdivisions in a manner consistent with national security
requirements and considerations.”

*

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

6

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

Under Executive Order 14,251, the agencies designated
for exclusion include, inter alia, the Departments of State,
Justice, and Veterans Affairs, the EPA, nearly all of the
Departments of Energy, Defense, and Treasury, and various
subdivisions of the Departments of Agriculture, Homeland
Security, and Health and Human Services.
Plaintiffs, six unions representing roughly 800,000
federal civilian employees, sued the President and various
other federal defendants, alleging that Executive Order
14,251 constituted First Amendment retaliation, as well as
other claims. The district court preliminarily enjoined
Executive Order 14,251 based solely on plaintiffs’ First
Amendment retaliation claim, finding a serious question as
to whether Executive Order 14,251 served to retaliate
against the plaintiff unions for filing lawsuits against and
publicly criticizing the current Administration.
The panel agreed with the district court that it had
jurisdiction over this case. Although the government
maintained that plaintiffs should have filed these claims
before the Federal Labor Relations Authority, the panel
explained that it was not “fairly discernible” that Congress
meant for unions representing employees excluded from the
statutory scheme to nonetheless use that scheme to challenge
their exclusion.
Turning to the merits, the panel concluded that plaintiffs
had not demonstrated a likelihood of success or serious
questions on the merits of plaintiffs’ retaliation claim.
Assuming without deciding that plaintiffs made out a prima
facie case of retaliation, the panel held that on this record the
government has shown that the President would have taken
the same action even in the absence of the protected conduct.
Executive Order 14,251 discloses no retaliatory animus on

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

7

its face and instead expresses that the President’s primary
concern with union activity was its interference with national
security. Accordingly, because Executive Order 14,251 has
a legitimate grounding in national security concerns, apart
from any retaliatory animus, the government on the existing
record has shown that the President would have taken the
same actions in the absence of the asserted retaliatory intent.
Because plaintiffs failed to show a likelihood of success
on the merits, the panel did not need to consider the
remaining preliminary injunction factors—irreparable harm,
the balance of equities, and the public interest—but if the
panel were to consider those factors, the government has the
edge.
Concurring, Judge Owens wrote separately to note that
the panel was reviewing a preliminary injunction, which
potentially is a distinction with a difference. Because the
review of a preliminary injunction is limited to the law
applied by the district court and because the fully developed
factual record may be materially different from that initially
before the district court, the disposition of appeals from most
preliminary injunctions may provide little guidance as to the
appropriate disposition on the merits.

8

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

COUNSEL
Ramya Ravindran (argued), Lane M. Shadgett, J. Alexander
Rowell, and Abigail V. Carter, Bredhoff & Kaiser PLLC,
Washington, D.C.; Catha Worthman and Daniel M.
Feinberg, Feinberg Jackson Worthman & Wasow LLP,
Berkeley, California; Rushab Sanghvi, Office of the General
Counsel, American Federation of Government Employees,
Washington, D.C.; for Plaintiffs-Appellees.
Joshua M. Koppel (argued), Melissa N. Patterson, Tyler J.
Becker, Andrew M. Bernie, and Benjamin T. Takemoto,
Attorneys; Eric D. McArthur, Deputy Assistant Attorney
General; Brett A. Shumate, Assistant Attorney General;
United States Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.;
Defendants-Appellants.
Asim M. Bhansali, Kate E. Lazarus, and Scott W. Taylor,
Kwun Bhansali Lazarus LLP, San Francisco, California;
Elena Goldstein, Democracy Forward Foundation,
Washington, D.C.; for Amici Curiae Former Senior National
Security Officials and Advisors, and Other Interested
Parties.
Nicholas F. Soares, Katheen L. Millian, and Molly
Bernstein, Terris Pravlik & Millian LLP, Washington, D.C.,
for Amici Curiae American Civil Liberties Union &
American Civil Liberties Union of Northern California.
Harold C. Becker and Norman L. Eisen, Democracy
Defenders Fund, Washington, D.C., for Amici Curiae
Former Cabinet Secretaries, Agency Heads, and Other
Federal Officers and Employees.
Barry Winograd, Arbitrator & Mediator, Oakland,
California; Matthew W. Finkin, College of Law, University

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

9

of Illinois, Champaign, Illinois; Joshua M. Javits, Arbitrator
& Mediator, Washington, D.C.; for Amicus Curiae National
Academy of Arbitrators.
Paul Dimick and Madeleine Demeules, Assistant Attorneys
General; Elizabeth C. Kramer, Solicitor General; Keith
Ellison, Minnesota Attorney General; Minnesota Office of
the Attorney General, St. Paul, Minnesota; Kristin K. Mayes,
Arizona Attorney General, Office of the Arizona Attorney
General, Phoenix, Arizona; Rob Bonta, California Attorney
General, Office of the California Attorney General, Oakland,
California; Philip J. Weiser, Colorado Attorney General,
Office of the Colorado Attorney General, Denver, Colorado;
William Tong, Connecticut Attorney General, Office of the
Connecticut Attorney General, Hartford, Connecticut;
Kathleen Jennings, Delaware Attorney General, Office of
the Delaware Attorney General, Wilmington, Delaware;
Brian L. Schwalb, District of Columbia Attorney General,
Office of the District of Columbia Attorney General,
Washington, D.C.; Anne E. Lopez, Hawai‘i Attorney
General, Office of the Hawai‘i Attorney General, Honolulu,
Hawai‘i; Kwame Raoul, Illinois Attorney General, Office of
the Illinois Attorney General, Chicago, Illinois; Aaron M.
Frey, Maine Attorney General, Office of the Maine Attorney
General, Augusta, Maine; Anthony G. Brown, Maryland
Attorney General, Office of the Maryland Attorney General,
Baltimore, Maryland; Andrea J. Campbell, Massachusetts
Attorney General, Office of the Massachusetts Attorney
General, Boston, Massachusetts; Dana Nessel, Michigan
Attorney General, Office of the Michigan Attorney General,
Lansing, Michigan; Aaron D. Ford, Nevada Attorney
General, Office of the Nevada Attorney General, Carson
City, Nevada; Matthew J. Platkin, New Jersey Attorney
General, Office of the New Jersey Attorney General,

10

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

Trenton, New Jersey; Letitia James, New York Attorney
General, Office of the New York Attorney General, New
York, New York; Jeff Jackson, North Carolina Attorney
General, Office of the North Carolina Attorney General,
Raleigh, North Carolina; Dan Rayfield, Oregon Attorney
General, Office of the Oregon Attorney General, Salem,
Oregon; Peter F. Neronha, Rhode Island Attorney General,
Office of the Rhode Island Attorney General, Providence,
Rhode Island; Charity R. Clark, Vermont Attorney General,
Office of the Vermont Attorney General, Montpelier,
Vermont; Joshua L. Kaul, Wisconsin Attorney General,
Office of the Wisconsin Attorney General, Madison,
Wisconsin; Nicholas W. Brown, Washington Attorney
General, Office of the Washington Attorney General,
Olympia, Washington; for Amici Curiae Minnesota,
Arizona, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware,
District of Columbia, Hawai’i, Illinois, Maine, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Michigan, Nevada, New Jersey, New York,
North Carolina, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont,
Washington and Wisconsin.

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

11

OPINION
BRESS, Circuit Judge:
On March 27, 2025, the President signed Executive
Order 14,251, invoking his authority under 5 U.S.C.
§ 7103(b)(1) to exclude various federal agencies and
subdivisions from collective bargaining requirements based
on national security considerations. The district court
preliminarily enjoined the Executive Order after concluding
that the President issued it to retaliate against federal
employee unions, in violation of the First Amendment. We
stayed the district court’s injunction pending appeal. See
Am. Fed’n of Gov’t Emps. v. Trump (AFGE I), 148 F.4th 648
(9th Cir. 2025) (per curiam). Consistent with the reasoning
in our prior stay order, we now vacate the preliminary
injunction.
I
A
As part of the Civil Service Reform Act of 1978 (CSRA),
Congress enacted the Federal Service Labor-Management
Relations Statute (FSLMRS) to “govern labor relations
between the executive branch and its employees.” Am.
Fed’n of Gov’t Emps. v. Trump, 929 F.3d 748, 752 (D.C. Cir.
2019) [hereinafter AFGE 2019]; see also Ohio Adjutant
Gen.’s Dep’t v. FLRA, 598 U.S. 449, 452 (2023). The
FSLMRS is located within Title VII of the CSRA and
Chapter 71 of Title 5 of the U.S. Code. See AFGE 2019, 929
F.3d at 752; Pub. L. No. 95-454, § 701, 92 Stat. 1111 (1978)
(codified at 5 U.S.C. §§ 7101–35).
In the FSLMRS, Congress found that “labor
organizations and collective bargaining in the civil service

12

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

are in the public interest.” 5 U.S.C. § 7101(a). The
FSLMRS therefore “expressly protects the rights of federal
employees ‘to form, join, or assist any labor organization, or
to refrain from any such activity,’ and imposes on federal
agencies and labor organizations a duty to bargain
collectively in good faith.” Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco &
Firearms v. FLRA, 464 U.S. 89, 92 (1983) (first quoting 5
U.S.C. § 7102; and then citing 5 U.S.C. § 7116(a)(5),
(b)(5)).
The FSLMRS exempts several federal agencies from
coverage, including the FBI, the Government Accountability
Office, and the CIA. 5 U.S.C. § 7103(a)(3). Importantly for
this case, the statute also authorizes the President to exclude
other agencies and subdivisions from coverage based on
national security considerations. See id. § 7103(b)(1). This
portion of the statute reads:
The President may issue an order excluding
any agency or subdivision thereof from
coverage under this chapter if the President
determines that—
(A) the agency or subdivision has as a
primary
function
intelligence,
counterintelligence,
investigative,
or
national security work, and
(B) the provisions of this chapter cannot be
applied to that agency or subdivision in a
manner consistent with national security
requirements and considerations.
Id.; see also Am. Fed’n of Gov’t Emps. v. Reagan, 870 F.2d
723, 725 (D.C. Cir. 1989). Since the FSLMRS was enacted

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

13

in 1978, every President other than President Biden has
signed executive orders that exclude designated agency
subdivisions from the FSLMRS under § 7103(b)(1). See
AFGE I, 148 F.4th at 652.
On March 27, 2025, President Trump signed Executive
Order 14,251 (EO 14,251). Exec. Order No. 14,251, 90 Fed.
Reg. 14553 (Apr. 3, 2025). Invoking § 7103(b)(1), the
President determined that certain agencies “have as a
primary
function
intelligence,
counterintelligence,
investigative, or national security work,” and that the
FSLMRS “cannot be applied to these agencies and agency
subdivisions in a manner consistent with national security
requirements and considerations.” Id. § 1.
Under EO 14,251, the agencies designated for exclusion
include, inter alia, the Departments of State, Justice, and
Veterans Affairs, the EPA, nearly all of the Departments of
Energy, Defense, and Treasury, and various subdivisions of
the Departments of Agriculture, Homeland Security, and
Health and Human Services. Id. § 2. The Executive Order
exempted from exclusion “local employing offices of any
agency police officers, security guards, or firefighters,
provided that this exclusion does not apply to the Bureau of
Prisons.” Id. It appears that EO 14,251 is the largest single
effort to date to exclude agencies and subdivisions from
collective bargaining on national security grounds.
Upon issuing the Executive Order, the White House
posted a “Fact Sheet” to the White House website. White
House, Fact Sheet: President Donald J. Trump Exempts
Agencies with National Security Missions from Federal
Collective Bargaining Requirements (Mar. 27, 2025),
https://perma.cc/Y7HR-4W3H. The Fact Sheet emphasized
that the President “is taking action to ensure that agencies

14

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

vital to national security can execute their missions without
delay and protect the American people.” It described how
the various excluded agencies were involved in national
security functions relating to national defense, border
security, foreign relations, energy security, cybersecurity,
and so on. The Fact Sheet further explained that collective
bargaining agreements and “hostile Federal unions” were
impeding national security, including by hamstringing
agencies in their ability to address poor performance and
employee misconduct.
Citing “widely fil[ed]” union grievances, the Fact Sheet
also stated that “[c]ertain Federal unions have declared war
on President Trump’s agenda” and that “[t]he largest Federal
union describes itself as ‘fighting back’ against Trump.” The
Fact Sheet further expressed that “President Trump supports
constructive partnerships with unions who work with him”
but “will not tolerate mass obstruction that jeopardizes his
ability to manage agencies with vital national security
missions.”
The Office of Personnel Management (OPM) issued its
own guidance on EO 14,251 in a memorandum addressed to
the heads of federal departments and agencies.
Memorandum from Charles Ezell, Acting Dir., Off. of Pers.
Mgmt., to Heads and Acting Heads of Departments and
Agencies (Mar. 27, 2025), https://perma.cc/QH4A-MQ9F
(OPM Guidance).
The OPM Guidance highlighted
provisions of agency collective bargaining agreements
(CBAs) that were inconsistent with the President’s national
security priorities, including provisions that limited
performance accountability, return to in-person work, and
large-scale reductions in force. OPM’s Guidance explained,
for example, that CBAs “often create procedural
impediments to separating poor performers,” and that these

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

15

and other CBA requirements interfered with the President’s
national security objectives.
B
On April 3, 2025, six unions (collectively, AFGE), which
represent roughly 800,000 federal civilian employees, sued
the President and various other federal defendants, seeking
to invalidate EO 14,251. AFGE asserted that EO 14,251
constituted First Amendment retaliation and viewpoint
discrimination, exceeded the President’s authority under
§ 7103(b)(1) (an ultra vires claim), and violated AFGE’s due
process, contract, and equal protection rights.
On June 24, 2025, the district court preliminarily
enjoined EO 14,251 based solely on AFGE’s First
Amendment retaliation claim, which it viewed as the
strongest. The district court found that AFGE “demonstrated
a serious question” as to whether EO 14,251 served to
retaliate against the plaintiff unions for filing lawsuits
against and publicly criticizing the current Administration.
The district court relied heavily on what it characterized as
the Fact Sheet’s expression of “a clear point of view that is
hostile to federal labor unions and their First Amendment
activities.” While the district court stated that it would not
“sit in judgment of the President’s national security
determinations,” it concluded that the Order’s invocation of
the national security authority in § 7103(b)(1) did not rebut
the nexus between EO 14,251 and the unions’ protected
speech. Because AFGE demonstrated a “serious question”
going to the merits, and because the balance of the harms
and the equities favored AFGE, the district court
preliminarily enjoined EO 14,251.
The United States filed an emergency motion in this
court to stay the district court’s preliminary injunction. After

16

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

granting an administrative stay, we heard oral argument and
granted the government’s motion for a stay pending appeal.
See AFGE I, 148 F.4th at 654. We concluded that even if
AFGE had made out a prima facie claim of retaliation, “on
this record the government has shown that the President
would have taken the same action even in the absence of the
protected conduct.” Id. at 654–55 (citing Mt. Healthy City
Sch. Dist. Bd. of Educ. v. Doyle, 429 U.S. 274, 287 (1977)).
In our view, the Executive Order on its face did not express
retaliatory animus, but rather conveyed the “President’s
determination that the excluded agencies have primary
functions implicating national security and cannot be
subjected to the FSLMRS consistent with national security.”
Id. at 655.
In addition, and assuming we could look “beyond the
facial neutrality of the order” and consider the Fact Sheet,
we concluded that “the Fact Sheet conveys an overarching
objective of protecting national security through its
assessment that collective bargaining impedes the
functioning of agencies with national security-related
responsibilities.” Id. (citation omitted). We therefore held
that the Executive Order and Fact Sheet “fairly indicate that
the President would have issued the Order, regardless of
[p]laintiffs’ speech, based on the perceived impact of union
activities and collective bargaining on the sound operation
of agencies and subdivisions with national security-related
missions.” Id. Because the government was likely to
succeed on the merits of the retaliation claim, and because
the balance of the harms and equities favored the

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

17

government, we stayed the district court’s preliminary
injunction pending appeal. Id. at 655–56.1
After full briefing and a second oral argument, we now
consider the government’s appeal of the preliminary
injunction.
We have jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C.
§ 1292(a)(1). We review the grant of a preliminary
injunction for abuse of discretion but review underlying
legal principles de novo. Mobilize the Message, LLC v.
Bonta, 50 F.4th 928, 934 (9th Cir. 2022). A preliminary
injunction is “an extraordinary remedy never awarded as of
right.” Winter v. Nat. Res. Def. Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 24
(2008). A plaintiff is entitled to a preliminary injunction if it
establishes a likelihood of success on the merits, irreparable
harm in the absence of preliminary relief, that the balance of
equities tips in its favor, and that an injunction is in the public
interest. See id. at 20. In the Ninth Circuit, a preliminary
injunction is also appropriate when a “plaintiff
demonstrates . . . serious
questions
going
to
the
merits . . . and the balance of hardships tips sharply in the
plaintiff’s favor.” All. for the Wild Rockies v. Cottrell, 632
F.3d 1127, 1134–35 (9th Cir. 2011) (citation omitted).
II
As an initial matter, we agree with the district court that
it had jurisdiction over this case. AFGE’s claims plainly
arise under federal law. See 28 U.S.C. § 1331. But the
government maintains that plaintiffs should have filed these
1

Our stay order was consistent with recent D.C. Circuit decisions staying
two preliminary injunctions of Executive Order 14,251 involving ultra
vires claims. See Nat’l Treasury Emps. Union v. Trump, No. 25-5157,
2025 WL 1441563 (D.C. Cir. May 16, 2025) [hereinafter NTEU]; Am.
Foreign Serv. Ass’n v. Trump, No. 25-5184, 2025 WL 1742853 (D.C. Cir.
June 20, 2025).

18

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

claims before the Federal Labor Relations Authority
(FLRA). See 5 U.S.C. § 7105(a)(1) (the FLRA “shall be
responsible for carrying out the purpose of this chapter”); see
also Axon Enter., Inc. v. FTC, 598 U.S. 175, 185 (2023)
(explaining that “[a] special statutory review
scheme . . . may preclude district courts from exercising
jurisdiction over challenges to federal agency action”).
Although it is true that Congress “intended the
[FSLMRS] statutory scheme to be exclusive with respect to
claims within its scope,” AFGE 2019, 929 F.3d at 755,
AFGE’s challenges are best viewed as outside the statute’s
scope because EO 14,251 has excluded the employees of the
listed agencies from coverage under Chapter 71 (i.e., the
FSLMRS). In issuing the Executive Order, the President
pursuant to § 7103(b)(1) determined “that Chapter 71 of title
5, United States Code, cannot be applied to these agencies
and agency subdivisions in a manner consistent with national
security requirements and considerations.” EO 14,251, § 1
(emphasis added). The President thus excluded these
agencies “from coverage under this chapter” (again meaning
Chapter 71 and the FSLMRS). 5 U.S.C. § 7103(b)(1). In
these circumstances, it is not “‘fairly discernible’ that
Congress precluded district court jurisdiction” over AFGE’s
claims, Elgin v. Dep’t of Treasury, 567 U.S. 1, 10 (2012)
(quoting Thunder Basin Coal Co. v. Reich, 510 U.S. 200, 207
(1994)), i.e., that Congress meant for unions representing
employees excluded from the statutory scheme to
nonetheless use that scheme to challenge their exclusion.
Consistent with this understanding, the FLRA has
regularly found that it lacks jurisdiction to hear cases
brought by a union against an agency excluded from
FSLMRS coverage under § 7103(b)(1). See, e.g., U.S. Att’ys
Off. S.D. Tex. v. AFGE Loc. 3966, 57 F.L.R.A. 750, 750

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

19

(2002); Dep’t of the Navy v. Navtelcom Unit Loc. No. 1, 6
F.L.R.A. 498, 499 & n.6 (1981); AFGE Loc. 2118 v. Dep’t of
Energy, 2 F.L.R.A. 916, 918 (1980). And by recently filing
affirmative litigation against unions in federal district courts
over EO 14,251, the government itself took the apparent
position in those cases that district courts have jurisdiction
to decide cases involving agencies excluded from Chapter
71 coverage. See Dep’t of Def. v. AFGE Dist. 10, 792
F. Supp. 3d 711, 715–16 (W.D. Tex. 2025); Dep’t of Treasury
v. NTEU Ch. 73, 783 F. Supp. 3d 991, 998 (E.D. Ky. 2025).
Although the government is not estopped from taking a
different position now, its prior litigation conduct
underscores that Congress’s intent to route these particular
claims to the FLRA is not fairly discernible.
Turning to the merits, we conclude that on this record,
AFGE has not demonstrated a likelihood of success or
serious questions on the merits of its retaliation claim. “To
bring a First Amendment retaliation claim, the plaintiff must
allege that (1) it engaged in constitutionally protected
activity; (2) the defendant’s actions would ‘chill a person of
ordinary firmness’ from continuing to engage in the
protected activity; and (3) the protected activity was a
substantial motivating factor in the defendant’s conduct—
i.e., that there was a nexus between the defendant’s actions
and an intent to chill speech.” Ariz. Students’ Ass’n v. Ariz.
Bd. of Regents, 824 F.3d 858, 867 (9th Cir. 2016) (quoting
O’Brien v. Welty, 818 F.3d 920, 933–34 (9th Cir. 2016)).
Upon making a prima facie showing, “the burden shifts to
the defendant official to demonstrate that even without the
impetus to retaliate he would have taken the action
complained of.” Boquist v. Courtney, 32 F.4th 764, 777–78
(9th Cir. 2022) (quoting Hartman v. Moore, 547 U.S. 250,
260 (2006)); see also Mt. Healthy, 429 U.S. at 287. “If there

20

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

is a finding that retaliation was not the but-for cause of the
adverse action, the claim fails for lack of causal connection
between unconstitutional motive and resulting harm, despite
proof of some retaliatory animus in the official’s mind.”
Boquist, 32 F.4th at 778 (alterations omitted) (quoting
Hartman, 547 U.S. at 260).
Assuming without deciding that AFGE has made out a
prima facie case of retaliation, we conclude, as we did when
we stayed the district court’s injunction pending appeal, that
“on this record the government has shown that the President
would have taken the same action even in the absence of the
protected conduct.” AFGE I, 148 F.4th at 654–55 (citing Mt.
Healthy, 429 U.S. at 287). The district court seemingly did
not address this issue, but it is an impediment for AFGE on
the record as it now stands.
EO 14,251 discloses no retaliatory animus on its face.
See id. at 655. It instead expresses that the President’s
primary—if not only—concern with union activity was its
interference with national security, which is a judgment that
§ 7103(b)(1) at least presumptively entrusts to the
Executive. AFGE thus relies heavily on the Fact Sheet.
There may be some question about whether it is proper to
consider that kind of extrinsic evidence in the face of a
neutral Executive Order, particularly when the President is
exercising congressionally delegated national security
authority, for which an appreciable measure of deference is
traditionally afforded. See Trump v. Hawaii, 585 U.S. 667,
685–86, 703–05 (2018); Ziglar v. Abbasi, 582 U.S. 120, 142
(2017); AFGE I, 148 F.4th at 655.

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

21

But even considering the Fact Sheet, matters do not
change. As we previously recognized:
[E]ven accepting for purposes of argument
that certain statements in the Fact Sheet
reflect a degree of retaliatory animus toward
Plaintiffs’ First Amendment activities, the
Fact Sheet, taken as a whole, also
demonstrates the President’s focus on
national security. The Fact Sheet first
explains that the excluded agencies and
subdivisions serve national security in areas
including national defense, border security,
foreign relations, energy security, pandemic
preparedness
and
response,
and
cybersecurity. It then states that the
FSLMRS allows unions to “obstruct agency
management,” including by impeding the
removal of employees for “poor performance
or misconduct,” which is contrary to the need
for “a responsive and accountable civil
service to protect our national security.” The
Fact Sheet thus conveys that EO
14,251 advances national security by
curtailing union activity that undermines the
agile functioning of government offices with
national security-related missions. In other
words, the Fact Sheet conveys an overarching
objective of protecting national security
through its assessment that collective
bargaining impedes the functioning of

22

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

agencies with
responsibilities.

national

security-related

AFGE I, 148 F.4th at 655 (citations omitted). The OPM
Guidance on EO 14,251 buttresses this conclusion because
it highlights how collective bargaining has assertedly
undermined the President’s ability to oversee the federal
workforce, which is essential “to take care that the law is
faithfully executed and to protect America’s national
security.” In short, because EO 14,251 has “a legitimate
grounding in national security concerns, quite apart from
any” retaliatory animus, Trump, 585 U.S. at 706, the
government on the existing record has shown that the
President would have taken the same actions in the absence
of the asserted retaliatory intent.
AFGE focuses on particular lines in the Fact Sheet that
we quoted above. But the law does not require us to read the
Fact Sheet in the worst possible light, especially when
considered alongside the neutral Executive Order and OPM
Guidance, and when affording the President some measure
of deference in the national security context. See, e.g.,
Holder v. Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U.S. 1, 33–34
(2010). The statements in the Fact Sheet on which AFGE
relies do not torpedo the government’s “but-for” defense,
especially when there is no basis to conclude that collective
bargaining activities that assertedly bear on national security
can never inform a § 7103(b)(1) determination. See 5 U.S.C.
§ 7103(b)(1)(B) (permitting the President to consider “the
provisions of this chapter,” i.e., the FSLMRS, in relation to
“national security requirements and considerations”). On
this record, the government has shown not only that it could
have, but also that it would have, issued EO 14,251 in the
absence of the asserted retaliatory animus. See Trump, 585

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

23

U.S. at 706 (“It cannot be said that it is impossible to discern
a relationship to legitimate state interests or that the policy is
inexplicable by anything but animus.” (quotation marks
omitted)).
AFGE tries to cast doubt on this conclusion by focusing
on those agencies and subdivisions that EO 14,251 excludes
from the FSLMRS. It argues that some of the excluded
agencies have no meaningful role in promoting national
security and that some police officers, security guards, and
firefighters at otherwise excluded agencies are exempted
from exclusion under EO 14,251, except for Bureau of
Prisons (BOP) personnel, who are exclusively represented
by AFGE. AFGE asks us to infer discriminatory animus
based on how EO 14,251 treats different agencies and
subdivisions.
Although we express no opinion on plaintiffs’ ultra vires
claim, which is not before us, AFGE asks us to read too much
into the coverage of EO 14,251. There are various reasons
why a President, when exercising national security authority
under § 7103(b)(1), might include some agencies and
subdivisions but not others in an Executive Order like this,
and why one might also distinguish between police officers
and BOP personnel. Even assuming EO 14,251 is over- or
under-inclusive, it does not follow that the President would
only have issued this Executive Order because of his
purported retaliatory animus. We need not infer the most
jaundiced, retaliatory account of the President’s actions
without greater support in the record. Regardless, even if the
nature of EO 14,251’s line-drawing raises some inference of
discriminatory animus, there is still substantial indicia in the
record—through the Order itself, the Fact Sheet, and the
OPM Guidance—that the President still “would have issued
the Order, regardless of Plaintiffs’ speech, based on the

24

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

perceived impact of union activities and collective
bargaining on the sound operation of agencies and
subdivisions with national security-related missions.”
AFGE I, 148 F.4th at 655.
Because AFGE “has failed to show the likelihood of
success on the merits, we need not consider the remaining
three Winter elements.” Garcia v. Google, Inc., 786 F.3d
733, 740 (9th Cir. 2015) (en banc) (alteration and quotation
marks omitted) (quoting Ass’n des Eleveurs de Canards et
d’Oies du Quebec v. Harris, 729 F.3d 937, 944 (9th Cir.
2013)). But even if we were to consider them, the
government has the edge.
A preliminary injunction would harm the United States
because “[a]ny time a State is enjoined by a court from
effectuating statutes enacted by representatives of its people,
it suffers a form of irreparable injury.” Trump v. CASA, Inc.,
606 U.S. 831, 861 (2025) (quoting Maryland v. King, 567
U.S. 1301, 1303 (2012) (Roberts, C.J., in chambers)). That
is particularly true here, where the government’s interest in
ensuring the nation’s security is “an urgent objective of the
highest order.” Humanitarian Law Project, 561 U.S. at 28.
Upon concluding, as we have, that the President would have
issued EO 14,251 in the absence of the asserted retaliatory
animus, the national security underpinnings of EO 14,251
favor the government. The government’s supporting
declarations, which discuss operations at individual
agencies, further buttress this conclusion.
It is true that in the absence of a preliminary injunction,
AFGE is likely to suffer some irreparable harm resulting
from the loss of collective bargaining rights. In our earlier
grant of a stay pending appeal, we relied on OPM’s initial
instruction to agencies to refrain from terminating CBAs

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

25

pending resolution of litigation concerning EO 14,251. See
AFGE I, 148 F.4th at 656. OPM has since changed its
guidance, and we are informed that agencies have started to
terminate certain CBAs. Although harm cannot overcome a
lack of likelihood of success on the merits, this change in
OPM policy means that AFGE has shown more likely harm
now than it did before.
But despite the change to OPM’s guidance, it remains the
case that the harm to the unions would likely be mitigated to
a fair extent by reinstating the terminated agreements if the
union plaintiffs were to prevail. Id.; NTEU, 2025 WL
1441563, at *2. And any long-term weakened support for
the unions remains speculative. See AFGE I, 148 F.4th at
656. AFGE must show that this injury is “likely,” not just
possible. See Winter, 555 U.S. at 20. Because union
membership is voluntary and the status of the unions could
be restored if AFGE succeeds, AFGE has not demonstrated
that it is likely that “as time passes, the benefits of
unionization [will be] lost and the spark to organize [will be]
extinguished” before a final decision on the merits can be
reached. Small v. Avanti Health Sys., LLC, 661 F.3d 1180,
1192 (9th Cir. 2011). “[T]emporary economic loss alone
generally is not a basis for injunctive relief,” Arcamuzi v.
Cont’l Air Lines, Inc., 819 F.2d 935, 938 (9th Cir. 1987), and
much of AFGE’s asserted injury could be repaired if AFGE
were to prevail.
“The final two injunction factors—the balance of
equities and the public interest—merge where [the
government] is a party.” Assurance Wireless USA, L.P. v.
Reynolds, 100 F.4th 1024, 1031 (9th Cir. 2024). And for the
reasons we have already explained, on the current record the
government’s asserted interest in national security

26

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

outweighs the interests of the plaintiff unions, considering
the balance Congress struck in § 7103(b)(1).
*

*

*

For the foregoing reasons, the preliminary injunction is
VACATED.
OWENS, Circuit Judge, concurring:
I concur fully in the court’s opinion. I write separately
only to note that we are reviewing a preliminary injunction,
which potentially is a distinction with a difference. “The
propriety of preliminary relief and resolution of the merits
are . . . ‘significantly different’ issues.” Parents Involved in
Cmty. Sch. v. Seattle Sch. Dist. No. 1, 551 U.S. 701, 721 n.10
(2007) (quoting Univ. of Texas v. Camenisch, 451 U.S. 390,
393 (1981)). “The purpose of such interim equitable relief
is not to conclusively determine the rights of the parties, but
to balance the equities as the litigation moves
forward.” Trump v. Int’l Refugee Assistance Project, 582
U.S. 571, 580 (2017) (citation omitted).
Here, the district court did not address the applicability
of Mt. Healthy City Sch. Dist. Bd. of Educ. v. Doyle, 429 U.S.
274 (1977), to the question at hand. “The Mt. Healthy butfor causation inquiry is purely a question of fact.” Eng v.
Cooley, 552 F.3d 1062, 1072 (9th Cir. 2009). And based on
the preliminary record before us now, I agree that the
government likely would prevail on this issue, meaning that
the plaintiffs have failed their significant burden. But
“[b]ecause our review of a preliminary injunction is limited
to ‘the law applied by the district court and because the fully
developed factual record may be materially different from

AM. FED’N OF GOV’T EMPLOYEES V. TRUMP

27

that initially before the district court, our disposition of
appeals from most preliminary injunctions may provide little
guidance as to the appropriate disposition on the
merits.” Marlyn Nutraceuticals, Inc. v. Mucos Pharma
GmbH & Co., 571 F.3d 873, 876–77 (9th Cir. 2009) (quoting
Sports Form, Inc. v. United Press Int’l, Inc., 686 F.2d 750,
753 (9th Cir. 1982)).

