FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
K.C., a minor, by and through her
guardian ad litem Carolina Navarro;
A. S., a minor, by and through her
guardian ad litem Araceli Saenz;
CAROLINA NAVARRO, guardian
ad litem on behalf of K.C.;
ARACELI SAENZ, guardian ad
litem on behalf of A.S.; AMBER
NEUBERT, guardian ad litem on
behalf of K.C.; JACQUELINE
LAWRENCE; KEITH CHILDRESS
Sr., Individually and as Successor in
interest to Keith Childress, Jr.,
deceased; FREDERICK WAID, as
special administrator of the Estate of
Keith Childress, Jr.,
Plaintiffs - Appellants,
v.
LAS VEGAS METROPOLITAN
POLICE DEPARTMENT; DOJ UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE; ROBERT
BOHANON; BLAKE WALFORD;
JAMES LEDOGAR,

No. 24-5580
D.C. No.
2:16-cv-03039APG-NJK
ORDER
CERTIFYING
QUESTION TO
THE SUPREME
COURT OF
NEVADA

2

K.C. V. LVMPD

Defendants - Appellees,
and
BRIAN MONTANA, UNITED
STATES MARSHALS SERVICE,
Defendants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Andrew P. Gordon, Chief District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted October 6, 2025
Las Vegas, Nevada
Filed January 2, 2026
Before: Mark J. Bennett, Gabriel P. Sanchez, and Holly A.
Thomas, Circuit Judges.
SUMMARY *
Certification to Supreme Court of Nevada
In an action arising from a lethal shooting in which
police officers mistakenly believed that a suspect carried a
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

K.C. V. LVMPD

3

firearm, the panel certified the following two questions to
the Supreme Court of Nevada:
1. Under Nevada law, can a plaintiff raise a
theory of negligence based on an officer’s
intentional use of force?
2. Is “reasonable care” under Nevada
negligence law co-extensive with
“reasonableness” under the Fourth
Amendment?
In a concurrently filed memorandum disposition, the
panel affirmed the district court’s grant of summary
judgment to defendants on plaintiffs’ Fourth Amendment
excessive force claim based on defendants’ first volley of
shots and Fourteenth Amendment interference with familial
relationship claim.
ORDER
Pursuant to Rule 5 of the Nevada Rules of Appellate
Procedure, we respectfully certify the following two
questions to the Supreme Court of Nevada:
1. Under Nevada law, can a plaintiff raise a
theory of negligence based on an officer’s
intentional use of force?
2. Is “reasonable care” under Nevada
negligence law co-extensive with
“reasonableness” under the Fourth
Amendment?

4

K.C. V. LVMPD

The answer to these questions will be determinative of
the cause pending before this court as there is no controlling
precedent in the decisions of the Supreme Court of Nevada
or the Nevada Court of Appeals. Nev. R. App. P. 5(a). We
do not intend our framing of these questions to restrict the
Supreme Court of Nevada’s consideration of any issues it
determines are relevant. Should the Supreme Court of
Nevada decide to consider the certified questions, it may, in
its discretion, reformulate the questions. See Broad v.
Mannesmann Anlagenbau AG, 196 F.3d 1075, 1076 (9th Cir.
1999). If the Court agrees to decide these questions, we will
accept its decision. We hold Plaintiffs’ negligence claim in
abeyance pending the result of certification.
I.
This case concerns a lethal shooting in which police
officers mistakenly believed that a suspect carried a firearm.
We briefly summarize the facts. On March 14, 2013, Keith
Childress was indicted on charges of armed robbery and
kidnapping in Arizona. He fled Arizona and crossed into
Nevada. On December 30, 2015, U.S. Marshals located
Childress at his uncle’s home in Las Vegas and, on
December 31, attempted to apprehend Childress. Childress
fled on foot. The U.S. Marshals requested assistance from
the Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department
(“LVMPD”). A U.S. Marshal incorrectly reported that
Childress was suspected of “attempted homicide.” LVMPD
officers were also informed that a firearm had been found in
Childress’s uncle’s car and that Childress may have access
to a firearm.
LVMPD Sergeant Robert Bohanon and Officer Blake
Walford responded to the call and identified Childress
walking on the right side of the road in a cul-de-sac.

K.C. V. LVMPD

5

Bohanon commanded Childress to “get on the ground” and
show his “hands,” but Childress ignored the commands and
instead crossed to the left side of the street.
The officers advanced and crouched behind a vehicle
beside two U.S. Marshals. Bohanon told Walford that
Childress had a firearm in his right hand. Bohanon
repeatedly commanded Childress to drop his “gun” and
show his “hands.” Bohanon also warned, “If you advance
on us, you will be shot.”
Childress then walked quickly toward the officers. The
officers testified that they could not see Childress’s right
hand as he approached them. According to the officers,
Childress’s hand was either in his pant pocket or hidden
behind his legs. Bohanon and Walford opened fire when
Childress came within 45 feet of them. Bohanon fired two
rounds, and Walford fired two or three rounds. Childress
was struck by the first volley of shots and fell to the ground.
After a two-second pause, Bohanon fired two more shots as
Childress lay on the ground. Walford paused for five
seconds before firing two or three additional shots. Neither
U.S. Marshal fired upon Childress.
After the second volley of shots was fired, Officer James
Ledogar released a police dog onto Childress, which bit him
for fifteen seconds. The officers then handcuffed and
searched Childress’s body. They found a black phone in
Childress’s right front pocket but no gun. Medical personnel
arrived and pronounced Childress dead at the scene.
Childress’s estate, parents, and three minor children
(“Plaintiffs”) sued Bohanon, Walford, Ledogar, and
LVMPD (“Defendants”), asserting, inter alia, a Fourth
Amendment excessive force claim against Bohanon and
Walford for firing their weapons, a Fourth Amendment

6

K.C. V. LVMPD

excessive force claim against Ledogar for his deployment of
a police dog, and state law negligence and battery claims
against all the officer Defendants. As to Plaintiffs’ Fourth
Amendment claims, the district court granted Defendants’
motion for summary judgment concerning Bohanon and
Walford’s first volley of shots. The court concluded that the
officers had a reasonable albeit mistaken belief that
Childress was armed and posed an immediate threat to their
safety, and that their use of force was reasonable as a matter
of law. The district court denied summary judgment as to
Bohanon and Walford’s second volley of shots and
Ledogar’s deployment of the police dog while Childress lay
on the ground. Following a trial, the jury returned a verdict
in Defendants’ favor on Plaintiffs’ remaining Fourth
Amendment claims.
As for Plaintiffs’ negligence claim, the district court
determined that Nevada law did not allow Plaintiffs to assert
a negligence theory of liability based on the officers’
intentional use of force. Observing that Nevada law is
unclear on this question, the district court agreed with the
Supreme Court of Arizona, which held that “plaintiffs
cannot assert a negligence claim based solely on an officer’s
intentional use of physical force.” Ryan v. Napier, 425 P.3d
230, 233 (Ariz. 2018). The district court accordingly
excluded the officers’ shootings from the jury’s negligence
evaluation and instructed the jury to evaluate only the
officers’ “alleged failure to properly and adequately assess
the need to use force against Childress after the first volley
of shots until the time the police dog was taken off of
Childress.” The jury determined that Bohanon and Walford
were 25% negligent and Childress was 75% negligent. The
jury awarded Plaintiffs $150,000 in damages, but under

K.C. V. LVMPD

7

Nevada’s modified comparative fault regime, see Nev. Rev.
Stat. § 41.141, Plaintiffs’ award was reduced to $0.
Plaintiffs timely appealed to our court. We affirm in a
concurrently filed memorandum disposition the district
court’s grant of summary judgment to Defendants on the
Fourth Amendment excessive force claim based on the first
volley of shots and Fourteenth Amendment interference with
familial relationship claim. Plaintiffs’ negligence claim,
however, raises unsettled questions of state law on which we
request guidance.
II.
Nevada law permits certification of a state law question
from a federal court when there are “questions of law of this
state which may be determinative of the cause then pending
in the certifying court and as to which it appears to the
certifying court there is no controlling precedent in the
decisions of the Supreme Court or Court of Appeals of this
state.” Nev. R. App. P. 5(a).
No controlling precedent from the Nevada appellate
courts resolves these two questions. Defendants maintain
that a negligence claim cannot be based on an intentional use
of force because, as a matter of tort principles, negligent
conduct is separate from intentional conduct. Plaintiffs point
to recent decisions by the Supreme Court of Nevada on
officers’ intentional uses of force that suggest otherwise.
None of those authorities, however, resolve the two
questions we certify.
Some precedent suggests that negligence cannot be
based on an intentional act, as Defendants argue. In Rocky
Mountain Produce Trucking Company v. Johnson, 369 P.2d
198 (Nev. 1962), the Supreme Court of Nevada explained

8

K.C. V. LVMPD

that, as a general matter, negligence is mutually exclusive
with intentional tort. Id. at 201–02. The Court held that
“wanton misconduct did not exist as a matter of law” in a
collision between two drivers. Id. at 203. The Court
differentiated “wanton misconduct” from “negligent” and
“intentional” conduct by defining all three terms to show the
defendant driver’s conduct was only “negligent” but not
“wanton.” Id. at 201–02. In its discussion, the Court
explained:
Negligence is an unintentional tort . . . . A
negligent person has no desire to cause the
harm that results from his carelessness. And
he must be distinguished from a person guilty
of willful misconduct, such as assault and
battery, who intends to cause harm.
Willfulness and negligence are contradictory
terms. If conduct is negligent, it is not
willful; if it is willful, it is not negligent.
Id. (quotations and citations omitted).
This principle finds support in persuasive tort
authorities. See Restatement (Second) of Torts § 282 cmt. d
(A.L.I. 1965) (noting that negligence “excludes conduct
which creates liability because of the actor’s intention to
invade a legally protected interest”); Restatement (Third) of
Torts: Physical and Emotional Harm § 1 cmt. d (A.L.I. 2010)
(“In a negligence case the defendant does not desire to cause
harm . . . .”).
Still, the general principle set forth in Rocky Mountain
does not establish that negligence claims cannot be based on
a police officer’s intentional use of force. Rocky Mountain
did not involve an officer’s use of force, nor did it address

K.C. V. LVMPD

9

plaintiffs who assert concurrent Fourth Amendment
excessive force and state law negligence claims. Moreover,
the Supreme Court of Nevada has never applied Rocky
Mountain’s reasoning to hold that negligence cannot be
based on the same set of facts that can support an intentional
tort; it has instead applied that principle to hold that
negligent conduct is not intentional conduct. See, e.g.,
Tahoe Vill. Homeowners Ass’n v. Douglas County, 799 P.2d
556, 558 (Nev. 1990) (per curiam) (“Willful misconduct
requires some degree of intent to do harm, yet Tahoe’s
complaint contains no allegations regarding intent.”); Lee v.
Lamar Cent. Outdoor, LLC, 130 Nev. 1208, 2014 WL
1319180, at *3 (Nev. 2014) (unpublished disposition)
(finding no willfulness where plaintiff alleged only
negligence and failed to offer evidence of willfulness).
Other recent Supreme Court of Nevada decisions suggest
that a police officer’s intentional use of force can give rise to
negligence liability, as Plaintiffs argue. In Estate of Brenes
v. Las Vegas Metropolitan Police Department, the Court
denied the defendants’ claim of discretionary immunity and
reversed a grant of summary judgment for officers on battery
and negligence claims where evidence was presented before
the district court that the “use of lethal force was objectively
unreasonable” under the Fourth Amendment. 468 P.3d 368,
2020 WL 4284335, at *1 & n.2 (Nev. 2020) (unpublished
disposition). Brenes suggests that the Supreme Court of
Nevada would hold that a negligence claim can be based on
an officer’s intentional use of force. As an unpublished
disposition, however, Brenes is not controlling. See Nev. R.
App. P. 36(c)(2).
In Paulos v. FCH1, LLC, the state trial court “concluded
that issue preclusion applied to [a] negligence claim” against
a police officer with respect to a use of force incident

10

K.C. V. LVMPD

because a federal district court “had determined that [the
officer] acted reasonably under the Fourth Amendment and
the issue of reasonableness under the Fourth Amendment
was identical to that under Nevada negligence law.” 456
P.3d 589, 593 (Nev. 2020) (en banc). The Supreme Court of
Nevada reversed and held that the judgment of the federal
district court was not final and preclusive on the issue of
reasonableness because the Ninth Circuit had affirmed on a
different prong of the qualified immunity analysis. Id. at
595. In doing so, the Court noted that recent caselaw has
“called into question” whether “reasonableness under the
Fourth Amendment is identical to reasonableness under
Nevada’s negligence law,” but the Court declined to resolve
that issue. Id. at 595 n.2.
Like the parties, federal district courts are divided on the
questions we certify today.
These courts have
acknowledged that “[t]he Supreme Court of Nevada has not
expressly addressed the issue of whether a police officer can
be liable under a negligence theory based on the same facts
as battery, excessive force, or other intentional tort claims.”
DeCastro v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dep’t, No. 2:23-cv00580-APG-EJY, 2024 WL 4189939, at *22 (D. Nev. Sep.
12, 2024). When confronted with this issue, however,
district courts have resolved it differently.
Some district courts predict that “the Supreme Court of
Nevada would agree with the Supreme Court of Arizona that
‘negligence and intent are mutually exclusive grounds for
liability,’ and there is no cognizable claim for the ‘negligent
use of intentionally inflicted force.’” Id. (quoting Ryan, 425
P.3d at 236); see also, e.g., Wells v. City of Las Vegas, No.
2:21-CV-1346 JCM (EJY), 2024 WL 2028007, at *16 (D.
Nev. May 7, 2024) (predicting that the Supreme Court of
Nevada would hold that “liability under a negligence theory

K.C. V. LVMPD

11

cannot be based on an intentional use of force”); Sommer v.
Las Vegas Metro. Police Dep’t, No. 2:23-cv-01682-GMNNJK, 2025 WL 1180174, at *13 n.2 (D. Nev. Apr. 22, 2025)
(“[T]o the extent Plaintiff’s negligence claim is based on an
intentional use of force, it cannot form the basis of her
negligence claim.”).
Other district courts have rejected such a prediction. See,
e.g., Llera v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dep’t, No. 2:20-cv01589-RFB-BNW, 2023 WL 6393092, at *16 (D. Nev. Sep.
30, 2023) (noting the absence of “binding or persuasive
authority that the negligence and battery causes of action are
mutually exclusive and cannot be alleged together as a
matter of law”); Murnane v. Las Vegas Metro. Police Dep’t,
No. 2:13-cv-01088-MMD-PAL, 2016 WL 10806738, at *11
(D. Nev. Mar. 31, 2016) (concluding the same because the
plaintiffs’ “negligence claim sweeps more broadly” than
intentional tort claims).
In the absence of controlling precedent, the parties turn
to out-of-state authorities. Plaintiffs invoke California law,
which permits plaintiffs to assert a negligence claim based
on an officer’s intentional use of force. See Hayes v. County
of San Diego, 305 P.3d 252, 262 (Cal. 2013) (holding that
the “reasonable care” standard of negligence and the Fourth
Amendment “reasonableness” standard are distinct).
Defendants, like the district court here, invoke Arizona law,
which prohibits plaintiffs from “assert[ing] a negligence
claim based solely on an officer’s intentional use of physical
force.” Ryan, 425 P.3d at 233.
The answers to the questions we certify may determine
the outcome of this case. As discussed, the jury determined
that Defendants were negligent, but only based on the
officers’ “failure to properly and adequately assess the need

12

K.C. V. LVMPD

to use force” prior to firing a second volley of shots. Had
the jury been allowed to consider whether Defendants were
negligent in firing a second volley of shots as Childress lay
on the ground, then the jury’s negligence verdict and
apportionment of fault could have materially differed. As to
our second certified question, if the standard for
“reasonableness” under the Fourth Amendment is identical
to the standard of “reasonable care” under Nevada
negligence law, then the district court’s grant of summary
judgment and the jury’s verdict for Defendants on the Fourth
Amendment claims would foreclose Plaintiffs’ negligent use
of force claim.
We therefore certify the two questions set forth above to
the Supreme Court of Nevada. “We invoke the certification
process only after careful consideration and do not do so
lightly.” Kremen v. Cohen, 325 F.3d 1035, 1037 (9th Cir.
2003). In deciding whether to certify a question of state law,
we consider whether the question involves “important public
policy ramifications,” whether it is “new, substantial, and of
broad application[,]” “the state court’s caseload[,]” and “the
spirit of comity and federalism.” Murray v. BEJ Mins., LLC,
924 F.3d 1070, 1072 (9th Cir. 2019) (quotations omitted).
We recognize that the Court has a substantial caseload, and
we submit these questions because of their importance to
negligence claims that frequently arise in federal courts, as
well as their potential to advance uniformity among federal
courts.
III.
Pursuant to Nevada Rule of Appellate Procedure 5(c)(4),
if our request for certification is granted, we designate
Plaintiffs as the appellants and Defendants as the appellees

K.C. V. LVMPD

13

in the Supreme Court of Nevada. Pursuant to Rule 5(c)(5),
the names and addresses of counsel for the parties are:
For Plaintiffs: Dale K. Galipo and Hang D.
Le, Law Offices of Dale K. Galipo, 21800
Burbank Boulevard, Suite 310, Woodland
Hills, California 91367.
For Plaintiffs: Peter Goldstein, Law Office
of Peter Goldstein, 10161 Park Run Drive,
Suite 150, Las Vegas, Nevada 89145.
For Defendants: Craig R. Anderson, Marquis
Aurbach Coffing, 10001 Park Run Drive, Las
Vegas, Nevada 89145.
The Clerk of this Court is hereby directed to transmit to
the Supreme Court of Nevada, under official seal of this
court, a copy of this order and request for certification and
all relevant briefs and excerpts of record. Submission of this
case is withdrawn, and the case will be submitted following
receipt of the Supreme Court of Nevada’s opinion on the
certified question or notification that it declines to answer
the certified question.
The Clerk is directed to
administratively close this docket pending further order.
The parties shall notify the Clerk of this court within one
week after the Supreme Court of Nevada accepts or rejects
certification. In the event the Supreme Court of Nevada
grants certification, the parties shall notify the Clerk within
one week after the Court renders its decision.
It is so ORDERED.
/s/ Gabriel P. Sanchez
Gabriel P. Sanchez, Circuit Judge, Presiding

