FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
WALKER SPECIALTY
CONSTRUCTION, INC.,
Plaintiff - Appellee,

No. 24-1560
D.C. No.
2:23-cv-00281APG-MDC

v.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE
CONSTRUCTION INDUSTRY
AND LABORERS JOINT PENSION
TRUST FOR SOUTHERN
NEVADA; THE CONSTRUCTION
INDUSTRY AND LABORERS
PENSION TRUST FOR
SOUTHERN NEVADA,

OPINION

Defendants - Appellants.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Andrew P. Gordon, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted March 5, 2025
Las Vegas, Nevada
Filed January 5, 2026

2

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

Before: Johnnie B. Rawlinson, Eric D. Miller, and Roopali
H. Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Desai
SUMMARY *
Multiemployer Pension Plan Amendments Act
The panel affirmed the district court’s grant of summary
judgment in favor of Walker Specialty Construction, Inc., in
Walker’s action against the Board of Trustees of the
Construction Industry and Laborers Joint Pension Trust,
contesting withdrawal liability under the Multiemployer
Pension Plan Amendments Act, an amendment to the
Employee Retirement Income Security Act that imposes
liability on employers that withdraw from multiemployer
pension plans.
The panel held that Walker was exempt from withdrawal
liability under the MPPAA because its asbestos abatement
work qualified it for the “building and construction industry”
exception to liability. The panel concluded that, as the
agency tasked with enforcing the Labor Management
Relations Act, the only other statute in which Congress had
previously used the term “building and construction
industry,” the National Labor Relations Board established a
settled meaning for the term to include not only the erection
of new buildings, but also maintenance, repair, and
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

3

alterations that are essential to a building or structure’s
usability. The panel inferred that Congress’s intent to
incorporate the NLRB’s definition into the MPPA was plain
from its use of the same language in both statutes. The panel
concluded that, under the NLRB’s comprehensive
definition, Walker’s asbestos abatement work was within the
building and construction industry, and it therefore qualified
for the liability exemption.

COUNSEL
Ryan C. Curtis (argued) and David L. Sieck, Fennemore
Craig PC, Phoenix, Arizona, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Adam P. Segal (argued), Christopher M. Humes, and
William D. Nobriga, Brownstein Hyatt Farber Schreck LLP,
Las Vegas, Nevada, for Defendants-Appellants.
Andrew J. Martone, Martone Legal LLC, Creve Coeur,
Missouri, for Amicus Curiae the Association of General
Contractors of America.

4

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
Walker Specialty Construction, Inc. (“Walker”) sued the
Board of Trustees of the Construction Industry and Laborers
Joint Pension Trust (“Trust”) to contest withdrawal liability
under the Multiemployer Pension Plan Amendments Act
(“MPPAA”). Walker claims that it qualifies for the “building
and construction industry” exception and is thus exempt
from liability. The district court granted summary judgment
in favor of Walker, and the Trust appealed. We hold that
Walker’s asbestos abatement work is performed in the
“building and construction industry” under the MPPAA, and
thus we affirm.
BACKGROUND
The MPPAA, which amended the Employee Retirement
Income Security Act (“ERISA”), imposes liability on
employers that withdraw from multiemployer pension plans.
29 U.S.C. § 1381(a). Employers can avoid withdrawal
liability if they qualify for an exception available to
employers operating in the “building and construction
industry.” 29 U.S.C. § 1383(b). But the MPPAA does not
define the term “building and construction industry.” See id.
To resolve this appeal, we must determine the meaning of
“building and construction industry” under the MPPAA and
decide whether Walker’s employees worked in the industry.
Walker’s employees performed asbestos abatement and
demolition work in southern Nevada. Asbestos abatement
involves the remediation of building materials containing
asbestos, such as insulation, roofing, flooring, walls, cement
piping, and fireproofing materials. Remediation requires

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

5

removing asbestos-containing materials or covering them
with an impermeable coating like polyethylene to prevent
the release of asbestos fibers. To remove materials with
asbestos, Walker’s employees scrape or grind them off,
break them down using chemical solvents, or demolish them.
Removal of asbestos-containing materials, especially
demolition, can facilitate the refurbishment and renovation
of existing buildings and the construction of new buildings.
The Trust administers a multiemployer pension benefit
plan that primarily covers “building and construction
industry” employees in southern Nevada. Walker
contributed to the Trust’s plan for its employees until 2019,
when Walker stopped operating in the state and ceased
contributing to the plan.
The Trust sent Walker a letter in 2021 claiming that
Walker owed $2,837,953 in withdrawal liability based on its
2019 withdrawal. Walker requested review of the Trust’s
claim, arguing that it is exempt from withdrawal liability
under the MPPAA’s “building and construction industry”
exception. While review was pending, Walker made
quarterly payments on the disputed liability, as required
under ERISA. The Trust reaffirmed its assessment of
withdrawal liability, stating that building and construction
involves “forming, making or building a structure,” and
asbestos abatement does not qualify because it involves
“tearing down structures rather than building or making
them.”
Walker initiated arbitration, and both parties moved for
summary judgment on Walker’s claim for relief under the
exception. The arbitrator granted judgment in favor of the
Trust, holding that “work in the construction industry” is
“the provision of labor whereby materials and constituent

6

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

parts may be combined on the building site to form, make or
build a structure” and that Walker’s work “does not fit within
that definition.”
Walker sued the Trust in the district court to contest
withdrawal liability and vacate or modify the arbitration
award on the basis that Walker qualifies for the “building
and construction industry” exception. Both parties again
moved for summary judgment. The district court rejected the
Trust’s understanding of “building and construction
industry” as the “literal erecting of structures.” Rather, it
adopted a more expansive understanding of “building and
construction industry,” which includes the erection,
maintenance, repair, and alteration of buildings and
structures. The district court held that Walker’s asbestos
abatement work qualified as work in the “building and
construction industry” because it involved “alteration,
demolition, repair, or improvement of fixed structures in
buildings.” The district court granted summary judgment to
Walker and ordered the Trust to return Walker’s partial
payments with interest. The Trust timely appealed.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
“We review de novo the district court’s grant of
summary judgment.” Penn Cent. Corp. v. W. Conf. of
Teamsters Pension Tr. Fund, 75 F.3d 529, 533 (9th Cir.
1996). We also review de novo questions of law, including
questions of statutory interpretation. Trs. of Amalgamated
Ins. Fund v. Geltman Indus., Inc., 784 F.2d 926, 929 (9th
Cir. 1986). “Whether a withdrawal within the meaning of the
statute has occurred presents a mixed question of law and
fact,” Penn Cent., 75 F.3d at 533, which we review de novo,
Carpenters Pension Tr. Fund for N. Cal. v. Underground
Const. Co., 31 F.3d 776, 778 (9th Cir. 1994); Resilient Floor

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

7

Covering Pension Tr. Fund Bd. of Trs. v. Michael’s Floor
Covering, Inc., 801 F.3d 1079, 1088 (9th Cir. 2015).
ANALYSIS
When first enacted, ERISA “did not adequately protect
multiemployer pension plans from the adverse consequences
that resulted when individual employers terminated their
participation in, or withdrew from, multiemployer plans.”
Resilient Floor, 801 F.3d at 1088 (cleaned up). “[A]
significant number of multiemployer plans were
experiencing extreme financial hardship as a result of
individual employer withdrawals from the plans, which
saddled the remaining employers with increased funding
obligations.” Id. (cleaned up).
In 1980, Congress enacted the MPPAA to address this
problem. H.C. Elliott, Inc. v. Carpenters Pension Tr. Fund
for N. Cal., 859 F.2d 808, 810 (9th Cir. 1988). Under the
MPPAA revisions to ERISA, when an employer withdraws
from a multiemployer pension plan, it is liable for its share
of the plan’s unfunded vested benefits. Resilient Floor, 801
F.3d at 1089 (citing 29 U.S.C. § 1381). Generally, an
employer that “permanently ceases” its work in the plan’s
jurisdiction has withdrawn and owes withdrawal liability. 29
U.S.C. § 1383(a).
But the MPPAA contains a “building and construction
industry” exception to withdrawal liability. This exception
exempts an employer from paying withdrawal liability if
(1) substantially all the employees for whom the employer
contributes to the multiemployer pension plan work in the
“building and construction industry;” (2) the plan primarily
covers employees in the “building and construction
industry;” and (3) the employer ceases work in the

8

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

jurisdiction and does not resume such work within five
years. 29 U.S.C. § 1383(b).
Congress created this exception because of “the
transitory nature of contracts and employment in the
building and construction industry.” Carpenters Pension Tr.
Fund, 31 F.3d at 778. “[T]he construction industry as a
whole does not necessarily shrink when a contributing
contractor leaves the industry; employees are often
dispatched to another . . . contractor” in the area that
contributes to the multiemployer pension plan on their
behalf. H.C. Elliott, 859 F.2d at 811. Thus, “as long as the
base of construction projects in the area covered by the plan
is funding the plan’s obligations, the plan is not threatened”
when an individual employer withdraws. Carpenters
Pension Tr. Fund, 31 F.3d at 778.
Here, the parties agree that the Trust’s plan primarily
covers employees in the “building and construction
industry” and that Walker ceased work in the jurisdiction
and did not resume within five years. The parties also agree
that substantially all of Walker’s employees perform
asbestos abatement. Thus, the sole issue on appeal is whether
asbestos abatement qualifies as work in the “building and
construction industry.” The Trust argues that the term is
narrow and only relates to the building of structures, which
does not include asbestos abatement. Walker argues that the
term is more inclusive and includes alterations and repairs
for asbestos abatement.
The MPPAA does not define “building and construction
industry,” and neither the Supreme Court nor this court has
interpreted it as used in the MPPAA. Interpreting this
statutory term as an issue of first impression, “we look first
to the plain meaning of the language in question.” S & M Inv.

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

9

Co. v. Tahoe Reg’l Plan. Agency, 911 F.2d 324, 326 (9th Cir.
1990). “If the term at issue has a settled meaning, we must
infer that the legislature meant to incorporate the established
meaning, unless the statute dictates otherwise.” Id. At the
time of the MPPAA’s enactment, Congress had used the
term “building and construction industry” in only one other
statute. As the agency tasked with enforcing that statute, the
National Labor Relations Board (“NLRB”) had given the
term a comprehensive definition. Because the NLRB
established a settled meaning for the term “building and
construction industry,” we must infer that Congress
incorporated the NLRB’s definition of “building and
construction industry” into the MPPAA.
A. The NLRB previously defined “building and
construction industry” to include work
involving the erection, maintenance, repair,
and alteration of buildings and structures.
Before the MPPAA was enacted, the only statute in
which Congress used the exact term “building and
construction industry” was the Labor Management Relations
Act of 1947, also known as the Taft-Hartley Act (“TaftHartley”), which regulates unfair labor practices. See 29
U.S.C. § 141. Like the MPPAA, Taft-Hartley contains an
exception for employers in the “building and construction
industry.” 29 U.S.C. § 158(f). The exception allows such
employers to enter into prehire agreements—collectivebargaining agreements established prior to hiring any
employees—which are otherwise prohibited. Id.; Bldg. &
Constr. Trades Council of Metro. Dist. v. Associated
Builders & Contractors of Mass./R.I., Inc., 507 U.S. 218,
230 (1993).

10

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

The NLRB settled the meaning of the “building and
construction industry” through a series of administrative
decisions interpreting Taft-Hartley in the 1960s. In Indio
Paint, the NLRB surveyed contemporaneous sources—
including technical publications and manuals, common
dictionaries, and state codes and decisions—to determine
that the “building and construction industry” includes “the
provision of labor whereby materials and constituent parts
may be combined on the building site to form, make or build
a structure.” Carpet, Linoleum and Soft Tile Local Union No.
1247 (Indio Paint & Rug Ctr.), 156 N.L.R.B. 951, 959
(1966) (emphasis omitted). Moreover, “[c]onstruction
covers the erection, maintenance and repair . . . of immobile
structures and utilities . . . which become integral parts of
structures and are essential to their use for any general
purpose.” Id. at 957 (emphasis omitted). The NLRB
similarly noted that “construction” includes “new work,
additions, alterations, and repairs.” Id. at 958.
The NLRB reaffirmed that the “building and
construction industry” includes the alteration and demolition
of buildings in Zidell Explorations, Inc. 175 N.L.R.B. 887
(1969). The employer in Zidell both built and dismantled
buildings and structures. Id. at 889. Indeed, the relevant
project in that case involved dismantling a ballistic missile
complex. Id. at 888. Because “[i]ts work on th[e] job was in
all characteristics identical to that performed in the
construction industry,” the NLRB held that the employer
“was engaged in the building and construction industry
within the meaning of” Taft-Hartley. Id. at 888–89.
Thus, for over a decade before the MPPAA, the term
“building and construction industry” had a settled meaning
under Taft-Hartley. The NLRB defined the term to include
not only the erection of new buildings, but also maintenance,

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

11

repair, and alterations that are essential to the buildings’
usability.
The Trust urges us to consider only the “form, make, or
build” part of the definition and argues that the NLRB thus
included only work putting together materials to build
something new. Not so. While Indio Paint stated that
construction involves erecting new structures, the NLRB did
not exclude alterations, maintenance, and repairs from its
definition. And, to the extent the NLRB excluded certain
work from the “building and construction industry,” it was
referring to off-site construction work. See Indio Paint, 156
N.L.R.B. at 959 (“Congress did not intend to include in the
exemption those employers who manufacture and assemble
products which are subsequently installed by others at the
construction site.”).
Two of our sister circuits similarly rely on the NLRB’s
expansive interpretation of “building and construction
industry” to include repairs and alterations under the
MPPAA exception. The Eighth Circuit has held that a
company that supplied oils and asphalt materials to
contractors working on road construction and repair was not
in the “building and construction industry” because it “was
merely a supplier” and “sold a product that another company
refined, and still others applied or used.” Union Asphalts &
Roadoils, Inc. v. MO-KAN Teamsters Pension Fund, 857
F.2d 1230, 1232, 1235 (8th Cir. 1988). But the Eighth
Circuit explained that road repair would be construction
work. See id. at 1235 (holding that the company did not
perform construction work because its employees “did not
engage in spreading road oil or asphalt on any highway or in
any other way engage in actual road construction or repair”).
And it noted that a surveying company, too, would qualify
for the exception if most of the company’s work were done

12

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

on-site at construction projects, even though surveyors are
not involved in the actual erection of structures. See id.
(citing Operating Eng’rs Pension Tr. v. Beck Eng’g &
Surveying Co., 746 F.2d 557, 562–64 (9th Cir. 1984)
(finding that construction-related surveying work was in the
“building and construction industry” under Taft-Hartley)).
The Second Circuit has similarly stated that the NLRB’s
definition of the “building and construction industry”
includes “using materials to ‘form, make or build a
structure’” and “structural additions and alterations.” Dycom
Indus., Inc. v. Pension, Hospitalization & Benefit Plan of the
Elec. Indus., 98 F.4th 397, 401 (2d Cir. 2024) (per curiam)
(quoting Indio Paint, 156 N.L.R.B. at 957–59). In Dycom,
the Second Circuit found that a company providing cable
service for buildings, which were prewired for the service,
was not “in the building and construction industry” because
its work did not involve repairs or alterations. Id. The
company’s employees “only had to do wiring in a small
percentage of jobs” and “were not even required to make a
hole in a wall for most jobs.” Id. The Second Circuit
suggested that, while such surface-level work does not
qualify for the exception, alterations that affect the structure
of buildings would qualify for the exception. Id.
B. We presume that Congress incorporated the
NLRB’s definition of “building and
construction industry” into the MPPAA.
Because the term “building and construction industry”
had a settled meaning prior to the MPPAA’s enactment, we
infer that Congress was aware of and intended to incorporate
this definition when it enacted the “building and construction
industry” exception in the MPPAA. See S & M, 911 F.2d at

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

13

326; see also Comm’r of Internal Revenue v. Keystone
Consol. Indus., Inc., 508 U.S. 152, 159 (1993) (holding that
a statutory phrase “had acquired a settled judicial and
administrative interpretation,” of which “Congress
presumptively was aware,” and thus “it is proper to accept
the already settled meaning of the phrase”); Edelman v.
Lynchburg Coll., 535 U.S. 106, 116–17 (2002) (“This
background law . . . points to tacit congressional approval of
the EEOC’s position, Congress being presumed to have
known of this settled judicial treatment [of the statutory
language] when it enacted and later amended Title VII.”).
And notably, Congress used the same term in both statutes
without disclaiming or narrowing the NLRB’s settled
definition of “building and construction industry” when
incorporating the term in the MPPAA. Congress’s
straightforward adoption of this preexisting term in the
MPPAA is evidence that it intended “building and
construction industry” to have the same meaning. 1
We thus adopt the NLRB’s interpretation of “building
and construction industry” to determine the term’s meaning
under the MPPAA. Here, work in the “building and
construction industry” includes the erection, maintenance,
repair, and alterations that are essential to a building or
structure’s usability.
The Trust makes several arguments against using the
NLRB’s comprehensive definition, all of which are
Because the plain language of the statute is clear, we do not look
beyond it to the MPPAA’s legislative history. S & M, 911 F.2d at 327.
But in any event, the legislative history also supports our interpretation.
A congressional committee report about the MPPAA noted that it
intended for the term to “be given the same meaning as has developed in
administration of the Taft-Hartley Act.” H.R. Rep. No. 96-869, pt. 1, at
76 (1980).
1

14

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

unavailing. First, it argues that we should adopt the
definition of “building and construction industry” used by
other circuits, rather than the NLRB’s definition, to ensure
national uniformity. But our sister circuits have taken the
same approach as we do here and looked at the NLRB’s
definition to interpret the MPPAA. See Dycom, 98 F.4th at
400 (“Although the phrase ‘building and construction
industry’ is not defined in ERISA, the parties agree that we
should utilize the definition articulated by the [NLRB] for
the purposes of the Taft-Hartley Act.”); MO-KAN, 857 F.2d
at 1234 (“[W]e look to case law under section 8(f) of the
Taft-Hartley Act, 29 U.S.C. § 158(f), which contains the
same term [as the MPPAA].”).
Second, the Trust argues that we should not use the
NLRB’s definition of “building and construction industry”
because Taft-Hartley is a different law covering a different
subject area than the MPPAA. But both statutes regulate the
employment relationship, and Congress used the same term
in both statutes for the same reason: the uniquely transient
nature of the building and construction industry. Much like
the MPPAA exception, Congress enacted the Taft-Hartley
“building and construction industry” exception to prehire
agreements because of “the short-term nature of
employment [in the construction industry] which makes
posthire collective bargaining difficult, the contractor’s need
for predictable costs and a steady supply of skilled labor, and
a long-standing custom of prehire bargaining in the
industry.” Associated Builders, 507 U.S. at 231. Although
Taft-Hartley addresses labor practices and the MPPAA
addresses pension plans, it is appropriate to use the same
definition of “building and construction industry” under both
statutes because Congress enacted the exceptions based on

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

15

the transient nature of the construction industry in both
contexts.
Third, the Trust argues that despite referencing TaftHartley in other parts of ERISA, Congress did not include a
Taft-Hartley cross-reference in this exception, indicating
that Congress did not intend to use the NLRB’s definition of
“building and construction industry.” The MPPAA
expressly references and incorporates several other terms
from Taft-Hartley. See 29 U.S.C. § 1002(1) (defining
“welfare plan” under ERISA to mean any plan maintained
for the purpose of providing its participants with any benefit
described in § 186(c) of Taft-Hartley), 1002(12) (defining
“industry or activity affecting commerce” as the same term
under Taft-Hartley). But a cross-reference is not required,
and its absence does not defeat the presumption that
Congress intended to incorporate the NLRB’s definition of
“building and construction industry” into the MPPAA.
Again, the use of identical language in both statutes indicates
that the definition of the term should be the same under the
MPPAA and Taft-Hartley. See Comm’r of Internal Revenue,
508 U.S. at 159; see also Shinseki v. Sanders, 556 U.S. 396,
406–07 (2009).
Fourth, the Trust argues that the Supreme Court’s
decision in Loper Bright Enters. v. Raimondo establishes
that the NLRB’s interpretation does not bind this court. 603
U.S. 369 (2024). Loper Bright overturned Chevron
deference, but it did not overturn the tools of statutory
interpretation we apply here. See id. at 412. We do not defer
to the NLRB’s interpretation of the phrase “building and
construction industry” under Chevron. To the contrary, we
hold that Congress’s intent to incorporate the NLRB’s
definition of the term into the MPPAA is plain from its use
of the same language in both statutes.

16

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

Fifth, the Trust emphasizes that the term “building and
construction industry” should be construed narrowly
because it is part of a statutory exception. See Resilient
Floor, 801 F.3d at 1094 (describing the exception as
narrow). But because we infer that Congress incorporated
the NLRB’s interpretation of the term into the MPAA, we
cannot define the term more narrowly than Congress
intended.
Finally, the Trust argues that even if we were to adopt
the NLRB’s definition as articulated in Indio Paint, that
definition would be limited to literally forming, making, or
building a structure. But as we have already explained, Indio
Paint provided a comprehensive definition of the “building
and construction industry” that included alterations,
maintenance, and repairs. See 156 N.L.R.B. at 957–58. We
therefore adopt the NLRB’s expansive understanding of the
“building and construction industry.”
C. Asbestos abatement is work in the “building
and construction industry” because it involves
structural alterations and repairs.
Turning to the facts at hand, we must now determine
whether Walker’s asbestos abatement work falls within the
NLRB’s definition of the “building and construction
industry.” We conclude that asbestos abatement is work
within the “building and construction industry” because it
involves the “maintenance and repair . . . of immobile
structures . . . which become integral parts of structures and
are essential to their use for any general purpose.” See Indio
Paint, 156 N.L.R.B. at 957.
By removing asbestos from building walls, roofs, and
floors, Walker repairs integral parts of buildings and ensures

WALKER SPECIALTY CONSTR., INC. V. BOARD OF TRUSTEES

17

that the buildings are usable without any hazard to
occupants’ health. Walker’s abatement work requires
substantial alterations to buildings—it is not merely scraping
surfaces, as the Trust argues. For instance, Walker’s asbestos
abatement involves “demolishing [asbestos-containing]
material such as drywall” and roofing, and “seal[ing] off”
areas around asbestos using polyethylene. Walker’s
employees remove walls, ceiling, and “interior finishes such
as carpets, wall coverings etc.” to facilitate asbestos removal
and enable remodeling, refurbishing, or complete demolition
of buildings. Indeed, Walker’s asbestos abatement work is
virtually indistinguishable from the demolition work in
Zidell, which the NLRB concluded to be part of the
“building and construction industry” under its well-settled
definition of the term. See 175 N.L.R.B. at 888. Thus,
Walker’s asbestos abatement is part of the “building and
construction industry” under the MPPAA.
CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, we hold that “building and
construction industry” under the MPPAA incorporates the
NLRB’s established definition of the term and thus includes
Walker’s asbestos abatement work. Because substantially all
of Walker’s employees worked in the “building and
construction industry,” Walker qualifies for the exception to
withdrawal liability and was thus entitled to summary
judgment.
AFFIRMED.

