FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
DIAMOND SANDS
APARTMENTS, LLC,
Plaintiff - Appellant,

No. 25-2884
D.C. No.
2:25-cv-00137ART-NJK

v.
OPINION
CLARK COUNTY NEVADA,
Defendant - Appellee.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Nevada
Anne R. Traum, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted November 21, 2025
San Jose, California
Filed January 16, 2026
Before: Mary M. Schroeder and Michelle T. Friedland,
Circuit Judges, and Karen E. Schreier, District Judge.
Opinion by Judge Schreier


The Honorable Karen E. Schreier, United States District Judge for the
District of South Dakota, sitting by designation.

2 DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA

SUMMARY**
Preliminary Injunction / Excessive Fines Clause
The panel affirmed the district court’s denial of plaintiff
Diamond Sands Apartments, LLC’s motion for a
preliminary injunction in Diamond Sands’ suit alleging that
a Clark County, Nevada ordinance prohibiting unlicensed
short-term property rentals runs afoul of the Eighth
Amendment’s Excessive Fines Clause.
Diamond Sands, the owner and operator of a 360-unit
apartment complex in Las Vegas, Nevada, argued that the
County’s enforcement scheme on its face and as applied
unconstitutionally penalizes property owners for short-term
rental activity conducted by tenants.
The panel held that the record demonstrated that the
district court did not abuse its discretion in concluding that
Diamond Sands failed to show serious questions that the
County’s fines of $4,000 were grossly disproportionate to
the gravity of the underlying offense. The fines were not
grossly disproportionate because (1) Diamond Sands had
knowledge of the improper short-term rentals, failed to
eliminate the violations, and therefore bore some culpability
for the short-term rental ordinance violations; (2) the
ordinance authorized alternative remedies, though the
County ultimately chose to impose fines, which were on the
low end of the authorized range; and (3) the ordinance was
aimed at deterring harm to County residents from short term
rentals and the County’s legislative findings on the impact
**

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA 3

of the harms supplied a rational basis for the fines
imposed. Accordingly, Diamond Sands’ as-applied
challenge failed.
Diamond Sands’ facial challenge to the Clark County
ordinance failed because Damond Sands failed to
demonstrate that the ordinance is unconstitutional in every
conceivable application.

COUNSEL
Adam R. Fulton (argued) and Steve Shevorski, Jennings &
Fulton LTD, Las Vegas, Nevada, for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Timothy J. Allen (argued), Deputy District Attorney; Steven
B. Wolfson, Clark County District Attorney; Clark County
Office of the District Attorney, Las Vegas, Nevada; for
Defendant-Appellee.

4 DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA

OPINION
SCHREIER, District Judge
Clark County, Nevada enacted an ordinance that
prohibits short-term property rentals without authorization.
After determining that Diamond Sands Apartments, LLC
violated that ordinance, Clark County imposed fines totaling
$4,000 on the apartment complex. Diamond Sands sought
declaratory and injunctive relief, arguing that Clark
County’s ordinance runs afoul of the Eighth Amendment’s
Excessive Fines Clause. The district court denied Diamond
Sands’ motion for a preliminary injunction. We have
jurisdiction under 28 U.S.C. § 1292(a)(1), and we affirm.
I.
A.
Diamond Sands owns and operates a 360-unit apartment
complex in Las Vegas, Nevada. Units are leased pursuant to
long-term rental agreements that prohibit tenants from
renting units to third parties without authorization.
Clark County received numerous complaints that certain
units at Diamond Sands were being used as short-term
rentals, including for loud parties. In response, the County’s
Code Enforcement Unit opened investigations into the
identified units and spoke with Diamond Sands’ property
management about the complaints. In multiple instances,
enforcement officers confirmed through in-person
inspections and interviews with residents that the identified
units had been rented for short-term stays through Airbnb.

DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA 5

Based on those investigations, the County issued notices
of abatement to Diamond Sands for violating the County’s
short-term rental ordinances, which prohibit operating shortterm rentals without proper authorization and permit the
imposition of penalties—including fines between
$1,000 and $10,000 per violation and potential criminal
liability—against property owners. Clark Cnty. Code
§ 7.100.230(e)(2). After follow-up inspections confirmed
continued violations, the County issued two administrative
citations assessing $2,000 fines for each violation. The
County identified additional violations but did not issue
administrative citations in those instances. Diamond Sands
paid one citation and disputed the other, which remains
outstanding.
B.
Diamond Sands filed suit in the United States District
Court for the District of Nevada, asserting facial and asapplied challenges to Clark County’s ordinances under the
Eighth Amendment’s Excessive Fines Clause. Diamond
Sands argued that the County’s enforcement scheme
unconstitutionally penalizes property owners for short-term
rental activity conducted by tenants and sought to enjoin
Clark County from enforcing its ordinance.
Diamond Sands filed a motion for a preliminary
injunction, which the district court denied, holding that
Diamond Sands had failed to demonstrate a likelihood of
success on the merits because the fines imposed were not
grossly disproportionate to the gravity of the violations.
Diamond Sands timely appealed.

6 DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA

II.
“We review the denial of a preliminary injunction for
abuse of discretion, but we review de novo the underlying
issues of law.” Hubbard v. City of San Diego, 139 F.4th 843,
849 (9th Cir. 2025) (quotation marks omitted). A district
court abuses its discretion if it bases its decision “on an
erroneous legal standard or on clearly erroneous factual
findings.” Cal. Chamber of Com. v. Council for Educ. &
Rsch. on Toxics, 29 F.4th 468, 475 (9th Cir. 2022) (quotation
marks omitted).
III.
A.
“A preliminary injunction is an extraordinary remedy
that is never awarded as of right.” Winter v. Nat. Res. Def.
Council, Inc., 555 U.S. 7, 24 (2008). A party seeking relief
must demonstrate that it is likely to succeed on the merits,
that it is likely to suffer irreparable harm absent preliminary
relief, that the balance of equities tips in its favor, and that
an injunction is in the public interest. Id. at 20.
We apply a sliding-scale approach to those factors, under
which a plaintiff may receive a preliminary injunction by
showing “serious questions going to the merits” “so long as
the balance of hardships . . . ‘tips sharply toward’ the
movant.” All. for the Wild Rockies v. Cottrell, 632 F.3d
1127, 1132 (9th Cir. 2011). However, “if a movant fails to
meet the threshold inquiry of likelihood of success on the
merits (or serious questions going to them), a court may
decide to deny a preliminary injunction without considering
the other factors.” Bennett v. Isagenix Int’l LLC, 118 F.4th
1120, 1126 (9th Cir. 2024). We hold that the district court
did not err by denying Diamond Sands’ motion, because

DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA 7

Diamond Sands failed to show serious questions going to the
constitutionality of Clark County’s ordinances under the
Eighth Amendment.
The Eighth Amendment provides that “[e]xcessive bail
shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed.” U.S.
Const. amend. VIII. In determining whether a punitive fine
is excessive, we do not require “strict proportionality”
between the underlying offense and the fine imposed. 1
United States v. Bajakajian, 524 U.S. 321, 336 (1998).
Instead, our guiding question is whether the fine is “grossly
disproportional to the gravity of the [] offense[.]” Id. at 337.
Four factors inform our analysis of gross disproportionality:
“(1) the nature and extent of the underlying offense;
(2) whether the underlying offense related to other illegal
activities; (3) whether other penalties may be imposed for
the offense; and (4) the extent of the harm caused by the
offense.” Pimentel v. City of Los Angeles, 974 F.3d 917, 921
(9th Cir. 2020) (“Pimentel I”). Diamond Sands argues that
the district court erred in holding that the first, third, and
fourth factors cut in favor of the fines’ proportionality. Each
argument is unavailing.
B.
The first factor “typically look[s] to the violator’s
culpability.” Pimentel I, 974 F.3d at 922. Diamond Sands
argues that it was not the party causing the short-term rental
violations, and that it therefore bears no meaningful
culpability. The district court correctly rejected that
1

Only punitive fines—those that “constitute[] punishment for an
offense”—are subject to the Eighth Amendment’s restrictions. United
States v. Mackby, 261 F.3d 821, 829 (9th Cir. 2001). Clark County does
not dispute that its ordinance is at least partly punitive and therefore falls
within the scope of the Excessive Fines Clause.

8 DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA

premise. Property owners may bear a non-trivial degree of
culpability for the misuse of their property by others. See
Towers v. City of Chicago, 173 F.3d 619, 625 (7th Cir. 1999)
(holding vehicle owners culpable for violations of a city
ordinance where the owner “does not ensure that others with
access to the vehicle do not place illegal items in it”). Even
“benign actions may still result in some non-minimal degree
of culpability.” Pimentel I, 974 F.3d at 923; see also id.
(“The Seventh Circuit’s decision in Towers v. City of
Chicago is instructive.”).
Here, the district court correctly found that Diamond
Sands’ actions were not entirely benign. Contrary to
Diamond Sands’ representations that it was unaware of and
not responsible for the short-term rental violations, Clark
County provided Diamond Sands with notices of abatement
informing Diamond Sands of the violations prior to the
imposition of fines. At a minimum, because Diamond Sands
had knowledge of the improper short-term rentals and failed
to eliminate the violations, we conclude that the district court
did not err in finding that Diamond Sands bore some
culpability for the short-term rental ordinance violations.
C.
Diamond Sands next argues that the third factor—
alternative penalties—weighs in its favor because Clark
County could have created “alternative requirements and
penalties” on property owners or could have targeted the
tenants rather than imposing fines on the owners. But the
third factor asks whether the relevant legislature has
authorized other penalties, not whether the legislature could
have theoretically pursued an alternative enforcement
regime.

DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA 9

Diamond Sands fails to recognize that Clark County’s
ordinance does contemplate alternative penalties: Clark
County may issue misdemeanor citations, suspend or revoke
short-term rental licenses, or audit a violator’s financial
records. Clark Cnty. Code § 7.100.230(f). Authorization of
those alternative penalties demonstrates that the gravity of a
violation of Clark County’s short-term rental ordinances is
more than minimal. See Bajakajian, 524 U.S. at 339 n.14
(1998) (holding that potential criminal liability
demonstrated that violations of a statutory reporting
requirement were not “trivial”). Ultimately, Clark County
chose to impose fines, and it chose to impose a fine on the
low end of the authorized range. Clark Cnty. Code
§ 7.100.230(d)(1)(I) (authorizing up to a $10,000 fine per
violation). Accordingly, we conclude that the district court
did not err in holding that this factor weighed in favor of
proportionality.
D.
Finally, the fourth factor looks to the “extent of the harm
caused by the violation,” including both monetary and nonmonetary harm. Pimentel I, 974 F.3d at 923-924. The
district court properly concluded that the County suffers
cognizable harm from unlicensed short-term rentals by
property owners like Diamond Sands. Diamond Sands
argues that the district court erred by not requiring Clark
County to provide evidence of the extent of the harm.
Specifically, Diamond Sands argues that our decision in
Pimentel v. City of Los Angeles, 115 F.4th 1062 (9th Cir.
2024) (“Pimentel II”), requires that when governmental
entities seek to justify a fine under a broad interest in
deterrence, they must provide some specific evidence—such
as a declaration saying that a city bore more enforcement
costs or had to pay overtime for police—to show that a fine

10 DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA

is proportional to the alleged harm. Diamond Sands is
incorrect.
In Pimentel I, we held that Los Angeles’s $63 fine for
parking violations was not grossly disproportionate. 974
F.3d at 925. In doing so, we did not require empirical proof
of harm to the city, explaining that courts grant “substantial
deference to the broad authority” of legislatures to set fines.
Id. at 924 (quoting Bajakajian, 524 U.S. at 336). We
expressly rejected the notion that municipalities must
produce specific evidence to justify penalties and
emphasized that strict proportionality is not required under
the Excessive Fines Clause. Id.
Pimentel II did not retreat from that principle. In that
case, we analyzed a separate fine—Los Angeles’s $63 late
payment fee, imposed for failure to pay the underlying $63
parking fine within 21 days—and reversed the district
court’s grant of summary judgment in favor of Los Angeles.
115 F.4th at 1068-69. We held that we could not “determine
‘gross disproportionality’ as a matter of law because the City
offered no evidence to justify its $63 late fee.” Id. at 1069.
Although we recognized that “the [C]ity’s interest in
deterring nonpayment is legitimate,” we noted that the
plaintiffs had entered unrebutted testimony from
government officials that the fine in question was “an
arbitrary figure” that had been established solely for
revenue-generating purposes, id. at 1069-70, and held that
“the City’s interest alone does not validate any fine amount
that the City might arbitrarily impose,” id. at 1069. Our
reasoning turned on the fact that the City had failed to
provide any “evidence that the penalty amount was actually
tethered to the nature and extent of the harm caused by
nonpayment.” Id. at 1072 (emphasis omitted). We observed
that if the City had entered “witness [testimony], a

DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA 11

declaration from a City official, or even a single piece of
paper shedding light on the City’s basis for the $63 late fee
amount[,] the City would have likely prevailed. But the City
provided zilch.” Id. at 1071.
Diamond Sands argues that because Clark County
similarly provided no evidence, the County cannot prevail.
But Diamond Sands’ reliance on Pimentel II is misplaced.
First, in Pimentel II, we “stress[ed] that our holding [wa]s a
narrow one,” id. at 1074, and that “[s]o long as a government
provides an unrebutted commonsense explanation or
some—even relatively weak—evidence to justify its fine, it
will likely prevail against an Excessive Fines Clause
challenge,” id. at 1069. The problem there was that, even at
the summary judgment stage, the City had offered no
explanation whatsoever for why nonpayment warranted a
doubling of the initial fine. Second, Pimentel II dealt with a
distinct kind of fine—one aimed at addressing an
administrative problem, the late payment of a related fine—
where the harms from a violation would be felt by the
government itself rather than its citizens. In such a context,
it makes more sense to require documentary evidence of
harm to the government itself. But that is not the type of fine
at issue here.
Clark County’s ordinances are aimed at deterring harm
to County residents in general, not just to the County
government itself. In its ordinance, Clark County expressly
articulated that unlicensed short-term rentals negatively
impact the availability of affordable housing for county
residents and increase public nuisances in the community
from loud parties and the like. Clark Cnty. Code
§ 7.100.010. The County also explained that short-term
rentals interfere with its ability to collect transient lodging
taxes. Id. The impact of those harms falls not only on the

12 DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA

functions of the County government but also on the
community directly, as evidenced from the numerous
complaints from residents regarding disruptive parties at
Diamond Sands. See, e.g., Thomas v. Cnty. of Humboldt,
124 F.4th 1179, 1194 (9th Cir. 2024) (holding that when
violations did not impact the community, “caus[ing] no harm
beyond a technical lack of compliance,” this factor weighed
against proportionality), cert. denied 2025 WL 2906470
(U.S. Oct. 14, 2025); Pimentel I, 974 F.3d at 920
(recognizing that the relevant fine was aimed at
“alleviat[ing] traffic” for the “Los Angelenos [who] sigh and
despair when mired in traffic jams”); Towers, 173 F.3d at
625 (noting that the fine at issue aimed to deter “the spread
of drugs and the use of firearms,” which threatened public
safety in general). Clark County’s legislative findings
supply a rational basis for the fines imposed.
Diamond Sands does not dispute that short-term rental
violations negatively impact the County or present evidence
to rebut the proportionality conclusion. Under these
circumstances, and “[w]ithout material evidence provided
by [Diamond Sands] to the contrary,” the Eighth
Amendment does not require Clark County to “commission
quantitative analysis” to justify its fine penalty schedule.
Pimentel I, 974 F.3d at 924. Thus, when compared to the
harms Clark County identified, the imposed fines of $4,000
against Diamond Sands, weigh against a finding of gross
disproportionality. See id. We conclude that the district
court did not err in deciding that this factor weighed in favor
of finding that the County’s fines are proportional. As a
result, on this record, we conclude that Diamond Sands’ asapplied challenge fails to raise serious questions going to the
constitutionality of the fines Clark County imposed.

DIAMOND SANDS APARTMENTS, LLC V. CLARK COUNTY NEVADA 13

E.
We conclude that Diamond Sands has not raised serious
questions going to the facial constitutionality of Clark
County’s ordinances under the Eighth Amendment’s
Excessive Fines Clause. Diamond Sands argues that
because the County could theoretically impose a $20,000
fine on a property owner who had no prior knowledge of any
short-term rentals, the ordinance must be deemed facially
unconstitutional. But that argument turns the facial inquiry
on its head. Rather than showing that the ordinance could
potentially be enforced unconstitutionally in one
hypothetical application, Diamond Sands must demonstrate
that it is “unconstitutional in every conceivable application.”
Wolford v. Lopez, 116 F.4th 959, 984 (9th Cir. 2024)
(emphasis added) (quotation marks omitted). Because
Diamond Sands cannot rely on “a worst-case analysis that
may never occur” to demonstrate facial unconstitutionality,
Ohio v. Akron Ctr. for Reprod. Health, 497 U.S. 502, 514
(1990), its facial challenge fails.
IV.
The record before us demonstrates that the district court
did not abuse its discretion in concluding that Diamond
Sands failed to show serious questions that the fines at issue
are grossly disproportionate or that Clark County’s
ordinance is facially unconstitutional. For the foregoing
reasons, the district court’s denial of Diamond Sands’
motion for a preliminary injunction is AFFIRMED.

