FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
LAWRENCE P. KALBERS,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
DOJ - UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,

No. 24-1048
D.C. No.
2:18-cv-08439FMO-PJW

OPINION

Defendant,
VOLKSWAGEN AG,
Intervenor-Defendant, Appellant.
LAWRENCE P. KALBERS,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
DOJ - UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE,
Defendant - Appellant,

No. 24-1477
D.C. No.
2:18-cv-08439FMO-PJW

2

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

VOLKSWAGEN AG,
Intervenor-Defendant.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Fernando M. Olguin, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted May 16, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed January 30, 2026
Before: Milan D. Smith, Jr.* and Ryan D. Nelson, Circuit
Judges, and David A. Ezra, District Judge.**
Opinion by Judge R. Nelson

*

This case was submitted to a panel that included Judge
Ikuta. Following Judge Ikuta’s death, Judge M. Smith was drawn by lot
to replace her. See Ninth Cir. Gen. Order 3.2.h. Judge M. Smith has
read the briefs, reviewed the record, and listened to oral argument.
**

The Honorable David A. Ezra, United States District Judge for the
District of Hawaii, sitting by designation.

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

3

SUMMARY***
Freedom of Information Act
The panel reversed in part and vacated and in part the
district court’s order, issued in response to a Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) request, requiring the disclosure of
six million documents.
Lawrence Kalbers sought every document Volkswagen
AG turned over to federal prosecutors as part of its criminal
plea deal with the Department of Justice (DOJ). DOJ
obtained the documents in question through a grand jury
investigation. All but four of the six million documents are
labeled as responsive to a grand jury request.
FOIA Exemption 3 provides that FOIA does not apply to
matters that are specifically exempted from disclosure by
statute. Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 6(e), which
prevents government attorneys from revealing a matter
pending before a grand jury, qualifies as a statute under
Exemption 3.
The panel held that revealing documents only in the
government’s possession because of a grand jury subpoena
compromises the integrity of the grand jury’s deliberative
process. Here, Rule 6(e) bars disclosing nearly all the six
million documents subject to Kalbers’s FOIA request
because Kalbers seeks documents the Government obtained
through a grand jury subpoena—and through no other
means. Accordingly, the panel reversed the district court’s
***

This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.

4

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

order requiring disclosure of these documents. With respect
to four documents lacking a Rule 6(e) label, the panel
vacated and remanded for the district court to evaluate
whether the government must disclose the documents.

COUNSEL
Daniel Jacobs (argued), Law Office of Daniel Jacobs, Los
Angeles, California, for Plaintiff-Appellee.
Sean R. Janda (argued) and Daniel Tenny, Attorneys,
Appellate Staff; Brian M. Boynton, Principal Deputy
Assistant Attorney General; Civil Division, United States
Department of Justice, Washington, D.C.; Alarice M.
Medrano, Assistant United States Attorney, E. Martin
Estrada, United States Attorney; Office of the United States
Attorney, United States Department of Justice, Los Angeles,
California; for Defendant-Appellant.
Morgan L. Ratner (argued), Sullivan & Cromwell LLP,
Washington, D.C.; Robert J. Giuffra Jr., Andrew J. Finn,
Suhana S. Han, and Leslie B. Arffa, Sullivan & Cromwell
LLP, New York, New York; for Intervenor-DefendantAppellant.
Katie Lynn B. Townsend, Mara Gassmann, Adam A.
Marshall, and Ellen Goodrich, The Reporters Committee for
Freedom of the Press, Los Angeles, California, for Amicus
Curiae the Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press.

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

5

OPINION
R. NELSON, Circuit Judge:
Lawrence Kalbers seeks to expose what he calls
Volkswagen’s “sweetheart” criminal plea deal with the
Department of Justice (DOJ). He filed a Freedom of
Information Act (FOIA) request seeking every document
Volkswagen turned over to federal prosecutors. Normally,
FOIA requires the government to disclose information in its
possession. But there are exemptions. One of those
exemptions is a problem for Kalbers—DOJ obtained these
documents only through a grand jury subpoena. All but four
of the six million documents are labeled as responsive to a
grand jury request.
Federal law normally forbids
government attorneys from revealing anything that occurs in
a grand jury room. Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e). FOIA, in turn,
exempts disclosure of any information protected by federal
law.
That exemption governs. The file compiled for a grand
jury subpoena—like the subpoena itself—is a “matter”
before the grand jury under Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 6(e). Disclosing the requested documents
necessarily reveals that a grand jury subpoenaed them.
Because the government possessed these documents only
through the criminal investigation, the documents are
entitled to the same rule of secrecy that governs the subpoena
itself. Thus, the documents at issue are exempt from FOIA.
We therefore reverse in part and vacate in part the district
court’s order and remand for it to consider disclosure of the
four documents lacking a Rule 6 label.

6

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

I
Ten years ago, DOJ began to investigate Volkswagen’s
use of “‘defeat device’ software.” Kalbers v. U.S. Dep’t of
Just. (Kalbers I), 22 F.4th 816, 819 (9th Cir. 2021). This
software “enabled certain diesel vehicles to fraudulently
pass emissions tests.” Id. Courts and commentators have
dubbed this scandal “Dieselgate.” Id. Volkswagen
tampered with over 585,000 vehicles sold in the United
States. See In re Volkswagen “Clean Diesel” Mktg., Sales
Pracs., & Prods. Liab. Litig., 959 F.3d 1201, 1208 (9th Cir.
2020). This conduct led Volkswagen to strike a plea
agreement to settle criminal charges brought by DOJ, while
facing hundreds of civil lawsuits. Kalbers I, 22 F.4th at 819;
see also In re Volkswagen, 959 F.3d at 1207–09.
Volkswagen’s liability to federal and state regulators
exceeded $20 billion. In re Volkswagen, 959 F.3d at 1209.
The scope of the appeal before us is narrower. We
address the extent to which federal law requires DOJ to
maintain the confidentiality of documents it obtained only
while investigating the criminal charges. Volkswagen gave
DOJ “millions of documents in response to a grand jury
subpoena.” Kalbers I, 22 F.4th at 819. Much of the publicly
available information about this investigation comes from a
2017 Volkswagen Annual Report. According to the report,
Volkswagen hired the law firm Jones Day “to carry out an
extensive investigation of the diesel issue in light of the
DOJ’s . . . criminal investigations.” Volkswagen then
instructed Jones Day “to present factual evidence to the
DOJ.” The report also explains that Volkswagen and DOJ
reached a plea agreement to “resolve US criminal law
charges.” The parties based the agreement on “Jones Day’s
factual findings as well as the evidence identified by the DOJ
itself.” DOJ’s criminal charges wrapped up when it filed the

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

7

plea agreement with the U.S. District Court for the Eastern
District of Michigan. Kalbers I, 22 F.4th at 819. But the
public fallout from Dieselgate was far from over.
The scandal piqued the interest of many commentators
and scholars. One of those scholars is Lawrence Kalbers, a
professor at Loyola Marymount University. Kalbers seeks
to determine whether DOJ offered Volkswagen a
“sweetheart deal.” To find out, Kalbers filed a FOIA request
with DOJ seeking “all ‘factual evidence’ presented by Jones
Day” to DOJ “as the term i[s] used on p[age] 295 of
Volkswagen’s 2017 Annual Report.” DOJ denied Kalbers’s
FOIA request because the records were exempt as they were
“compiled for law enforcement purposes.” Kalbers I, 22
F.4th at 820.
Kalbers sought the documents in court. Id. DOJ
provided a Vaughn index 1 listing 281 documents which
Jones Day formally presented to DOJ. The parties call these
documents the presentation documents. DOJ withheld most
of the presentation documents under FOIA Exemption 7(A)
and Exemption 3.
Exemption 7(A) renders FOIA
inapplicable to “records or information compiled for law
enforcement purposes.” 5 U.S.C. § 552(b)(7). Exemption 3
renders FOIA inapplicable to matters “specifically exempted
from disclosure by statute.” Id. § 552(b)(3).
DOJ moved for summary judgment, arguing that the
FOIA exemptions authorized it to withhold the presentation
1

“A Vaughn index ‘is a government affidavit identifying the documents
withheld, the FOIA exemptions claimed, and a particularized
explanation of why each document falls within the claimed exemption.’”
Kalbers I, 22 F.4th at 820 n.1 (quoting Aguirre v. U.S. Nuclear Regul.
Comm’n, 11 F.4th 719, 728 (9th Cir. 2021)); see also Vaughn v. Rosen,
484 F.2d 820, 827–28 (D.C. Cir. 1973).

8

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

documents. The district court denied the motion without
reaching whether the exemptions apply. Instead, the district
court ordered DOJ to search for additional documents
because Kalbers’s FOIA request seeks all documents Jones
Day submitted to DOJ, not only those formally presented to
investigators.2 Four months later, the district court ordered
DOJ to “produce all responsive documents” to Kalbers’s
FOIA request along with a Vaughn index detailing which
documents it sought to withhold. In response, DOJ
determined that Jones Day provided nearly six million
documents to federal prosecutors in response to the grand
jury subpoena.
Based on the number of documents at issue, the district
court appointed a special master to address any claimed
FOIA exemptions. DOJ filed two petitions in the Eastern
District of Michigan, 3 asking the court to protect the
documents from disclosure under Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 6(e). That rule prevents government attorneys
from revealing a “matter” pending before a grand jury. See
Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e). DOJ explained that the “vast majority
of” the requested records “were produced by Jones Day with
the label ‘FOIA Confidential – Produced Pursuant to Rule
6(e).’” Only four documents responsive to Kalbers’s request
“do not include this label.” The Eastern District of Michigan
transferred the petitions to the Central District of California
under Rule 6(e)(3)(G). With the petitions in California, the

2

The district court also denied Volkswagen’s motion to intervene,
which we reversed in Kalbers I, 22 F.4th at 828.
3

A petition for a court “to disclose a grand-jury matter under Rule
6(e)(3)(E)(i) must be filed in the district where the grand jury convened.”
Fed. R. Crim. P. 6(e)(3)(F).

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

9

district court consolidated the matter with Kalbers’s FOIA
suit and referred the petitions to a special master.
Before the special master, DOJ submitted a declaration
explaining that it received “approximately 5.9 million
records” from Jones Day “in response to a subpoena issued
by a federal grand jury.” DOJ estimated that around 720,000
to 1.3 million records “were tagged by the government in the
course of its investigation,” leaving around 3.3 to 4.3 million
records which “were not identified for review by
government prosecutors.”
The special master recommended that the district court
deny DOJ’s petitions. The special master wrote that it was
unclear “which of the millions of records were actually
presented to and/or considered by the grand jury, rendering
it virtually impossible for the public to glean any information
about the grand jury’s investigation or deliberation.” The
special master also concluded that DOJ had not shown “that
there is something inherent in the documents—e.g., witness
lists, summaries of grand jury testimony, copies of
subpoenas, and the like—that would reveal any information
about the grand jury.”
Thus, the special master
recommended that the documents subject to Kalbers’s FOIA
request “be produced in their entirety.” The special master
noted that Kalbers “agreed to limit his request by excluding
all untagged records,” thereby “leaving between 720,000 to
1.3 million tagged records to process.”
DOJ and Volkswagen objected to the special master’s
recommendation. The district court overruled the parties’
objections and denied the DOJ petitions in a minute order.
DOJ and Intervener Volkswagen appealed.

10

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

II
We have jurisdiction to review the district court’s minute
order under 28 U.S.C. § 1291. See In re Sells, 719 F.2d 985,
988 (9th Cir. 1983) (an order granting disclosure under Rule
6(e) is a final decision under § 1291). Contrary to Kalbers’s
contention, DOJ’s original objection and petitions seek the
same relief. Thus, the district court’s minute order resolves
the issue in the FOIA request and in the DOJ petitions,
rendering it a final decision granting disclosure of
documents under Rule 6(e). See id.; In re Steele, 799 F.2d
461, 464 (9th Cir. 1986). Nor did consolidation deprive DOJ
and Volkswagen of their appellate rights to contest a final
decision on the DOJ petitions. See Hall v. Hall, 584 U.S. 59,
67–68, 77 (2018).
“We review de novo a district court’s interpretation of
the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure.” United States v.
Brown, 784 F.3d 1301, 1303 (9th Cir. 2015). The question
is whether the DOJ can withhold the documents under Rule
6(e) because they are a “matter occurring before the grand
jury.” The district court agreed with the special master’s
recommendation that the “documents be produced in their
entirety, subject to the restrictions to address
burdensomeness concerns.” Because that is a legal
conclusion about the scope of Rule 6(e), we review the
ruling de novo. See Brown, 784 F.3d at 1303.
III
A
We address whether FOIA requires the Government to
disclose a file it only possesses because it was created “in
response to” a grand jury investigation. Under FOIA, an
agency “shall make the records promptly available to any

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

11

person” upon “any request for records” which meets the
statutory requirements. 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(3)(A).
Congress, however, recognized that the government
possesses many documents that should remain confidential.
FOIA thus has many exemptions. Relevant here, Exemption
3 provides that FOIA “does not apply to matters that
are . . . specifically exempted from disclosure by statute.”
Id. § 552(b)(3). This incorporates Federal Rule of Criminal
Procedure 6(e)(2)(B)(vi), which provides that “an attorney
for the government” must “not disclose a matter occurring
before the grand jury.” See also Sussman v. U.S. Marshals
Serv., 494 F.3d 1106, 1113 (D.C. Cir. 2007) (Rule 6(e)
qualifies as a statute under Exemption 3 of FOIA); Act of
July 30, 1977, Pub. L. No. 95-78, 91 Stat. 319, 319–20.
Thus, we must determine what “matter” means.
We have refused to adopt a precise test of what qualifies
as a “matter” under Rule 6(e). Instead, we evaluate whether
releasing information “would compromise ‘the integrity of
the grand jury’s deliberative process.’” In re Optical Disk
Drive Antitrust Litig., 801 F.3d 1072, 1075 (9th Cir. 2015)
(quoting United States v. Dynavac, Inc., 6 F.3d 1407, 1414
(9th Cir. 1993)). Although the Rule does not define the term,
a “matter” is ordinarily defined as a “subject under
consideration.” Matter, Black’s Law Dictionary (12th ed.
2024); see also Matter, Black’s Law Dictionary (4th ed.
1968) (defining “matter” as “subject-matter of
controversy”). Thus, a rule that prohibits disclosing
“matter[s] occurring before the grand jury” bars revealing
any “subject” under the grand jury’s consideration. Fed. R.
Crim. P. 6(e)(2).
We have never addressed whether revealing documents
only in the government’s possession because of a grand jury

12

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

subpoena compromises “the integrity of the grand jury’s
deliberative process.” Optical Disk Drive, 801 F.3d at 1077
(cleaned up). We follow the guidance of the “considerations
inherent” in our prior decisions, id., and hold that it does.
First, courts consider several factors that prevent disclosure
under Rule 6(e). Courts consider whether the government
possesses documents only through a grand jury
investigation, whether the documents reveal their source,
and whether the request is coterminous with the grand jury
file. Second, certain factors may allow disclosure under a
preexisting-documents exception. But contrary to Kalbers’s
contention, that exception applies only when a requester
seeks preexisting documents from a source independent of
the grand jury investigation.
1
FOIA exempts disclosing a grand jury’s subpoena file
when the file consists of the only version of the documents
in the government’s possession and the documents
themselves show that they were subject to a grand jury
subpoena. This outcome flows from the grand jury’s
investigative function. A grand jury’s core function is to
investigate and decide whether someone has committed a
crime. That power is broad. “While there are some limits
on the investigative powers of the grand jury, there are few
if any other forums in which a governmental body has such
relatively unregulated power to compel other persons to
divulge information or produce evidence.” United States v.
Sells Eng’g, Inc., 463 U.S. 418, 433 (1983) (footnote
omitted). This immense power generally flows through the
prosecuting attorney. See id. at 429–30 & n.13. After all,
the power of the prosecuting attorney to issue a subpoena to
bring evidence before the grand jury is “grounded in the

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

13

grand jury investigation.” Lopez v. Dep’t of Just., 393 F.3d
1345, 1349 (D.C. Cir. 2005).
To counter this broad investigative power, the law
shields matters brought before the grand jury from public
view. The Supreme Court has “consistently . . . recognized
that the proper functioning of our grand jury system depends
upon the secrecy of grand jury proceedings.” Rehberg v.
Paulk, 566 U.S. 356, 374 (2012) (quoting Sells Eng’g, 463
U.S. at 424). Without secrecy protections, cooperating
witnesses “would be hesitant to come forward voluntarily.”
Douglas Oil Co. of Cal. v. Petrol Stops Nw., 441 U.S. 211,
219 (1979). And those who do come forward “would be less
likely to testify fully and frankly.” Id. The tradition of grand
jury secrecy also safeguards the privacy interests of
investigatory targets, some of whom may be “exonerated by
the grand jury,” but may face “public ridicule” for being
called by the prosecution. Id. Thus, to match the broad
scope of the grand jury’s broad ability to investigate, “the
scope of the secrecy is necessarily broad.” Fund for Const.
Gov’t v. Nat’l Archives & Recs. Serv., 656 F.2d 856, 869
(D.C. Cir. 1981).
The founders infused the tradition of secrecy into “our
constitutional grand jury,” which “was intended to operate
substantially like its English progenitor.” Costello v. United
States, 350 U.S. 359, 362 (1956). Congress later spelled out
the details of these principles through Rule 6(e), which
“codifies the traditional rule of grand jury secrecy.” Sells
Eng’g, 463 U.S. at 425. The Rule has only “limited
exceptions.” Fund for Const. Gov’t, 656 F.2d at 868.
Courts applying Rule 6(e) consistently find that items
requested by the grand jury through subpoena are
presumptively protected from disclosure. See Standley v.

14

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

Dep’t of Just., 835 F.2d 216, 218 (9th Cir. 1987) (Rule 6
protects “the strategy or direction of the [grand jury’s]
investigation”). As the D.C. Circuit explained, when a party
“seeks [documents] from an entity whose possession of
[those documents] is directly linked to its role relating to the
grand jury investigation[],” Rule 6(e) bars disclosure
because “revelation in [that] particular context would in fact
reveal what was before the grand jury.” Fund for Const.
Gov’t, 656 F.2d at 870. Indeed, Rule 6(e) prohibits
disclosing materials that “would reveal something about the
grand jury’s identity, investigation, or deliberation.” Labow
v. United States Dep’t of Just., 831 F.3d 523, 529 (D.C. Cir.
2016); see also Sec. & Exch. Comm’n v. Dresser Indus., Inc.,
628 F.2d 1368, 1382 (D.C. Cir. 1980) (en banc).
Under these principles, secrecy over the grand jury
investigation protects large swaths of materials. Rule 6(e)
unquestionably protects the “identities of witnesses or
jurors, the substance of testimony, the strategy or direction
of the investigation, the deliberations or questions of jurors,
and the like.” Dresser, 628 F.2d at 1382. The subpoena
itself—or the list of documents or witnesses requested by the
grand jury—fits comfortably on this list. See Lopez, 393
F.3d at 1350 (“All grand jury subpoenas (be they ad
testificandum or duces tecum) and therefore their dates of
issuance fall within FOIA’s third exemption.”); see also,
e.g., Martin v. Consultants & Adm’rs, Inc., 966 F.2d 1078,
1097 (7th Cir. 1992) (material can fall within Rule 6(e)’s
protection if its disclosure “would reveal the identities of
targets” of the grand jury’s investigation).
If Rule 6(e) protects the grand jury’s request for
documents, the Rule likewise protects the file prepared in
response to that request. The file is susceptible to reverseengineering. Subpoenaed documents “when considered in

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

15

the aggregate and in their relationship to one another, make
possible inferences about the nature and direction of the
grand jury inquiry.” In re Grand Jury Proceedings, 851 F.2d
860, 865 (6th Cir. 1988) (citations omitted).
“[T]he selection and compilation of documents by
counsel” reveals “important aspects of his understanding of
the case.” Sporck v. Peil, 759 F.2d 312, 316 (3d Cir. 1985)
(citation omitted). After all, each time an attorney decides
to include a document in the set, the attorney decides that the
document is relevant to some predetermined criteria for
inclusion. See id. In the context of the attorney
work-product protection, many courts have recognized that
curation reveals the attorney’s “thought processes and
theories regarding th[e] litigation” by demonstrating which
arguments are stronger, weaker, or more likely to draw
additional probing during depositions. In re Allen, 106 F.3d
582, 608 (4th Cir. 1997); accord Shelton v. Am. Motors
Corp., 805 F.2d 1323, 1329 (8th Cir. 1986).
In the context of a grand jury subpoena file, the curating
attorney’s thought process is more apparent: Is the
document at issue responsive to the subpoena? One need
only to flip through the compiled file and observe patterns to
figure out the time periods, individuals, and subject matters
the grand jury was investigating. See 1 Wright & Miller’s
Federal Practice & Procedure § 107 (5th ed. 2023) (Rule
6(e) prohibits disclosure of information that would reveal
“the types of crimes being examined” and “the identity of
the target and subjects of the investigation”). On the other
hand, the lack of documents related to a particular time,
individual, or subject matter would permit the inference that
the grand jury did not view those matters as worthy of
investigation. Once these patterns are known, even lay
people can reverse engineer the subpoena itself and thus

16

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

impermissibly reveal “matters occurring before the grand
jury.” See McDonnell v. United States, 4 F.3d 1227, 1246,
1248 (3d Cir. 1993).
To be sure, few cases have held that the subpoena file is
itself protected by Rule 6(e). But parties rarely present the
issue to the courts; and the few times the parties contested
the issue, the court remanded to the lower court to determine
whether the government could release documents without
revealing that they were part of the grand jury file.
The case on the margin is Senate of Puerto Rico ex rel.
Judiciary Committee v. U.S. Department of Justice, 823 F.2d
574 (D.C. Cir. 1987). There, the D.C. Circuit noted that the
Government had not submitted evidence supporting the
district court’s finding that the documents “were compiled
from an investigation culminating in and used in a grand jury
proceeding,” id. at 584 n.33, and remanded for further
fact-finding, id. at 583. Most cases are not on the margins.
In those cases, the courts presume that requests for the intact
jury subpoena file are exempt from FOIA. See, e.g, Labow,
831 F.3d at 529 (“If the documents would reveal to the
requester that they had been subpoenaed, we would agree.”);
United States v. Stanford, 589 F.2d 285, 291 n.6 (7th Cir.
1978) (“A general request for ‘all documents collected or
received in connection with the investigation of antitrust
violations,’ for example, would be in effect a disclosure of
the grand jury proceedings.” (cleaned up)).
A subpoena is a tool of investigation. Rule 6(e) prevents
disclosing the grand jury’s investigation. Since revealing the
results of a subpoena generally reveals the contents of the
subpoena itself, the only question is whether it is possible to
reveal the subpoenaed documents without revealing the
subpoena. Kalbers contends that it is possible under caselaw

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

17

that allows releasing documents that preexist the grand jury
investigation. As explained below, however, those cases
apply only when the documents come from at least one
source independent of the grand jury.
2
Kalbers points to two additional factors we have
considered in our prior cases. According to Kalbers, Rule
6(e) does not apply because he seeks the documents for their
“own sake rather than to learn what took place before the
grand jury” and because “disclosure will not compromise the
integrity of the grand jury process.” Kalbers borrows this
language from our opinions in Dynavac, 6 F.3d 1407, and
Optical Disk Drive, 801 F.3d 1072, which are part of a
broader line of cases in which a party seeks “documentary
information coincidentally before the grand jury” from some
other source. Fund for Const. Gov’t, 656 F.2d at 870 (citing
Dresser, 628 F.2d at 1383). Kalbers errs by transposing
these cases out of their specific context.
Start with Dynavac. There, the IRS issued a summons
to a private corporation seeking its business records for a
civil tax investigation. 6 F.3d at 1409. The corporation
resisted, contending that it could not disclose the requested
materials under Rule 6(e) because it had once produced the
documents to a grand jury. Id. at 1410.
This attempt at clever lawyering drove our analysis. In
context, the question was whether a private party can shirk
its obligations in an independent discovery process—
unrelated to the grand jury—simply because it had once
presented the material to a grand jury. But “it is not the
purpose of the Rule to foreclose from all future revelation to
proper authorities the same information or documents which
were presented to the grand jury.” Id. at 1411 (quoting

18

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

United States v. Interstate Dress Carriers, Inc., 280 F.2d 52,
54 (2d Cir. 1960)). “Thus, if a document is sought for its
own sake rather than to learn what took place before the
grand jury, and if its disclosure will not compromise the
integrity of the grand jury process, Rule 6(e) does not
prohibit its release.” Id. at 1411–12.
It bears repeating that the IRS had an independent source
for the corporation’s records. The IRS could issue summons
to “examine any books, papers, records, or other data which
may be relevant or material to” its inquiry. 26 U.S.C.
§ 7602(a)(1). In those circumstances, courts have made
clear that the “existence of a grand jury proceeding neither
adds to nor detracts from” existing legal obligations.
Dresser, 628 F.2d at 1383.
This meant that the IRS could obtain the requested
documents without any indication of the grand jury’s
request. Indeed, the IRS sought specific business records
identified by their content, “without mention of the grand
jury.” Dynavac, 6 F.3d at 1414. And the IRS directed the
summons to the company, not the government. Id. Thus,
enforcement of the summons did not reveal that a grand jury
requested the company’s records.
And even with this attenuated link between the
documents and their role in the grand jury investigation,
Dynavac emphasized that disclosure is improper if it
“compromise[s] the integrity of the grand jury process.” 6
F.3d at 1412. The opinion “allow[ed] for the possibility”
that “learning which documents were subpoenaed by the
grand jury may disclose the grand jury’s deliberative
process.” Id. at 1412 n.2.
Optical Disk Drive also considered a request for records
which the government possessed independent of the grand

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

19

jury’s investigation. As part of a criminal antitrust
investigation, the FBI secretly recorded conversations
involving an employee of one of the companies under
investigation. 801 F.3d at 1074. The FBI made the
recordings two months before the grand jury issued a
subpoena to the employee seeking his testimony. Id. After
the grand jury investigation concluded, Dell, Inc., in a
separate civil antitrust action, subpoenaed DOJ seeking
“recordings of conversations” related to DOJ’s earlier
criminal investigation. Id. The employee moved to quash
Dell’s civil subpoena, arguing that DOJ’s disclosure of the
recordings would violate Rule 6(e) because the recordings
were a “matter occurring before the grand jury.” Id. The
district court denied the motion to quash, and we affirmed.
As in Dynavac, Dell requested materials which
overlapped with the grand jury investigation. See id. DOJ
created and possessed the FBI recordings in Optical Disk
Drive independent of the grand jury proceeding. So the
documents’ disclosure would not have necessarily
implicated the grand jury or the nature and scope of its
criminal investigation. See id. at 1078 (“[The party seeking
to prevent disclosure] has not demonstrated that the tape
recordings and transcripts were a product of the grand jury’s
investigation.”). And documents produced could have come
from files the government possessed independent of the
grand jury proceeding.
The Second and D.C. Circuit cases on which we relied
also considered whether the requester sought the documents
from an independent source. Dresser allowed a limited
exception to the rule of secrecy because Rule 6(e) does not
require “a veil of secrecy be drawn over all matters occurring
in the world that happen to be investigated by a grand jury.”
628 F.2d at 1382 (emphasis added) (citing Interstate Dress

20

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

Carriers, 280 F.2d at 54). Even under a broader reading of
the Rule, “courts should permit disclosure of documents in
the hands of private parties, independently identified and
sought for a lawful and independent purpose.” Id. at 1383
n.37.
An independent source obscures the precise source.
When the documents are also in the possession of an
independent source—or the government obtained the
documents from another source independent of the grand
jury—the requester has no way of knowing which
documents are also a part of the document set curated for the
grand jury. In other words, the curation is broken and any
overlap between the sets of documents becomes purely
“coincidental[].” Fund for Const. Gov’t, 656 F.2d at 870.
Because “jury proceedings are genuinely secret, other
agencies and courts will not know the subject matter of the
grand jury investigation and thus will not be able to
determine whether their own inquiry would overlap that of
the grand jury.” Dresser, 628 F.2d at 1383. But when a
requester “seeks information from an entity whose
possession of that information is directly linked to its role
relating to the grand jury investigations,” revelation “in
[that] particular context would in fact reveal what was before
the grand jury.” Fund for Const. Gov’t, 656 F.2d at 870.
The district court erred by ignoring this context. Citing
Optical Disk Drive, the special master focused her analysis
on whether the materials “are directly associated with the
grand jury process” and “reveal the inner workings of the
grand jury.”
This portion of the special master’s
recommendation also incorporated the district court’s prior
ruling that the documents may be released if they are “sought
for [their] own sake” and disclosure does not “compromise
the integrity of the grand jury.” But as explained, in

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

21

Dynavac and Optical Disk Drive, we also considered
whether the requested information was developed
independently from the relevant grand jury proceeding or
otherwise came from an independent source. Thus, the
government may defeat a request to reveal documents
subpoenaed by a grand jury by disproving any of the
following: (1) that the documents are in governmental
possession from an independent source; (2) that the
documents were sought for a reason independent of the
grand jury investigation; or (3) that disclosure of the
documents would not otherwise compromise the integrity of
the grand jury process. Cf. Dresser, 628 F.2d at 1383 n.37.
The district court applied the second and third factors. It
erred by ignoring the first. The documents are indisputably
in the government’s possession only through the grand jury
subpoena—and not through any other source.
B
With the relevant factors from our caselaw in mind, we
apply them to Kalbers’s request. Doing so, Rule 6(e) bars
disclosing nearly all the six million documents subject to
Kalbers’s FOIA request. Kalbers seeks documents the
Government obtained through a grand jury subpoena—and
through no other means. On that fact alone, Rule 6(e) bars
disclosure. But even applying the other two Dynavac
factors, the special master misread Kalbers’s request and
concluded that he does not seek grand jury materials. The
record says otherwise. Kalbers seeks to discover what
criminal charges the grand jury considered. This fact also
dooms the request. Applying any of the three relevant
factors leads to the same result: Rule 6(e) bars disclosure of
these documents.

22

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

Start with the factor the district court overlooked.
Releasing the curated, intact grand jury file would
“necessarily reveal a connection to a grand jury.” Labow,
831 F.3d at 529–30. DOJ explains that it obtained the
records “in response to a subpoena issued by a federal grand
jury investigating [Volkswagen’s] criminal conduct,” and
that it has the records “because of the grand jury
investigation.” As a result, disclosing all “factual evidence”
“presented by” Volkswagen’s counsel would necessarily
reveal the compiled file produced in response to the grand
jury’s subpoena.
This is not a case where the commingling of documents
subpoenaed by the grand jury and by other governmental
agencies makes it impossible to determine which documents
were obtained through which process. Compare Senate of
Puerto Rico, 823 F.2d at 583 (“[H]ad the DOJ released these
exhibits, along with the over 1,000 pages of non-grand jury
material it did release, there is nothing in this record to
suggest that the Senate . . . would have been able to
determine which documents had been submitted to the grand
jury.” (footnote omitted)). Instead, all but four of the six
million documents are stamped with a label reading: “FOIA
Confidential – Produced Pursuant to Rule 6(e).”
The records themselves “reveal to the requester that they
ha[ve] been subpoenaed by a grand jury.” Bartko v. U.S.
Dep’t of Just., 898 F.3d 51, 73 (D.C. Cir. 2018) (cleaned up).
And the government cannot redact the labels without
providing justification.
That too would reveal the
documents’ connection to the grand jury, making the
redaction meaningless. See Labow v. U.S. Dep’t of Just., 278
F. Supp. 3d 431, 445 (D.D.C. 2017).

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

23

The juxtaposition of six million marked documents to
four unmarked documents puts this case squarely in the
category contemplated by the D.C. Circuit in Labow. There,
the D.C. Circuit remanded for the district court to determine
“if the government’s sole copies of the documents were
marked as grand jury exhibits.” Labow, 831 F.3d at 530. If
so, “the documents at issue . . . necessarily evince their
connection to a grand jury.” Id. Worse, the number of
documents, combined with Kalbers’s broad request for “all
‘factual evidence’” in the government’s possession, makes it
apparent that the six million documents (or any subset) are
the documents requested by the grand jury. Thus, a reader
may consider the documents “in the aggregate” and
determine which topics the grand jury investigated and
which topics it passed over. See In re Grand Jury
Proceedings, 851 F.2d at 865. This file is “a product of the
grand jury’s investigation,” and the government cannot
produce it without “compromis[ing] the integrity of the
grand jury’s deliberative process.” Optical Disk Drive, 801
F.3d at 1078.
We could end the matter there. But even considering the
two additional factors at play in Dynavac, the result remains
the same. On appeal, Kalbers claims that he seeks the
documents for their “own sake rather than to learn what took
place before a grand jury” because “research and public
dissemination” is “an independent and legitimate purpose.”
While the purpose of his request may be legitimate, it is not
independent. Kalbers’s request specifically asks for all
“factual evidence” “presented by Jones Day” to DOJ “as that
term is used on p[age] 295 of Volkswagen’s 2017 Annual
Report.”
Kalbers contends that this request seeks
information about Jones Day’s “internal investigation of
Volkswagen” rather than the grand jury proceeding. Not so.

24

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

It is hard to see what page 295 of the Annual Report
references other than the grand jury proceeding. The Annual
Report makes clear that Volkswagen commissioned the
internal investigation because of DOJ’s “criminal
investigation.” And immediately after stating that “Jones
Day was instructed by Volkswagen to present factual
evidence to the DOJ,” the Annual Report states that
Volkswagen and DOJ “entered into a Plea Agreement” “[t]o
resolve US criminal charges.” Although a plea agreement
can waive the Fifth Amendment right to a grand jury
indictment, see Fed. R. Crim. P. 7(b), the reference to
pending criminal charges raises the possibility the
government had empaneled a grand jury. At minimum, a
well-informed researcher such as Kalbers likely read page
295 and questioned whether the prosecution presented the
referenced documents to a grand jury.
Whether Kalbers’s request references a grand jury
proceeding, the documents are not “preexisting business
records” under Dynavac. As explained, Dynavac applied the
“preexisting business records” exception because the IRS
requested a new document collection directly from their
original source, rather than from a grand jury. See 9 F.3d at
1412. Once an attorney curates a collection of documents,
that collection becomes a product itself. Cf. Sporck, 759
F.2d at 316. Kalbers requests that product.
That Kalbers “agreed to limit his request by excluding
all untagged records” does not save his request from
Exemption 3’s protections. Kalbers now seeks the 720,000
to 1.3 million “records that were tagged by the government
in the course of its investigation.” But this file of 1.3 million
documents is still “a product of the grand jury’s
investigation.” Optical Disk Drive, 801 F.3d at 1078. And
in many ways, it is an even more protected list of documents.

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

25

Volkswagen’s lawyers curated the file of 6 million
documents to ensure that the included records responded to
the grand jury’s subpoena. Then, DOJ lawyers conducted a
second level of curation to include only the documents most
responsive to the grand jury’s concerns. This file is a far cry
from the business records that “predated the grand jury
investigation” in Dynavac. 6 F.3d at 1414.
Finally, the release of these records would “compromise
the integrity of the grand jury process.” Id. at 1412. The
special master found otherwise because the documents at
issue were “created for purposes independent of the grand
jury proceeding,” unlike “witness lists, summaries of grand
jury testimony, copies of subpoenas, and the like.”4 Thus,
the special master appeared to believe that Rule 6(e) applies
only to materials created for or by the grand jury. That
cannot be. “Disclosure of a grand-jury matter—other than
the grand jury’s deliberations or any grand juror’s vote—
may be made to” certain government personnel. Fed. R.
4

The district court also expressed concern that exempting disclosure
“would allow any party that is being investigated by a grand jury to
undermine the goals of FOIA . . . by preventing the disclosure of
documents by simply turning over all documents . . . to the grand jury.”
This concern is unfounded. FOIA does not give Kalbers a right to
request information from Volkswagen. See, e.g., 5 U.S.C. § 552(a)(3)
(FOIA provides a right of access to “agency” records); U.S. Dep’t of Just.
v. Reps. Comm. for Freedom of Press, 489 U.S. 749, 773 (1989) (FOIA
was enacted to allow citizens “to know what their government is up to.”).
Thus, there cannot be a perverse incentive for private actors to turn over
documents to a governmental agency to trigger a FOIA exemption,
because FOIA does not apply to those private actors in the first place.
To the extent that Kalbers may have some other legal entitlement to seek
documents directly from Volkswagen—such as the Federal Rules of
Civil Procedure—that would likely be more analogous to our holding in
Dynavac, 6 F.3d at 1409.

26

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

Crim. P. 6(e)(3)(A). So, as a textual matter, “matter[s]
occurring before the grand jury” must mean something more
than just grand jury deliberations. Id. 6(e)(2). Plus, Rule
6(e) protects “the integrity of the grand jury process” as a
whole—not just deliberations. Dynavac, 6 F.3d at 1412; see
Standley, 835 F.2d at 218 (Rule 6(e) covers “the identities of
witnesses or jurors” and “the strategy or direction of the
investigation” in addition to “the deliberations or questions
of the jurors” (quoting Fund for Const. Gov’t, 656 F.2d at
869)). And other courts have concluded that Rule 6(e)
protects preexisting documents turned over to the grand jury.
See, e.g., Labow, 831 F.3d at 529; McDonnell, 4 F.3d at
1246, 1248.
Whether the documents reveal the grand jury’s
deliberative process is not the only question. Rule 6(e) bars
revelation of any “matter” before the grand jury—and
“matters” includes the investigation, too. If the grand jury
investigated Volkswagen’s internal emails or technical
documents, the Rule protects the fact of that investigation
from disclosure. The government cannot release those
documents without revealing that the grand jury investigated
them. Thus, their release “would compromise ‘the integrity
of the grand jury’s deliberative process.’” Optical Disk
Drive, 801 F.3d at 1075 (quoting Dynavac, 6 F.3d at 1414).5
5

Consistent with our precedent rejecting any per se approach, see
Dynavac, 6 F.3d at 1412, we decide only the case before us. We leave
open the question, for example, whether the government must disclose
an intact grand jury file without an independent source of the documents
if nothing on the face of the documents reveals they were the subject of
a grand jury subpoena. See Senate of Puerto Rico, 823 F.2d at 583 (the
government may not claim Rule 6(e) protection if the only indication that
the documents were subject to a grand jury subpoena is a post-request
representation by counsel).

KALBERS V. VOLKSWAGEN AG

27

IV
The government may disclose documents in its
possession independent of a grand jury, even if duplicate
documents also appear in a grand jury file. But the
government has these documents only through a grand jury
subpoena—and through no other source. There is a
difference between producing a file that coincidentally
overlaps with a grand jury subpoena file and producing the
file itself. Commingling documents can obscure their
source, thus creating one factor that may allow the release of
documents subpoenaed by a grand jury without
compromising “the integrity of the grand jury’s deliberative
process.” Dynavac, 6 F.3d at 1414. That factor does not
apply here. Thus, Rule 6(e) bars the disclosure of these
documents, and Exemption 3 to FOIA applies.
We therefore reverse the district court’s order requiring
disclosure of the six million documents and vacate and
remand for the district court to evaluate whether the
government must disclose the four documents lacking a Rule
6 label.
REVERSED IN PART, and VACATED AND
REMANDED IN PART.

