FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
JEFFREY B. SEDLIK, an individual,
Plaintiff - Appellant,
v.
KATHERINE VON
DRACHENBERG, an individual;
AKA Kat Von D; KAT VON D,
INC., a California corporation; HIGH
VOLTAGE TATTOO, INC., a
California corporation,

No. 24-3367
D.C. No.
2:21-cv-01102DSF-MRW

OPINION

Defendants - Appellees.
Appeal from the United States District Court
for the Central District of California
Dale S. Fischer, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted July 14, 2025
Pasadena, California
Filed January 2, 2026
Before: Kim McLane Wardlaw, Salvador Mendoza, Jr., and
Anthony D. Johnstone, Circuit Judges.

2

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

Per Curiam Opinion;
Concurrence by Judge Wardlaw;
Concurrence by Judge Johnstone
SUMMARY *
Copyright
The panel affirmed the district court’s judgment after a
jury trial in favor of Katherine Von Drachenberg and her
tattoo parlor, High Voltage Tattoo, in an action brought
under the Copyright Act by Jeffrey Sedlik, alleging
infringement of his copyright in a photograph of Miles
Davis.
The jury found that six allegedly infringing works—a
tattoo, a sketch, and four social media posts—were not
substantially similar to the photograph. Von Drachenberg
stipulated that four additional social media posts, referred to
as the “Process Images,” which depicted her in the process
of inking the tattoo, were substantially similar to the
photograph because they contained a reproduction of the
photograph, but the jury found that those works were not
infringing because they were a fair use of the photograph.
The panel held that the district court’s denial of Sedlik’s
motion for summary judgment was not reviewable on appeal
because it did not involve a purely legal question
independent of disputed facts.
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

3

The panel held that the district court did not err in
denying Sedlik’s Fed. R. Civ. P. 50(b) motion for judgment
as a matter of law because he did not show that the jury’s
verdict was contrary to the only reasonable conclusion
permitted by the evidence for both the intrinsic and extrinsic
tests for substantial similarity of the parties’ works. The
extrinsic test assesses the objective similarities of the works,
while the intrinsic test considers similarity of expression
from the standpoint of the ordinary reasonable
observer. The intrinsic test is reserved for the finder of fact,
while the extrinsic test may, when appropriate, be
determined as a matter of law at an earlier stage of
litigation. The panel declined to disturb the jury’s findings
as they pertained to the intrinsic test. The panel concluded
that because the jury found that the six works were not
intrinsically similar to the photograph, it need not reach the
extrinsic test.
Concurring in the judgment, Judge Wardlaw wrote that
she fully agreed with Judge Johnstone’s concurrence and
with his analysis of the court’s flawed extrinsic-intrinsic test
for substantial similarity. Judge Wardlaw suggested that the
intrinsic test for substantial similarity has fundamental
flaws, and that the court should consider dispensing with it
altogether.
Concurring, Judge Johnstone, joined by Judge Wardlaw,
wrote that he concurred in the per curiam opinion because it
applied the current state of the court’s case law. Judge
Johnstone also joined Judge Wardlaw’s call to realign the
court’s copyright doctrine with the principles established by
the Copyright Clause, the Copyright Act, and the Supreme
Court’s copyright case law. Judge Johnstone added that the
court’s doctrine has also drifted from its own origins. He
wrote that the court developed the intrinsic test to protect a

4

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

work’s full expression, but over time it has lost its legal
content, and now the standardless intrinsic test invites juries
to reach copyright verdicts unconstrained by copyright law.
The panel addressed additional issues in a concurrentlyfiled memorandum disposition.

COUNSEL
William F. Patry (argued), Quinn Emanuel Urquhart &
Sullivan LLP, New York, New York; Moon H. Lee, Quinn
Emanuel Urquhart & Sullivan LLP, Los Angeles, California;
Robert E. Allen, Jason C. Linger, and Lara A. Petersen,
Glaser Weil Fink Howard Jordan & Shapiro LLP, Los
Angeles, California; for Plaintiff-Appellant.
Allen B. Grodsky (argued), Grodsky Olecki & Puritsky LLP,
Los Angeles, California, for Defendants-Appellees.
Nancy E. Wolff, Cowan DeBaets Abrahams & Sheppard
LLP, New York, New York, for Amicus Curiae the
Copyright Alliance.
Thomas B. Maddrey, American Society of Media
Photographers, San Francisco, California; Stephen M.
Doniger, Doniger Burroughs PC, Venice, California;
Mickey H. Osterreicher and Alicia W. Calzada, National
Press Photographers Association, Athens, Georgia; for
Amici Curiae American Society of Media Photographers,
National Press Photographers Association, American
Photographic Artists, American Society for Collective
Rights Licensing, Digital Media Licensing Association,
Professional Photographers of America, and North
American Nature Photography Association.

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

5

Matthew Hersh, Mestaz Law, Phoenix, Arizona; Sandra
Aistars, Arts & Entertainment Advocacy Clinic, George
Mason University, Antonin Scalia Law School, Arlington,
Virginia; for Amici Curiae Tattoo Artists Ross C. Berg,
Jonny Gomez, and Maxime Plesciabuchi.
Andrew Grimm, Digital Justice Foundation, Omaha,
Nebraska; Gregory Keenan, Digital Justice Foundation,
Floral Park, New York; for Amici Curiae Lynn Goldsmith
& Digital Justice Foundation.
Christopher J. Sprigman, Engelberg Center for Innovation
Law and Policy, New York University School of Law, New
York, New York; Molly Van Houweling, Berkeley Center
for Law & Technology, University of California Berkeley
School of Law, Berkeley, California; for Amici Curiae
Sprigman and Van Houweling.
Erik Stallman, Samuelson Law Technology & Public Policy
Clinic, University of California Berkeley School of Law,
Berkeley, California, for Amicus Curiae Professor Pamela
Samuelson.
Rebecca Tushnet, Harvard Law School, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, for Amici Curiae Copyright Law Professors.
Christopher Bavitz, Cyberlaw Clinic, Harvard Law School,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, for Amicus Curiae Authors
Alliance.
Corynne McSherry and Kit Walsh, Electronic Frontier
Foundation, San Francisco, California, for Amicus Curiae
Electronic Frontier Foundation.

6

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

OPINION
PER CURIAM:
Jeffrey Sedlik appeals the district court’s denial of his
motions for summary judgment and for judgment as a matter
of law following a jury verdict finding that Katherine Von
Drachenberg and her tattoo parlor, High Voltage Tattoo
(“HVT”), were not liable for copyright infringement of
Sedlik’s photograph (“the Photograph”). 1 This case arose
because Von Drachenberg used Sedlik’s photograph of
Miles Davis as the basis of a tattoo of Davis’s likeness for
her client (“the Tattoo”). Von Drachenberg also drew a
sketch of the Photograph (“the Sketch”) and made several
social media posts 2 related to the Tattoo and the Photograph.
The jury found that six allegedly infringing works—the
Tattoo, the Sketch, the Messy Progress Post, the Final Tattoo
Post, the Instagram Story, and the Light Box Post—were not
substantially similar to the Photograph. While Von
Drachenberg stipulated that the four Process Images, which
depicted Von Drachenberg in the process of inking the
Tattoo, were substantially similar to the Photograph because
they contained a reproduction of the Photograph, the jury
found that those works were not infringing because they
were a fair use of the Photograph.

We address Sedlik’s appeal of the district court’s denial of his Rule
50(b) motion as to fair use and motion for a new trial in a memorandum
disposition filed concurrently with this opinion.

1

Following the district court’s terminology, we refer to the social media
posts as the “Messy Progress Post,” the “Final Tattoo Post,” the
“Instagram Story,” the “Light Box Post,” and the “Process Images.”

2

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

7

On appeal, Sedlik argues that the district court erred in
denying his motion for summary judgment and Rule 50(b)
motion for judgment as a matter of law. We affirm because
the district court’s denial of Sedlik’s motion for summary
judgment is not reviewable on appeal, and the district court
did not err in denying Sedlik’s Rule 50(b) motion because
the jury’s verdict was based on an application of the intrinsic
test.
I. Background
Sedlik is a professional photographer and a professor
who has been featured in numerous publications throughout
his extensive career. Von Drachenberg is a professional
tattoo artist and reality television star who has appeared on
shows such as “Miami Ink” and “LA Ink.” HVT was Von
Drachenberg’s tattoo shop.
A. The Photograph
In 1989, Sedlik created an iconic photograph depicting
world-renowned jazz musician Miles Davis. The Photograph
depicts a dimly lit Davis making a “Shh!” gesture with his
fingers over pursed lips against a black background, his
brows slightly furrowed. Sedlik specifically adjusted
Davis’s fingers so that the “Shh!” symbol would represent a
series of musical notes. He also adjusted Davis’s hair to
achieve his desired creative expression, selected Davis’s
wardrobe and jewelry, and instructed Davis on his
positioning and facial expressions. Lastly, Sedlik made
several decisions regarding lighting, camera positioning, and
lens and shutter settings to further achieve his desired result.
Sedlik has offered and sold non-exclusive copyright
licenses authorizing limited reproduction, distribution,
display, and creation of derivative works of the Photograph

8

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

for commercial and non-commercial purposes since its
creation. Sedlik has issued one tattoo license before, though
it was retroactive, and he charged tattoo artist Bryan
Vanegas zero dollars. The Photograph was registered with
the United States Copyright Office in 1994 and remains
registered to this day.
B. The Tattoo
Von Drachenberg opened her own tattoo shop, HVT, as
a “creative space . . . for artists,” where she also privately
tattooed clients of her own. Since 2012, Von Drachenberg
has not charged for her tattoos but instead treats them as gifts
to the individuals that she tattoos. It is not possible to book
an appointment with Von Drachenberg.
In 2017, Blake Farmer—a friend of Von Drachenberg —
told her that he played the trumpet and expressed how
important Miles Davis was to him. Von Drachenberg offered
to gift Farmer a tattoo of Davis. Farmer sent Von
Drachenberg’s assistant a digital file of the photo that he
wanted to use as a reference. It was the Photograph. Farmer
testified that he chose the Photograph as a reference image
because he “liked that it was simple,” and “[m]ost other
[images of Davis] had him playing the trumpet,” which he
did not believe would be suitable for an arm tattoo.
Over the course of two sessions in 2017, Von
Drachenberg tattooed a realistic tattoo of Davis on Farmer’s
shoulder. Von Drachenberg began by creating the Sketch.
She placed tracing paper over a copy of the Photograph,
using it to map out the spaces she would follow while
tattooing. Von Drachenberg then created a stencil using a
thermal-fax machine, which she applied to Farmer’s arm.
This created a map of sorts for Von Drachenberg to follow
as she inked the tattoo by hand. After Farmer approved of

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

9

the placement and the size of the Tattoo, Von Drachenberg
sketched what was essentially a “topographical map” using
a liner tattoo machine to guide her freehand shading. Ninetynine percent of the Tattoo consisted of freehand shading.
Von Drachenberg posted on social media several Process
Images featuring KVD in the process of tattooing Farmer’s
arm. These posts show Sedlik’s full photo in the background.
The posts all featured the following image:

The final Tattoo appears on the right, and the Photograph
on the left:

10

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

C. The Action
After discovering the Tattoo and Defendants’ social
media posts, Sedlik contacted Von Drachenberg’s agent to
discuss the matter, but received no response. Sedlik
proceeded to file an action for copyright infringement in the
Central District of California.
Sedlik moved for summary judgment on his copyright
infringement claims, but the district court denied the motion.
The district court found that, with respect to the Tattoo, there
were triable issues as to substantial similarity under both the
extrinsic and intrinsic tests. The Tattoo was the only
challenged work analyzed at this stage.
The case proceeded to trial in January 2024. At trial, the
jury had the opportunity to examine the Tattoo in person, on
Farmer’s arm. The jury also heard testimony from Sedlik,
Von Drachenberg, one of Von Drachenberg’s employees,
and Bryan Vanegas.
Both Sedlik and Defendants moved for judgment as a
matter of law before the case was submitted to the jury. See

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

11

Fed. R. Civ. Proc. 50(a). After resting their defense,
Defendants stipulated that the four Process Images were
substantially similar because they depicted the Photograph
itself. The jury, however, found that the Process Images were
a fair use of the Photograph. 3 The jury found that the other
works—the Tattoo, the Sketch, the Messy Progress Post, the
Final Tattoo Post, the Instagram Story, and the Light Box
Post—were not substantially similar.
After trial, Sedlik moved for judgment as a matter of law.
Sedlik requested that the court displace the jury’s verdict on
substantial similarity. The district court declined to do so for
several reasons. The court stated that the intrinsic test for
substantial similarity is “uniquely suited for determination
by the trier of fact because of its focus on the lay person, and
so a court must be reluctant to reverse a jury’s finding that
two works are intrinsically similar.” The district court
rejected Sedlik’s argument that he had satisfied the intrinsic
test because Defendants failed to present any evidence
showing that the works have a different total concept and
feel, noting that “the entire point of the intrinsic test is that it
is from the perspective of the ordinary person without expert
assistance.” It also rejected Sedlik’s arguments on the
extrinsic test, stating that it “must draw the reasonable
inference that the jury found that it was the unprotected
elements of the [Photograph] that were copied.”

The jury mistakenly determined that eight posts that were found to be
not substantially similar were a fair use. When a jury gives “superfluous
answers in violation of a trial court’s express instructions contained on
the special verdict form,” those answers “do not constitute legitimate or
viable findings of fact” and “[t]he trial court must therefore dismiss them
as surplusage, as a matter of law.” Floyd v. Laws, 929 F.2d 1390, 1397
(9th Cir. 1991).

3

12

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

II. Standard of Review
We review de novo a district court’s denial of a motion
for summary judgment, Banuelos v. Constr. Laborers’ Tr.
Funds for S. Cal., 382 F.3d 897, 902 (9th Cir. 2004), and a
renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law under Rule
50(b), Josephs v. Pac. Bell, 443 F.3d 1050, 1062 (9th Cir.
2006).
III. Discussion
A copyright plaintiff must prove (1) ownership of a valid
copyright, and (2) the defendant copied protected aspects of
that work’s expression. Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 883 F.3d
1111, 1116–17 (9th Cir. 2018), overruled on other grounds
by Skidmore as Tr. for Randy Craig Wolfe Tr. v. Led
Zeppelin, 952 F.3d 1051 (9th Cir. 2020) (en banc). The
second element has two separate components: “copying”
and “unlawful appropriation.” Id. at 1117; 4 Melville B.
Nimmer & David Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright
§ 13.01[B] (2017). Only unlawful appropriation is at issue in
this appeal.
Unlawful appropriation—that is, illicit copying—
requires a showing that two works are substantially similar.
Skidmore, 952 F.3d at 1064. We use a two-part test to
determine whether the defendant’s work is substantially
similar to the plaintiff’s copyrighted work. Id. The first part,
the extrinsic test, “assesses the objective similarities of the
two works, focusing only on the protectable elements of the
plaintiff’s expression.” Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1118. In
making this assessment, the court must filter out any
unprotectable elements of the plaintiff’s works. Id. The
second part, the intrinsic test, “test[s] for similarity of
expression from the standpoint of the ordinary reasonable
observer, with no expert assistance.” Jada Toys, Inc. v.

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

13

Mattel, Inc., 518 F.3d 628, 637 (9th Cir. 2008) (citation
omitted). The intrinsic test is reserved for the finder of fact,
while the extrinsic test may, when appropriate, be
determined as a matter of law at an earlier stage of litigation.
Funky Films, Inc. v. Time Warner Ent. Co., 462 F.3d 1072,
1076–77 (9th Cir. 2006), overruled on other grounds by
Skidmore, 952 F.3d 1051. Both tests must be satisfied for the
works to be deemed substantially similar. Id.
A. Motion for summary judgment
Sedlik first seeks review of the district court’s denial of
his motion for summary judgment, contending that the
district court erred in its application of the extrinsic test for
substantial similarity “due to the overwhelming and obvious
similarities” between the Photograph and the challenged
works. Generally, the denial of a motion for summary
judgment is not reviewable on an appeal from the final
judgment after a full trial on the merits, because “it would
be . . . unjust to deprive a party of a jury verdict after the
evidence was fully presented, on the basis of an appellate
court’s review of whether the pleadings and affidavits at the
time of the summary judgment motion demonstrated the
need for a trial.” Locricchio v. Legal Servs. Corp., 833 F.2d
1352, 1359 (9th Cir. 1987); see also, e.g., Ortiz v. Jordan,
562 U.S. 180, 183–84 (2011) (“May a party . . . appeal an
order denying summary judgment after a full trial on the
merits? Our answer is no.”); Dupree v. Younger, 598 U.S.
729, 735–36 (2023) (“[A]n appellate court’s review of
factual challenges after a trial is rooted in the complete trial
record, which means that a district court’s factual rulings
based on the obsolete summary-judgment record are
useless”).

14

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

We recognize a narrow exception to this rule exists when
summary
judgment
involves
“a
purely
legal
question . . . whose answer is independent of disputed
facts.” Jensen v. EXC, Inc., 82 F.4th 835, 857 (9th Cir. 2023)
(quoting Dupree, 598 U.S. at 737); see also Pavon v. Swift
Transp. Co., 192 F.3d 902, 906 (9th Cir. 1999). This
exception does not apply here because Sedlik’s arguments
“hardly present ‘purely legal’ issues capable of resolution
‘with reference only to undisputed facts.’” Williams v. Gaye,
895 F.3d 1106, 1122 (9th Cir. 2018) (quoting Ortiz, 562 U.S.
at 189). Rather, the district court’s orders denying Sedlik’s
motion for summary judgment and motion for
reconsideration were based on the existence of multiple
triable issues of fact as to substantial similarity and fair use.
Thus, the district court’s ruling does not involve the sort of
“legal issue” that this court typically reviews in a narrow
subset of cases. Id.; see also, e.g., Pavon, 192 F.3d at
906 (reviewing the district court’s summary judgment ruling
on claim preclusion); Escriba v. Foster Poultry Farms, Inc.,
743 F.3d 1236, 1243 (9th Cir. 2014) (reviewing whether “the
district court erred as a matter of law by entertaining
[defendant’s] ‘legally impossible’ theory of the case that
[plaintiff] affirmatively declined to take FMLA leave”). We
therefore decline to review the district court’s denial of
summary judgment.
B. Motion for judgment as a matter of law
Sedlik also appeals the district court’s denial of his
renewed motion for judgment as a matter of law. In
reviewing the district court’s denial, we must determine
“whether the evidence permits only one reasonable
conclusion, and that reasonable conclusion is contrary to the
jury’s verdict.” See Josephs, 443 F.3d at 1062. Because
Sedlik brought a Rule 50(a) motion on substantial similarity,

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

15

his Rule 50(b) motion was properly made. Thus, Sedlik must
show that the jury’s verdict was contrary to the only
reasonable conclusion permitted by the evidence for both the
intrinsic and extrinsic tests, since both tests are required for
substantial similarity. Funky Films, 462 F.3d at 107.
Sedlik argues that no reasonable juror could find that the
six works were not substantially similar to the Photograph.
As for intrinsic similarity, he argues that “all of the works
have a ‘mood and sentiment’ of melancholy, moodiness, and
movement,” and thus the intrinsic test is met as a matter of
law. We have recognized, however, that “the intrinsic test
for substantial similarity is ‘uniquely suited for
determination by the trier of fact’” because of its focus on
the layperson. Gray v. Hudson, 28 F.4th 87, 97 (9th Cir.
2022) (quoting Sid & Marty Krofft Television Prods., Inc. v.
McDonald’s Corp., 562 F.2d 1157, 1166 (9th Cir. 1977)).
For that reason, we are reluctant to reverse a jury’s
application of the intrinsic test. We therefore decline to
disturb the jury’s implicit findings as they pertain to the
intrinsic test for substantial similarity. See Three Boys Music
Corp. v. Bolton, 212 F.3d 477, 485 (9th Cir. 2000), overruled
on other grounds by Skidmore, 952 F.3d 1051.
Sedlik alternatively argues that the “intrinsic test is not
needed” at all because the objective similarities between the
six works and the Photograph are “overwhelming.” He bases
this argument on our decision in Unicolors, Inc. v. Urban
Outfitters, Inc., 853 F.3d 980 (9th Cir. 2017). Unicolors held
that in “exceptional cases,” a district court may grant
summary judgment to a plaintiff on the basis that the
“extrinsic similarity is so strong” that “no reasonable jury
could find that the works are not substantially similar in their
overall concept and feel.” Id. at 986–87. In such cases, the
court “need not delve into a complex subjective analysis of

16

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

the works to assess substantial similarity and does not risk
supplanting the jury’s subjective interpretation with its
own.” Id. Here, on summary judgment, the district court
concluded to the contrary—that the application of the
extrinsic test was a triable issue for the jury. And following
a jury verdict finding no substantial similarity based on the
evidentiary record, the different procedural posture means
that reversing the jury verdict would be tantamount to
“supplanting the jury’s subjective interpretation with [our]
own,” which we cannot do. Id. We therefore affirm the jury’s
verdict based on the intrinsic test. And because the jury
found that the six works were not intrinsically similar to the
Photograph, we need not reach the extrinsic test for
substantial similarity. See Cavalier v. Random House, Inc.,
297 F.3d 815, 822 (9th Cir. 2002) (both intrinsic and
extrinsic tests must be met to find that the allegedly
infringing work was substantially similar to the protected
work).
IV. Conclusion
First, the district court’s denial of Sedlik’s motion for
summary judgment is not reviewable on appeal. Although a
narrow exception applies when summary judgment involves
a purely legal question, the district court’s order denying
summary judgment was based on several triable issues of
fact as to substantial similarity. Second, the district court did
not err in denying Sedlik’s Rule 50(b) motion for judgment
as a matter of law. Because the jury’s verdict was based on
an application of the intrinsic test, we will not second-guess
it.
AFFIRMED.

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

17

WARDLAW, Circuit Judge, with whom JOHNSTONE,
Circuit Judge, joins, concurring in the judgment:
I fully agree with Judge Johnstone’s excellent
concurrence and with his analysis of our flawed extrinsicintrinsic test for substantial similarity. I write separately to
suggest that the “intrinsic test” for substantial similarity has
fundamental flaws, and we should consider dispensing with
it altogether.
Consider the dispositive role the intrinsic test played here
in resolving a case with complex legal questions.
Photographer Jeffrey Sedlik claimed that tattoo artist
Katherine Von Drachenberg infringed his copyright in his
iconic photograph of the trumpet player Miles Davis. The
case involved complex issues of copyright law, including
“distinguishing between the protected and unprotected”
components of a work depicting a human face. Photographs
of people are notoriously tricky subjects of copyright
analysis, given that many components of a photograph, such
as a person’s facial features and pose, are not protected by
copyright when “viewed in isolation,” and “[w]hat is
protected by copyright is the photographer’s selection and
arrangement of the photo’s otherwise unprotected
elements.” Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 883 F.3d 1111, 1119
(9th Cir. 2018). The case presented the additional wrinkle
that the allegedly infringing work was in a different
medium—tattooed on the human body.
The outcome, however, did not come down to these
difficult questions of copyright law. Rather, it came down
to the “intrinsic test,” a test created by our court and which
the Supreme Court has never blessed. The intrinsic test is
“subjective and asks whether the ordinary, reasonable person
would find the total concept and feel of the works to be

18

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

substantially similar.” Three Boys Music Corp. v. Bolton,
212 F.3d 477, 485 (9th Cir. 2000) (citation and internal
quotation marks omitted). Because the intrinsic test
considers the perspective of the “lay observer,” “analytic
dissection and expert testimony are not appropriate.” Sid &
Marty Krofft Television Prods., Inc. v. McDonald’s Corp.,
562 F.2d 1157, 1164–66 (9th Cir. 1977); see also Funky
Films, Inc. v. Time Warner Ent. Co., L.P., 462 F.3d 1072,
1077 (9th Cir. 2006) (intrinsic test is “exclusively the
province of the jury”). The intrinsic test is “virtually devoid
of analysis” and is “a mere subjective judgment as to
whether two literary works are or are not similar.” Shaw v.
Lindheim, 919 F.2d 1353, 1357 (9th Cir. 1990).
In line with our precedent, the jury here was instructed
that “[t]he intrinsic test is a holistic comparison that focuses
on whether the works are substantially similar in the total
concept and feel of the works.” Then, with no more
guidance, 1 the jury was left to consider a “holistic
comparison [of] . . . the total concept and feel” of the works.
Id. The jury found that the works did not have a substantially
similar “total concept and feel,” and thus failed the intrinsic
test. Because a copyright plaintiff must meet both the
extrinsic and intrinsic tests for substantial similarity, the
jury’s finding on the intrinsic test was fatal to Sedlik’s claim.
This test and outcome distort copyright law. The
intrinsic test’s instruction to consider the “total concept and
feel of the works” contradicts the Copyright Act’s statement
1
The jury had previously received the instruction that “[o]nly the
particular expression of an idea can be copyrighted” and copyright does
not protect “the underlying ideas contained in the work, such as any
procedures, processes, systems, methods of operation, concepts,
principles or discoveries.”

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

19

that “[i]n no case does copyright protection . . . extend to any
idea [or . . .] concept.” 17 U.S.C. § 102(b); see Pamela
Samuelson, A Fresh Look at Tests for Nonliteral Copyright
Infringement, 107 Nw. U.L. Rev. 1821, 1832 (2013)
(“Strangely enough, no court applying the total concept test
has noticed that [it] might run afoul of the strictures of
§ 102(b).”). As Professor Nimmer explains, the “total
concept and feel” test “subvert[s] the very essence of
copyright, namely the protection of original expression.” 4
Melville B. Nimmer & David Nimmer, Nimmer on
Copyright § 13D.31[C] (2025). Consider the two parts of
the standard, “concept” and “[f]eel”: “Concepts are
statutorily ineligible for copyright protection,” and “feel
hardly fares better; it is hard to imagine a more amorphous
referent.” Id. (internal quotation marks omitted). And, of
course, a work’s “feel” may arise from unprotected elements
of a work. See Christopher Jon Sprigman & Samantha Fink
Hedrick, The Filtration Problem in Copyright’s
“Substantial Similarity” Infringement Test, 23 Lewis &
Clark L. Rev. 571, 580 (2019).
The intrinsic test is a creation of our court; the Supreme
Court has never said that the ordinary observer’s
spontaneous impression of the “total concept and feel of the
works,” without any expert guidance, should be a dispositive
factor in copyright infringement. Indeed, Supreme Court
precedent suggests the opposite: that, to accord with the
Copyright Act, a court should focus on carefully filtering out
concepts and ideas. While the Supreme Court has not
spelled out the exact inquiry for substantial similarity, Feist
Publications, Inc. v. Rural Telephone Service Co., Inc., 499
U.S. 340 (1991), is instructive on this point. Feist dealt with
a copyright infringement suit brought by Rural Telephone
Service Company (“Rural”) against Feist Publications

20

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

(“Feist”). Rural published a telephone directory, which it
refused to license to Feist. Id. at 343. Feist, then, extracted
listings from Rural’s directory, and published its own
telephone directory. Id. at 343–44. At issue was whether
Feist’s use of Rural’s white pages constituted copyright
infringement. Id. at 344.
In finding that Feist had not infringed Rural’s copyright,
the Supreme Court explained that “[t]he mere fact that a
work is copyrighted does not mean that every element of the
work may be protected. Originality remains the sine qua
non of copyright; accordingly, copyright protection may
extend only to those components of a work that are original
to the author.” Id. at 348. Thus, the Supreme Court carefully
parsed the original, protectible components of Rural’s
directory from the unoriginal, unprotectable components.
The Supreme Court concluded that a directory’s “choices as
to selection and arrangement [of the compilations], so long
as they are made independently by the compiler and entail a
minimal degree of creativity,” could be “sufficiently
original” to be protected. Id. at 348. The “raw facts,”
however—the names and phone numbers themselves—were
unoriginal and “may be copied at will.” Id. at 350. The
Supreme Court concluded that because Rural’s white pages
were “limited to basic subscriber information and arranged
alphabetically,” they were “selected, coordinated, and
arranged in a way that utterly lacks originality,” and “Feist’s
use of the listings cannot constitute infringement.” Id. at
363–64.
Crucially, Feist never suggested that the ordinary
observer’s impression of the “concept and feel” of the works
was essential to infringement. As Nimmer describes, Feist
did not consider the “total concept and feel” of the works,
but rather defined infringing conduct as the “copying of

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

21

constituent elements of the work that are original.” 4
Nimmer § 13D.15 (quoting Feist, 499 U.S. at 361).
“Indeed, to focus on the precise scope of defendant’s
admitted copying and to detail how that copying was limited
to unprotected expression, it would seem that—to the exact
contrary of the audience test—critical analysis is essential.
The Court’s approach in Feist, on the facts there presented,
is therefore inhospitable to an unadorned audience test.” 4
Nimmer § 13D.15.
After all, copyright law “is intended to protect writers
from the theft of the fruits of their labor, not to protect
against the general public’s ‘spontaneous and immediate’
impression that the fruits have been stolen.” Id. at
§ 13D.16[B][1]. To be sure, a jury’s observation that two
works have a similar “concept and feel” may “be important
evidence” of infringement. Id. But the jury’s impression
that no such similarity exists—as occurred here—does not
necessarily mean there was no infringement, as there can be
“theft without an immediate and spontaneous detection by
the ordinary observer.” Id. This is particularly true where,
as here, the works exist in different media: a photograph and
a tattoo. An ordinary observer, untrained in both media,
“may fail to note similarities that, if analyzed and dissected,
would be only too apparent.” Id. at § 13D.16[B][2]. Or,
worse, an ordinary observer may find, in practice, that works
in different media almost never have the same “total concept
and feel.” Thus, the intrinsic test leaves the artist’s work
vulnerable to “clever thieves.” Id. at § 13D.16[B][3].
Thus, I suggest that we consider dispensing with the
intrinsic test. As the Eleventh Circuit has recognized, “the
ability to separate protectable expression from nonprotectable expression is, in reality, a question of law or, at
the very least, a mixed question of law and fact.” Intervest

22

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

Const., Inc. v. Canterbury Estate Homes, Inc., 554 F.3d 914,
920 (11th Cir. 2008). Thus, “[i]t is difficult for a juror, even
properly instructed, to conclude, after looking at two works,
that there is no infringement where, say, 90% of one is a
copy of the other, but only 15% of the work is protectable
expression that has not been copied.” Id.
Allowing the jury to render the final decision as to
infringement under the guise of the work’s “total concept
and feel,” immune from an appellate court’s review,
impermissibly gives this complex legal question—a
question of “unlawful appropriation”—to the factfinder. See
Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1117 (emphasis added). A better
solution, in my view, would be to focus the test on the
filtration of protectable and unprotectable elements, and
remove any inquiry into a work’s “total concept and feel.”
Therefore, I agree with Judge Johnstone’s assessment that
had we been able to do so in this case, we would have
concluded that Von Drachenberg’s tattoo infringed Sedlik’s
copyright in his photograph of Miles Davis.
JOHNSTONE, Circuit Judge, with whom WARDLAW,
Circuit Judge, joins, concurring:
Tattoo artist Kat Von Drachenberg inked photographer
Jeffrey Sedlik’s photograph of Miles Davis on a friend’s
arm. There is no dispute that Sedlik held a valid copyright in
the photograph or that Von Drachenberg copied from it to
create the tattoo. She traced Sedlik’s photograph on a light
box to create a stencil, which she transferred onto her
friend’s arm. Then, with Sedlik’s photograph hanging at her
side as a reference, she tattooed its image onto her friend’s
skin. Von Drachenberg posted photos of the process and

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

23

resulting tattoo on social media to market her artistry and
tattoo shop.
The tattoo resembles the protected aspects of the
photograph. “To the[] trained eyes” of amici tattoo artists,
“there is no difference between the two works that is not
explained by the medium in which [Sedlik’s photograph]
was replicated into [Von Drachenberg’s tattoo].” It shares all
its major creative elements: Davis’s distinctive finger pose
(arranged by Sedlik); his facial expression (encouraged by
Sedlik); his dark wavy hair surrounding his face (styled at
Sedlik’s direction); the shadows and highlights on his face
and hands (lit by Sedlik); and the specific angle, position,
and focus of the viewer’s perspective (chosen by Sedlik).
Von Drachenberg admitted at trial that these features were
“very similar” to the photograph. Indeed, Von
Drachenberg’s friend had asked that the tattoo match
Sedlik’s photograph, Von Drachenberg followed a process
designed to do so, and her shop concluded that she
succeeded—it touted the tattoo on social media as “100%
exactly the same as the reference.”
But when Sedlik sued Von Drachenberg for copyright
infringement, a jury found that the tattoo was not
“substantially similar” to the photograph and returned a
verdict for Von Drachenberg. At trial, Von Drachenberg
testified that she made minor changes from Sedlik’s
photograph because of the inherent challenges in replicating
a photograph on human skin. She “added shading,
highlights, and texture to several parts of Miles Davis’s
face”; altered waves and highlights in his hair to “creat[e] a
kind of ‘visual noise’ that flies all around the tattoo and gives
the sense of movement,” as well as leaving room for
additional tattoos; and left out certain details of the
photograph, like Sedlik’s reflection in Davis’s eyes, part of

24

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

Davis’s wrist and his clothing, and the photograph’s black
background. In determining substantial similarity, however,
these differences matter little. See Newton v. Diamond, 388
F.3d 1189, 1195 (9th Cir. 2004) (“[N]o plagiarist can excuse
the wrong by showing how much of his work he did not
pirate.” (quoting Sheldon v. Metro–Goldwyn Pictures Corp.,
81 F.2d 49, 56 (2d Cir. 1936))).
Instead, what our cases required the jury to focus on—
and what mattered most to the verdict—was the jury’s
subjective perception of “the total concept and feel” of the
works. See Doc. 219, Jury Instructions, Page ID 4180
(describing the intrinsic test as “a holistic comparison that
focuses on whether the works are substantially similar in the
total concept and feel of the works”). As Von Drachenberg
correctly argues, our “intrinsic test” for substantial similarity
focuses solely on “an ordinary person’s holistic and
subjective impressions of the similarities in the works” based
on “total concept and feel.” And here the jury felt that Von
Drachenberg’s tattoo was not “substantially similar” to
Sedlik’s photograph. But a jury’s job is to find facts, not
feelings. Because a jury’s subjective impression of a work’s
“total concept and feel” is all but unreviewable, we have
never reversed a jury’s no-infringement verdict under the
intrinsic test.
The per curiam opinion applies the current state of our
case law in affirming the district court, so I concur. I also
join Judge Wardlaw’s call to realign our copyright doctrine
with the principles established by the Copyright Clause, the
Copyright Act, and the Supreme Court’s copyright case law.
I write to add that our doctrine has also drifted from its own
origins. A half-century ago, we developed the intrinsic test
to protect a work’s full expression. But over time it has lost
its legal content. Now the standardless intrinsic test invites

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

25

juries to reach copyright verdicts unconstrained by copyright
law. In practice, its holistic protection has become an empty
promise.
I. We developed the intrinsic test to protect the whole
of an expression.
Federal copyright law protects “pictorial . . . works,” but
“[i]n no case does copyright protection . . . extend to
any . . . concept.” 17 U.S.C. § 102(a)(5), (b). So how did we
get from a statute that protects against the copying of
pictures, not concepts, to a doctrine that turns on similarity
in “total concept and feel”? The roots of the intrinsic test lie
in the basic rule that copyright protects only an original
expression of an idea—not the idea itself, nor the use of
unoriginal scènes à faire that are necessary to express it. See
Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99, 101–03 (1879); 12 Melville B.
Nimmer & David Nimmer, Nimmer on Copyright
§§ 313.3(A), 313.4(I) (2025). As Judge Learned Hand
lamented almost a century ago, distinguishing protected
expression from unprotected ideas and stock elements is no
easy task. Nichols v. Universal Pictures Corp., 45 F.2d 119,
121 (2d. Cir 1930) (“Nobody has ever been able to fix that
boundary, and nobody ever can.”). It was in undertaking that
challenge in Roth Greeting Cards v. United Card Co., 429
F.2d 1106 (9th Cir. 1970), that we first looked to “total
concept and feel.”
Roth concerned a defendant’s allegedly unlawful
copying of the plaintiff’s greeting cards. Id. at 1107–08. Like
the works at issue, the defendant’s cards “b[ore] a
remarkable resemblance” to plaintiff’s copyrighted work,
with many similarities: “the characters depicted in the art
work,” the specific phrases and lettering, and “the
arrangement of the words on the greeting card[s].” Id. at

26

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

1107, 1110. Yet the district court concluded that the
defendant did not copy any protected expression because
most of these similarities—like the common phrases used in
the cards—consisted of unprotected ideas or stock elements.
Id. at 1109.
On appeal, we agreed that many of the cards’ shared
elements were unprotected in isolation. Id. But that did not
end the inquiry: “proper analysis of the problem require[d]
that all elements of each card, including text, arrangement of
text, art work, and association between art work and text, be
considered as a whole.” Id. Taken together, these elements
created an expression that was sufficiently “original” to
merit copyright protection. Id. at 1109–10. And we held that,
despite some differences in specific elements, the
defendant’s cards were substantially similar to the plaintiff’s
protected combination because “in total concept and feel the
cards . . . [we]re the same.” Id. at 1110. Roth used “total
concept and feel” to refer to what our more recent cases
describe as the “protectable . . . selection and arrangement
of . . . otherwise unprotected elements.” Tangle, Inc. v.
Aritzia, Inc., 125 F.4th 991, 997 (9th Cir. 2025) (internal
quotations omitted) (quoting Hanagami v. Epic Games, Inc.,
85 F.4th 931, 943 (9th Cir. 2023)).
We incorporated Roth’s meaning of “total concept and
feel” into our first articulation of the intrinsic test in Sid &
Marty Krofft Television Prods., Inc. v. McDonald’s Corp.,
562 F.2d 1157 (9th Cir. 1977) (“Krofft”). There, we
addressed a claim that “Mayor McCheese,” a character in a
McDonald’s advertising campaign, infringed the plaintiffs’
copyright in H.R. Pufnstuf, a character in a children’s
television show. Id. at 1161–62. “The real task in a copyright
infringement action,” we reasoned, “is to determine whether
there has been copying of the expression of an idea rather

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

27

than just the idea itself.” Id. at 1163. Because there “must be
substantial similarity not only of the general ideas but of the
expressions of those ideas,” we set forth our now-familiar
two-part test for substantial similarity. Id. at 1164.
In part one of the analysis, the “extrinsic test,” we ask
“whether there is substantial similarity in ideas” underlying
the two works. Id. at 1164 (emphasis added). We do so by
examining “specific criteria which can be listed and
analyzed,” some of which might be individually
unprotectable, like “the type of artwork involved, the
materials used, the subject matter, and the setting for the
subject.” Id. While still a factual inquiry, this “analytic
dissection” could “often be decided as a matter of law” by
breaking down the works into their constituent elements and
comparing those elements for proof of copying. Id. If this
extrinsic comparison shows a substantial similarity between
these elements, then the trier of fact assesses the intrinsic
similarity.
In part two, the “intrinsic test,” we ask “whether there is
substantial similarity in expressions” of the shared idea
based on the “response of the ordinary reasonable person.”
Id. (emphasis added). This inquiry turns on the overall
“impact of the respective works upon the minds” of lay
observers, making it “uniquely suited for determination by
the trier of fact.” Id. at 1166. Thus, in Krofft, we held that the
existence of some dissimilarities in “the constituent parts” of
the two characters at issue—like their “clothing, colors,
features, and mannerisms”—did not preclude a finding of
substantial similarity under the intrinsic test. Id. at 1165–67.
Instead, as in Roth, what mattered was that Mayor McCheese
“captured the ‘total concept and feel’ of the Pufnstuf show”
when the arrangement of all the elements was considered as
a whole. Id. at 1167 (quoting Roth, 429 F.2d at 1110). Under

28

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

this broader, holistic view of substantial similarity, we
affirmed the jury’s infringement verdict. Id.
In the decade after Krofft, we continued applying the
extrinsic test to assess the similarity of ideas based on the
works’ individual elements, then used the intrinsic test to
discern the similarity of the works’ expression of those
shared ideas based on the overall effect—that is, “total
concept and feel”—of the combination of those elements.
See, e.g., See v. Durang, 711 F.2d 141, 143–44 (9th Cir.
1983); Litchfield v. Spielberg, 736 F.2d 1352, 1356 (9th Cir.
1984); Berkic v. Crichton, 761 F.2d 1289, 1292 (9th Cir.
1985); McCulloch v. Albert E. Price, Inc., 823 F.2d 316, 319
(9th Cir. 1987); Narell v. Freeman, 872 F.2d 907, 912–13
(9th Cir. 1989). Over time, however, we gradually expanded
the types of similarities considered in the extrinsic analysis.
Although Krofft’s extrinsic test had looked only to discrete
elements like “the type of artwork” or “subject matter” of
two works, 562 F.2d at 1164, later cases also compared
broader similarities of “theme” and “mood,” see, e.g.,
Litchfield, 736 F.2d at 1356–57; Berkic, 761 F.2d at 1292;
Olson v. Nat’l Broad. Co., 855 F.2d 1446, 1450–51 (9th Cir.
1988), which Krofft had examined as part of the intrinsic test,
562 F.2d at 1166.
We recognized the increasingly “lengthy list of concrete
elements” considered “under the extrinsic test” in Shaw v.
Lindheim, 919 F.2d 1353, 1356 (9th Cir. 1990). And we
reasoned that the shift required a rethinking of the extrinsic
test: “Now that it include[d] virtually every element that may
be considered concrete,” the test could “no longer be seen as
a test for mere similarity of ideas.” Id. at 1357. Shaw thus
recast the extrinsic test as an “objective” analysis of the
similarity of works’ expression, not just of the unprotected
ideas underlying that expression. Id. But if the extrinsic test

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

29

examined “all objective manifestations of creativity,”
including the cumulative impact of works’ combination of
discrete elements, where did that leave the intrinsic test? In
Shaw’s words, it “ha[d] become a mere subjective judgment
as to whether two . . . works are or are not similar,” which
was “now virtually devoid of analysis.” Id. Put another way,
the extrinsic test “ha[d] expanded at the expense of the now
almost atavistic” intrinsic test. Douglas Y’Barbo, The Origin
of the Contemporary Standard for Copyright Infringement,
6 J. Intell. Prop. L. 285, 311 (1999).
Shaw’s reframing of the extrinsic and intrinsic test “as
objective and subjective analyses of expression” has
remained the law of our circuit for thirty-five years. 919 F.2d
at 1357. While once we limited our extrinsic analysis to
discrete elements, now we consider all objective similarities,
including those arising from works’ overall “selection and
arrangement” of elements at the first step. Woodland v. Hill,
136 F.4th 1199, 1210–11 (9th Cir. 2025) (quoting
Rentmeester v. Nike, Inc., 883 F.3d 1111, 1119 (9th Cir.
2018)). And where our old intrinsic test involved at least
some analysis of how works combine different elements to
create an overall “concept and feel,” the modern test
involves a purely “subjective comparison of the works” in
the often decisive second step. Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at
1118. What began as a factual test for determining
substantial similarity of an idea’s overall expression has
become a subjective test based on the jury’s own impression.
II. The intrinsic test leads to unpredictable and
asymmetrical results.
As it now operates, the intrinsic test has distorted
copyright law in our circuit. Because we have stripped away
any objective analysis from the intrinsic test, courts cannot

30

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

decide it as a matter of law, precluding summary judgment
for almost all copyright plaintiffs. The lack of objective
considerations also leaves juries without guidance at trial,
leading to unpredictable verdicts based on instructions to
decide cases based on “total concept and feel.” And while
defendants may appeal infringement verdicts under the
extrinsic test, plaintiffs have no meaningful way to seek
review of unfavorable judgments. The result has been to
increase unpredictability of outcomes in copyright cases and
to stack the procedural deck against plaintiffs on questions
of substantial similarity.
To start, the intrinsic test makes it almost impossible for
copyright plaintiffs to win their cases at summary judgment.
Because courts may decide the extrinsic test as a matter of
law, defendants often dispose of cases at summary judgment
by showing a lack of extrinsic similarity. See, e.g., Folkens
v. Wyland Worldwide, LLC, 882 F.3d 768, 776 (9th Cir.
2018); Brown Bag Software v. Symantec Corp., 960 F.2d
1465, 1475–77 (9th Cir. 1992). Plaintiffs, on the other hand,
must satisfy both the extrinsic and intrinsic tests to succeed
in their claims. Rentmeester, 883 F.3d at 1118 (citing Funky
Films, Inc. v. Time Warner Ent. Co., 462 F3d 1072, 1077
(9th Cir. 2006). And we have held that “it is improper . . . to
base a grant of summary judgment on [the] purely subjective
determination of similarity” that now guides the intrinsic
test. Shaw, 919 F.2d at 1359; see also L.A. Printex Indus.,
Inc. v. Aeropostale, Inc., 676 F.3d 841, 852 (9th Cir. 2012).
We have strayed from that rule in only one published
opinion, affirming summary judgment under the intrinsic
test in the rare instance where two works were
“overwhelmingly identical” and in the same medium.
Unicolors, Inc. v. Urban Outfitters, Inc., 853 F.3d 980, 987
(9th Cir. 2017) (quoting Twentieth Century–Fox Film Corp.

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

31

v. MCA, Inc., 715 F.2d 1327, 1330 (9th Cir. 1983)).
Functionally precluding summary judgment for copyright
plaintiffs favors defendants. See Clark D. Asay, An
Empirical Study of Copyright’s Substantial Similarity Test,
13 U.C. Irvine L. Rev. 35, 88 (2022). It also “substantially
dilute[s]” the effect of Rule 56. Unicolors, 853 F.3d at 987.
And as amicus the Copyright Alliance explains, requiring
that all plaintiffs proceed to trial in clear-cut cases “runs the
high risk of denying [them] the ability to enforce their
copyrights by making it prohibitively expensive to do so.”
Even when plaintiffs with strong cases reach trial, their
chances of prevailing are still uncertain. The intrinsic test
“ostensibly assesses qualities of the works themselves, ones
that exist independently of the observer.” Bruce E. Boyden,
The Grapes of Roth, 99 Wash. L. Rev. 1093, 1127 (2024).
But substantial similarity in “total concept and feel” depends
on an observer’s impressions, which may vary dramatically
from person to person. Id. Because the test is “devoid of
analysis,” Shaw, 919 F.2d at 1357, “[t]he jury is left to use
its subjective judgment, often . . . without instructions
designed to steer that judgment.” Christopher Jon Sprigman
& Samantha Fink Hedrick, The Filtration Problem in
Copyright’s “Substantial Similarity” Infringement Test, 23
Lewis & Clark L. Rev. 571, 580 (2019). So “when
substantial similarity cases go to the jury,” as they must for
most plaintiffs to prevail, “a panel of non-experts is asked to
apply an empty standard.” Boyden, supra, at 1098.
The intrinsic test’s vagueness is made worse because the
parties cannot use expert testimony to focus the inquiry.
Substantial similarity, after all, “is to be judged by the
ordinary observer.” Mark A. Lemley, Our Bizarre System
for Proving Copyright Infringement, 57 J. Copyright Soc’y
U.S.A. 719, 738–39 (2010); see Krofft, 562 F.2d at 1164. So

32

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

while plaintiffs must proceed to trial to succeed on their
claims, once there, they cannot use experts to assist the jury
in “dissect[ing] the protectable from the unprotectable” and
“guide the drawing of inferences from different sorts of
similarities.” Lemley, supra, at 736. The subjective nature of
the intrinsic test and the parties’ inability to present expert
testimony make the outcomes of cases unpredictable and
unprincipled—different juries or judges might reach
opposite conclusions on the same record. See id.; Pamela
Samuelson, A Fresh Look at Tests for Nonliteral Copyright
Infringement, 107 Nw. U. L. Rev. 1821, 1832 (2013). Little
wonder, then, that copyright scholars have criticized our
intrinsic test for producing inconsistent and unpredictable
results. See, e.g., Boyden, supra, at 1096; Samuelson, supra,
at 1832; Amy B. Cohen, Masking Copyright
Decisionmaking: The Meaninglessness of Substantial
Similarity, 20 U.C. Davis L. Rev. 719, 757 (1987).
Ultimately, our vague intrinsic test favors defendants. To
be sure, the intrinsic test may provide the occasional windfall
to plaintiffs by freeing the jury to assess substantial
similarity in “total concept and feel,” no matter if the
similarity stems from elements that copyright law protects.
See Boyden, supra, at 1098; Samuelson, supra, at 1832;
Lemley, supra, at 739. But without the opportunity to dissect
the protectable and unprotectable elements of the work, or to
hear expert testimony doing so, “juries are more likely to
find infringement in dubious circumstances.” Lemley,
supra, at 739. Or, as apparently happened here, the intrinsic
test can divert the jury’s attention away from objectively
substantial copying of protected expression toward trivial
differences, resulting in an inscrutable no-infringement
verdict. See Nicole Doc, Do We Even Need a Test?: A
Reevaluation of Assessing Substantial Similarity in a

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

33

Copyright Infringement Case, 15 J. L. & Pol’y 1375, 1400–
01 (2009) (arguing that, in many cases, lay observers are
“simply not capable of detecting very real appropriation”
where an infringing work “consists merely of clever
juxtaposition and alteration of unessential details in the
plaintiff’s work” (quoting Nimmer on Copyright
§ 13.03[E][2])); Y’Barbo, supra, at 293 n.29.
While the intrinsic test may produce erroneous verdicts
for both plaintiffs and defendants, only defendants can
correct such verdicts. When a jury errs by finding intrinsic
similarity based on works’ unprotected elements, defendants
can challenge the resulting infringement verdict under the
extrinsic test, which allows us to filter those unprotected
elements out of the analysis. We have not hesitated to
reverse infringement verdicts in such cases. See, e.g., Gray
v. Hudson, 28 F.4th 87, 96–97, 103 (9th Cir. 2022); Corbello
v. Valli, 974 F.3d 965, 973–75 (9th Cir. 2020). But when a
jury errs by finding a lack of intrinsic similarity despite
substantial copying of protected elements, plaintiffs have no
recourse. Because the intrinsic test is a purely “subjective
assessment of the ‘concept and feel’ of two works,” we have
held that it is “a task no more suitable for a judge than a
jury.” Shaw, 919 F.2d at 1360. As a result, we cannot
“second-guess the jury’s application of the intrinsic test.”
Three Boys Music Corp. v. Bolton, 212 F.3d 477, 485 (9th
Cir. 2000). Indeed, we have never reversed a jury’s noinfringement verdict under the test: “the absence of legal
analysis . . . frustrate[s] appellate review.” Shaw, 919 F.2d at
1357; see also Lemley, supra, at 739–40. And after a full
trial on the merits, as in this case, we cannot review a denial
of a plaintiff’s motion for summary judgment even when
there was no genuine dispute about intrinsic similarity. See

34

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

Locricchio v. Legal Services Corp., 833 F.2d 1352, 1359
(9th Cir. 1987).
The cumulative effect of all this has been to undermine
copyright protections and their purpose of “promot[ing] the
Progress of Science and useful Arts.” U.S. Const. art. I, § 8,
cl. 8. Few argue that this is the result that copyright law
contemplates. “[T]he almost universal opinion among
copyright scholars [is] that ‘total concept and feel’ is a
horrible test for infringement.” Boyden, supra, at 1095; see
also id. at 1095–96 (collecting criticisms of the test as
“threaten[ing] to subvert the very essence of copyright,”
“almost perversely calculated to miss the point,” “internally
inconsistent,” “vacuous,” providing “unconstrained space
for the impressions of the judge or jury,” and “lead[ing] to
unpredictable, unreviewable similarity determinations”).
III. Conclusion
By all accounts, the tattoo at issue here is a tour de force.
As amici tattoo artists note, photorealistic images are nearly
impossible to replicate on human skin. But Von
Drachenberg did it: skillfully tracing Sedlik’s photograph of
Miles Davis, transferring the resulting stencil to her friend’s
arm, and carefully reproducing every significant detail that
Sedlik had crafted in his original photograph. It is an
understatement to say that the tattoo is substantially similar
to Sedlik’s photograph —it is, as Von Drachenberg’s tattoo
shop put it, “100% exactly the same.” Our caselaw required
the jury to apply a subjective “total concept and feel” test
without meaningful guidance. That led the jury to deny the
substantial similarity between the photograph and the tattoo.
And no matter how many protectable elements of the
photograph show up in the tattoo, we cannot meaningfully

SEDLIK V. VON DRACHENBERG

35

review the jury’s finding of no similarity. In my view, a test
that produces such a result cannot be right.
We should defer to juries’ assessments of substantial
similarity. But for juries to make those calls consistently,
they need more than an empty standard premised on “total
concept and feel.” And despite the best efforts of the district
court, juries sometimes misapply the law. When they do,
courts must be able to correct course to ensure that copyright
serves its purpose of encouraging and protecting creative
expression. See Andy Warhol Found. for the Visual Arts, Inc.
v. Goldsmith, 598 U.S. 508, 526 (2023); U.S. Const. art. I,
§ 8, cl. 8. Because our intrinsic test leaves us no choice but
to rubber-stamp the no-infringement verdict, I concur in the
majority opinion. But I agree with Judge Wardlaw that it is
time to discard the intrinsic test and replace it with a legal
rule that offers more consistent and even-handed protection
to copyrighted works.

