FOR PUBLICATION

UNITED STATES COURT OF APPEALS
FOR THE NINTH CIRCUIT
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Plaintiff - Appellee,
v.
LUIS MIGUEL CASTRO ALAVEZ,
Defendant - Appellant.

No. 24-1921
D.C. No.
1:23-cr-00055SOM-1

OPINION

Appeal from the United States District Court
for the District of Hawaii
Susan O. Mollway, District Judge, Presiding
Argued and Submitted June 3, 2025
Honolulu, Hawaii
Filed February 20, 2026
Before: William A. Fletcher, Morgan B. Christen, and
Roopali H. Desai, Circuit Judges.
Opinion by Judge Desai

2

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

SUMMARY *
Criminal Law
The panel affirmed in part and vacated in part the district
court’s judgment, and remanded, in a case in which a jury
found Luis Miguel Castro Alavez guilty of one count of
attempted possession with intent to distribute 500 grams of
a mixture containing methamphetamine and one count of
conspiracy to possess 500 grams of a mixture containing
methamphetamine.
Castro Alavez argued that his conviction and sentence
for attempted possession of a specific drug type and quantity
should be reversed under United States v. Hunt, 656 F.3d
906 (9th Cir. 2011), because the district court improperly
instructed the jury that “the government does not have to
prove that [Castro Alavez] knew that the controlled
substance was methamphetamine or knew the quantity of
methamphetamine.” The panel agreed in part. To impose the
heightened
penalty
prescribed
by
21
U.S.C.
§ 841(b)(1)(A)(viii), the government must prove that Castro
Alavez intended to possess 500 grams of a
methamphetamine mixture. On the facts of this case, the
district court’s erroneous jury instruction was not harmless.
The panel declined to extend to the attempt context a line of
conspiracy cases that require no heightened mens rea beyond
what the underlying crime requires. The panel therefore
vacated Castro Alavez’s sentence for attempted possession
of a controlled substance, but not his conviction.
This summary constitutes no part of the opinion of the court. It has
been prepared by court staff for the convenience of the reader.
*

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

3

Castro Alavez also argued that his attempt conviction
and conspiracy conviction should be vacated because the
district court improperly admitted religious images and
expert testimony about “narco saints.” While the expert
testimony did not satisfy Federal Rule of Evidence 702, the
panel held that the district court’s error in admitting this
evidence was harmless. The panel thus affirmed Castro
Alavez’s convictions.

COUNSEL
Michael F. Albanese (argued), Sara Ayabe, and Gregg P.
Yates, Assistant United States Attorneys; Clare E. Connors,
United States Attorney; Office of the United States Attorney,
United States Department of Justice, Honolulu, Hawaii; for
Plaintiff-Appellee.
Georgia K. McMillen (argued), Law Office of Georgia K.
McMillen, Wailuku Maui, Hawaii, for Defendant-Appellant.

4

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

OPINION
DESAI, Circuit Judge:
A jury found Luis Miguel Castro Alavez (“Castro
Alavez”) guilty of one count of attempted possession with
intent to distribute 500 grams of a mixture containing
methamphetamine and one count of conspiracy to possess
500 grams of a mixture containing methamphetamine, both
in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 846, 841(a)(1),
841(b)(1)(A)(viii). Castro Alavez appeals on two grounds.
First, he argues that his conviction and sentence for
attempted possession of a specific drug type and quantity
should be reversed under United States v. Hunt, 656 F.3d
906 (9th Cir. 2011), because the district court improperly
instructed the jury that “the government does not have to
prove that [Castro Alavez] knew that the controlled
substance was methamphetamine or knew the quantity of
methamphetamine.” We agree in part. To impose the
heightened penalty prescribed by § 841(b)(1)(A)(viii), the
government must prove that Castro Alavez intended to
possess 500 grams of a methamphetamine mixture. On the
facts of this case, the district court’s erroneous jury
instruction was not harmless. We therefore vacate Castro
Alavez’s sentence for attempted possession of a controlled
substance, but not his conviction.
Second, Castro Alavez contends that his attempt
conviction and conspiracy conviction should be vacated
because the district court improperly admitted religious
images and expert testimony about “narco saints.” While the
expert testimony did not satisfy Federal Rule of Evidence
702, we nonetheless hold that the district court’s error in

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

5

admitting this evidence was harmless. We thus affirm Castro
Alavez’s convictions.
BACKGROUND
Castro Alavez, a native and citizen of Mexico, entered
the United States in 2017 and lived in California until 2023.
On June 15, 2023, Castro Alavez traveled to Hilo, Hawaii
and rented a studio apartment from Diana Machado. Castro
Alavez’s vacation rental was on the same property as
Machado’s residence.
On June 28, 2023, the postal service delivered a package
addressed to “Marco Alavez” to Machado’s residence.
Machado did not recognize the name on the package and
became suspicious of its contents. Shortly after, Castro
Alavez went to Machado’s residence, presumably to look for
the package. When Machado opened the door, Castro Alavez
saw the package sitting on her table and pointed at it saying,
“Mine, mine.” Machado responded that the package
belonged to her daughter. Castro Alavez left briefly but
returned with tracking information indicating that he was
expecting a package and asked whether she received it.
Machado told him that she did not receive his package but
would let him know if she did.
After he left, Machado opened the package and
discovered a substance that felt like “rock salt.” Suspecting
that the substance could be drugs, Machado took the package
to the police station and gave it to Special Agent Ryan
Faulkner (“Agent Faulkner”) of Homeland Security
Investigations. Agent Faulkner obtained a search warrant
and tested the package for narcotics, which revealed
4,970.92 grams of a mixture or substance containing a
detectable amount of methamphetamine.

6

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

Police arrested Castro Alavez, and Agent Faulkner
interviewed him at the police station. In the interview, Castro
Alavez explained that he was hired by an unknown man at a
nightclub in Riverside, California, who claimed he could
help Castro Alavez get out of poverty if Castro Alavez
agreed to pick up an unspecified item and give it to another
individual. The job also required Castro Alavez to deposit
money into a designated bank account. The man assured
Castro Alavez that he would not be doing anything wrong
but warned that, if Castro Alavez agreed to the work, there
would be “no going back” and that if Castro Alavez pulled
“a fast one,” Castro Alavez and his family would be in
danger.
Castro Alavez accepted the job and was sent to Hawaii.
There, an unknown man gave Castro Alavez $8,000 to
$10,000 and instructed him to wire the money to a bank
account in Mexico. Castro Alavez told Agent Faulkner that
he knew the money was drug money but felt that he was in
too deep.
Castro Alavez moved into Machado’s vacation rental in
Hawaii and gave Machado’s address to the people who
recruited him. Castro Alavez explained to Agent Faulkner
that he was instructed to retrieve a delivery at the vacation
rental and to give it to an individual who would come to pick
it up. The same morning the package arrived at Machado’s
residence, Castro Alavez received a call notifying him that
the package would arrive soon. Castro Alavez stated in his
interview that he knew the package likely contained drugs
but did not know the type or quantity of drugs inside.
Castro Alavez also consented to a search of his two cell
phones, his shoulder bag, and the vacation rental. And he
shared with Agent Faulkner the location of receipts for

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

7

several wire transfers to Mexico, which investigators found
during their search of the vacation rental.
Officers also found messages on Castro Alavez’s cell
phones instructing him to wire large amounts of U.S.
currency to Mexico and to conceal money inside chocolate
boxes before sending the boxes through the postal service.
In addition, they discovered two drawings from Castro
Alavez’s shoulder bag, depicting Jesus Malverde and Santa
Muerte, Mexican patron saints. Castro Alavez explained that
the people who recruited him gave him the Jesus Malverde
drawing in California and that the saint “helps the poor.”
The government charged Castro Alavez with:
(1) conspiracy to distribute and possess with intent to
distribute 500 grams of a mixture containing
methamphetamine in violation of 21 U.S.C. §§ 841(a)(1),
841(b)(1)(A)(viii), and 846 (count one); and (2) attempted
possession with intent to distribute 500 grams of a mixture
containing methamphetamine in violation of 21 U.S.C.
§§ 841(a)(1), 841(b)(1)(A)(viii), and 846 (count two). At
trial, the district court gave the following jury instruction for
attempted possession over Castro Alavez’s objection:
If you find the defendant guilty of [attempted
possession of a controlled substance], you are
then to determine whether the government
proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the
controlled substance involved in the offense
was 500 grams or more of a mixture or
substance containing a detectable amount of
methamphetamine, its salts, isomers, and
salts of its isomers. Your determination of
weight must not include the weight of any

8

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

packaging material. Your decision as to type
of drug and weight must be unanimous.
The government does not have to prove that
the defendant knew that the controlled
substance was methamphetamine or knew the
quantity of methamphetamine.
The jury convicted Castro Alavez on both counts. The
district court sentenced him to concurrent 120-month prison
terms on each count, followed by five years of supervised
release. Castro Alavez timely appeals.
STANDARD OF REVIEW
We review “de novo whether the jury instructions
accurately define the elements of a statutory offense.”
United States v. Hicks, 217 F.3d 1038, 1045 (9th Cir. 2000).
While we ordinarily review a district court’s evidentiary
rulings for an abuse of discretion, United States v. Shryock,
342 F.3d 948, 981 (9th Cir. 2003), we review unpreserved
objections for plain error, Tan Lam v. City of Los Banos, 976
F.3d 986, 1006 (9th Cir. 2020).
DISCUSSION
I. The government must prove a defendant’s intent to
possess the specified drug type and quantity to
impose an increased penalty based on the defendant’s
attempted possession of a particular type and
quantity of controlled substance.
21 U.S.C. § 841(a) makes it unlawful for a person to
“knowingly or intentionally” possess with the intent to
distribute a controlled substance. Section 841(b)(1) sets out
separate and increasing penalties depending on the type and
quantity of the controlled substance. Relevant here,

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

9

§ 841(b)(1)(A)(viii) imposes a mandatory minimum
sentence of ten years imprisonment if the offense involves
“500 grams or more of a mixture or substance containing a
detectable amount of methamphetamine.” Section 846
provides that “[a]ny person who attempts or conspires to
commit any offense” under § 841(a) “shall be subject to the
same penalties as those prescribed for the offense.”
The Sixth Amendment and Due Process Clause
“require[] that each element of a crime be proved to the jury
beyond a reasonable doubt.” Alleyne v. United States, 570
U.S. 99, 104 (2013). “[A]ny ‘facts that increase the
prescribed range of penalties to which a criminal defendant
is exposed’”—such as drug type and quantity under
§ 841(b)(1)—constitute “elements of the crime” that the
government must prove to the jury beyond a reasonable
doubt. Id. at 111 (quoting Apprendi v. New Jersey, 530 U.S.
466, 490 (2000)). We applied these principles in Hunt and
held that, to impose a heightened penalty under § 841(b)(1)
based on a defendant’s attempted possession of a particular
type and quantity of controlled substance, the government
must prove that the defendant intended to possess the
specified drug type and quantity. 656 F.3d at 913.
Castro Alavez argues that we must vacate his sentence
under Hunt. We agree.
A. Hunt controls our analysis.
In Hunt, after police intercepted a package and
discovered that it contained about a kilogram of cocaine, the
government charged the defendant with attempted
possession of 500 grams or more of a mixture containing
cocaine. Id. at 908–09. The defendant pleaded guilty without
a plea agreement to attempted possession of a controlled
substance but denied knowing the specific amount or type of

10

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

drug. Id. at 909–10. The district court sentenced him to 15
years in prison for attempting to possess cocaine in violation
of §§ 846 and 841(b)(1)(C), a penalty provision that
increases the statutory maximum sentence from a one-year
term of imprisonment to a 20-year term for offenses
involving specified drugs, including cocaine. Id. at 908,
910–11, 913, 916; compare 21 U.S.C. § 841(b)(1)(C) with
§ 841(b)(3).
We held that because the drug type “support[ed] an
increase in the maximum statutory sentence [the defendant]
faced,” it was an element of the crime the government must
prove beyond a reasonable doubt. Hunt, 656 F.3d at 912–13.
Although the defendant admitted that he intended to possess
a controlled substance, he did not admit to “attempt[ing] to
possess cocaine.” Id. The facts to which the defendant
admitted in his guilty plea were thus insufficient to support
a sentence under § 841(b)(1)(C). Id. at 913. Without “an
explicit admission” or proof of intent, the drug type “could
not be used to support an increase in the maximum statutory
sentence.” Id. at 912–13.
We rejected the government’s contention that it need
only prove the defendant “‘knowingly’ attempted to possess
cocaine.” Id. at 912. “While knowing possession is an
element of the completed offense of possession with intent
to distribute, attempted possession requires proof of intent,
not knowledge.” Id. (citations omitted); see also United
States v. Gracidas-Ulibarry, 231 F.3d at 1188, 1196 (9th Cir.
2000) (en banc) (explaining that “‘purpose’ corresponds to
the concept of specific intent, while ‘knowledge’
corresponds to general intent”). Thus, to obtain a sentence
under § 841(b)(1)(C) for attempted possession of cocaine,
“the government needed to prove that [the defendant]
intended to possess cocaine.” Hunt, 656 F.3d at 912. And

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

11

because the government failed to do so, we vacated the
sentence. Id. at 916–17.
B. Hunt is buttressed by our precedent holding that
criminal attempt requires specific intent even
when the underlying crime does not.
We explored the mens rea required for criminal attempt
in Gracidas-Ulibarry. There, we considered what level of
intent the government must prove to convict a defendant of
attempted illegal reentry under § 1326, when the underlying
offense required a showing only of general intent and the
statute did not otherwise specify an intent requirement. 231
F.3d at 1190.
Our starting point was the common law, which defines
attempt as “the specific intent to engage in criminal conduct
and an overt act which is a substantial step towards
committing the crime.” Id. at 1192 (citation modified). This
“accepted common law definition” underlies our rule that
“Congress’ use of the term ‘attempts’ in a criminal statute
manifest[s] a requirement of specific intent to commit the
crime attempted, even when the statute d[oes] not contain an
explicit intent requirement.” Id. (citing United States v.
Hadley, 918 F.2d 848, 853 (9th Cir. 1990) and United States
v. Sneezer, 900 F.2d 177, 179 (9th Cir. 1990)); see also
Neder v. United States, 527 U.S. 1, 21 (1999) (holding that
when a term has a settled common law meaning, “a court
must infer, unless the statute otherwise dictates, that
Congress means to incorporate the established meaning”
(citation modified)).
By requiring specific intent for attempt crimes, we
“resolve the uncertainty [over] whether the defendant’s
purpose was indeed to engage in criminal, rather than
innocent, conduct.” Gracidas-Ulibarry, 231 F.3d at 1193.

12

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

And such “uncertainty is not present when the defendant has
completed the underlying crime, because the completed act
is itself culpable conduct.” Id. Thus, we held that attempted
illegal reentry requires proof that the noncitizen “had the
purpose, i.e., conscious desire, to reenter the United States
without the express consent of the Attorney General.” Id. at
1196. This is true even though the substantive offense—
illegal reentry—does not require either willfulness or an
unlawful intent. Id. at 1194–95.
Our conclusion in Gracidas-Ulibarry was not
exceptional. Years earlier, we required the government to
prove a higher mens rea for attempt than for substantive
offenses. See, e.g., United States v. Darby, 857 F.2d 623, 626
(9th Cir. 1988) (holding that attempted bank robbery
requires a specific intent to rob a bank, even though bank
robbery is a general intent crime); Sneezer, 900 F.2d at 179
(holding that attempted sexual abuse under 18 U.S.C. § 2242
required a specific intent to commit the crime even though
§ 2242 “itself d[id] not appear to include any element of
specific intent”). And we have continued to require specific
intent for attempt crimes since Gracidas-Ulibarry. See, e.g.,
United States v. Ramirez-Martinez, 273 F.3d 903, 914 (9th
Cir. 2001) (holding that attempted unlawful transportation of
noncitizens requires a “purpose, i.e., the conscious desire, to
transport an undocumented [noncitizen],” even though
“[a]ctual (completed) transporting” requires only that the
defendant act with “reckless disregard” of the noncitizen’s
status (citation modified)), overruled on other grounds by
United States v. Lopez, 484 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2007) (en
banc).
In short, even if a substantive offense lacks an intent
requirement, an attempt to commit that offense requires
specific intent. Hunt applied this longstanding mens rea

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

13

requirement to attempt under § 841(b)(1), and it controls
here. The district court thus erred by instructing the jury that
the government need not prove that Castro Alavez intended
to possess 500 grams or more of a methamphetamine
mixture. This error was not harmless. 1 We thus vacate
Castro Alavez’s sentence for attempted possession of a
controlled substance and remand for resentencing. 2
The government does not argue harmlessness and therefore forfeits the
issue. United States v. Rodriguez, 880 F.3d 1151, 1163 (9th Cir. 2018).
But even so, the erroneous instructions relieved the government of its
burden to prove an element of the offense. See Dang v. Cross, 422 F.3d
800, 805 (9th Cir. 2005) (“In evaluating jury instructions, prejudicial
error results when, looking to the instructions as a whole, the substance
of the applicable law was not fairly and correctly covered.” (citation
modified)). And this error likely affected the outcome because there is
scant evidence suggesting Castro Alavez knew the type and quantity of
drugs involved. See id. at 811–12.

1

To the extent Castro Alavez argues that the district court’s instructional
error warrants vacatur of his conviction for attempted possession of a
controlled substance, we disagree. Drug type and quantity are elements
of the “aggravated crime” created by § 841(b)(1)(A)(viii), but they are
not elements of the “core crime” set forth in §§ 841(a) and 846. See
Alleyne, 570 U.S. at 113. The district court properly instructed the jury
on the core crime of attempted possession of a controlled substance, and
the jury found Castro Alavez guilty of this offense. Thus, Castro Alavez
is entitled only to resentencing. See United States v. Toliver, 351 F.3d
423, 431 (9th Cir. 2003) (holding that the government’s failure to prove
drug type and quantity did not entitle the defendants to a judgment of
acquittal and that the district court was instead “restricted in the
maximum sentence that it could impose”), abrogated on other grounds
by Blakely v. Washington, 542 U.S. 296 (2004); see also Alleyne, 570
U.S. at 114–18 (vacating the defendant’s sentence for the aggravated
crime of brandishing a firearm and remanding “for resentencing
consistent with the jury’s verdict” of guilty as to the core crime of using
or carrying a firearm); United States v. Delgado-Marrero, 744 F.3d 167,
192 (1st Cir. 2014) (collecting cases establishing that a defendant with a
2

14

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

II. We decline to extend our separate line of cases
involving criminal conspiracy to this context.
To avoid Hunt, the government argues that United States
v. Collazo, 984 F.3d 1308 (9th Cir. 2021) (en banc)
overruled it. But Collazo—which addressed the crime of
conspiracy—did not expressly or impliedly overrule Hunt
and, in fact, did not involve the same crime. Still, the
government insists that Collazo controls because its
reasoning is “clearly irreconcilable” with Hunt.
“[W]here the reasoning or theory of our prior circuit
authority is clearly irreconcilable with the reasoning or
theory of intervening higher authority, . . . [we are] bound by
the later and controlling authority, and should reject the prior
circuit opinion as having been effectively overruled.” Miller
v. Gammie, 335 F.3d 889, 893 (9th Cir. 2003) (en banc). But
we remain “bound by our prior precedent if it can be
reasonably harmonized with the intervening [higher]
authority.” Lair v. Bullock, 697 F.3d 1200, 1206 (9th Cir.
2012) (citation modified).
At bottom, Hunt controls here unless the government can
show that Hunt’s reasoning is “clearly irreconcilable” with
Collazo. The government does not meet this “high standard.”
Id. at 1207 (citation modified).

successful Apprendi or Alleyne claim “is not entitled to a new trial, but
rather is only entitled to resentencing”).

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

15

A. Collazo relied on “well-established principles of
conspiracy law,” which require no heightened
mens rea beyond what the underlying crime
requires.
In Collazo, a jury convicted the defendants of conspiracy
to distribute 500 grams of a mixture containing
methamphetamine in violation of 21 U.S.C. § 846, and the
district
court
sentenced
defendants
under
§ 841(b)(1)(A)(viii). 984 F.3d at 1317–18. The district court
instructed the jury to determine “whether the government
proved beyond a reasonable doubt that the amount of
methamphetamine that was reasonably foreseeable to [the
defendants] or fell within the scope of [their] particular
agreement equaled or exceeded . . . 500 grams of a mixture
containing methamphetamine.” Id. at 1317.
We held that this jury instruction was incorrect because
the conspiracy crime did not require the defendants’
knowledge of drug type and quantity. Id. at 1333. Relying
on “well-established principles of conspiracy law,” we
explained that a conspiracy conviction requires the
government to prove “(1) the defendant agreed with another
person that some member of the conspiracy would commit
the relevant underlying offense,” and “(2) the defendant had
the requisite intent necessary for a conviction of the
underlying offense.” Id. at 1318, 1320 (emphasis added).
Turning to the underlying offense, we observed that § 841(a)
makes it unlawful for any person to knowingly or
intentionally distribute “‘a controlled substance,’ which is an
unspecified substance listed on the federal drug schedules.”
Id. at 1325 (citation modified).
Although “the facts of drug type and quantity under
§ 841(b) constitute elements or ingredients of the crime

16

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

because they affect the penalty that can be imposed on a
defendant,” id. at 1322, we concluded that there was “no
natural or ordinary way to read the intent requirement in
§ 841(a)(1) as modifying the drug types and quantities in
§ 841(b),” id. at 1326. Thus, “[b]ecause the government
need not prove that a defendant knew (or had an intent) with
respect to a specific drug type and quantity in order to secure
a conviction under § 841(a) . . . , the government likewise
need not prove such knowledge or intent for” a conspiracy
conviction under § 846. Id. at 1320 n.10, 1329.
We reached this conclusion because—unlike attempt—
conspiracy requires no greater mens rea than the underlying
offense. See id. at 1329–33. Relying on United States v.
Feola, 420 U.S. 671 (1975), we explained that “where an
element of the underlying substantive offense does not
include an intent requirement, the same will be true for a
conspiracy to commit that offense, unless one of the policies
behind the imposition of conspiratorial liability is not served
by having the same intent.” Id. at 1330 (citation modified).
For § 846, “the offense of conspiracy to distribute a
controlled substance is as ‘opprobrious’ and dangerous to
society as the act of the individual drug dealer who actually
distributes the controlled substance,” and so imposing an
additional burden on the government to prove the
conspirator’s knowledge of drug type and quantity would
serve “no apparent purpose.” Id. at 1332–33 (quoting Feola,
420 U.S. at 693, 694).
Indeed, our court has repeatedly upheld convictions for
conspiracy based only on the mens rea required for the
underlying crime. In United States v. Karr, 742 F.2d 493 (9th
Cir. 1984), we held that the defendant could be found guilty
of conspiring to receive stolen explosives even though he did
not know the materials were stolen, because the underlying

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

17

offense required only that an individual have “reasonable
cause to believe” the materials were stolen. Id. at 497
(citation modified). So too in United States v. Thomas, 887
F.2d 1341 (9th Cir. 1989), where we upheld a conviction for
conspiracy to transport, receive, and acquire elk in interstate
commerce in violation of state law based only on proof that
the defendant “should have known” the conduct violated
state law. Id. at 1346–47. And in United States v. Baker, 63
F.3d 1478 (9th Cir. 1995), we held that “the defendants
c[ould] be guilty of conspiring to violate RICO even if they
were not aware their actions were illegal.” Id. at 1493. This
was because “establishing a defendant’s guilt of conspiracy
to commit a substantive crime requires proof of the mens rea
essential for conviction of the substantive offense itself. No
greater or different intent is necessary.” Id. (emphasis
added) (citation omitted).
B. Collazo’s reasoning cannot be grafted onto
attempted possession.
Hunt’s reasoning is not clearly irreconcilable with
Collazo. Collazo rests on the principle that conspiracy
requires no greater level of intent than the underlying crime.
But that principle does not apply to attempt. While
conspiracy demands “proof of the mens rea essential for
conviction of the substantive offense itself,” Baker, 63 F.3d
at 1493, attempt requires specific intent even when the
underlying crime does not, see Gracidas-Ulibarry, 231 F.3d
at 1193. This distinction makes sense. We require specific
intent for attempt to ensure that a defendant’s “purpose was
indeed to engage in criminal, rather than innocent, conduct.”
Id. at 1192–93. But the same rationale does not apply to
conspiracy, because “[t]he agreement itself is the offense.”
Collazo, 984 F.3d at 1319. Thus, because the mens rea for
attempt differs from the mens rea for conspiracy, the

18

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

government fails to show that Hunt is irreconcilable with
Collazo’s conspiracy-specific reasoning.
The government also argues that it is illogical to apply
Collazo to conspiracy to possess but not attempted
possession, because both crimes are inchoate offenses
covered by the same statute. To be sure, applying Hunt and
Collazo yields different outcomes for Castro Alavez’s
conspiracy conviction and his attempted possession
conviction. But there is nothing illogical about this result. At
most, the government highlights that there might be some
tension between the two cases. Even so, mere tension is not
a valid basis to disregard precedent. Lair, 697 F.3d at 1207
(“It is not enough for there to be some tension between the
intervening higher authority and prior circuit precedent, or
for the intervening higher authority to cast doubt on the prior
circuit precedent.” (citation modified)).
In sum, Collazo does not apply here, and we are bound
by Hunt.
III. The district court improperly allowed Detective
Kelly Moniz to testify about the significance of
Jesus Malverde and Santa Muerte, but the error
was harmless.
At trial, the government called Detective Kelly Moniz as
an expert witness on drug trafficking methods and valuation.
Detective Moniz testified that the drawings seized from
Castro Alavez’s bag depicted Jesus Malverde and Santa
Muerte, and that these are Mexican patron saints that drug
traffickers pray to for protection, wealth, abundance, and

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

19

silence. Castro Alavez argues the district court plainly erred
by admitting this testimony. 3
Under plain error review, Castro Alavez must show:
(1) an error; (2) that is plain; and (3) that affected his
substantial rights. See United States v. Olano, 507 U.S. 725,
732–36 (1993). “If these conditions are met, we may
exercise our discretion to notice the forfeited error only if the
error seriously affects the fairness, integrity, or public
reputation of judicial proceedings.” United States v.
Mendoza-Paz, 286 F.3d 1104, 1113 (9th Cir. 2002) (citation
modified).
The district court’s admission of Detective Moniz’s
testimony plainly contravened Federal Rule of Evidence
702, but Castro Alavez fails to show that the error affected
his substantial rights.
A. The district court abandoned its gatekeeping role.
Rule 702 allows a “witness who is qualified as an expert
by knowledge, skill, experience, training, or education” to
give opinion testimony if the expert’s “specialized
knowledge will help the trier of fact to understand the
evidence or to determine a fact in issue.” Fed. R. Evid.
702(a). “[B]efore admitting expert testimony, the district
court must perform a gatekeeping role to ensure that the
testimony is both relevant and reliable.” United States v.
Valencia-Lopez, 971 F.3d 891, 897–98 (9th Cir. 2020)
(citation modified).
The reliability of an expert’s testimony “is the lynchpin.”
Id. at 898. The reliability requirement ensures “that an
Castro Alavez concedes that he forfeited his objection to Detective
Moniz’s testimony, and thus plain error review applies. See Tan Lam,
976 F.3d at 1006.
3

20

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

expert, whether basing testimony upon professional studies
or personal experience, employs in the courtroom the same
level of intellectual rigor that characterizes the practice of an
expert in the relevant field.” Kumho Tire Co. v. Carmichael,
526 U.S. 137, 152 (1999). When law enforcement officers
are offered as experts, “reliability depends heavily on the
knowledge and experience of the expert, rather than the
methodology or theory behind [the testimony].” MendozaPaz, 286 F.3d at 1112 (citation modified).
Because the reliability analysis “is a malleable one tied
to the facts of each case,” district courts have “broad
latitude” to decide how to test an expert’s reliability. United
States v. Ruvalcaba-Garcia, 923 F.3d 1183, 1189 (9th Cir.
2019) (citation modified). But they “do not have discretion
to abandon the gatekeeping function altogether.” Id. (citation
modified). Here, the district court neglected its gatekeeping
role when it allowed Detective Moniz to testify about
religious iconography purportedly associated with drug
trafficking.
Detective Moniz has twenty years of experience as a law
enforcement officer and has investigated more than 300
narcotics-related cases. He no doubt has sufficient
knowledge and experience to qualify as an expert in drug
valuation and drug trafficking methods. But that expertise,
alone, does not qualify him to testify about every matter
remotely related to drug trafficking. See Valencia-Lopez,
971 F.3d at 900 (“[The expert’s] qualifications and
experience are relevant, and indeed necessary. But they
cannot establish the reliability and thus the admissibility of
the expert testimony at issue.”).
The government points to slim evidence that Detective
Moniz knows anything about religious iconography

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

21

associated with drug trafficking. His experience is limited to
one four-hour class in 2010 and another in 2022. He never
investigated or researched the subject; nor had he served as
an expert on the subject before this case. Across hundreds of
investigations, Detective Moniz has only encountered Jesus
Malverde iconography one other time. The government
offers no other basis to support the reliability of Detective
Moniz’s testimony.
These qualifications fall short of Rule 702’s demanding
standard. Cf. Mendoza-Paz, 286 F.3d at 1112–13 (finding
that the expert was qualified to testify about the value of the
seized drugs because the expert “had investigated illegal
narcotics trafficking for eleven years” and had “obtained
experience in the value of illegal narcotics from intelligence
databases” and investigations he conducted). Detective
Moniz’s minimal exposure to drug-related religious
iconography rendered his opinion unreliable. See ValenciaLopez, 971 F.3d at 900. We thus hold that the district court
erred by allowing him to testify on the subject.
B. Detective Moniz’s testimony did not affect Castro
Alavez’s substantial rights.
For an error to affect a defendant’s substantial rights,
“the error must have been prejudicial,” which means “[i]t
must have affected the outcome of the district court
proceedings.” Olano, 507 U.S. at 734. Castro Alavez fails to
demonstrate a reasonable probability that absent Detective
Moniz’s testimony, the jury would have returned a verdict of
not guilty on the conspiracy charge. See id. (explaining that
the defendant has the burden to show prejudice); United
States v. Rangel-Guzman, 752 F.3d 1222, 1224 (9th Cir.
2014).

22

USA V. CASTRO ALAVEZ

The evidence incriminating Castro Alavez was
extensive. Besides the circumstantial evidence implicating
him in drug trafficking, Castro Alavez admitted that he was
involved in drug trafficking and that he knew the package
that arrived at Machado’s residence likely contained drugs.
Because Castro Alavez fails to show a reasonable probability
that Detective Moniz’s testimony affected the jury’s verdict,
we affirm his convictions. 4
CONCLUSION
We vacate Castro Alavez’s sentence for attempted
possession with the intent to distribute a controlled substance
but affirm his convictions for attempted possession and
conspiracy to possess a controlled substance. We remand for
further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
AFFIRMED in part, VACATED in part, and
REMANDED.

Castro Alavez also argues that the district court abused its discretion by
admitting the drawings that depicted Jesus Malverde and Santa Muerte.
We need not reach this issue because we are persuaded that any error is
harmless for the same reasons that Detective Moniz’s testimony did not
affect Castro Alavez’s substantial rights. See Olano, 507 U.S. at 734
(explaining that the plain error standard “normally requires the same
kind of inquiry” as the “harmless error” standard except that the burden
of persuasion is on the defendant instead of the government).

4

