

jr-
^
j^j^^-i.-:-XL A X^A-
LIBRARY
ROOM 5030
MAR 16
1993
'''PASURY DEPAPTMF^

DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SERVICE
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20227
OFFICIAL BUSINESS
PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE, $300
FIRST-CLASS MAIL
POSTAGE & FEES PAID
Depeirtment of the Treasury
Permit No. G-4
New this Issue
Real Disposable Personal Income
Percent Change--4th qtr. to 4tti qtr.
PROFILE OF
THE ECONOMY
Both real disposable personal income and real
consumer spending were soft in the final months of
1991. After-tax income rose at an annual rate of .5
percent in the 4th quarter, contributing to a narrow
.4 percent increase in real spendable income for all
of 1991. Meanwhile, real consumer spending fell at
a
1 .1
percent annual rate in the 4th quarter as a
moderate increase in spending for services was
offset by a sharp decline in purchases of goods. For
all of 1991, spending was up by just 0.3 percent.
T
1
1
1
1
1
1
r
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
Real Personal Spending
Percent Change"4th qtr. to 4thi qtr.
See page 27 for more of:
Profile of the Economy
m
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991

TREASURY
'BULLETIN
THIS ISSUE
Treasury official tells
Congress that Japan's
market problems are
unlikely to significantly
affect Wall Street
/ Department of the Treasury
FinancialManagement ServicemmWWf
//
//
//
1
\
\
\
\
\

Additional Financial Management Service
Releases on Federal Finances
Sold on a subscription basis only (exceptions noted) by the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402:^
•
Daily Treasury Statement.
Provides summary data on the Treasury's cash and debt
operations for the Federal Government. Published each Federal working day. Sub-
scription price: $204 per year (domestic), $255 per year (foreign).
• Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the United States Gov-
ernment.
Provides Federal budget results, including receipts and outlays of funds,
the surplus or deficit, and the means of financing the deficit or disposing of the
surplus. Preparation based on agency reporting. Subscription price: $27 per year
(domestic), $33.75 per year (foreign).
• Consolidated Financial Statements of the United States Government
(annual).
Provides information about Government financial operations on the accrual
basis. Single copy price: $2.25.
• United States Government Annual Report and Appendix. Annual Report presents
budgetary results at the summary level. Appendix presents the individual receipt and
appropriation accounts at the detail level. Annual Report single copy price: $2;
Appendix free from Financial Management Service.
t Subscription orderform on inside back cover of this issue.
ON THE COVER: A line drawing from an old photograph of
Treasury's West Portico, looking toward the Washington Monument.

m^^
w\
i^
\
\
i.
i^yfii^
BULL
'''ijh,-,«l||v_^
J \j y
/
-hyiy'^'fi
''€:
^^[Commlcd and Published b
Office of the Secretary
• Department of the Treasury
• Washington, D.C.
The Treasury Bulletin
is for sale by the Superintendent of Documents,
U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. 20402

The Treasury Bulletin is issued quarterly in March, June, September, and December by the
Financial Management Service. The Reports Management Division, Financial Information
compiles articles of general interest as well as statistical data from sources within several
Treasury departmental offices and bureaus. Readers can contact the Financial Reports
Branch at (202) 208-1709 to inquire about any of the published information. Suggestions for
article subjects, tables or graphs are welcome.
TREASURY BULLETIN STAFF
Editor-in-Chief: Regina M. Dennis-Downing
Managing Editor: Karen Y. Shepard
Assistant Editor: Stephen T. Wiley
Editorial Assistants: Bertha M. Butts and Bernice T. James
UMMMM^^^

Contents
JUNE 1992
TREASURY ISSUES
Page
INTERNATIONAL FINANCES
The Japan stock market drop is not expected to seriously affect the U.S. stock market,
Treasury Assistant Secretary for Domestic Finance Jerome H. Powell tells the Senate
3
ECONOMIC POLICY
The Debt Debate, the latest on long-term vs. short-term borrowing to finance the public debt.
Excerpted from the April issue of Government Executive magazine
9
TREASURY REPORTS AND INDEX
Recent Reports and Studies
13
Treasury Issues Index
19
FINANCIAL OPERATIONS
PROFILE OF THE ECONOMY
POE-A. -Chart: Growth of real gross domestic product
23
POE-B. -Chart: Federal outlays and receipts as a share of gross domestic product
23
POE-C.-Chart: Personal saving
24
POE-D. -Chart: Federal deficit
24
POE-E
-Chart: Real disposable personal income; real personal spending
25
POE-F. -Chart: Merchandise trade deficit
26
FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
Analysis-Budget results for the second quarter, fiscal 1992
28
FFO-A. -Chart: Monthly receipts and outlays
30
FFO-B. -Chart: Budget receipts by source
30
FFO-1.-Summary of fiscal operations
31
FFO-2.-On-budget and off-budget receipts by source
32
FFO-3.-On-budget and off-budget outlays by agency
34
FEDERAL OBLIGATIONS
FO-1 .-Gross obligations incurred inside and outside of the Federal Government by object class
37
FO-A.-Chart: Gross Federal obligations; gross Federal obligations incurred outside the Federal Government
38
FO-B.-Chart: Total gross Federal obligations
38
FO-2.-Gross obligations incurred outside the Federal Government by department or agency
39
ACCOUNT OF THE U.S. TREASURY
UST-1. -Elements of changes in Federal Reserve and tax and loan note account balances
42
FEDERAL DEBT
FD- 1
-Summary of Federal debt
44
FD-2. -Interest-bearing public debt
45
FD-3.-Government account series
46
FD-4. -Interest-bearing securities issued by Government agencies
47
FD-5. -Maturity distribution and average length of marketable interest-bearing public debt held by private investors
48

IV
Contents
Page
FD-6.-Debt subject to statutory limitation
48
FD-7.-Treasury holdings of securities issued by Government corporations and other agencies
49
FD-A. -Chart: Average length of the marketable debt
50
FD-B. -Chart: Private holdings of Treasury marketable debt by maturity
51
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TREASURY FINANCING
53
PDO-1 -Maturity schedule of interest-bearing marketable public debt securities other than regular w/eekly and 52-w/eek
Treasury bills outstanding
57
PDO-2 -Offerings of bills
63
PDO-3. -Public offerings of marketable securities other than regular weekly Treasury bills
65
PDO-4.-Allotments by investor classes for public marketable securities
68
U.S. SAVINGS BONDS AND NOTES
SBN-1 -Sales and redemptions by series, cumulative
71
SBN-2. -Sales and redemptions by period, all series of savings bonds and notes combined
71
SBN-3 -Sales and redemptions by period, series E, EE, H, and HH
72
OWNERSHIP OF FEDERAL SECURITIES
OFS-1. -Distribution of Federal securities by class of investors and type of issues
74
OFS-2.-Estimated ownership of public debt securities by private investors
75
MARKET YIELDS
MY-1 -Treasury market bid yields at constant maturities: bills, notes, and bonds
77
MY-A. -Chart: Yields of Treasury securities
78
fu1Y-2.-Average yields of long-term Treasury, corporate, and municipal bonds by period
80
MY-B.-Chart: Average yields of long-term Treasury, corporate, and municipal bonds
81
U.S. CURRENCY AND COIN OUTSTANDING AND IN CIRCULATION
USCC-1.-Amounts outstanding and in circulation; currency, coin
83
USCC-2.-Amounts outstanding and in circulation; by denomination, per capita comparative totals
84
FEDERAL AGENCIES' FINANCIAL REPORTS
FAFR-1 .-Direct and guaranteed loans
86
FAFR-A—Chart: Direct and guaranteed loans
89
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STATISTICS
IFS-1 -U.S. reserve assets
94
IFS-2.-Selected U.S. liabilities to foreigners
95
IFS-3.-Nonmarketable U.S. Treasury bonds and notes issued to official institutions and other residents of foreign countries
96
IFS-4. -Trade-weighted index of foreign currency value of the dollar
97
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
LIABILITIES TO INTERNATIONALS REPORTED BY BANKS IN THE UNITED STATES
CM-l-1 -Total liabilities by type of holder
99
CM-l-2. -Total liabilities by type, payable in dollars
1 00
CM-l-3. -Total liabilities by country
101
CM-l-4. -Total liabilities by type and country
103
CM-A.-Chart: International liabilities
105

Contents
Page
CLAIMS ON FOREIGNERS, REPORTED BY BANKS IN THE UNITED STATES
CM-ll-1. --Total claims by type
106
CM-ll-2. -Total claims by country
107
CM-ll-3. -Total claims on foreigners by type and country, reported by banks in the United States
109
SUPPLEMENTARY LIABILITIES AND CLAIMS DATA REPORTED BY BANKS IN THE UNITED STATES
CM-lll-1 -Dollar claims on nonbank foreigners
Ill
CM-lll-2. -Dollar liabilities and other financial commitments of the United States Government
112
CM-B. -Chart: Claims on internationals
113
LIABILITIES TO, AND CLAIMS ON, FOREIGNERS, REPORTED BY NONBANKING BUSINESS ENTERPRISES IN
THE UNITED STATES
CM-IV-1. -Total liabilities and claims by type
114
CM-IV-2.-Total liabilities by country
115
CM-IV-3. -Total liabilities by type and country
117
CM-IV-4. -Total claims by country
119
CM-IV-5. -Total claims by type and country
121
TRANSACTIONS IN LONG-TERM SECURITIES BY FOREIGNERS REPORTED BY BANKS AND BROKERS IN
THE UNITED STATES
CMC. -Chart: Net purchases of long-term domestic securities by selected countries
123
CM-V-1 -Foreign purchases and sales of long-term domestic securities by type
1 24
CM-V-2.-Foreign purchases and sales of long-term foreign securities by type
124
CM-V-3—Net foreign transactions in long-term domestic securities by type and country
125
CM-V-4.-Foreign purchases and sales of long-term securities, by type and country
127
CM-V-5— Foreign purchases and sales of long-term securities, by type and country
129
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
SUMMARY POSITIONS
FCP-l-1
-Nonbanking firms' positions
132
FCP-l-2.-Weekly bank positions
132
CANADIAN DOLLAR POSITIONS
FCP-ll-1.-Nonbanking firms' positions
133
FCP-ll-2.-Weekly bank positions
133
GERMAN MARK POSITIONS
FCP-lll-1.-Nonbanking firms' positions
134
FCP-lll-2
-Weekly bank positions
134
JAPANESE YEN POSITIONS
FCP-IV-1 .-Nonbanking firms' positions
1 35
FCP-IV-2.-Weekly bank positions
135
SWISS FRANC POSITIONS
FCP-V-1 -Nonbanking firms' positions
136
FCP-V-2.-Weekly bank positions
136

VI
Contents
Page
STERLING POSITIONS
FCP-VI-1.-Nonbanking firms' positions
137
FCP-VI-2.--Weekly bank positions
137
U.S. DOLLAR POSITIONS ABROAD
FCP-VII-1.--Nonbanking firms' foreign subsidiaries' positions
138
FCP-VII-2 --Weekly bank foreign office positions
1 38
EXCHANGE STABILIZATION FUND
ESF-1 -Balance sheet
141
ESF-2—Income and expense
141
GLOSSARY
142
NOTES
Details offigures may not add to totals because of rounding.
r represents Revised, p Preliminary, n.a. Not available.

VII
Nonquarterly Tables and Reports
For the convenience of the Treasury Bulletin user, nonquarterly tables and reports are listed below along
with the issues in which they appear.
Issues
March
Federal Fiscal Operations
FFO-4. -Summary of internal revenue collections by States and other areas
.
.
V
Capital Movements
CM-lll-2. --Dollar liabilities to, and dollar claims on, foreigners in countries and
areas not regularly reported separately
Special Reports
Consolidated Financial Statements of tfie United States Government
Statement of Liabilities and Otfier Financial Commitments of tfie United
States Government
V
Trust Fund Reports:
Civil service retirement and disability fund
Airport and airway trust fund
V
Asbestos trust fund
V
Black lung disability trust fund
V
Federal disability insurance trust fund
Federal hospital insurance trust fund
Federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund
Federal supplementary medical insurance trust fund
Harbor maintenance trust fund
V
Hazardous substance superfund
V
Highway trust fund
V
Inland waterways trust fund
V
Leaking underground storage tank trust fund
V
National service life insurance fund
Nuclear waste fund
V
Railroad retirement account
Reforestation trust fund
V
Unemployment trust fund
Investments of specified trust accounts
V
June
Sept.
V
V
Dec.
V
V
V
V
V
V
V


TREASURY ISSUES


Treasury Official Tells Congress Dropping Japanese Market
Will Not Significantly Affect Independent U.S. Stock Market
The following addresses the recent economic and financial developments in Japan and the effect those develop-
ments might ultimately have on our own economy.
It was excerpted from a statement given by then Assistant Secretary
of the Treasury for Domestic Finance Jerome H. Powell.
The increasing
internationalization
of national econo-
mies and financial mar1<ets is a fact of life. On balance,
It is
a positive trend, full of benefits for each and every nation.
Globalization allows the world to mobilize
its savings
more effectively, drawing funds to those Investment prqects
that offer the best returns, wherever they may be located.
It
allows the world economy to produce at the lowest possible
cost in terms of resources, directing demands for products
to whereverthe most efficient sources of supply are located.
At times of economic adversity abroad, however, increased
international ties can become a source of concem.
The economic links between the United States and Ja-
pan are many, and they cover a broad range of areas, from
finance to farming. The concem that has been expressed
about the possible spillover effects of the sharp decline In
Japanese stock prices is, therefore, an understandable one.
I will review some of the particular areas in which one
might expect to see those effects-for example, in Japanese
banks' activities in this country,
in Japan's investments in
our securities and real assets, and in Japan's exports to and
imports from the United States.
To summarize my conclusion: while the links between
the two nations' economies are undeniable,
it
is our view
that the spillover onto our economy of the recent stock
market developments in Japan is likely to be limited.
Background on Developments in Japan's Stock Market
I would like to begin by reviewing briefly the path Japan's
stock market has taken in recent years. Buoyed in part by
an expansionary monetary policy, the market soared during
the last half of the 1 980s. The Nikkei index tripled from
1 985
to its peak at just below 39,000 at yearend 1989.
That rapid rise, however, was followed by an even more
rapid decline. The Nikkei, now at roughly 17,500, has fallen
by more than one-halt from its high and is back to levels not
seen since 1986.
Land prices, too, skyrocketed in the late 1980s and have
retreated
since. The
Ministry
of Finance's imposition
of
restrictions on
real estate lending by commercial banks
between April 1990 and December 1991 was undoubtedly

TREASURY ISSUES
in business and consumer confidence. Highly leveraged
investors have kjeen especially hard-hit, and banlouptcles
have Increased sharply.
Although real Gross National Product growth in Japan
for 1991 as a whole was 4.5 percent, there was a sharp
deceleration over the 4 quarters, with a small decline
in
output registered in the final quarter. A second factor behind
the drop
in
stocl< prices
Is a general erosion
In Investor
confidence. The scandals that have surfaced In that mari<et
in recent years contributed to this development.
Since investors began to lose money in the mart<et and
then were confronted with evidence that the playing field
might be less than level, they appear increasingly to have
withdrawn.
Indeed,
liquidity
in Japan's
stock
mari<et
is
greatly reduced, with turnover running at pertiaps a quarter
of its eariier rate. This in turn has produced more volatility
in share prices, which makes the needed recovery in confi-
dence that much more difficult. We are watching the situ-
ation in Japan carefully. But we believe that the decline to
date, which has occurred over a 28-month period, essen-
tially constitutes a major correction
of what was widely
acknowledged to be a distorted and inflated mart<et.
With respect to our own mari<et, there is
little evidence
of any direct or important effects of the drop in Japanese
share prices.
In fact, U.S. stock indexes have tended to rise during the
period of decline in the Nikkei, hitting new highs within the
last month. In general, the relationship between price move-
ments in the U.S. and Japanese stock mart<ets has been
fairiy weak, as analyzed exhaustively
in
Securities and
Exchange Commission Chairman Breeden's testimony be-
U.S. -based banks have improved
their balance sheets over the last year
and are better positioned to take ad-
vantage of lending opportunities that
may arise from a retrenchment by
Japanese banks.
fore this Committee 2 weeks ago.
Japanese Banks' Ability to Meet International Capital
Standards
The reduction in stock and property prices in Japan has
generated questions about the capital positions of Japa-
nese banks and their ability to meet international standards
for capital adequacy. In order to address these concems,
it
is useful to make some general observations about capital
adequacy and profitability in Japan's banking system.
The sharp
rise of stock prices over the 4-year period
through 1989 contributed
to a lower cost
of
capital
for
Japanese banks by enabling them to raise equity at very
low cost and also by increasing the value
of the stock
holdings that constitute part of their reserves. Correspond-
ingly, the Nikkei's subsequent decline both has Increased
the cost
of
raising new
capital and has eroded
capital
adequacy.
In addition, Japanese banks are suffering from
reduced
profits as the
quality
of
their loan
portfolios
Is
impaired by the weaker economy, rising bankruptcies, and
declines in real estate values.
But Japan's banks have been adjusting to the adverse
developments, as evidenced
in
part by
less aggressive
lending pattems in various mari<ets. According to the Min-
istry of Finance, the average ratio of risk-weighted assets
to capital for the major Japanese banks was just above 8
percent at the end of March 1992.
How these banks
reinforce
their capital
positions-in
terms of raising capital or restraining asset growth-ahead
of the full phase-in of the BIS intemational capital standards
next year will have consequences for the rest of the worid,
but we expect these effects to be relatively small.
Effects of Japanese Financial Market Developments on
Japanese Bank Lending in the United States
Concems also have surfaced as to the likelihood that the
U.S. agencies, branches, and subsidiaries
of Japanese
banks will curtail lending in the United States, and about the
impact this development might have on commercial
real
estate mari<ets, U.S. banks, and the Califomia economy,
where their mari<et share
is especially high. To address
these concems,
it is useful to review the pattem of lending
by Japanese banks in the United States in recent years.
In a nutshell, after growing at an average annual rate of
24 percent from 1985 through 1989, assets of Japanese
banks in this country have been about flat.
The dramatic growth
in the last half of the 1980s was
spurred by several
factors.
First, Japan was running a
substantial current account surplus, with a corresponding
net outflow of capital, a major share of which found its way
into the United States~a portion of that through banks.
Second, the yen was
relatively strong versus the dollar,
making direct investment in the United States attractive to
many Japanese investors. This took many forms, including
investments in real estate, in manufacturing facilities, and
in financial and banking operations, the
latter notably
In
Califomia. Third, the cost of capital to Japanese banks was

TREASURY ISSUES
very low, enabling them to finance rapid growth
in their
assets both at home and abroad.
During this period, the share of Japanese bank assets in
the U.S. market grew significantly, particularly in California.
At the end of
1 990, the Japanese share of commercial bank
assets reached over
11
percent
nationally and over 26
percent in the State of California. The Japanese share of
business loans was even higher, and
it continued to grow
in 1 991 as U.S. banks pulled back from this type of lending.
This year, Japanese banks are expected to reduce their
woridwide growth in order to reach and maintain their capital
at the levels required by the BIS standards. They may be
expected to give greater precedence to their customers in
Japan,
resulting
in some further retrenchment of lending
overseas, including
in the United States. Therefore,
it
is
unlikely that Japanese bank lending
in the United States
and California will be particulariy strong in the near term.
Nevertheless, this trend does not necessarily portend
more constrained borrowing conditions in California. U.S.-
based banks have improved their balance sheets over the
last year and are better positioned to take advantage of
lending opportunities that may arise from a retrenchment by
the Japanese banks. U.S. banks have built up a consider-
able stock of liquid securities that can be replaced with loans
as private credit demands pick up in a strengthening econ-
omy. Banks based in other foreign countries have lending
capacity as well.
For example, although Japanese bank assets
in the
United States declined by $7 billion in 1991
, foreign-based
banks as a group expanded their assets in the United States
by $79 billion. Therefore, the overall effect on the Califomia
economy
of a diminished presence by Japanese banks
should not be disruptive.
Effects on U.S. Economy, Long-Tenn Interest Rates,
and U.S. Budget Financing
While accurate figures on total Japanese investment in
U.S. Treasury securities do not exist, the downward trend
since the middle of 1989
is clear. According to the best
figures
currently
available, Japanese holdings
of
U.S.
Treasury securities are estimated to have decreased $47
billion from mid-1989 to February 1992. This represented a
decline from about 5 percent to 2 percent of outstanding
privately-held Treasury securities (based on the 1984 For-
eign Portfolio Investment Survey benchmari<).
As significant as that decrease may seem,
I would point
out that total foreign investment in U.S. Treasury securities
increased by approximately $100
billion over the same
period. In other words, the drop in Japanese holdings has
been more than offset by increases in the holdings by other
countries. This pattem
of decreases
in the holdings
of
We believe that the view that the Gov-
ernment or the
U.S. economy as a
whole
is "hostage" to particular in-
vestor groups or foreign countries is
mistaken.
particular countries being more than offset by increases in
the holdings of other countries is a typical one. The result
has been that the percentage of the public debt held by
foreigners has remained
remarkably constant over the
years. Foreign demand for Treasury debt has grown at very
close to the same rate as Treasury debt itself has grown.
In December 1 982, the share of the total public debt held
by foreign and intemational accounts was 1 2.5 percent, and
in February
1 992 it was 1 2.2 percent. This constancy is also
evident when the public debt held by U.S. Government
accounts and Federal Reserve banks is excluded from the
calculation. By that accounting,
at the end of 1982, the
percentage of this debt held by foreigners was 1 7.6 percent,
and in February 1992, 17.9 percent.
Tuming
to Japanese holdings
of
private sector U.S.
securities, the size of these holdings would not appear to
be a great concem.
While Japanese investments in U.S. corporate debt and
U.S. equities"$1 8 billion and $20 billion, respectively, at the
end of
1 991 -are large in absolute amounts, they represent
only a small
fraction
of the
total
mart<et. These figures
translate into Japanese ownership of slightly over 1 percent
of U.S. corporate debt and approximately .5 percent of the
total mari<et value of U.S. equities at the end of
1 991
.
From a broader perspective, the amount the U.S. econ-
omy as a whole
is dependent on capital inflows can be
determined by looking at the U.S. balance of payments.
Since the United States has been running a current account
deficit, this means that there has been a net capital inflow
into this country.
However, the current account deficit has been declining,
which means, in effect, that the U.S. economy as a whole
is depending less on foreign capital inflows. At the same
time, interest rates here have declined.
Despite the size of the U.S. Government's budget deficit
and the sometimes very large U.S. current account deficit,
we ttelieve that the view that the Government or the U.S.
economy as a whole
is "hostage"
to
particular investor
groups or foreign countries is mistaken.
The Treasury's debt is too widely distributed and inter-
national capital mart<ets are too well developed for that to
be the case. Consequently, we do not believe that Japanese

TREASURY ISSUES
disinvestment in Treasury securities or other capital flows
resulting from current Japanese financial market difficulties
will have any perceptible effect on long-term interest rates
in this country.
U.S. Bilateral Trade Deficit with Japan: U.S. Manufac-
turing Base
Next
I would
like to turn to the question
of the U.S.
bilateral trade deficit with Japan, the likelihood that
it will
worsen, and the effects of this on the U.S. manufacturing
base. First,
I should say that the Treasury Department does
not attempt to make forecasts of bilateral balances. That
said, we do expect much larger Japanese trade and current
account surpluses this year than last, and there are some
reasons to think that our bilateral deficit with Japan will also
increase this year.
By way of background, Japan's current account surplus
actually declined sharply from a peak of $87 billion in 1987
to $36 billion in 1990. However, last year, the surplus more
than doubled
to $73
billion. For 1992, the
International
Monetary Fund forecasts Japan's current account surplus
at about $93 billion.
The reasons behind the recent rise in Japan's extemal
surplus are dear: Both the Japanese yen and Japan's
domestic demand growth have weakened. These develop-
ments tend to make imports into Japan more expensive,
tend to make Japan's demand for imports fall, and tend to
divert more of Japanese production toward export martlets.
Nevertheless, the U.S.-Japan bilateral trade deficit has
widened only slightly, from $42 billion in 1990 to $44 billion
last year. In the first 2 months of this year, the deficit ran a
bit above last year's pace.
Most of the increase in Japan's current account surplus
was registered with countries other than the United States,
particulariy some Asian nations and the countries of the
European Community. However, if signs of economic recov-
ery in the United States are borne out and the slowdown in
Japan's economy is not soon arrested, the bilateral imbal-
ance between us could worsen further.
With respect to the effect of trade with Japan on the U.S.
manufacturing base, the numbers do not support the view
that the United States
is able to export only agricultural
products and unsophisticated manufactures to Japan. For
example, over the last 4 years, the value of U.S. exports to
Japan has grown by 70 percent, whereas imports from
Japan have grown much less rapidly, by only 8 percent.
Looking behind these numbers, one notes that
U.S.
export growth has been strong in sophisticated and high-
technology goods. For example, U.S. exports to Japan of
industrial and service machinery grew 93 percent, telecom-
munications equipment exports increased by 148 percent,
.
.
. the risk ofcontagion is quite small,
as our stock market has remained ro-
bust, moving in the opposite direction
of the Nikkei in recent years.
and exports of scientific and medical machinery grew 129
percent. Civilian aircraft and engine exports increased by
60 percent, and exports of computers,
peripherals, and
semi-conductors increased by
1 24 percent.
The United States also does well on service transactions.
In
fact,
in finance-related
service transactions, such as
royalties and license fees, financial services and insurance,
the United States has a surplus with Japan.
To sum up, Japan's trade and current account surpluses
have risen dramatically, primarily reflecting a decline in the
level
of imports, which
in tum has been a function of a
weaker yen and slower growth in Japan. So far, the U.S.
bilateral trade deficit with Japan has not borne the brunt of
this decline, but there is a possibility that our deficit will grow
this year.
Cross-Ownership of Japanese Stock (Keiretsu)
Finally,
I would like to respond to your question about the
possibility that the Japanese practice of corporate cross-
ownership of stock, an aspect of the keiretsu system, will
unravel as a
result of the decline
in the Japanese stock
mari<et.
First, some basic facts about cross-ownership of
stock in Japan. About 70 percent of Japanese stocks are
held in the form of long-term stable shareholdings. One-third
of
this amount
is held
in "cross-shareholdings" between
business corporations, and the other two-thirds is held by
institutional investors, such as banks, pension funds, and
insurance companies.
During the bull mari<et of the 1 980s, these share holdings
could be justified on the basis of large capital gains. How-
ever, since the average dividend yield on Japanese equities
has been meager, in the absence of capital gains, corpora-
tions and financial
institutions may well re-evaluate their
holdings. In addition, some corporations could be forced to
divest stocks held in a cross-shareholding arrangement in
order to meet their investment financing needs in the face
of reduced credit availability.
These mari<et pressures will probably reduce the propor-
tion of stable shareholdings and erode the cross-share-
holding system to some extent, but it certainly does not spell
the end of the keiretsu system.

TREASURY ISSUES
CtToss-share holding is only one, albeit the most visible,
aspect of the keiretsu system. While the decline in share
prices may cause companies, especially investment institu-
tions, to re-evaluate their share holdings and divest those
that are nonperforming,
in many instances the financial
aspects of cross-shareholdings are secondary to their role
in cementing the long-temi relationships among corporate
business partners that are central to the keiretsu system.
Therefore, there will continue to be strong institutional and
business pressures to hold onto shares of "group" members
and of companies that are major suppliers or customers.
Conclusion
I do not wish to minimize the import of the sharp decline
in Japanese stock prices over the past 28 months.
The capitalization of Japan's stock market has declined
by about one half, and a drop of that magnitude cannot occur
without notable repercussions on Japan's wealth, the health
of its financial sector, and its economy generally.
But one mitigating factor has been the extended period
over which that decline has taken place, thereby allowing
businesses to adjust to their changed circumstances and
reducing the risk of damage to the economy.
From the United States' perspective, the drop
in the
Japanese stock market is likely to have limited effects. As
noted, the
risk of contagion
is quite small, as our stock
mari<et has remained robust, moving in the opposite direc-
tion of the Nikkei in recent years.
While worid economies are increasingly interdependent,
we do not expect the decline in stock prices in Japan will
translate into substantial consequences for our economy.


TREASURY ISSUES
THE DEBT DEBATE
In recent months, the issue ofFederal debt management has become a topic ofgreat interest. Thefollowing,
featuring an interview with Treasury Assistant Secretaryfor Domestic Finance Jerome H. Powell, continues
to expand on debt issues brought to the forefront in recent issues of the Treasury Bulletin. Excerpted with
permission o/Government Executive magazine, itfirst appeared in that publication in April 1992.
Paul Starobin is a correspondent for National Journal.
Many people think the Federal Government relies too
heavily on long-term securities to finance Its debt. But Treas-
ury's debt managers oppose a change.
...a number of analysts believe that
flaws in the Government's debt-
management strategy are adding
hundreds of millions of dollars
annually to the cost of servicing the
public debt.
The Federal Government may justifiably be criticized for
many shortcomings, but there
is
at least one task that
it
appears to perform exceedingly well-with almost frightening
proficiency, in fact. That's the job of raising money to finance
the public debt.
The era of hundred-billion-dollar-plus deficits, which be-
gan
in the 1980s and which the House Budget Ck)mmittee
recently predicted could last into the next century, has posed
something of a challenge to the Treasury Department team
responsible for meeting the Government's cash needs. After
all, every dollar of spending the Government can't cover with
a dollar of revenue has to be borrowed from private investors
and paid back, of course, with interest.
But no amount of fiscal excess has proven too big for
Treasury's debt managers to handle. In 1980, investors held
a mere $709.3 billion in Federal debt;
1 992 debt holdings will
likely breach the $3 trillion mark. Last year, Treasury issued
$1 .7 trillion in marketable securities~$1 .4 trillion of the pro-
ceeds went toward retiring maturing debt and the rest toward
financing the budget deficit. Meanwhile, the Office of Man-
agement and Budget (OMB) projects that the deficit for the
current fiscal year will be a record $399.1
billion.
Not to worry: The hole Is being filled by the mountain of
cash raised in the auctions of Treasury securities held by the
debt-management squad 160 times annually. Week
after
week, these auctions attract flocks of investors from Wall
Street to Tokyo. (Foreigners hold about 18 percent of the
public debt; the Japanese alone account for about 3 percent.)
All of the buyers are eager to lend Uncle Sam money, all of
them are sure this is one loan that won't go sour.
"Borrowing money is one of the things the Government
does really well,' says Jerome H. Powell, Treasury's Assis-
tant Secretary for Domestic Finance. "Debt management is
basically a success story."
Or is it? Sure, the Govemment has been able to finance
its deficits. But has
it done so at the lowest possible cost to
the taxpayer? With interest-rate payments on Treasury secu-
rities exceeding $200
billion annuaiiy-an expenditure that
now outstrips every component of the budget, except for
Defense and Social Security-this is not an idle question. An
increase of a mere one-hundredth of one percentage point
(one basis point) in the interest rate paid on Treasury paper
costs taxpayers an extra $250 million or so a year in debt-
service costs.
Powell's assessment notwithstanding, a number of ana-
lysts believe that flaws in the Government's debt-manage-
ment strategy are adding hundreds
of
millions
of
dollars
annually to the cost of servicing the public debt and thereby
depriving the budget of scarce funds. The criticism boils down
to this: Treasury's debt managers, either because they tend
to be captives of the big Govemment bond dealers on Wall
Street or simply because they are afflicted with bureaucratic
inertia, have their heads in the sand.
Enormous deficits beg for an aggressive, entrepreneurial
approach to managing the public debt, critics say, but Treas-
ury's posture tends to be cautious and unimaginative.
Passing the Long Bond
A prime example
of Treasury short-sightedness that
critics cite is the department's reluctance to shift away from
sales of 30-year Treasury bonds~the so called long bond-to-
ward sales of shorter-term Treasury securities.
Advocates
of such a
shift,
including Nobel
laureate
economist James Tobin of Yale University and Stephen H.
Axiirod, formeriy a top staffer at the Federal Reserve Board,
note that the prevailing mari<et interest rate on the long bond
is much higher than the rate on short-term securities, such as

10
TREASURY ISSUES
the 3-month and 6-month
bills and the 2-year and 5-year
notes. In fact, the spread between short-term and long-bond
rates has never been
higher. The Congressional Budget
Office said in a recent report on the economic and budget
outlook that shifting the $50 billion or so that Treasury now
sells each year in long bonds into short-temfi maturities would
save about $1
billion in interest payments annually.
For many economists, the logic is simple and compelling.
"Interest-rate restmcturing
is taking place at the consumer
level, through a refinancing of mortgages at lower rates, and
at the corporate level, through the plethora of new corporate
bond Issues at lower rates," says Kathleen M.
Camilli, an
economist for Maria Ramirez Capital Consultants Inc. on Wall
Street. "The only place
it is not taking place is at the Federal
Government level.
I think we could find some more creative
ways of saving the taxpayer money."
What's more, many who advocate shifting away from
long bonds also predict a side benefit to the economy: a
further reduction in mortgage and corporate-bond rates.
If the
Treasury makes long bonds scarce, this argument goes, they
will become more valuable, and investors who still want them
will have to bid a higher price and settle for a lower rate of
return. Because mortgage and corporate rates tend to move
in the credit markets
in tandem with long-bond rates, their
interest rates too would decrease.
Last December, Treasury Secretary Nicholas F. Brady
revealed that the Govemment was reviewing
its borrowing
strategy with an eye toward reducing reliance on the long
bond. But his comment sparked opposition within the financial
community, particularly among Wall Street Govemment bond
dealers who buy and actively trade Treasury securities. For
dealers and investors, the long bond is by farthe most popular
and most profitable of all U.S. Govemment securities-in fact,
it is the most actively traded security in the world.
On Febmary 5, Powell declared at a press conference
attended by a packed house of financial joumalists that, aside
from making a modest, one-time-only reduction in its quarterly
long-bond issues, Treasury would not depart from
its tradi-
tional debt-management strategy, after all. "Over time, the
cost of financing the debt is minimized by a stable, predictable
pattem of Treasury financing," he said. In an interview in his
office a few days later, he insisted that neither concems about
upsetting the bond dealers nor a commitment to bureaucratic
routine played any role in the decision.
Francis X. Cavanaugh, an ex-Treasury aide who
until
1986 was the top career official advising political appointees
on debt-management policy, also defends Treasury's tradi-
tional debt-management approach. "The debt
is so big, so
enomnous, that
if you start surprising the market with a lot of
innovation, then you pay a price for it," says Cavanaugh, now
head of the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board. 'This
is business-it's not airy macro economics."
"The debt is so big that ifyou start
surprising the market with a lot of
innovation, you pay a price, " said
Frank X. Cavanaugh, aformer
Treasury aide.
Inside the Treasury
Although
it is just one decision, the debate over whether
to curtail long bonds offers a window into the little-understood
world of how the Govemment makes and carries out debt-
management policy.
The first thing to grasp is that debt management, notwith-
standing
its implications for the economy and the Federal
budget, is virtually the sole province of the Treasury Depart-
ment. Although
advice
is
often sought from
the
Federal
Reserve Board and occasionally from other quarters of Gov-
emment, Treasury feels free to ignore
it.
During the Reagan Administration, for instance. Council
of Economic Advisers member William A. Niskanen says he
tried without success to sell Treasury on issuing a so-called
index bond that Niskanen thought could signal the Govern-
ment's commitment to lowering inflation. "The Treasury debt-
management people are a worid unto themselves and are
basically unresponsive to outside advice," Niskanen says.
Today, even Richard Darman, the powerful and often-im-
perious chief of 0MB, is quick to defer to Treasury's suprem-
acy on debt-management decisions.
At a
late January
hearing, Darman told House Budget Committee lawmakers
that he personally favored "a sensible shift out of long into
short maturities," but added, "We don't control that.... That's
a Treasury decision."
And though the top dog at Treasury, the Secretary,
is
nominally responsible for debt policy, the key players are
deeper within the bureaucracy. The two most important slots
are the one occupied by
Powell,
Assistant Secretary
for
Domestic Finance, and a perch immediately below his, the
Deputy Assistant Secretary for Federal Finance.
These officials meet regulariy with the Treasury Borrow-
ing Advisory Committee, a group of senior officials at impor-
tant bond dealerships and investment houses who make
recommendations on debt-management strategy and tactics.
The atmosphere has tended to be clubby. In fact, the Deputy
Assistant Secretary for Federal Finance, Treasury's front-line
contact with Wall
Street,
traditionally has been a
political
appointee drawn from the bond-dealer community.

TREASURY ISSUES
11
But a change occurred recently following Salomon Broth-
ers
Inc.'s admission
last summer that
it had
repeatedly
cheated in Treasury's bond auctions. Faced with widespread
perceptions on Capitol Hill and elsewhere of incestuous links
between the dealers and Treasury, Powell filled the Federal-
finance slot with a career economist at the Fed, Deborah J.
Danker. The 38-year-old Danker has a high-powered aca-
demic background that includes a doctorate in intemational
economics from Yale University, but she has never traded a
bond on
Wall
Street or any-
where else. (Nor, for that mat-
ter, has Powell; he previously
worked as an investment
banker at Secretary Brady's old
firm, Dillon, Read & Co. Inc.)
Danker says her toughest
challenge in her new job prob-
ably will be establishing herself
as an effective liaison with the
dealer community. She's been
making the rounds on
Wall
Street to introduce
herself to
the Important
players
in
the
bond market.
A non-player at Treasury
when
it comes to the making of
debt-management policy is the
Bureau of the Public Debt.
The Bureau handles ad-
ministrative tasks,
including
conducting auctions of Treas-
ury
securities and accounting
for debt holdings in the mar1<et.
Bureau commissioner Flichard
L. Gregg, who joined Treasury
in
1 970, gets a bit testy when a
reporter tries to draw him out on
the policy question of whether
Treasury should shift to short-
term maturities.
THE SPIRALING PUBLIC DEBT
As Federal debt held by the public skyrocketed from $395
billion in 1 975 to $2.4 trillion in 1990, interest on that debt grew
from 7.5 percent
of Federal outlays
to
16.1
percent. From
1991 -95, the debt is expected to grow by
1 ,4 trillion.
The graph shows growth of the debt in trillions of constant
1987 dollars. By this inflation-adjusted measurement, the debt
is expected to grow lay 350 percent between 1975 and 1995.
response to a single question posed by a lawmaker in the
middle of a House Ways and Means hearing on middle-class
tax proposals, and all Brady said was that a change in strategy
was "something we're taking a look at." Nevertheless, the
comment was pounced on by financial wire service journalists
covering the hearing; split-second transmission to Wall Street
sent the prices of short-term securities down (on the guess
that Treasury would make more of them available) and long
bonds up (on the guess that they would become scarce). But
before the day was out, other
Treasury officials played down
Brady's remarks, and
long-
bond prices retreated.
1975
'80
'85
'90
'95
Source: Budget of the United States Government, Fiscal 1993
"No matter what
I thought
or said, the decision is with the
Undersecretary [for Finance] or Assistant Secretary for Do-
mestic Finance," Gregg says. "That's not my job."
Market Jitters
Gregg's reluctance to talk about policy is understandable.
Just as financial mari<ets can be rolled by seemingly benign
remari<s by the chairman of the Fed, comments made by
Treasury or other officials on debt-management matters can
send shivers through Wall Street.
Consider Brady's revelation that Treasury was consider-
ing a
shift away from borrowing
long bonds.
It came
In
It is just this sort of episode
that makes debt-management
professionals nervous.
At a
February press conference,
Powell said big shifts in the mix
of securities offered by Treas-
ury would
ultimately
cost the
Government
in
interest pay-
ments because, lacking a pre-
dictable
pattern
of
financing,
the
mart<et would charge an
"uncertainty premium" for hold-
ing bonds.
The
mari<et's
big
players
certainly
aren't asking
for
changes in the status quo. The
Brady trial balloon, if that's what
it was, triggered a 16-page re-
port by Goldman Sachs & Co.
entitled "The Misguided Move-
ment
to Abandon Treasury
Bond Sales."
Many of the report's argu-
ments made sense, such as the
observation that a few years of
taxpayer savings achieved by
curbing long-bond purchases
could ultimately be negated
if
the debt had to be refinanced at
higher interest rates later. Gold-
man also noted that the long bond was not, by any means,
the dominant security in Treasury's arsenal:
It currently com-
prises only about 1 1 percent of outstanding public debt, and
more than
half of Treasury's mari<etable debt comes due
within 2 years. Goldman Sachs did not mention that the
company is one of Wall Street's biggest dealers in the high
profit sales of long bonds.
Also weighing in against curtailment of long bonds was
the politically powerful Chicago Board of Trade, the worid's
largest commodity futures exchange. Just as traders buy
pork-belly futures to protect against swings
In pori< prices,

12
TREASURY ISSUES
holders of Treasury securities buy Treasury futures to hedge
against movements in bond prices. In fact, futures and options
contracts based on the long txsnd accounted for a whopping
three-fourths of the exchange's trading volume in
1 991
.
The price of a seat on the exchange plummeted in the
wake
of Brady's
remart<s, and Board
of Trade President
Thomas R. Donovan dashed off a letter to Brady protesting
that a curb on long bonds "would cripple" the exchange. He
wrote a similar letter to the board's long-time protector on
Capitol
Hill, Democrat Dan RostenkowskI
of Chicago, the
powerful chaimian of House Ways and Means.
Powell says Treasury has received inquiries about
its
review of the long bond from Capitol Hill but refuses to name
specific sources; he also says congressional pressure did not
Influence Treasury's decision.
Serving Constituents
Analysts disagree on the extent to which Treasury debt
managers should cater to the demands of the mari<et. Treas-
ury orthodoxy holds that, just as Detroit should make the kinds
of cars that consumers want to buy, debt managers should
sell the kinds of securities that the mari<et wants to purchase.
And nobody should
object
to dealers making money on
Treasury securities, this logic goes:
If the business weren't
profitable, then the Govemment would run Into trouble financ-
ing its debt.
But many economists say this sort of conservative ap-
proach underestimates the market's
ability
to adapt to
change. Even as Chicago's Donovan was writing to warn
Brady of the dangers of cutting back on long bonds, Richard
L. Sandor, the board of trade's former chief economist, was
telling
reporters
that a move toward
shorter maturities
wouldn't be a big deal. Hedgers and speculators would simply
shift their trading into futures based on two-year notes and
other short-term Treasury securities, Sandor said.
Other analysts say that Treasury's recent overtiaul of
auction procedures-spun-ed by the Salomon scandal-pro-
vides fresh opportunities for debt managers to operate in a
more freewheeling fashion. Under the old rules, only a small
circle of Govemment bond deaiers-so-calied primary deal-
ers~and commercial banks were allowed to submit bids on
behalf of customers.
Under the new rules, aimed at broadening participation
In auctions,
ail Govemment securities brokers and dealers
Powell was quick to say that Treasury
was not trying to signal any basic
change in debt-management strategy.
He said shortage-averting injections of
securities would be offered in only
"rare cases" and emphasized, "It is
not our intention to micro manage the
Treasury market-at all.
registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission are
allowed
to submit
bids
for customers. What's more,
the
Treasury is Installing a system that will allow firms to submit
bkls by computer.
"What you're doing
Is breaking down that clubby
little
relationship between Treasury and the primary dealer com-
munity," says a veteran Wall Street analyst, and "giving the
Treasury more flexibility than they might have had in the past
because they had to depend on the 30 or so primary dealers."
Economist Camiiii suggests that Treasury hire a special
group of whIz-kId traders to handle debt management-the
sorts of people who would wori< in Govemment for maybe a
year or two after graduate school and then go on to make big
bucks on Wall Street. Agencies, such as the Intemational
Monetary Fund, the Fed, and the Federal Home Loan Mort-
gage Corp. (Freddie Mac) hire many such people, she notes.
For example, Freddie Mac has a cadre of savvy debt-mari<et-
ing specialists who sell mortgage-backed securities to inves-
tors in New Yori<, Tokyo, and other global centers of finance.
Treasury's auction reforms also contained a policy that
some on Wall Street took as a hartaingerof a newly aggressive
stance toward the bond mart<ets: providing additional quanti-
ties of a security to the mari<et when an acute, protracted
shortage develops. The idea is to prevent any one firm from
cornering the mari<et on a new issue. But
in the interview,
Powell was quick to say that Treasury was not trying to signal
any basic change
in debt-management strategy. He said
shortage-averting injections of securities would be offered in
only "rare cases" and emphasized,
"It is not our Intention to
micro manage the Treasury mari<et~at all."

TREASURY ISSUES
13
Recent Reports and Studies
Economic Developments and Reforms in the Former Soviet Union
The GDP for the former Soviet Union fell by as much as
12 percent
in 1991, and the IMF estimated
inflation
of 140
percent for the same year,
according to David C.
Mutford,
Under Secretary of the Treasury for International Affairs. The
Under Secretary spoke to the House Committee on Banking,
Finance, and Urban Affairs, and the Subcommittee on Interna-
tional Development, Finance, Trade, and Monetary Policy on
February 5, 1992, regarding economic reform measures in the
former Soviet Union.
According to the Under Secretary, the budget deficit in-
creased to more than 22 percent
of GDP. However, a trade
surplus was the result of declines in both imports and exports.
In January of this year, the Russian government introduced a
28 percent value added tax, a 32 percent profits tax, and a 37
percent wage tax. Overall consumer prices have roughly dou-
bled since January.
The Russian Federation is working in cooperation with the
IMF to pursue economic reform. Plans include changes in fiscal
and monetary policies, the foreign exchange system,
price
liberalization, and privatization. Russia has cut both domestic
and military spending substantially. Several other former re-
publics are also working with the IMF and other international
institutions. Secretary of State James Brady announced U.S.
support for early consideration of IMF and World Bank mem-
bership for new states establishing diplomatic relations with the
United States.
The exchange
rate
for commercial transactions
is 110
rubles to the dollar. Russian authorities expect the value of the
ruble to strengthen as confidence
in the reform program
in-
creases.
However, a proposal
by the
Central Bank
for a
foreign investment" rate of 8-1
rubles to the dollar could have
a substantial negative impact on foreign investment.
The Western response
to the reforms taking place
in-
cludes debt
deferral by
leading
creditor countries,
humanitarian and food aid, technical assistance, and nuclear
risk reduction.
Contrasting the current
situation
with the
rebuilding
of
Europe following World War
II, the Under Secretary said "the
process in the new states requires creation of institutions and
systems for a market-based economy, which has not existed
in these countries during much of the present century."
Changing Economic and Financial Relationships Between the United States and Pacific Region
The nature of relationships Between the United States and
Taiwan and Korea has changed as Asian economies have
grown and prospered, according to Treasury's Deputy Assis-
tant
Secretary
for
Developing
Nations, who spoke
to the
Bankers' Association for Foreign Trade on January 23.
The first objective in consultations with Korea and Taiwan
is to improve treatment of U.S. financial firms, ensuring them
equality of competitive opportunity with domestic counterparts.
The United States
is also seeking broader
liberalization
of
financial markets to include interest deregulation, elimination
of capital controls, and changes to exchange rate policies.
In both Korea and Taiwan, policies exist that discriminate
against foreign institutions. Taiwan strictly limits foreign banks'
access to domestic funding resources and
restricts foreign
exchange activities. Korea offers a "closed, protected, unfair,
and discriminatory environment for foreign
institutions," and
strictly controls and directs foreign exchange activities. Banks
must adhere to a long list of prohibited activities. A regulatory
system is used in Korea with minimal written implementation.
The Deputy Assistant Secretary concluded that the newly
industrializing economies must "take up the challenge of liber-
alization and opening
markets"
if more
equitable
financial
markets are to be established.
Deputy Secretary Robson Addresses the Mortgage Bankers Association
Deputy Secretary
of the Treasury John
E. Robson de-
scribed the economy as
"unsatisfactorily
sluggish" due
to
forces
in the business cycle" while addressing the Mortgage
Bankers' Association. The Deputy Secretary spoke February
3, 1992, to discuss the Administration's proposals for bank
reforms aimed in part at strengthening the real estate industry.
He
referred to the
President's economic growth
plan
that
includes passive loss relief, using pension funds for real estate
investment, extending tax credits to stimulate construction and
refurbish low income rental housing, and cutting the capital
gains tax.
The plan also incorporates a $5,000 credit and penalty
free withdrawal from Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) for
first time buyers, and other tax incentives. The plan is intended
to result in increased real estate values and a stronger market.
Concerning the present "credit crunch," the Deputy Sec-
retary said that too
little credit has been available to fuel the
real estate
industry, and called on banks
to "come
out
of
hibernation and start lending."
"Banking," he said, "is not risk free and not intended to be
so. And bankers should be stepping forward nowto make loans
to sound borrowers." Credit crunch guidelines were created by

14
TREASURY ISSUES
the four bank regulatory agencies to ensure "balance and good
judgment" in bank and thrift examinations. They instruct exam-
iners to view real estate values in the long term.
'We cannot have examiners hanging a scarlet letter on
real estate," Deputy Secretary Robson said. The Administra-
tion supports changes in regulatory law, including flexibility for
the Office of Thrift Supervision (OTS) in granting extensions to
thrifts that must set aside capital against real estate invest-
ments, as well as a reduction in the amount of capital that must
be set aside.
Deputy Secretary Robson blamed the weak banking sys-
tem on antiquated laws that prevent financial health and reduce
international competitiveness. In his argument for fundamental
bank reform, he said that rather than adopting the Administra-
tion's bank reforms Congress has passed flawed legislation
that imposes more
regulation,
higher
costs, and
offers no
opportunity for the banks to strengthen themselves financially."
The Administration's Views on Thrift Institutions' Deductions ofReimbursed Losses
Under capital loss protection provisions, the Federal Sav-
ings and Loan
Insurance
Corporation
(FSLIC) agreed
to
protect resolved institutions against losses realized on the sale
of or write down on designated assets. Institutions were gen-
erally reimbursed for the difference between the book value of
an asset and the selling price or the write down value.
Under guaranteed yield maintenance,
institutions were
guaranteed a minimum
yield or
return on covered assets.
Assistance agreements made in
1 988 and
1 989 obligated the
FSLIC to make ongoing assistance payments to 91 remaining
institutions resolved
in 1988 and 1989 transactions. Those
institutions take the position that the Government assistance
is deductible for income tax purposes.
February 11,1 992, Terrill A. Hyde, Deputy Tax Legislative
Counsel for Regulatory Affairs, presented to the House Com-
mittee on Ways and Means the Administration's views on the
extent to which thrift institutions should be permitted to deduct
losses
reimbursed
with
tax free Government
assistance.
Treasury's
Report on Tax Issues Relating
to the
1988/89
Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation Assisted
Transactions concludes that reimbursed losses should not be
deductible and that the issue
is governed by principles of tax
law precluding deduction of compensation by insurance.
The report recommends legislation to clarify deductibility
to avoid the delay and cost of
litigation on this issue by the
Internal Revenue Service (I RS). The report determines that the
potential cost to the taxpayer of continuing the incentives to
hold covered assets and to minimize the value of assets when
sold would outweigh the cost of "creating the perception that
the Government is not adhering to its bargain."
Report to Congress on the Requestfor Additional Fundingfor the Resolution Trust Corporation
The Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) Oversight Board
requested additional funds to cover losses as well as working
capital to finance RTC's acquisition of failed thrifts. September
12, 1991, Deputy Secretary of the Treasury John E. Robson
spoke to the House Subcommittee on
Financial
Institutions
Supervision, Regulation and Insurance, in support of additional
funding for RTC, RTC asset disposition, and RTC restructur-
ing. (The bill has since been passed to the full committee.)
The Board estimated that another $80 billion in loss funds
would be needed, doubling the amount already authorized.
It
also requested that RTC's borrowing limit be raised from $125
billion to $160 billion. Also, RTC is requesting an extension of
Office of Thrift Supervision transfer authority until September
30,
1993,
citing a larger than expected case
load. Deputy
Secretary Robson said RTC
is "making progress" in meeting
clean-up
goals, and
that mandated improvements
in RTC
management include a uniform Conservatorship Operations
Manual, a soon-to-be-operational computerized
securities
portfolio management system, an assets tracking system, and
standardized contracting policies and procedures.
As of June 30, 1991
, RTC had sold 51 percent of seized
assets, netting $168.2 billion. Also, 73 percent of RTC's book
value of securities has been sold with only a 3 percent loss.
Through August
of
1991, RTC has sold $2.5
billion
of
its
mortgage-backed securities and is considering securing com-
mercial loans.
The RTC has
introduced a
portfolio sales program to
increase asset sales due to growing inventories of hard-to-sell
assets and
is promoting the sale of single- and multi-family
homes. As of June 30, 1991, 22 percent
of
its single-family
homes; 10 percent of the multi-family homes had been sold.
Report to Congress on Tax Simplification, Employee Benefits; Proposals Concerning Tax Deposits,
Earned Income Tax Credit, and Pension Coverage and Portability
The Tax Simplification Act of 1991
(S. 1394) is estimated
by the Office of Tax Analysis to be "nearly revenue neutral, with
a loss of $89 million
in fiscal 1992 and $47 million over the
5-year budget period," according to Kenneth W. Gideon, As-
sistant Secretary
of the Treasury
for Tax
Policy, who
addressed the Senate Subcommittee on Taxation and the
Committee on Finance on tax simplification proposals pending
(S. 1394 and S. 1364) and related proposals September 10,
1991. The Employee Benefits
Simplification and Expansion
Act of 1991
(8. 1364), according to the Administration, would
lose approximately $16 billion in its current form.

TREASURY ISSUES
15
Although the Administration believes that simplification of
benefit provisions "can be achieved within the parameters of
the budget agreement,"
it opposes legislation that loses reve-
nue. Proposed simplification
of the employment tax deposit
system (H.R. 2775) would require semi-weekly deposits
in-
stead
of the eight monthly deposits required by the current
system. Also proposed are repeals of "interaction rules" pre-
venting taxpayers from receiving full benefit of health insurance
credit, the young child credit, and other provisions, and the
simplification
of tax laws to expand pension coverage and
enhance pension portability. The proposals also include sim-
plifying and encouraging tax free
roll-overs,
establishing a
simplified employee pension program, simplifying the admini-
stration of 401 (k) and other plans, extending 401 (k) plans to
Government employees and employees of tax-exempt organi-
zations, and adopting a uniform vesting standard.
The Administration's Views on a Proposal To Allow U.S. -Controlled Foreign Corporations To Elect
To Be Taxed as Domestic Corporations
The Administration opposes H.R. 2889, which would elimi-
nate deferral on income from property imported into the United
States, including profits, commissions, and fees, according to
Philip D. Morrison, International Tax Counsel, Department of
the Treasury. He presented to the House Committee on Ways
and Means the Administration's views on H.R. 2889 and on the
proposed taxing
of
U.S.-controlled foreign corporations on
October 3,
1 991
.
The Administration's opposition stems from the difficulty
in enforcement, the fact that the proposal differs significantly
from the traditional focus, and the lack of impact, due in part to
excess foreign tax credits.
Under the bill, the IRS would be required to trace indirect
sales, as well as determine whether a U.S.-controlled corpo-
ration should have
'.
.
. expected at the time of the initial sale
that the property would ultimately be imported into the United
States." Adding to the complexity of these tasks is the fact that
the
bill also applies to components incorporated
into other
products, which are subsequently imported. Further complicat-
ing enforcement would be the importation of components used
in U.S. manufacturing of products to be exported.
Another concern
is that the
bill would increase taxes for
U.S.-controlled agricultural or mineral companies that, due to
geographical
limitations, must operate abroad. The Admini-
stration also expresses reservations concerning the impact of
the
bill
for companies who import from both
high-tax and
low-tax countries.
The Administration also opposes U.S. shareholders being
allowed to treat U.S.-controlled foreign corporations as U.S.
corporations.
It is the Administration's view that, without safe-
guards,
a
reduction
in
tax
liabilities would
result
in
approximately $1.5 billion
in revenue losses over the 5-year
budget window.
Copies of the preceding statements are available througti the U.S. Department of the Treasury,
1 500 Pennsylvania Ave., NW., Office of Public Affairs,
Room 2315, Washington, D.C. 20220, phone (202) 566-2041.
Integration of the Corporate and Individual Tax Systems
The current tax system taxes corporate profits distributed
to shareholders at least twice-once at the corporate level and
once at the shareholder level. On January 6, 1992, Treasury
released the Report of the Department of the Treasury on
Integration of the Individual and Corporate Tax Systems: Tax-
ing Business Income
Once, which documents
distortions
created by the double tax and describes several integration
prototypes for taxing corporate income once.
The Report does not contain any legislative recommenda-
tions,
but
rather
is intended to stimulate discussion
of the
prototypes and encourage serious consideration of proposals
for integrating the individual and corporate tax systems in the
United States. The report
is available from the Government
Printing Office, GPO Stock Number 048-000-00430-0, at a cost
of $14.00.
Tax Treatment ofDeferred Compensation Under Section 457
Section 457
of
the
Internal Revenue Code
limits the
amount of deferred compensation provided to employees of
tax-exempt
organizations and
State
or
local governments,
according to the Report to the Congress on the Tax Treatment
of Deferred Compensation Under Section 457, released on
January 7, 1992.
The
report summarizes the
legislative
history and the
underlying policies
of section 457, regarding tax-exempt or-
ganizations and concludes that statutory limits are appropriate
because, unlike taxable employers, employers that are exempt
from income taxation have no tax incentive to
limit deferred
compensation. Moreover, section 457 serves as an incentive
for tax-exempt employers to provide greater benefits through
tax-qualified plans.
The report recommends section 401
(k) cash or deferred
arrangements be extended to nongovernmental, tax-exempt
employers, as current law does not allow certain tax-exempt
employers to offer salary reduction plans to their employees.

16
TREASURY ISSUES
Allocation ofExcess Pension Plan Assets in the Case ofBridge Banks
In response to the requirements of Section 6067(b) of the
Technical and Miscellaneous Revenue Act of 1988, Treasury
released its "Study on the Allocation of Excess Pension Plan
Assets
in the Case
of Bridge Banks' January
7, 1992. The
study examines conflicting goals of pension policy and bank
insurance policy in an over-funded defined benefit pension plan
sponsored by a bank holding company for the joint benefit of
the employees
of the bank holding company and a failing
subsidiary bank. According to the study, the current provision
in the Internal Revenue Code should be amended to require
an equitable allocation of the full amount of excess pension
assets whenever a bridge bank receives assets and liabilities
of an insured bank closed by regulations.
Report to the Congress on the Tax Treatment ofBad Debts by Financial Institutions
Recently proposed regulations generally allow banks and
thrifts to conform their tax and regulatory accounting for the
charge-off of bad debts, according to Treasury's 'Report to the
Congress on the Tax Treatment
of Bad Debts by Financial
Institutions," released on September 16, 1991.
The report studies the criteria to be used in determining
whether a debt
is worthless for Federal tax purposes and
specifically considers circumstances under which a conclusive
or rebuttable presumption of worthlessness is appropriate.
The report concludes that conformity of tax and regulatory
treatment should not apply to accrued but unpaid interest on
loans that are placed
in nonaccrual status for regulatory pur-
poses.
The report further states that extension of the conformity
rules to unregulated lenders would be a significant departure
from settled policy and practice that should be left to Congress
to consider.
Coplas of these reports may l>e purchased from the National Technical Information Service, S28S Port Royal Road, Springfield, VA 221 61
; phone (703)
487-4660.
Revenue Impact ofProposed Capital Gains Tax Reductions
In recent years,
a considerable amount
of debate has
centered on the likely effect of a decrease in the capital gains
tax. While analysis of the issue has been split between two
approaches-estimating aggregate responsiveness of capital
gains realizations, as well as focusing on individual taxpayer
responsiveness-neither has provided conclusive evidence to
decide the issue.
Research Paper No. 9003, 'The effect of Marginal Tax
Rates on Capital Gains Revenue: Another Look at the Evi-
dence," by Robert Gillingham and John S. Greenlees (Office
of Economic Policy, Department of the Treasury), focuses on
aspects of the debate. The authors define the responsiveness
of revenue to tax rates at the individual and aggregate levels.
Citing an analysis by the Congressional Budget Office they
present an econometric data analysis procedure.
The study also includes time-series evidence incorporat-
ing revisions in the National Accounts and Flow of Funds data
to demonstrate the effect of the Tax Reform Act of
1 986 on the
estimated relationship.
The aim of the paper is to give a better understanding of
the relationship among capital gains tax realizations, revenues,
and tax rates. And although analyses do not give conclusive
evidence on the
effect
of proposed tax
rate changes, the
authors conclude that the evidence does not suggest that a tax
reduction would decrease tax revenues.
A related study concludes that a capital gains tax reduction
would increase the number and amounts of such gains de-
clared by taxpayers. And
it would do so in sufficient amounts
to increase tax revenues.
Research Paper No.
9004, 'An
Econometric Model of Capital Gains Realization Behavior,' by
Robert Gillingham, John S. Greenlees, and Kimberly D.
Zi-
eschang (Office of Prices, Bureau of Labor Statistics), explores
the revenue impact
of proposed reductions
in capital gains
taxation, as well as the expected response of taxpayers.
The marginal tax rate on long-term gains has a negative
impact on both the proportion
of taxpayers realizing capital
gains and on the value of those gains declared, according to
the study. The researchers further stated that there was no
evidence that income switching as a result of the reductions
would offset expected tax revenue increases. The study
in-
cludes taxpayer data covering three
historical
tax
policy
regimes that varied widely in their treatment of capital gains.
The authors supported their predictions by citing a 1988
study finding,
in the past, the majority of capital gains were
never realized for tax purposes. That 1988 study found only
3.1 percent of the stock of accrued gains realized each year
between 1960-84. This large flow of unrealized gains, accord-
ing to the authors, supports their conclusion that a reduction in
the
capital gains tax would
yield a permanent increase
in
government revenues.
(For related studies on the capital gains tax issue, see
Research Paper Nos. 8801 and 9002.)

TREASURY ISSUES
17
Report on Social Security and the Public Debt
For the next 25 years, the
social security program
is
expected to have average surpluses of
.6 percent of Gross
National Product (GNP),
according to James
E. Duggan's
Research Paper No. 9102.
After that, the senior economist
says, deficits will reach
1 .7 percent of GNP (4 percent after the
addition of health care). These deficits could result
in large,
unstable debt ratios and may affect future U.S. debt policy. The
study stresses the
public debt
implications of the long-run
financial status of the program and presents three alternatives,
or combinations thereof, for financing Social Security obliga-
tions. James
E. Duggan
is
a
senior economist.
Office
of
Economic Policy, U.S. Department of the Treasury.
CoplM of th«M rasearch papers may be obtained by wrRIng to Shirley Bryant, U.S. Department of the Treasury, 1 5th & Pennsylvania Avenue, NW.,
Room 4422, Washington, D.C. 20220; phone (202) 866-6600

18
TREASURY ISSUES
RESEARCH PAPER SERIES
Available Through the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy
8701
.
"The Empirical Reliability of Monetary Aggregates as Indicators: 1983-1987." Michael R. Darby, Angelo R. Mascaro,
and Michael L. Marlow.
8702. "The Impact of Government Deficits on Personal and National Saving Rates." Michael R. Darby, Robert Gllllngham,
and John S. Greenlees.
8703. "The Ins and Outs of Unemployment: The Ins Win." Michael R. Darby, John C. Haltiwanger, and Mark W. Plant.
8704. "Accounting for the Deficit: An Analysis of Sources of Change in the Federal and Total Government Deficits."
Michael R. Darby.
8801
. "The Direct Revenue Effects of Capital Gains Taxation: A Reconsideration of the Time Series Evidence." Michael
R. Darby, Robert Gllllngham, and John S. Greenlees.
9001. "Some Economic Aspects of the U.S. Health Care System." James E. Duggan.
8002. "Historical Trends In the U.S. Cost of Capital." Robert Gllllngham and John S. Greenlees.
9003. "The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Capital Gains Revenue: Another Look at the Evidence." Robert Giiiingham
and John S. Greenlees.
9004. "An Econometric Model of Capital Gains Realization Behavior." Robert Gllllngham, John S. Greenlees, and
Kimberiy D. Zieschang.
9101. "The Impact of Government Deficits on Personal and National Saving Rates" (Revised). Michael R. Darby, Robert
Giiiingham, and John S. Greenlees.
9102. "Social Security and the Public Debt." James E. Duggan.
Copies of thasa research papers may be obtained by writing to Shirley Bryant, U.S. Department of the Treasury, 15th & Pennsylvania Avenue, NW.,
Room 4422, Washington, D.C. 20220; phone (202) 566-6600

TREASURY ISSUES
19
Index
Previous Treasury Issues articles are listed below by subject, title, issue, and page.
DOMESTIC FINANCE
'Findings of the Joint Report on the Government Securities Market Revealed by Assistant Secretary for Domestic
Finance." Powell, Jerome H. March 1992, pp. 18-19.
Findings of the review of the Government Securities Market unclertal<en by Treasury, the Federal Reserve, and the
Securities Exchange Commission, after the admission of wrongdoing by Salomon Brothers.
'Assistant Secretary for Domestic Finance Jerome H. Powell Talks About the latest Developments In the Government
Securities Market;* "Recent Changes to Treasury Auctions and Rules;" and "Auction Violations Lead to Closer Scrutiny
of the Government Securities Market." Powell, Jerome H. December, 1991, pp. 3-13.
Exclusive interview in which the Assistant Secretary for Domestic Finance expands on the Salomon Brothers' auction
violations and their effects; recent auction changes; a summary of Powell's September statement to Congress.
ECONOMIC POLICY
"Secretary of the Treasury Discusses the President's Economic Proposals, The." Brady, Nicholas F. March 1992, pp.
12-17
A summary of Secretary Brady's address to the House Committee on Ways and Means concerning the economic
proposals announced by President Bush in his State of the Union address and detailed in the President's budget for fiscal 1993.
"Moderate Growth Projected for U.S. Economy." Jones, Sidney L. September 1991, pp. 3-4.
An article by the Assistant Secretary of the Treasury for Economic Policy on projected economic growth and recovery
from the ninth postwar recession.
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS
"New OECD Tied Aid Agreement Expected to Benefit U.S. Exporters Says Deputy Assistant Secretary For Trade and
Investment Policy William E. Barreda." Barreda, William E. March 1992, pp. 3.
Interview summarizing the
tied aid rules recently agreed to by the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and
Development designed to reduce trade distortions.
"Foreign Participation In U.S. Futures Markets Grows." Cayton, Michael. March 1992, pp. 7-11
This first of a kind Treasury report on the scope of foreign participation in the U.S. futures market previews some of the
information included in the upcoming release of the Foreign Investment Portfolio Survey.
"Director of the Office for Trade Finance William L. McCamey Explains New OECD Agreement to Congress." McCamey,
William L. March 1992, pp.4-6.
Summary of statement to Congress by the Director of the Office of Trade Finance detailing the tied aid agreement.


^
FINANCIAL
OPERATIONS


23
Profile of the Economy
Quarterly Annual Rate
91, IV
92,1
Percent Change--4tti qtr. to 4th qtr
CHART POE-A.--
Growth of Real Gross Domestic Product
Real GDP grew at a 2 percent annual rate in the first quarter of
1992, the strongest showing
in 3 years and up from
.4 percent
in the
fourth quarter of 1991. Real final sales jumped at a 4.8 percent rale
reflecting a 5.3 percent rise
in consumer spending and a 15.8 percent
increase
in homebuilding. Many of the final purchases were made
from existing inventories rather than increased domestic production,
which resulted in large inventory drawdowns.
Inflation rose to a 3.1
percent annual rate in the first quarter of 1992.
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
-1
-2
-3
n
u
x
T
T
T
r
X
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
89
90
91
CHART POE-B.--
Federal Outlays and Receipts As a Percent of Gross Domestic Product
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
rx
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
I
1950
1955
1960
1980
1985
1990
1995
1965
1970
1975
FISCAL YEARS*
The new budget projects fiscal year 1992 outlays at 25.2 percent of GDP-a post-war
high. Excluding deposit insurance outlays, outlays
still are expected to climb to a near-record 23.9 percent.
That figure
is projected to fall to 21 .6 percent by fiscal 1997, mostly because of
defense cutbacks
Also, the receipts share of GDP
is expected to
fall to 18.4 percent this year, before leveling off at 19 percent through fiscal
1997. The projected gap between receipts and outlays in fiscal 1997 represents a structural deficit of about 2-3/4 percent of GDP
* Daia lor
1 992 through
1 997 are based on projections from the liscaJ
1 993 budget, figured on a cash basis of accounting.

24
PROFILE OF THE ECONOMY
CHART POE-C.--Personal Saving
Household Saving as a Percent of After-Tax Income Througfi Marcfi 1992
1950
1955
1960
1965
1970
1975
1980
1985
1990
1995
The personal saving rate
tell to 4 7 percent
in the
first quarter of 1992, from 5.2 percent in 1991
The decline
in saving reflected a sharp
increase
in spending, which outpaced a moderate increase
in disposable incomes. The saving rate drpped
to 4.3 percent
in January and
in
edged up only slightly ito 4.5 percent
in Feburary. During f^arch, spending slowed significantly (and was down in real terms) and much of that
money was tunneled into savings. The f^arch saving rate improved significantly to 5.3 percent. Although the current rate is well above the 1987
low of 4.3 percent,
it is far lower than the historical high of 9.0 percent and well below the long-term average of 6 9 percent.
Noie: The rate for 1992
is based on lifsi quaner ligures.
CHART POE-D."
Federal Deficit
The Federal budget was in
deficit by $49.4 billion in Inarch,
compared with $41.2 billion a
year earlier.
For the first 6
months of fiscal 1992, the deficit
totaled $196.9 billion while the
deficit for the same period last
year was $152.2 billion.
After
adjustments for this year's drop
in Resolution Trust Corporation
and other deposit insurance
outlays as well as Desert Storm
contributions, the 1992 deficit
widened by $33 billion.
Forecasters now expect the total
deficit for 1992 to come in well
below the Administration's $400
billion estimate, mainly due to
lower deposit insurance
spending than originally
anticipated and the possibility of
shortfalls elsewhere.
Sum Over the Latest 12 Months
(In billions of dollars)
350
300
-
250
-
200
-
150
-
100
-
liiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiii
82
83
84
85
86
87
88
CALENDAR YEAR

25
PROFILE OF THE ECONOMY
Real Disposable Personal Income
Percent Change--4th qtr. to 4th qtr.
CHARTS POE-E.-
Real consumer spending was up by a strong
5.3 percent annual rate in the first quarter of
1992, after very
little growth over the past 2
years. Most of that spending took place in
January and February; purchases dipped
in
March. Meanwhile, first-quarter growth of after-
tax income grew at a smaller, yet sizable,
annual rate of 3 percent with private sector
wage and salary payments up strongly in
February and March.
Real Personal Spending
Percent Ctiange-4tti qtr. to 4tti qtr.
T
1
1
1
1
1
1
r
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991 1992*
6
5
-
4
-
3
-
2
-
1
-
-1
-2
-3
-
-4
-
-5
-
-6
n
n
n
—
\
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992*
First quarter at an annual rata.

26
PROFILE OF THE ECONOMY
CHART POE-F.--Merchandise Trade Deficit
The trade deficit narrowed sharply to $3.4 billion in February from a slightly revised $5.9 billion now posted for January
The February figure is the smallest since March 1983. The February drop was supported by a significant increase in exports-
6.8 percent-- as well as a drop in imports of 0.4 percent,
attributed to a reduced volume of oil imports combined with lower oil
prices.
Translated to an annual rate, the trade deficit for the first 2 months of 1992 was $56 billion, which compares with a
1991 annual rate of $66 billion. Figures for the first 2 months of this year imply that the trade component made a positive
contribution to the real Gross Domestic Product in the first quarter of this year.
(In billions of dollars)
175
-r
83
84
91
WM
YEARLY
n billions of dollars)
MONTHLY
1/91
2/91
3/91
4/91
5/91
6/91
7/91
8/91
9/91
10/9111/9112/91
1/92
2/92

27
INTRODUCTION: Federal Fiscal Operations
Budget authority usually takes the form of appropriations that
allow obligations to be incurrBd and payments to be made. Reappro-
priaticns
are
Congressional
actions
tnat extend
the
availability of
unobligated amounts that have expired or would otherwise
e)x>ire.
These are counted as new budget authority In the fiscal year or the
legislation in which the reappropriation act is included, regardless of
when the amounts were originally appropriated or when mey would
otherwise lapse.
Obligations generally are liquidated by the issuance of checks or
the disbursement of cash-outfays. Obligations may also be liquidated
(and outlays recorded) by the accrual of interest on public issues of
Treasury debt securities (including an increase in redemption value of
bonds outstanding); or by the issuance of bonds, debentures, notes,
monetary credits, or electronic payments.
Refunds of collections generally are treated as reductions of
collections, whereas payments for eamed-income tax credits in excess
of tax liabilities are treated as outlays. Outlays during a fiscal year may
be for payment of obligations incurred in prior years or in die same
year. CXJtIays, therefore, flow in part from unexpended balances of prior
year budqet authority and from budget authority provided for the year
in which the money
is spent. Total outlays include both Ixidget and
off-budget outlays and are stated net of offsetting collections.
Receipts are reported in the tables as either budget receipts or
offsetting collections. They are collections fnom the public, excluding
receipts offset against outlays. These, also called governmental
re-
ceipts, consist mainly of tax receipts (including social insurance taxes),
receipts from court fines, certain licenses, and deposits of earnings by
the
Federal Reserve system.
Refunds
of
receipts are
treated as
deductions from gross receipts.
Offsetting collections from other Government accounts or the
public are of a business-type or mari<et-oriented
nature. They are
classified as either collections credited to appropriations or fund ac-
counts,
or
offsetting
receipts
(i.e., amounts oeposited
in
receipt
accounts). The former normally can be used without appropriation act
by Congress. These occur in two instances: (1) when authorized by
law, amounts collected for materials or services are treated as reim-
bursements to appropriations, and (2) in the three types of revolving
funds (public enterprise, intragovemmental, and trust); collections are
netted against spending, and outlays are reported as the net amount.
Offsettingreceipts in receipt accounts cannot be used without
appropriation.They are subdivided into two categories: (1) proprietary
receipts, or collections from the public, offset against outlays by agency
and by function, and (2) intra-govemmental funds, or payments into
receipt accounts from governmental appropriation or fund accounts.
They finance operations within and between Govemment agencies
and are credited with collections from other Govemment accounts.
Intrabudgetaiy transactions are subdivided into three categories:
(1) interfund transactions-payments are from one fund group (either
Federal finds or trust funds) to a receipt account in the otner fund
group; (2) Federal intrafund transactions-payments and receipts both
occur wifliin the Federal fund group; ana (3) trust intrafund transac-
tions-payments and receipts both occur within tfie trust fund group.
Offsetting receipts are generally deducted from budget authority
and outlays by functon, subfunction, or agency. There are four types
of receipts, however, that are deducted from budget totals as undis-
tributed
offsetting
receipts. They
are:
(1) agencies' payments
(including payments by off-budget Federal entities) as employers into
employees' retirement funds; (2) interest received by trust funds; (3)
rents and royalties on the Outer Continental Shelf lands; and (4) other
interest (i.e.
, ttiat collected on Outer Continental Shelf money in deposit
funds when such money is transfen-ed into the budget).
The Govemment has used
the
unified budget concept as a
foundation for its budgetary analysis and presentation since 1 969. The
concept calls for the Dudget to include
all of the Government's fiscal
transactions with the public. Since 1971
, however, various laws have
been enacted removing several Federal entities from (or creating them
outside
of) the budget. Other laws have moved certain
off-budget
Federal entities onto the budget. Under current law, the off-budget
Federal entities consist of the two Social Security trust funds. Federal
old-age and survivors insurance, and Federal disability insurance.
Although an off-budget Federal
entity's
receipts,
outlays, and
surplus
or
deficit
ordinarily are
not subject
to
targets
set by
the
congressional resolution, the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit
Control Act
of 1985 (commonly known as
the Gramm-Rudman-
Hollings Act) included off-budget surplus or deficit in calculating deficit
targets under that act and in calculating excess deficit. Partly for this
reason, attention has focused on both on- and off-budget receipts,
outlays, and deficit of the Govemment.
Tables FFO-1, FFO-2, and FFO-3 are published quarteriy and
cover 5 years of data, estimates for 2 years, detail for 1 3 months, and
fiscal year-to-date data. They provide a summary of data relating to
Federal fiscal operations reported by Federal entities and disbursing
officers, and daily reports from the Federal Reserve banks. They also
detail accoun'ing transactions affecting receipts and outlays of the
Govemment and off-budget Federal entities and their relatedeffect on
assets and
liabilities of tne Govemment. Data are derived from the
Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the United
States Govemment.
• Table FFO-1 summarizes the amount of total receipts, outlays,
and surplus or deficit, as well as transactions in Federal securities,
monetary assets, and balances in Treasury operating cash.
•
Table FFO-2 includes on- and off-budget receipts by source.
Amounts represent income taxes, social insurance taxes, net contribu-
tions for other insurance and retirement, excise taxes, estate and gift
taxes, customs duties, and net miscellaneous receipts.
• Table FFO-3 details on- and off-budget outlays by agency.
•
Table FFO-4 (Fall issue) summarizes intemal revenue collec-
tions by States and other areas and by type of tax. Amounts reported
are collections made
in a fiscal year. Tney span several tax liability
years because they consist of prepayments
(i.e., estimated tax pay-
ments and taxes
vifithheld by employers
for individual income and
Social
Siecurity taxes),
of payments made with tax retums, and of
subsequent payments made after tax retums are due or are filed (i.e.,
payments with delinquent retums or on delinquent accounts).
It is important to note that these data do not necessarily reflect
the Federal tax burden of individual
States. Amounts are reported
based on the primary
filing address provided by each taxpayer or
reporting entity. For multistate corporations, the address may reflect
only the Slate where such a corporation reported
its taxes from a
principal office rather than other States where income was eamed or
where individual income and Social Security taxes were withheld.
In
addition, an individual may reside in one State and wori< in another.

28
FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
Budget Results for the Second Quarter, Fiscal 1992
Summary
The
budget
deficit was
$113.8
billion
in
the
second
quarter of fiscal 1992, or roughly $48
billion wider than the
$65.7
billion
in the corresponding quarter a year
earlier. A
better measure
of underlying trends
in the
deficit might be
obtained
by
excluding
some
of
the
special
factors
that
affected the
figures. Among these,
foreign
contributions to
Desert Storm dwindled to $0.5
billion
in the second quarter
of fiscal 1992 from $22.6
billion a year
earlier. (The
deficit
was not reduced
in the second quarter of fiscal 1991 by the
full
$22.6
billion,
because
actual
Defense
outlays
were
boosted by the effort. However, the major portion of the cash
outlays associated with Desert Storm were spread out over a
much longer period of time.) An additional special factor was
a 1992 increase
in deposit insurance outlays (by the RTC,
FDIC,
etc.)
of
$8.2
billion
from
last
year's
fiscal second
quarter.
Excluding these
factors,
the
deficit was wider by
about $18 billion than
in the second quarter of fiscal 1991.
For the
first
6
months
of
fiscal
1992,
the
deficit was
$196.9 billion, or $44.7 billion more than the $152.2 billion
in
the corresponding months of 1991. That difference narrows
to about $33 billion after adjustments for the above factors.
Receipts increased by 2.5 percent
in the second quarter
from a year earlier and by a similar 2.4 percent for the entire
first 6 months of the current fiscal year.
Fiscal year-to-date
withheld income and employment taxes rose by 4.3 percent,
or
about
1
percentage
point
faster
than
growth
of
the
underlying wage and salary tax base. Nonwithheld individual
payments on both income and employment tax
liability were
up by only
1.1
percent. (The largest portion of such receipts
typically
is received
in the third fiscal quarter.) Individual tax
refunds rose by a sharp
16.3
percent,
reflecting the more
expeditious
handling
of
returns.
Corporate
income
tax
payments fell by 7.5 percent, including a 5.5 percent decline
in
the
March
payment
when
corporations
made
final
settlements
on
liability
for
the
previous
fiscal
year.
An
improvement
in
profits that appeared
to emerge during the
second fiscal quarter will not show up in payments until later.
Total budget outlays
increased
from
a year
earlier by
18.1 percent
in the second fiscal quarter and by 8.8 percent
for
the
first
half
of
fiscal
1992.
While
deposit
insurance
outlays were up significantly
in the March
quarter, year-to-
date they were down by nearly $1 1
billion to a total of only
$5.5
billion, with more than
all of the decline accounted for
by
the
RTC.
In
the
January
budget,
deposit
insurance
outlays were projected at $80 billion for the entire fiscal year.
The slow rate of spending
in the
first half may indicate that
outlays for all of fiscal
1 992 will fall short of projections.
Excluding
deposit
insurance
and
Desert
Storm/Shield
contributions, outlays during the first half of fiscal 1992 were
6.8 percent ahead
of a year
earlier. The
largest increases
have been for such social spending categories as Medicare
(up 17.2 percent), other health (up 30.8 percent including an
increase of 36.5 percent for Medicaid), and income security
(up 15.6 percent, including a rise of 48 percent for unemploy-
ment insurance
benefits).
Net
interest outlays rose by
3.9
percent, as a decline
in the effective interest rate partly offset
an
increase
of
nearly
9
percent
in
average
public
debt
outstanding. Defense spending
fell by 4 percent
(excluding
Desert Storm contributions).
A somewhat different perspective on budget trends may
be obtained from 12-month cumulative totals of the deficit, as
shown
in Profile of the Economy Chart D (see page 24) For
the
12 months through
March, the
total
deficit was $314
billion, and excluding deposit insurance outlays,
it was $267
billion. The latter represented a widening of more than $100
billion from the corresponding figure for March 1991.
Tolaf on-budget and off-budget resuHs:
Tolal receipts
On-budget receipts
Off-budget receipts
Total outlays
On-budget outlays
Off-budget outlays
Total surplus (+) or deficit
(-)
On-budget surplus (+) or deficit
(-)
Off-budget surplus () or deficit
(•)
lyieans of financing:
Borrowing from Ifie public
Reduction of operating cash. Inaease (-)
Other means
Total on-budget and off-budget financing
1 13,773
Pn milllona of dollars]

FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
29
First-Quarter Receipts
The following capsule analysis of budget receipts, by source, for the first quarter of fiscal 1992 supplements
fiscal data earlier reported
in the
fall Issue of the Treasury Bulletin. At the time of that Issue's release, not enough
data was available to analyze adequately collections for the quarter.
Individual income taxes.—lndividual income tax receipts
were $113.0
billion for the
first quarter of
fiscal 1992. This
represents a decrease
of $1.3
billion over the comparable
quarter for
fiscal
1991.
Withheld
receipts were down
$0.2
billion
for
this
period.
Nonwithheld
receipts
were
nearly
unchanged from the comparable quarter of fiscal 1991, while
refunds increased by $1.1
billion.
Corporate
income
taxes.-Corporate
income
tax
receipts
in the first quarter of fiscal 1992 were $24.4
billion.
This was
$1.0
billion
lower than the
first quarter
of
fiscal
1991. The $1.0
billion decrease was comprised
of a $0.7
billion decrease
in
estimated and
final
payments, and an
increase in refunds of $0.3 billion.
Employment
taxes
and
contributions.-Employment
taxes and contributions receipts for the October-December
1991
quarter were $86.3
billion, an increase of $5.0
billion
over the comparable prior year quarter. Receipts to the Old-
Age Survivors
Insurance, the
Disability
Insurance, and the
Hospital Insurance trust funds increased by $1.7 billion, $0.2
billion, and $3.1
billion,
respectively. The increase from the
prior year
is due entirely to an increase
in estimated
liability
for the October-December quarter.
Unemployment
insurance.--Unemployment
insurance
receipts for the October-December quarter were $3.5
billion
compared
with
$3.4
billion
for the comparable
prior
year
quarter. Federal Unemployment Tax Act receipts Increased
by $0.1
billion.
Contributions
for other insurance and
retlrement.-
Contributions
for other retirement were $1.2
billion
for the
first quarter of fiscal 1992. This represents less than a $0.1
billion
change
from
the
first
quarter
of
fiscal
1991.
The
growth
in
contributions
will
remain
flat over
the
next few
years as the number of employees covered by the Federal
employees' retirement system (FERS) grows slowly relative
to those covered under the
civil service retirement system
(GSRS).
Excise
taxes.-Excise
tax
receipts
for
the
October-
December 1991 quarter were $11.8 billion compared to $8.9
billion
for
the
comparable
quarter
of
fiscal
1991.
The
increase of $2.8 billion (32 percent) over the prior year level
is primarily the result of the increase
in excise tax rates and
broadened tax base enacted as part of the Omnibus Budget
Reconciliation Act
of 1990.
In
addition, business
activity
in
the October-December quarter of fiscal 1992 improved from
the depressed levels of a year earlier. This recovery resulted
in an increased excise tax base.
Estate and gift taxes.-Estate and gift tax receipts were
$2.7
billion
in the October-December quarter of 1991. This
represents
a decrease
of
less
than
$0.2
billion
over
the
previous quarter and is virtually unchanged from tax receipts
over the same quarter in the previous year
Customs dutles.-Customs receipts net of refunds were
$4.4
billion
for the
first
quarter
of
fiscal
1992.
This
is an
increase
of
$0.2
billion
from
the
comparable
prior
year
quarter.
It is due to an increase
in imports
.
Miscellaneous receipts.-Net miscellaneous receipts for
the first quarter of fiscal
1 992 were $7.8 billion, a decrease of
$0.3
billion from the comparable prior year quarter. Most of
this decline is due to lower Federal Reserve earnings.
First Quarter Rscal 1992 Net Budget Receipts, by Source
[In billions of dollars]
Source
Dec.
Individual income taxes
Corporate income taxes
Employment taxes and contributions
Unemployment Insurance
Contributions for other insurance and retirement
Excise taxes
Estate and gift taxes
Customs duties
Miscellaneous receipts
Total budget receipts
39.3

30
FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
CHART FFO-A.-Monthly Receipts and Outlays*
no
On-budget Receipts
Off-budget 'Receipts
70
bn-budget Outlays
Off-budget Outlays
50
10
30-".^^
.-.--•'"
**•.-.-
T
T
w-
Apr. '91
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Jan. '92
Feb.
Mar.
]
250
200
-
150 -
CHART FFO-B."
Budget Receipts
by Source Through
Second Quarter
Fiscal 1991-1992*
100
-
50
-
individual
Corp.
Soclai
Excise
Estate
Customs
Misc.
Income
income
ins.
Tax
/Gift
Duties
Receipts
TAXES AND OTHER RECEIPTS
'In bliiions of dollars. Source: Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the United States Government

FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
TABLE FF0-1.--Summary of Fiscal Operations
31
[In millions ot dollars. Source: Monlhly Treasury SlalemenI ol Receipts and Outlays ot Ihs United Slates Govemmentl
Fiscal year
or month
Total
receipts
(1)
Total on-budget and oft-budqet results
On-budget
receipts
(2)
Off-budget
receipts
(3)
Total
outlays
(4)
On-budget
outlays
(5)
Off-budget
outlays
(6)
Total
surplus
deficit
(•)
(7)
On-budget
surplus
or
deficit
()
(8)
Off-budget
surplus
or
deficit
()
(9)
Means of financing
-net transactions
Borrowing from tfie
public-Federal
securities
Public
debt
securities
(10)
19871

32
FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
TABLE FF0-2."0n-budget and Off-budget Receipts by Source
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monthly Treasury SlalemenI of Receipts and Outlays ol Ihe United Stales Govemmenl]
Fiscal year
or month
Income taxes
Individual
Other
Refunds
Gross
Corporation
Refunds
Net
income
taxes
Social insurance
taxes and contributions
Errpioyment taxes and contributions
Old-age, disability, and
hospital insurance
Gross
Refunds
Net
19871
322.463
19881
341.435
19891
361.387
19901
390.480
1991
1
404,152
1992- (Est.)
n.a.
1993 -(Est.)
n.a.
1991 -Mar
30,478
Apr
36,428
May
36,958
June
27,449
July
37,119
Aug
32,993
Sept
30,758
Oct
37.291
Nov
32,448
Dec
39,943
1992 -Jan
36,047
Feb
33,941
Mar
35,728
Fiscal 1992 to date
215.398
142,990

FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
33
TABLE FF0-2.-0n-budget and Off-budget Receipts by Source, Con.
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monthly Treasury Statemen! of Receipts and Outlays of Ihe United States Governmem]
Fiscal year
or month
Sodal insurance

34
FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
Table FF0-3.--0n-budget and Off-budget Outlays by Agency
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipis and Outlays o1 the United Slates Governmeni]
Fiscal year
or month
Legis-
lative
branch
The
Executive
Judi-
Office
ciary
of the
President
Funds ap-
Agricul-
proprialed
ture De-
to the
partment
President
Commerce

FEDERAL FISCAL OPERATIONS
Table FFO-3.—On-budget and Off-budget Outlays by Agency, Con.
35
[In millions of dollars]

36
INTRODUCTION: Federal Obligations
The
Federal Government
controls
the use
of funds through
obligations. Obligations are recorded when the Government makes a
commitment to acquire goods or services. Obligations are the first of
four key events tha\ characterize the acquisition and use of resources:
order, payment, delivery, and consumption. In general, they consist of
orders placed, contracts awarded, sen/ices received, and similar trans-
actions requiring the disbursement of money.
The obligational stage of a Government transaction is a strategic
point
in gauging the impact of the Government's operations on
ffie
national economy because
it frequently
represents a Government
commitment that stimulates business investments, such as inventory
purchases and employment. Though payment may
not occur for
months after the Government places
its order,
the order
itself can
cause immediate pressure on the private economy.
An obligation is classified by the nature of the transaction, without
regard to its ultimate purpose. For example, all salaries and wages are
reported as personnel compensation, whether the services are used
in current operations or in the construction of capital items.
Federal agencies often do business with one another.
In doing
so,
the
"buying" agency
records
obligations and
thie
"performing
agency records reimbursements. In table FO-1
, these transactions are
[>resented.
Conversely,
table FO-2 shows only those
transactions
incurred outside the Federal Government.

37
FEDERAL OBLIGATIONS
TABLE FO-1.—Gross Obligations Incurred Within and Outside the Federal Government
By Object Class, Dec. 31, 1991
[In millions of dollars. Source: Standard Form 225. Report on Obllgallons, from agencies]
Object class
Gross obligations Incurred
Outside
Total
Personal services arxl benefits:
Personnel compensation
Personnel benefits
Benefits for former personnel
Contractual services and supplies;
Travel and transportation of persons
.
Transportation of tilings
Rent, communications, and utilities
.
Printing and reproduction
Otfter services
Supplies and materials
Acquisition of capital assets:
Equipment
Lands and structures
Investments and loans
Grants and fixed cfiarges:
Grants, subsidies, and contributions
.
Insurance claims and Indemnities
.
.
Interest and dividends
Refunds
Otfier:
Unvouchered
Undistributed U.S. obligations
Gross obligations incurred
t
44.628
3.031
183
1.458
2.853
3.909
619
50.656
13.712
15.796
5.018
9.004
64.110
130,929
57.674
458
28
11.399
10.756
159
52S
1,050
550
9,772
5,083
2,149
61
268
11,925
50
44,808
929
44,628
13,787
1S3
1,617
3,381
4,959
1,189
60,428
18,795
17,945
5,079
9,272
76,035
130,979
102,482
458
28
12,328
415.465
88,088
503,553
Gross obligations incurred {as above)
Deduct:
Advances, reimbursements, otfier Income, etc.
Offsetting receipts
Net obligations Incurred
56.875
-88.387
358,291
t For Federal budget presentation a concept of
"net obligations incurred'
Is generally used.
This concept eliminates transactions within the Government and revenue and reimburse-
ments from the public which by statute may be used by Government agencies
without
appropriation action by the Congress. Summary figures on this basis follow. (Data are on
the basis of Reports on Obligations presentation and therefore may
differ somewhat from
the Budget of the U.S. Government.)

38
FEDERAL OBLIGATIONS
Acquisition of Capital Asset
7%
Grants and Fixed Charge
61%
ontractual Services and Supplies
18%
ersonal Services and Benefits
12%
CHART FO-A."
Gross Federal Obligations
Incurred Outside
the Federal Government,
Dec. 31, 1991
I
1
CHART FO-B.--Total Gross Federal Obligations, Dec. 31, 1991
(In billions of dollars)

FEDERAL OBLIGATIONS
39
TABLE FO-2."Gross Obligations Incurred Outside the Federal Government by
Department or Agency, Dec. 31, 1991
[In millions of dollars. Source: Standard Form 225. Report on Obligations, Ifom agencies]
Classification
Personal sen/ices and benefits
Contractual services and supplies

40
FEDERAL OBLIGATIONS
TABLE FO-2.—Gross Obligations Incurred Outside the Federal Government by
Department or Agency, Dec. 31, 1991, Con.
[In millions of dollars]
Grants and fixed charges
Other
Classification
Acquisition of

41
INTRODUCTION: Source and Availability of the
Balance In the Account of the U.S. Treasury
The Treasury's operating cash is maintained in accounts with the
Federal Reserve oanks (FRBs) and branches, as well as in tax and
loan accounts in other financial institutions. Major information sources
include the Daily Balance Wire received from the FRBs and branches,
and electronic transfers through the Letter of Credit Payment, Fedine
Payment, and Fedwire Deposit Systems. As the FRb accounts a.re
depleted, funds are called in (withdrawn) from thousands of tax and
loan accounts at financial institutions throughout the country.
Under authority of Putilic Law 95-147, Treasury implemented a
program on November2, 1978, to invest a portion of its operating cash
in obligations of depositaries maintaining tax and loan accounts. Under
the Treasury tax arxd loan investment program, depositary financial
institutions select the manner in which they will participate. Rnandal
institutions wishing to retain funds deposited into their tax and loan
accounts
in interest-t)earing obligations participate under the Note
Option. The program permits Treasury to collect funds through finan-
cial institutions and to leave the funds in Note Option depositaries and
in the financial communities in which they arise until Treasury needs
the funds for its operations.
In this way. Treasury is able to neutralize
the effect of its fluctuating operations on Note Option financial institu-
tion reserves and on the economy. Likewise, those Institutions wishing
to remit the funds to ttie Treasury's account at FRBs do so under the
Remittance Option.
Deposits to tax and loan accounts occur as customers of financial
institutions deposit tax payments, which the financial institutions use
to purchase Government securities.
In most cases,
this involves a
transfer of funds from a customer's account to the tax and loan account
in tfie same financial institution. Also, Treasury can direct the FRBs to
invest excess funds in tax and loan accounts di rectly from the Treasury
account at the FRBs.

42
ACCOUNT OF THE U.S. TREASURY
TABLE UST-l.-Elements of Changes in Federal Reserve
And Tax and Loan Note Account Balances
fin millions ot dollafs. Source: Financial ManaaemanI Service]

43
INTRODUCTION: Federal Debt
Treasury securities (i.e., public debt securities) comprise most of
the Federal debt, with securities issued by other Federal agencies
accounting for the rest. Tables in this section of the Tmasu/y Bulletin
reflect the total. Furtherdetailed infomiation is published in the Monthly
Statement of ttie Public Debt of the United States. Ukewise, infomia-
tion on agency securities and on investments of Federal Government
accounts
in Federal securities
is published
in the Monthly Treasury
Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the United States GovemmenL
• Table FD-1 summarizes the Federal debt by listinqpublic debt
and agency securities held by the public,
inclucfing the Federal Re-
sen/e.
It also includes debt held by Federal agencies, largely by the
Social Security and other Federal retirement trust funds. (For greater
detail on holdings of Federal securities by particular classes ofinves-
tors, see the ownership tables, OFS-1 and OFS-2.)
•
Table FD-2 categorizes by type interest-bearing maricetable
and nonmatketable Treasury securities. The difference between inter-
est-bearing
arxJ
total
public debt
securities
reflects outstanding
matured Treasury secunties-that is, unredeemed securities that have
matured and are no longer accruing
interest. Because the Federal
Rnancing Bank is uixier ffie supervision of Treasury, its securities are
held by a U.S. Government account.
•
In table FD-3, nonmai1<etable Treasury securities held by U.S.
Government accounts are summarized by issues to particular funds
w/ithin Government. Many of the funds invest in par value special series
nonmarketables at interest rates determined 6^ law. Others invest in
market-based special Treasury securities whose terms mirror those of
mart<etable securities.
•
Table FD-4 presents
interest-bearing
securities issued by
Government agencies.
Federal agency Ixirrowing has declined
in
recent years, in part tiecause the Federal Rnancing Bank has provided
financing to other Federal agencies.
Meanwhile, Government-spon-
sored
entities whose
securities are presented are
not Federal
agencies, and
their securities are not guaranteed by
the
Federal
Government. (Federal agency borrowing from Treasury is presented
in the Monthly Treasury Statement of Receipts and Outlays of the
United States Government.)
• Table FD-5 illustrates the average length of mari<etable inter-
est-bearing
public debt held by
private investors and the maturity
distrilxition of that debt. Average maturity has increased gradually
since
it hit a tow of 2 years, 5 months,
in December 1975. In March
1971,
Ckxigress enacted a
limited exception
to the 4-1/4-percent
interest rate ceiling on Treasury bonds. This permitted Treasury to offer
securities maturing
in more than 7 years at current market rates of
interest for the
first lime since 1965. This exception bias expanded
since 1971 authorizing Treasury to continue to issue long-term secu-
rities, and the ceiling on Treasury bonds was repealed on November
10, 1988. The volume of privately held Treasury marketable securities
by maturity class reflects the remaining period to maturity of Treasury
bills, notes, and bonds. The average length is comprised of an average
of remaining periods to maturity, weighted by fie amount of each
security held by private investors.
In other words, computations of
average length exclude Government accounts and the Federal Re-
sen/e tanks.
•
In table FD-6, the debt ceiling is compared v\rith the outstanding
debt subject to limitation by law. The other debt category includes
Federal debt Congress has designated as being subject to the debt
ceiling. Changes
in the non-interest-bearing debt shown
in the last
column reflecFmaturities of Treasury securities on nonbusiness days,
which can be redeemed on the next business day.
•
Table FD-7 details Treasury holdings of securities issued by
Govemment corporations and other agencies. Certain Federal agen-
cies are authorized to bonow money from the Treasury,
largeK^ to
finance direct loan programs. In addition, agencies such as the Bon-
neville Power Administration are authonzed
to borrow from
the
Treasury to finance capital projects. Treasury, in turn, finances these
loans by selling Treasury securities to the public.

44
FEDERAL DEBT
TABLE FD-l.-Summary of Federal Debt
[In millbns of dollars. Source: Monthly Treasury Slalemenl of Receipts and Oullays of Ihe Uniled Stales Government]
End of
fiscal year
or month
Amount outstanding
Securities held by:
Total
Public
debt
securi-
ties
Agency
securi-
ties
Government accounts
The public
Total
Public
debt
securi-
ties
Agency
securi-
ties
Total
Public

FEDERAL DEBT
TABLE FD-2.--Interest-Bearing Public Debt
45
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monthly Slalemenl of the Public Debt ot the Unried States]

46
FEDERAL DEBT
TABLE FD-3.--Government Account Series
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monthly SlalemenI ot the Public Debt ol Ihe United Slates]

47
FEDERAL DEBT
TABLE FD-4."Interest-Bearing Securities Issued by Government Agencies
[In millions ol dollars. Source: Monlhly Treasury Slatemenl of Receipts and Outlays o( the United Slates Governmenl and Financial Managemenl Service]
Endol
fiscal year
or month
Total
outstanding
Federal Deposit
Insurance Corporation
Housing and Urtian
Developmenl Department
Bank
Federal Savings
Federal
insurance
and Loan Insur-
Housing
fund
ance Corporation-
Adminis-
resolution
tration
fund
Government
National
Mortgage
Assoaaton
aher
independeni
Tennessee
Valley
Authority
Other
1987
4,009
1988
12,398
1989
23,680
1990
32,758
1991
17,751
1991 -Mar
26,503
Apr
25,470
May
25,027
June
24,952
July
23,341
Aug
21,898
Sept
17,751
Oct
18,476
Nov
18,789
Dec
18,705
1992 -Jan
17.278
Feb
15,682
Mar
15,916
882
3.130
2,981
95
1.S47
1.450
1/t50
1.450
1.450
96
95
95
95
94
94
94
93
200
9,733
18,598
19,339
6.124
14,490
13,560
13,075
12,981
11.529
11,425
6,124
6,119
6.119
5,846
2,583
2,368
2,259
178
120
295
357
336
370
365
407
428
300
315
336
337
365
397
335
372
421
1.965
1.380
1,380
1.380
9,380
10,503
9.380
9.380
9.380
9.380
9.380
9.380
10.503
11.231
11.516
1 1 ,676
13,575
12,157
12,454
285
283
276
701
694
716
715
715
712
682
682
694
693
692
690
689
1 Funds matured Jan.
5. 1987.

48
FEDERAL DEBT
TABLE FD-5."Maturity Distribution and Average Length of Marketable
Interest-Bearing Public Debt Held by Private Investors
[In millions of dollars. Source: Office o< Market Finance]
Endol
fiscal year
Amount
outstanding
privatafy
field
Wittiin
1 year
1-5
years
Maturity dasses
5-10
years
10-20
years
20 years
and over
Average lengtfi
1987
1,445,366
483,582
526,746
209,160
1988
1.555,208
524,201
552,993
232,453
1989
1,654.660
546.751
578.333
247.428
1990
1,841,903
626,297
630,144
267,573
1991
2,113,799
713,778
761,243
280,574
1991 -Mar
1,970,519
678.000
685,842
268,356
Apr
1,974,883
647,282
720,023
269,257
May
2,012,127
662,538
736,577
264,523
June
2,003,121
673,231
717,100
264,344
July
2,054,782
688,269
752.002
r266,064
Aug
2,075,255
702,752
733,723
280,576
Sepi
2.113,799
713,778
761,243
280,574
Oct
r2.143,246
r736,171
769,530
280,645
Nov
r2,l57,160
r743,409
769,070
276,457
Dec
2,171,507
742,609
788,493
274,221
1992- Jan
2,201,642
749,495
806,162
278,275
Feb
2.211,963
758,592
785,152
291,657
Mar
2.266,806
786,988
812,044
291,507
72,862
74,186
80,616
82,713
84,900
85.136
85.136
87,198
87.198
87.198
84.900
84.900
84.394
87.461
87.203
87.297
85.798
85.708
153,016
171,375
201,532
235,176
273,304
253,185
253,185
261,291
261 ,248
261 ,248
273,304
273,304
272,506
280,764
278,980
280,413
290,764
290,559
5yrs.
5yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
6yrs.
5 yrs.
6yrs.
6 yrs.
5 yrs.
6 yrs.
5 yrs.
9nios.
9 mos.
Omos.
1 mo.
mo.
Omos.
Omos.
2 mos.
1 mo.
Omos.
1 mo.
mos.
11 mos.
1 mo.
mos.
11 mos.
1 mo.
1 1 mos.
TABLE FD-6.--Debt Subject to Statutory Limitation
(In millions of dollars. Source: Montfily Statement of tfie Pubfic Debt of tfw United States]
End of
fiscal year
or rrwnth
Statutory
debt
limit
Debt outstanding
subject to limitation
Total
Public debt
Otfier debt
t
Interest-bearing debt
subject to limitation
Public debt
Otfier debt
Non-interest-bearing
public debt subject
to limitation
1987
2.800,000
2,336,014
2,334,677
1988
2,800,000
2,586,869
2,586,739
1989
2,870,000
2,829,770
2,829,474
1990
3.195.000
3.161.223
3.160.866
1991
4.145.000
3.569.300
3.568.964
1991 -Mar
4.145.000
3.377.098
3.376.728
Apr
4.145.000
3.357.933
3.357.569
May
4.145.000
3.409.353
3.408.947
June
4.145.000
3.450.261
3.449,833
July
4,145,000
3,486,213
3,485,912
Aug
4.145,000
3,517,966
3.517.651
Sep!
4.145.000
3.569.300
3.568.964
Oct
4.145.000
3.620.778
3.620.441
Nov
4.145.000
3.650.487
3.650.122
Dec
4.145.000
3.706.814
3.706.417
1992 -Jan
4.145.000
3.714.426
3.714.091
Feb
4.145.000
3.734.266
3.733.907
Mar
4.145.000
3.783.610
3.783.220
1.336
130
296
358
336
370
365
407
428
300
315
336
337
365
397
335
359
390
2.332.750
2.584,878
2,808,949
3.139.092
3.567.793
3.354.246
3.356.268
3.407.647
3.429.273
3.484.674
3.505.217
3.567,793
r3,618,522
r3.635,634
r3,704,172
3.711,877
3,719,590
3.781,020
1,336
130
296
358
336
370
365
407
428
300
315
336
337
365
397
335
359
390
1,927
1,861
20,525
21.774
1.171
22.482
1.301
1.300
20.560
1.238
12.434
1.171
r1.918
r 14.488
t2,245
2.214
14.318
2.200
1 Consists of guaranteed debt Issued by tfie Federal Housing Administration.

49
FEDERAL DEBT
TABLE FD-7.--Treasury Holdings of Securities
Issued by Government Corporations and Other Agencies
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monlhly Treasury Slalemenl ol Receipts and Outlays ol the United Stales Govemmenll

50
FEDERAL DEBT
CHART FD-A.--Average Length of the Marketable Debt*
Privately Held
1945 47
49
51
53
55
57
59
61
63
65
67
69
71
73
75
77
79
81
83
85
87
89
91
* Source: Depanment ot the Treasury. Otiice ol Market Finance

FEDERAL DEBT
51
CHART FD-B.--Private Holdings of Treasury Marketable Debt, by Maturity*
$Bil
2200
2000
1800
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
As of March 31
(In billions of dollars)
COUPONS
Over 10 years
2-10 years
1-2 years
1 year & under
BILLS
March 31, 1992 —
2266.8
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
As of December 31
1988
1989
1990
1991
' Source: Depanmenl ol Ihe Treasury, Otiice ol Markel Finance

52
INTRODUCTION: Public Debt Operations
The Second Liberty Bond Act (31 U.S.C. 3101, et sea) allows
the Secretary of the Treasury to borrow money by issuing Treasury
securities. The Secretary determines the terms aixl conditions of issue,
conversion, maturity, payment, and Interest rate. New issues of Treas-
ury notes mature in 2 to 1
years. Bonds mature in more than 1
years
from the issue date. Each marketable security is listed in the Monthly
Statement of the Public Debt of the United States. The information in
this section of the Treasury Bulletin pertains only to marltetable Treas-
ury securities, cun-ent bills, notes, and bonds.
• Table PDO-1 provides a maturity schedule of interest-bearing
mari<etable public debt securities other than reqular weekly and 52-
week
t)ills.
All unmatured Treasury notes ana bonds are
listed
in
maturity order, friom eariiest to latest. A separate breakout is provided
for the combined holdings of the Govemment accounts and Federal
Resen/e banks, so that the
"all other investors' category includes all
private holdings.
• Table PDO-2 presents the results of weekly auctions of 1 3- arxJ
26-week bills, as well as auctions of 52-week tiills, which are held every
fourth week. Treasury
bills mature each Thursday. New issues of
13-week bills are reopenings of 26-week bills. The 26-week bill issued
every fourth week to mature on the same Thursday as an existing
52-week bill is a reopening of the existing 52-week bill. New issues of
cash management hills are also presented. High, low, and average
yields on accepted tenders and the
dollar value
of
total
titds are
presented, with the dollar value of awards made on both competitive
and noncompetitive basis.
Treasury accepts noncompetitive tenders of up to $1
million for
bills and $5 million for notes and bonds in each auction of securities to
erKxxirage participation of individuals and smaller institutions.
• Table PDO-3 lists the results of auctions of maricetable securi-
ties, other than weekly
bills,
in chronological order over the past 2
years. Included are: notes and bonds from table PDO-1
; 52-week bills
from table PDO-2; and data for cash management bills. The maturities
of cash management
bills coincide with those of regular issues of
Treasury bills.
• Table PDO-4 indicates the total amount of mari<etable securi-
ties allotted to each dass of investor. The Federal Resen/e banks tally
into investor classes the tenders in each auction of maricetable secu-
rities other than weekly auctions of 13- and 26-week bills.

PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
53
TREASURY FINANCING: January-March
JANUARY
\uction of 7-Year Notes
to 5 percent, price 99.765. Tenders at the high yield were allotted
25 percent.
Noncompetitive tenders were accepted
in full at the average
yield. 4.99 percent,
price
99.784. These totaled $1,140
mil-
lion. Competitive tenders accepted from private investors totaled
$12,626 million.
Decennber 31 Treasury announced
it would auction $9,500
nillion of 7-year notes to refund $5,308 million of notes maturing
January 15, 1992, and to raise about $4,200 million of new cash,
rhe notes offered were Treasury Notes of Series E-1 999, dated
January 15, 1992, due January 15, 1999, with interest payable July
15 and January 15 until maturity. An interest rate of 6-3/8 percent
was set after the determination of which tenders were accepted on
i yield auction basis.
Tenders were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST, for noncom-
jetitive tenders and prior to 1 :00 p.m., EST, for competitive tenders
January
8,
1992, and totaled $18,315
million,
of which $9,507
Tiillion was accepted at yields ranging from 6.38 percent, price
J9.972, up to 6.41 percent, price 99.805. Tenders at the high yield
vere allotted 77 percent.
Noncompetitive tenders were accepted in full at the average
^eld, 6.40 percent, price 99.861. These totaled $772 million. Ac-
;epted private investors' competitive tenders totaled $8,735 million.
In addition to the $9,507 million
of tenders accepted
in the
luction process, $588 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
)anks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities,
and $451
million was accepted from Federal Reserve banks for
heir own account.
Auction of 2-Year and 5-Year Notes
January
15 Treasury announced
it would auction $13,750
nillion of 2-year notes of Series V-l 994 and $9,250 million of 5-year
lotes
of
Series H-1997 to refund $10,772
million
of
securities
Tiaturing January 31, 1992, and to raise about $12,225 million of
lew cash.
The notes of Series V-1 994 were dated January 31
, 1992, due
January 31, 1994, with interest payable July 31 and January 31
jntil maturity. An interest rate of 4-7/8 percent was set after the
determination of which tenders were accepted on a yield auction
}asis.
Tenders were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST, for noncom-
setitive tenders and prior to 1 :00 p.m., EST, for competitive tenders
January 22, and totaled $42,670 million, of which $13,766 million
was accepted at yields ranging from 4.98 percent, price 99.802, up
In addition to the $13,766 million of tenders accepted in the
auction process, $898 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
banks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities,
and $439 million was accepted from Federal Reserve banks for
their own account.
Thenotesof Series H-1997 were dated January 31, 1992, due
January 31, 1997, with interest payable July 31 and January 31
until maturity. An interest rate
of 6-1/4 percent was set after the
determination of which tenders were accepted on a yield auction
basis.
Tenders for the notes were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST,
for noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
petitive tenders January 23, and totaled $20,514 million, of which
$9,271
million was accepted at yields ranging from 6.26 percent,
price 99.958, up to 6.29 percent, price 99.831
. Tenders at the high
yield were allotted 73 percent.
Noncompetitive tenders were accepted
in full at the average
yield, 6.28 percent, price 99.873. These totaled $768 million. Ac-
cepted private investors' competitive tenders totaled $8,503 million.
In addition to the $9,271
million of tenders accepted
in the
auction process, $70 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
banks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities,
and $100 million was accepted from Federal Reserve banks for
their own account.
52-Week BUls
January 3 tenders were
invited
for approximately $12,500
million of 364-day Treasury bills to be dated January 16, 1992, and
to mature January
14,
1993. The issue was to refund $11,803
million of maturing 52-week bills and to raise about $700 million of
new cash.
Tenders were opened January 9. They totaled $37,121 million,
of which $12,526 million was accepted, including $697 million of
noncompetitive tenders from the public and $3,130 million of the
bills issued to Federal Reserve banks for themselves and as agents
for foreign and international monetary authorities.

54
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TREASURY FINANCING: January-March, Con.
An additional $300
million was issued to
Federal Reserve
banks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities
for new cash. The average bank discount rate was 3.84 percent.
February Quarterly Financing
February 5 Treasury announced
it would auction $15,000
million of 3-year notes of Series N-1995, $1 1,000 million of 9-3/4-
year 7-1/2 percent notes of Series D-2001, and $10,000 million of
29-2^4-year 8 percent bonds of November 2021 to refund $21 ,032
million
of Treasury securities maturing February 15 and to raise
about $14,975 million of new cash.
The notes of Series N-1995 were dated February 18, 1992,
due February 15, 1995, with interest payable August 15 and Feb-
ruary 15 until maturity. An interest rate of 5-1/2 percent was set after
the determination of which tenders were accepted on a yield auction
basis.
Tenders for the notes were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST,
for noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
petitive tenders February
1 1
, and totaled $29,425 million, of which
$1 5,01 6 million was accepted at yields ranging from 5.51 percent,
price 99.973, up to 5.55 percent, price 99.864. Tenders at the high
yield were allotted 32 percent.
Noncompetitive tenders were accepted in full at the average
yield, 5.54 percent, price 99.891
, totaling $839 million. Accepted
private investors' competitive tenders totaled $14,177 million.
In addition to the $15,016 million of tenders accepted
in the
auction process, $894 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
banks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities,
and $1,818 million was accepted from Federal Reserve banks for
their own account.
The 7-1/2 percent notes of Series D-2001 were an additional
issue of notes dated November 15, 1991, due November 15, 2001,
with
interest payable May 15 and November 15
until
maturity.
Accrued interest of $1 9.5741 8 per $1 ,000, covering the period from
November 15, 1991, to February 18, 1992, was payable with each
accepted tender.
TenderaJor the notes were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST,
for noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
petitive tenders February 12, and totaled $25,425 million, of w/hich
$1 1 ,033 million was accepted at yields ranging from 7.29 percent,
price 101.413, up to 7.30 percent, price 101.344. Tenders at the
high yield were allotted 38 percent. Noncompetitive tenders were
accepted
in full at the average yield, 7.29 percent, price 101.413.
These totaled $652
million. Competitive tenders accepted from
private investors totaled $10,381
million.
In addition to the $1 1 ,033 million of tenders accepted in the
auction process, $118 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
banks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities,
and $300 million was accepted from Federal Reserve banks for
their own account.
The notes of Series D-2001 may be held in STRIPS form. The
minimum par amount required is $80,000.
The 8 percent bonds of November 2021 were an additional
issue of bonds dated November 15, 1991, due November 15, 2021
,
with
interest payable May
15 and November 15
until
maturity.
Accrued interest of $20.8791 2 per $1 ,000, covering the period from
November 15, 1991, to February 18, 1992, was payable with each
accepted tender.
Tenders for the bonds were received prior to 1 2:00 noon, EST,
for noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
petitive tenders February 13, and totaled $20,624 million, of which
$10,005 million was accepted at yields ranging from 7.90 percent,
price 101.101, up to 7.93 percent, price 100.757. Tenders at the
high yield were allotted 29 percent.
Noncompetitive tenders were accepted in full at the average
yield,
7.91
percent,
price
100.986. These
totaled $376
mil-
lion. Competitive tenders accepted from private investors totaled
$9,629 million.
In addition to the $10,005 million of tenders accepted
in the
auction process, $150 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
banks for their own account.
The bonds of November 2021 may be held
in STRIPS form.
The minimum par amount required is $25,000.
Auction of 2-Year and 5-Year Notes
February 19 Treasury announced
it would auction $14,250
million
of 2-year notes
of Series W-1994 and $9,750
million
of
5-year notes of Series J-1 997 to refund $1 0,928 million of securities
maturing February 29, 1992, and to raise about $13,075 million of
new cash.
Notes of Series W-1994 were dated March 2, 1992, due Feb-
ruary 28, 1994, interest payable August 31 and February 28 until
maturity. An interest rate of 5-a'8 percent was set after determina-
tion of which tenders were accepted on a yield auction basis.

PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
55
TREASURY FINANCING: January-March, Con.
Tenders for the notes were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST,
or noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
(etitive tenders February 25, and totaled $36,688 million, of which
)1 4,305 million was accepted at yields ranging from 5.39 percent,
)rice 99.972, up to 5.41 percent, price 99.935. Tenders at the high
'ield were allotted 41
percent. Noncompetitive tenders were ac-
;epted in full at the average yield, 5.40 percent, price 99.953. These
otaled $988
million. Competitive tenders accepted from private
nvestors totaled $1 3,31 7 million.
In addition to the $14,305 million of tenders accepted in the
luction process, $838 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
lanks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities,
ind $763 million was accepted from Federal Reserve banks for
heir own account.
The notes
of Series J- 1997 were dated March 2, 1992, due
•ebruary 28, 1997, with interest payable on the last calendar day
»f August and February
until
maturity. An
interest
rate
of 6-3'4
lercent was set
after the determination
of which tenders were
iccepted on a yield auction basis.
Tenders for the notes were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST,
3r noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
letitive tenders February 26, and totaled $31 ,787 million, of which
19,762 million was accepted at yields ranging from 6.74 percent,
irice 100.042, up to 6.75 percent, price 100.000. Tenders at the
ligh yield were allotted 72 percent. Noncompetitive tenders were
iccepted in full at the average yield, 6.75 percent, price 100.000.
'hese totaled $684
million. Competitive tenders accepted from
irivate investors totaled $9,078 million.
In addition to the $9,762
million
of tenders accepted
in the
lUction process, $150 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
lanks for their own account.
l-Week Bills
additional amount of bills dated October 31, 1991, maturing April
30, 1992. The issue was to raise new cash. Tenders were opened
February 27. They totaled $48,434 million, of which $14,081 million
was accepted. The average bank discount rate was 3.97 percent.
Auction of 2-Year and 5-Year Notes
March 18 Treasury announced
it would auction $14,750 million
of 2-year notes of Series X-1 994 and $1 0,250 million of 5-year notes
of
Series K-1997 to
refund $18,254
million
of Treasury
notes
maturing March 31 and to raise about $6,750 million of new cash.
The notes
of
Series
X-1 994 were dated March
31,
1992,
due March
31,
1994,
with
interest payable September 30 and
March 31
until maturity. An interest rate of 5-3/4 percent was set
after the determination of which tenders were accepted on a yield
auction basis.
Tenders for the notes were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST,
for noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
petitive tenders March 24, and totaled $41 ,944
million,
of which
$14,779 million was accepted at yields ranging from 5.84 percent,
price 99.832, up to 5.85 percent, price 99.814. Tenders at the high
yield were allotted 84 percent.
Noncompetitive tenders were accepted
in full at the average
yield,
5.85
percent,
price
99.814. These
totaled $1,154
mil-
lion. Competitive tenders accepted from private investors totaled
$13,625 million.
January 31
tenders were
invited for approximately $12,750
nillion of 364-day Treasury bills to be dated February 1 3,
1 992, and
D mature February
11, 1993. The issue was to refund $12,550
nillion of maturing 52-week bills and to raise about $200 million of
lewcash. Tenders were opened February 6. They totaled $38,621
nillion,
of which $12,861
million was accepted,
including $698
nillion of noncompetitive tenders from the public and $3,901 million
if the bills issued to Federal Reserve banks for themselves and as
igents for foreign and international monetary authorities. The av-
irage bank discount rate was 4.01 percent.
^b Management Bills
February 25 tenders were invited for approximately $14,000
nillion of 57-day bills to be issued March 4, 1992, representing an
In
addition
to the $14,779
million
of tenders accepted
in
the auction process, $732 million was accepted from Federal Re-
serve banks as agents
for
foreign and
international monetary
authorities, and $2,262 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
banks for their own account.
The notes
of Series K-1997 were dated March
31,
1992,
due March
31,
1997,
with
interest payable September 30 and
March 31
until maturity. An interest rate of 6-7/8 percent was set
after the determination of which tenders were accepted on a yield
auction basis.
Tenders for the notes were received prior to 12:00 noon, EST,
for noncompetitive tenders and prior to 1:00 p.m., EST, for com-
petitive tenders March 25, and totaled $25,522
million,
of which
$10,290 million was accepted at yields ranging from 6.93 percent,

56
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TREASURY FINANCING: January-March, Con.
price 99.771
, up to 6.94 percent, price 99.729. Tenders at the high
yield were allotted 90 percent.
Noncompetitive tenders were accepted
in full at the average
yield,
6.94
percent,
price
99.729. These
totaled $1,037
mil-
lion. Competitive tenders accepted from private investors totaled
$9,253 million.
In addition to the $10,290 million
of tenders accepted in the
auction process, $700 million was accepted from Federal Reserve
banks as agents for foreign and international monetary authorities,
and $250 million was accepted from Federal Reserve banks for
their own account.
52-Week Bills
February 28 tenders were invited for approximately $1 3,750
million of 364-day Treasury bills to be dated March 12, 1992, and
to mature March 11,1 993. The issue was to refund $1 1 ,233 million
of maturing 52-week bills and raise about $2,525 million of new
cash. Tenders were opened March 5. They totaled $31 ,077 million,
of which $13,785 million was accepted, including $625 million of
noncompetitive tenders from the public and $3,409 million of the
bills issued to Federal Reserve banks for themselves and as agents
for foreign and
international monetary
authorities. The average
bank discount rate was 4.37 percent.

57
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-1.--Maturity Schedule of Interest-Bearing Marketable Public Debt Securities
Other than Regular Weekly and 52-Week Treasury Bills Outstanding, Mar. 31, 1992
[In millions ot dollars. Source: Monthly Statement of the Public Debt of the United Slates, and Office of Market Finance]
Amount of maturities
Date o( final maturity
Descrption

58
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-l.-Maturity Schedule of Interest-Bearing Marketable Public Debt Securities
Other than Regular Weekly and 52-Week Treasury Bills Outstanding, Mar. 31, 1992, Con,
Date of final maturity
[In millions of dollars]
Description
1994
Jan. 15
7%-D note
Jan. 31
4-7/8%-V note
Feb
15
9% bond
Feb. 15
8-7/8%-H note
Fab
15
6-7/8%-R note
Fob 28
5-3/8%-W note
Maf. 31
B-1/2°/rM nae
Mar. 31
5-3/4'yrX note
Apr. 15
7%-E note
May 15.89-94
4-l/8%bond
May 15
13-1/8%A nolo
May 15
9 1'2%J note
May 15
7%-S note
June 30
8-1/2%-N note
July 15
8%-F note
Aug. 15
12-»8%B note
Aug. 15
8-3/4% bond
Aug. 15
e-5/B%-K note
Aug
15
6-7/8%-T note
Sept. 30
B-M2y^P note
Oct. 15
9-1/2%-G note
Nov. 15
'
1 1-5/8%-C note
Nov. 15
1 0-1/8% bond
Nov. 15
8-1/4%-L note
Nov. 15
6%-U note
Dec. 31
7-5/8%-Q note
Amount of maturities
Held by

PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-l.-Maturity Schedule of Interest-Bearing Marketable Public Debt Securities
Other than Regular Weekly and 52-Week Treasury Bills Outstanding, Mar. 31, 1992, Con.
[In millions of dollafsl
Amount of maturities
Date of final maturity
Descrptlon
1996 Con.
Sspl- 30
7%.T noia
Of)- '5
8%-H note
Oa.21
6-7/8%-U note
J^ov- 15
2 7.i/4%.D note
Nov- 30
6-1/2%-V note
Oec.31
6-1/8%-W note
1997
•i3n.:5
B<y„.0 note
;i3n- 31
6-lM%-H note
[,* 28
6-3/4"!<rJ note
M*'- 3'
6-7/8°/.^K note
*P'- '5
8-l/2°/rE note
"^^y 15
2 8.1/2%-A note
'"''> '5
B--[/2°/^F note
2i;9- 'I
2 8-5'8%-B note
i^\%
8-3/4°/rG note
"^O"- 15
2 8-7/8%-C note
1998
^^•15
7-7/8%-E note
;* 15
2 8-1/8%-A note
y']^
7-7/8%-F note
w
"
t' ;>i
,i,-
^ 9°''°-B no'e
May 15, 93-98
7% bond
-["'1' 15-
8-1/4%-G note
*"9- 15
2 9.1/4VC note
P<^- 15-
7-1/8%-H note
^o*-
5
2 8-7/8»/<rD note
''0"-15
3-l/2%bond
1999
^^15
6-3/8"y,^E note
f*- 15
2 8-7/8%A note
Ji^'
f-
•
•
• •;
2 9-i/B%.B note
May 15. 94-99
8-l/2%bond
*"9
15
28''/^C note
'^o^- 15
2 7.7/8»^D note
2000
^!5' II „V^;
2 8-i/2%.A note
Feb. 15, 95-00
7.7/8./. bond
"^l'
1 5-
2 8-7/8%-B note
.
3' Ic Vi'Ai
28-3^4%-C note
Aug.
5. 95-00
8-3/B%bond
'^'^•15
2 8-l/2»/^D note
2001
^*
15
1 1-3(4% bond
r^.*- 15
2 7-3'4%-A note
"^y 15
13-1/8% bond
"^"15
2 8%-B note
.3 ^ „• -
2 7-7/B%rC note
Aug. 15. 96-01
8%bond
Held by

60
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-1."Maturity Schedule of Interest-Bearing Marketable Public Debt Securities
Other than Regular Weekly and 52-Week Treasury Bills Outstanding, Mar. 31, 1992, Con.
[In millions of dollars]
Date
erf final maturity
Amount of maturities
Description
Issue date
Total
Held by
U.S. Govl
accounts and
Federal Re-
serve banks
All
other
investors
2001 Con.
Aug. 15
13-:V8%bond
Nov. 15
15-:V4%bond
Nov. 15
2 7-1/2%-D note
07/02/81
10/07/81
11/15/91
1.753
1.753
24.226
217
163
610
1,536
1.590
23.616
Total
68.518
2.972
2002
Feb. 15
14-1/4%bond
Nov. 15
11-S'8%bond
2003
Feb. 15
10-*4%bond
May 15
10- 3(4% bond
Aug. 15
11 -1/8% bond
Nov. 15
11-7/8% bond
2004
May 15
12-3'8%bond
Aug. 15
13-3/4%-C note
Nov. 15
2 11-5/8% bond
2005
May 15. 00-05
8-l/4%bond
May 15
2 12% bond
Aug. 15
2 10-3/4% bond
2006
Feb.15
29-3'8%bond
01/06/82
09«9/82

61
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-l.—Maturity Schedule of Interest-Bearing Marketable Public Debt Securities
Other than Regular Weekly and 52-Week Treasury Bills Outstanding, Mar. 31, 1992, Con.
[In millions ol dollars]
Date of final maturity
Amount of maturities
Description
Issue date
Total
Held by
U.S. Gmt
accounts and
Federal Re-
serve banks
All
other
investors
2008 Con.
Nov. 15, 03-08
8-3/4% bond
2009
May 15. 04-09
9-l/8%bond
Nov. 15. 04-09
10-a8%bond
2010
Feb. 15.05-10
ll-a'4%bond
May 15.05-10
10% bond
Nov. 15.05-10
12-:y4%bond
2011
May 15. 06-11
13-7/8% bond
Nov. 15,06-11
14% bond
2012
Nov. 15, 07-12
10-3'8%bond
2013
Aug. 15.08-13
12%bond
2014
May 15. 09-14
13-l/4%bond
Aug. 15.09-14
12-l/2%bond
Nov. 15.09-14
2 11-3/4% bond
2015
Feb. 15
2 11-1/4%bond
Aug. 15
2 io-5/8%bond
Nov. 15
2 9-7/8% bond
11/15if78
5,230
3,574
Total

62
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-1.--Maturity Schedule of Interest-Bearing Marketable Public Debt Securities
Other than Regular Weekly and 52-Week Treasury Bills Outstanding, Mar. 31, 1992, Con.
[In millions ot dollafs]
Amount ot maturities
Date 0) linal maturity
Descrption

PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PD0-2.--0fferings of Bills
63
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monthly Statement of ihe Public Debt of ihe United States and allotments]
Issue date
Description of new Issue
Maturity
Number of
Arrxjunt of
date
days to
bids
maturtty
1
tendered
Amounts of bids accepted
Total
On conv
On nonconv
anxunt
petttlve basis 2
petltive basis 3
Arrxjunt

64
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PD0-2.--0fferings of Bills, Con.

PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
65
Table PD0-3."PubIic Offerings of Marketable Securities
Other than Regular Weekly Treasury Bills
[In millions of dollars. Source: Bureau of Iha Public Debt]
Auctton

66
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
Table PD0-3,--Public Offerings of Marketable Securities
Other than Regular Weekly Treasury Bills, Con.
[In millions ol dollars. Source: Bureau of the Public Debt]
Auction
date
Issue
date
Desaiptbn ol securities
<

67
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
Table PD0-3.--PubIic Offerings of Marketable Securities
Other than Regular Weekly Treasury Bills, Con.
average at 7.09% (price 99.835).
38 Yields accepted ranged from 7.60% (price 99.590) up to 7.63% (price 99.468) with the
average at 7.62% (price 99.509).
39 Yields accepted ranged from 6.97% (price 99.747) up to 6.98% (price 99.720) with the
average at 6.98% (price 99.720).
40 Yields accepted ranged from 7.84% (price 99.384) up to 7.85% (price 99.316) with the
average at 7.85% (price 99.316).
41 Yields accepted ranged from 7.97% (price 98.922) up to 7.98% (price 98.810) with the
average at 7.98% (price 98.810).
<2 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.85% (price 99.816) up to 6.87% (price 99.779) with the
average at 6.87% (price 99.779).
<3 Yields accepted ranged from 7.50% (price 100.000) up to 7.51% (price 99.959) with the
average at 7.51% (price 99.959).
" Ytelds accepted ranged Irom 7.13% (prioe 99.991) up to 7.15% (price 99.954) with the
average at 7.15% (price 99.964).
45 Yralds accepted ranged (rom 7.80% (price 99.796) up to 7.81% (price 99.756) with the
average at 7.81% (price 99.756).
46 Yields accepted ranged from 7.92% (price 99.762) up to 7.94% (price 99.666) with the
average at 7.93% (price 99.709).
47 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.99% (price 100.018) up to 7.00% (price 100.000) with the
average at 7.00% (price 100.000).
48 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.69% (price 99.734) up to 7.70% (price 99.694) with the
average at 7.70% (price 99.694).
49 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.07% (price 99.814) up to 7.09% (price 99.761) with the
average at 7.09% (price 99.761).
50 Yields accepted ranged from 8.06% (price 99.593) up to 8.07% (price 99.626) with the
average at B.07%> (price 99.626).
51 Yields accepted ranged Irom 8.19% (price 99.278) up to 8.24% (price 98.728) with the
average at 8.21% (price 99.057).
52 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.81% (price 99.890) up to 6.83% (price 99.853) with the
average at 6.81% (price 99.890).
53 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.66% (price 99.867) up to 7.70% (price 99.694) with the
average at 7.69% (price 99.734).
54 Yields accepted ranged from 7.03% (price 99.945) up to 7.06% (price 99.890) with the
average at 7.06% (price 99.890).
55 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.95% (price 99.696) up to 7.97% (price 99.61 5) with the
average at 7.96% (price 99.656).
56 Yields accepted ranged Irom 8.25% (price 100.000) up to 8.26% (price 99.948) wHh the
average at 8.26% (price 99.948).
57 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.93% (price 99.899) up to 6.95% (price 99.862) with the
average at 6.94% (price 99.881).
58 Yields accepted ranged from 7.88% (price 99.980) up to 7.89% (price 99.939) with the
average at 7.89% (price 99.939).
59 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.90% (price 99.933) up to 6.93% (price 99.853) with the
average at 6.92% (price 99.880).
so Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.94% (price 99.567) up to 7.96% (price 99.489) wHh the
average at 7.94% (price 99.667).
61 Yields accepted ranged Irom 8.15% (price 99.721) up to 8.19% (price 99.278) with the
average at 8. 1 7% (price 99.499)
62 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.45% (price 99.862) up to 6.46% (price 99.843) with the
average at 6.46% (price 99.843).
63 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.36% (price 99.647) up to 7.38% (price 99.465) with the
average at 7.37% (price 99.506).
64 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.13% (price 99.991) up to 6.15% (price 99.954) with the
average at 6.14% (price 99.972).
65 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.04% (price 99.834) up to 7.05% (price 99.792) with the
average at 7.06% (price 99.792).
66 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.19% (price 99.647) up to 7.20% (price 99.693) with the
average at 720% (price 99.593).
67 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.00% (pries 100.000) up to 6.01% (price 99.981) with the
average at 6.01% (price 99.981).
68 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.91% (price 99.854) up to 6.93% (price 99.771) with the
average at 6.92% (price 99.812).
69
Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.97% (price 100.081) up lO 6.03% (price 99.919) with the
average at 6.00% (price 100.000).
70 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.50% (price 100.000) up to 7.56% (price 99.584) with the
average at 7.53% (price 99.792).
71 Yields accepted ranged from 7.98% (price 100.227) up to 8.01% (price 99.887) with the
average at 8.00% (price 100.000).
72 Yields accepted ranged from 6.49% (price 100.019) up to 5.52% (price 99.963) with the
average at 6.61% (price 99.981).
73 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.52% (price 99.916) up to 6.54% (price 99.832) with the
average at 6.54% (price 99.832).
74 Yields accepted ranged from 5.09% (price 99.831) up to 5.13% (price 99.756) with the
average at 5.12% (price 99.775).
75
Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.24% (price 99.513) up to 6.25% (prioe 99.470) with the
average at 624% (price 99.513).
76 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.38% (price 99.972) up to 6.41% (price 99.805) with the
average at 6.40% (price 99.861 ).
77 Yields accepted ranged from 4.98% (price 99.802) up to 5.00%
(price 99.766) with the
average at 4,99% (price 99.784).
78 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.26% (price 99.958) up to 6.29% (price 99.831) with the
average at 628% (price 99.873).
79 Yields accepted ranged Irom 5.51% (price 99.973) up to 5.55% (price 99,864) with the
average at 5.54% (price 99.891 ).
80 Yields accepted ranged from 7.29% (price 101.413) up to 7.30% (price 101.344) with the
average at 729% (price 101.413).
81 Yields accepted ranged Irom 7.90% (price 101.101) up to 7.93% (pries 100.757) with the
average at 7.91% (price 100.986).
82 Yields accepted ranged Irom 5.39% (price 99.972) up to 5.41% (price 99.935) with the
average at 5.40% (price 99.963).
83 Yields accepted ranged Irom 6.74% (price
1 00.042) up to 6.75% (price
1 00.000) with the
average at 6.75% (price 100.000).
84 Yields accepted ranged from 5.84%. (pries 99.832) up to 5.86% (price 99.814) with the
average at 5.85% (price 99.814).
85 Yields accepted ranged from 6.93% (price 99.771) up to 6.94% (price 99.729) with the
average at 6.94% (price 99.729).
Note. "All notes and bonds, except for foreign-targeted issues, were sold at auction through
competitive and
noncompetitive
bidding.
Foreign-targeted
issues
were
sold
at
auction
through corrpetitive bidding only.

68
PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-4A."Allotments by Investor Classes
For Public Marketable Securities Other than Bills
[In millions ot dollars]

PUBLIC DEBT OPERATIONS
TABLE PDO-4B."Allotments by Investor Classes for Public Marketable Securities
For Bills Other than Regular Weekly Series
Pn millions ol dollars]

70
INTRODUCTION: Savings Bonds and Notes
Series EE bonds, on sale since January
1, 1980, are the only
savings bonds currently sold. Series HH bonds are issued in exchange
for Series E and EE savings bonds and savings notes. Series A-D were
sold from March 1, 1935, through April 30, 1941. SeriesE wason sale
from May
1
, 1941
, through December 31
,
1 979 (through June 1980 to
payroll savers only). Series F and G were sold from May
1, 1941,
through April 30, 1952. Series H was sold from June 1, 1952, through
December 31
, 1 979. Series HH bonds were sold for cash from January
1
, 1980, through October31
, 1982. Series J arxl K were sold from May
1, 1952, through April 30, 1957. U.S. savings notes were on sale May
1, 1967, through June 30, 1970. The notes were eligible for purchase
by individuals with the simultaneous purchase
of series E savings
bonds. The principal temis and conditions for purchase and redemp-
tion and infomiation on investment yields of savings notes appear in
the Treasury Bulletins of March 1967 and June 1968; and the Annual
Report of the Secretary of thte Treasury for fiscal 1974.

71
U.S. SAVINGS BONDS AND NOTES
TABLE SBN-1. --Sales and Redemptions by Series, Cumulative through Mar. 31, 1992
[In millions ot dollars. Source: Monthly Slalemenl of the Public Debt ol Ihe UnBed Stales; Market Analysis Section. Unilad Stales Savings Bonds Divisionl
Amount oulslandinq
Series
Sales
1

72
U.S. SAVINGS BONDS AND NOTES
TABLE SBN-3.--Sales and Redemptions by Period, Series E, EE, H, and HH
[In millions of dollars. Source: Monthly SlalennenI ol Ihe Public Debt ot Ihe United Stales: Market Analysis Section. United Slates Savings Bonds Division]
Period
Sales
Accrued
discount
Sales plus
accrued
discount
Redemptions
Sales
price
Acaued
discount
Exchange ot
E bonds for
Hand HH bonds
Amount outstanding
Interest-
Matured
bearing debt
non-interest-
bearing debt
Series E and EE
Fiscal years:
1941-89
256.711
1990
7.774
1991
9.154
Calendar years:
1941-89
258.431
1990
8,085
1991
9,494
1991 -Mar
815
Apr
864
May
841
June
694
July
769
Aug
692
Sepi
688
Oct
769
Nov
735
Dee
870
1992 -Jan
1,338
Feb
1.190
Mar
1.148
1 16.279

73
INTRODUCTION: Ownership of Federal Securities
Federal securities presented
in the following tables are public
debt
securities such as savings bonds,
bills,
and
notes
that
the
Treasury issues. The tables also detail debt issued by other Federai
agencies under special financing authorities. (See the Federal debt
(FD) tables for a more complete description of the Federal debt.)
•
Table OFS-1 presents Treasury marketable and nonmarket-
able securities and debt issued by other Federal agencies held by
Government accounts, the Federal Reserve banks, and private inves-
tors.
Social Security and Federal retirement tnist fund investments
comprise much of the Government account holdings.
The Federal Reserve banks acquire Treasury securities in the
market as a means of executing monetary policy.
•
Table OFS-2 presents the estimated amount of public debt
securities held
by
pnvate
investors.
Information
is obtained
from
sources such as the Federal financial institution regulatory agencies.
State, local, and foreign holdings include special issues of nonmari<et-
able securities to municipal entities and foreign official accounts. Thiey
also include municipal, foreign official, and pnvate holdings of mari<et-
able Treasury securities. (See footnotes to the table for description of
investor categories.)

74
OWNERSHIP OF FEDERAL SECURITIES
TABLE OFS-l.--Distribution of Federal Securities by Class of Investors and Type of Issues
|ln millbns ol dollars. Source: Financial Management Service]
End of
llscal year
or month
Interest-bearing public debt securities
Total

75
OWNERSHIP OF FEDERAL SECURITIES
TABLE 0FS-2.--Estimated Ownership of Public Debt Securities by Private Investors
Far values
'
In billions o( dollars. Source: Office ol Market Finance]
Nonbank Investors
End of
month
Total
Commer-
pfrvately
dal
held
banks 2
Total
Sav-
ings
bonds *
Other
secu-
rities
Insurance
companies
Money
market
funds
Corpora-
State
tions 5
and
local
govern-
ments 6
Foreign
Other
and Inter-
Inves-
natk>nal ^
tors 8
1982- Mar
733.3
June
740.9
Sept
791.2
Dec
848.4
1983 -Mar
906.6
June
948.6
Sept
982.7
Dec
1,022.6
1984 -Mar
1,073.0
June
1,102.2
Sept
1,154.1
Dec
1,212.5
1985 -Mar
1,254.1
June
1,292.0
Sept
1,338.2
Dec
1,417.2
1986- Mar
1,473.1
June
1,502.7
Sept
1,553.3
Dec
1,602.0
1987 -Mar
1,641.4
June
1,658.1
Sept
1,680.7
Dec
1,731.4
1988- Mar
1,779.6
June
1,786.7
Sepi
1,821.2
Dec
1,858.5
1989- Mar
1,903.4
June
1.909.1
Sept
1,958.3
Dec
2,015.8
1990- Mar
2,115.1
June
2.141.8
SepI
2.207.3
Dec
2,288.3
1991
- Mar
2,360.6
June
2,397.9
Sept
2,489.4
Dec
2,563.2
1992 -Mar
2,664.0
117.3

76
INTRODUCTION: Market Yields
The tables and charts in this section present yields on Treasury
marketable
securities, and compare long-term
yields on Treasury
securities with yields on long-term corporate and municipal securities.
• Table MY-1 lists Treasury mari<et bid yields at constant maturi-
ties
for
bills,
notes,
and bonds. The Treasury
yield curve
in
the
accompanying chart, is biased on current market b)id quotations on die
most actively traded Treasury securities as of 3:30 p.m. on the last
business day of the calendar quarter.
Treasury obtains quotations from the Federal Reserve Bank of
New
York, which composites quotations provided by
five primary
dealers. Treasury uses tfiese composite quotations to derive the yield
curve, based on semiannual interest payments and read at constant
maturity points to deveksp a consistent data series. Yields on Treasury
bills are coupon equivalent yields of bank discount rates at which
Treasury
bills trade
in the
mart<et. The Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System publishes the Treasury constant maturity
data series in its weekly H.15 press release.
•
Table MV-2 shows average
yields
of long-term
Treasury,
corporate, and municipal bonds. The long-lemi Treasury average yield
is the 30-year constant maturity yield. The corporate bond average
yield is developed by Treasury by calculating reoffering yields on new
long-term
securities maturing
in at least 20 years arra rated Aa by
Moody's Investors Sendee. The municipal bond average yield prior to
1991 was compiled by Treasury. Beginning with January 1991, the
average yield
is the 'Municipal Bond Yield Average," published by
Moody's Investors Service for 20-year reoffering yields on selected
Aa-rated general obligations. See the footnotes for further explanation.

MARKET YIELDS
77
TABLE MY-1.--Treasury Market Bid Yields at Constant Maturities: Bills, Notes, and Bonds*
[Source: Office of Market Finance]
Date
3-mo.
1yr.
2-yr.
3yr.
5-yr.
7-yr.
lO-yr.
30-yr.
MontHy average
1991 -Apr
5.83%
5.98%
6.24%
6.95%
7.23%
7.70%
May
5.63
5.87
6.13
6.78
7.12
7.70
June
5.75
6.02
6.36
6.96
7.39
7.94
July
5.75
5.97
6.31
6.92
7.38
7.91
Aug
5.50
5.63
5.78
6.43
6.80
7.43
Sept
5.37
5.48
5.57
6.18
6.50
7.14
Oct
5.14
5.26
5,33
5.91
6.23
6.87
Nov
4.69
4.80
4.89
5.56
5.90
6.62
Dec
4.18
4.26
4.38
5,03
5.39
6.19
1992 -Jan
3.91
4.01
4.15
4.96
5.40
6.24
Feb
3.95
4.08
4.29
5.21
5.72
6.58
Mar
4.14
4.33
4.63
5.69
6.18
6.95
7.92%
7.94
8.17
8.15
7.74
7.48
7.25
7.06
6.68
6.70
6.96
7.26
8.04%
8.07
8.28
8,27
7.90
7.65
7,53
7.42
7.09
7.03
7.34
7.54
821%
8.27
8,47
8,45
8.14
7.95
7.93
7.92
7.70
7.58
7.85
7.97
End of month
- Apr
.
May.,
June
,
July
.
Aug.
Sept.
Oct
.
Nov.
Dec.
- Jan
.
Feb.,
Mar.,
5.68
5.71
5,71
5,70
5,49
5,26
4,96
4,47
396
3.94
4.03
4,15
5,83
5,94
5,95
5,93
5,60
5,34
5.03
4,57
4,00
4.07
4,14
4,32
6.06
6,16
6,32
6.19
5,72
5.42
5,10
4,69
4.12
4.23
4.35
4.54
6,80
6,68
6,90
6,81
6.36
5.99
5,70
5,38
4,77
5,11
5,27
5,60
7.15
7.10
7.33
7.21
6.68
6.28
6.06
5.76
5.11
565
5.75
6.17
7.63
7.69
7.90
7.77
7.34
6.92
6.74
6.48
5,93
6,44
6.58
6.94
7.88
7.92
8.14
8.03
7.67
7.29
7.15
6.99
6.38
6.92
6.95
7,25
8,02
8,06
8,24
8,20
7.82
7.47
7.47
7.38
6.71
7.31
7.27
7,54
8,20
8,26
8,42
8,36
8,06
7.82
7.91
7.94
7.41
7.77
7.80
7.96
Rates are from Ifie Treasury yiekJ curve.

78
MARKET YIELDS
CHART MY - A. -- Yields of Treasury Securities, March 31, 1992
Based on closing bid quotations

79
MARKET YIELDS
TABLE MY-2.--Average Yields of Long-Term Treasury, Corporate, and Municipal Bonds
[Source:
Otiice o( Market Finance]
Treasury
New Aa
New Aa
Period
30-yr. bonds
corporate
municipal
bonds
1
bonds 2
MONTHLY SERIES-AVERAGES OF DAILY OR WEEKLY SERIES (PERCENT)
1981
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1982
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1983
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1984
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1985
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
1986
Jan
Feb
Mar
Apr
May
June
July
Aug
Sept
Oct
Nov
Dec
See footnotes at end of table.
12.14

80
MARKET YIELDS
Table MY-2.--Average Yields of Long-Term Treasury, Corporate, and Municipal Bonds, Con.
Treasury

MARKET YIELDS
81

82
INTRODUCTION: U.S. Currency and Coin Outstanding and in Circulation
The
U.S.
Currency and Coin Outstanding and
in
Circulation
(USCC) statement informs the public of the total face value of currency
and coin used as a medium of exchange that
is in circulation at the
end of a given accounting month. The statement defines the
total
amount of currency and coin outstanding and the portion deemed to
be in circulation, and includes some old and current rare issues that
do not circulate, or that may do so to a limited extent. Treasury includes
them in the statement because the issues were originally intended for
general dtculation.
The USCC statement provides a description of the various issues
of paper money.
It also gives an estimated average of currency arKi
coin held by each individual, using estimates of population from the
Bureau
of the Census. USCC imormation
fias been published by
Treasury since 1888, and was published separately until 1983, when
it was incorporated into the Treasury Bulletin. The USCC comes from
monthly reports compiled by Treasury offices, various U.S. Mint of-
fices, the Federal Reserve tanks, ancf the Federal Reserve Board.

U.S. CURRENCY AND COIN OUTSTANDING AND IN CIRCULATION
83
TABLE USCC-l.--Amounts Outstanding and in Circulation, Mar. 31, 1992
[Source: Financial ManaQemenI Service]

84
U.S. CURRENCY AND COIN OUTSTANDING AND IN CIRCULATION
TABLE USCC-2.--Amounts Outstanding and in Circulation, Mar. 31, 1992
[Source: Financial Management Service]
CURRENCY IN CIRCULATION BY DENOMINATION
Denomination
Total

85
INTRODUCTION: Federal Agencies' Financial Reports
Section 114 of the Budget and Accounting Procedures Act of
1950(31 U.S.C. 3513a) requires eacli executive agency to provide the
Secretary of the Treasury with reports and informatjon on the agency's
flnanda) condition and operations. Although these provisions do not
apply to the Federal Government's legislative and judicial branches,
they are encouraged
to submit reports so that the Secretary of the
Treasury can prepare comprehensive reports on
all of the rinandal
activities of the Government.
Federal agencies submit four financial reports and three support-
ing reports. The financial reports include: Report on Financial Position
(SF 220), Report on Operations (SF 221), Report on Cash Rovir (SF
222), and Report on Reconciliation (SF 223V The supportinq reports
are: Direct arid Guaranteed Loans Reported by Agency and Program
Due from
the
Public (SF 220-8),
Report on Accounts and Loans
Receivable Due from the Public (SF 220-9), and Additional Financial
Information (SF 220-1). Agencies submit SF 220-8
Quarterly, and
annually for publication in the Treasury Bulletin. Meanwhile,
all agen-
cies submit SF 220-9 annually,
while some
report quarterly on a
selected basis.
The Treasury Rnancial Manual
(I TFM 2-4100) sets criteria for
the submission of annual and quarterly reports in accordance with tfie
Reporting Entities Listing (Bulletin No. 91 -09). There are reports for six
fund types: revolving funds, trust revolving funds, 15 major trust funds,
all other trust funds,
all other activity combined,
arKj consolidated
reports of each organizational unit. Financial transactions supportinq
tfie reports are accounted for on the accrual basis, although the SF
221 can be submitted on a cash tasis under certain circumstances.
The Office of Management and Budget (0MB) Circular No. A-1 27
requires agencies to prepare reports from a budgeting and accounting
system that contains an integrated data base, which
is part of the
agency's integrated financial management system. Reports are sup-
posed
to incTude
all
assets,
liabilities, ana
equities
relating
to
all
programs and activities under control of the reporting agency. (Treas-
ury reports assets of disbursing officers.)
Reports should also include transfer appropriation accounts from
other agencies, foreign currencies, operations conducted in the terri-
tories or overseas, and any monetary assets or property received,
spent, or otherwise accounted for by the reporting agency. Amounts
are reported to the dollar.
Information from SF 220-8
is presented
in
tat)le FA-1, vi^ich
reflects the
direct and guaranteed loans to the public through the
Federal Credit Program
to support credit activities. Credit program
levels are controlled by authorizing legislation and appropriation acts.
SF 220-8 also provides the Federal Reserve Board information to
monitor the flow of funds. The accompanying chart depicts direct and
guaranteed loans for the first quarter of fiscal 1992.

86
FEDERAL AGENCIES FINANCIAL REPORTS
TABLE FAFR-1.--Direct and Guaranteed Loans Dec. 31, 1991
[In thousands of dollars
Source SF 220-8, compiled by Financial Management Service]
Agency and program
Direct loans or credit
Amount
outstanding
Maximum
authority
Guarantees or insurance
Amount
outstanding
Maximum
authority
I—Wholly owned Government enterprises
U.S. dollar loans
Funds appropnated to the President:
Guaranty reserve fund
Housing and other credit guaranty programs
Alliance for Progress loan fund
Other programs
Overseas Private Investment Corporation
Total Funds appropriated to the President
Department of Agriculture:
Commodity loans
Rural electrification and telephone revolving fund
Rural economic development
Rural Telephone Bank
Rural communication development fund
Agricultural credit insurance loans
Rural development insurance loans
Rural housing insurance loans
Self-help housing development loans
Rural development loans
Other Farmers Home Administration loans
Total Department of Agriculture
Department of Commerce
Economic development loans
Coastal energy impact fund
Federal ship financing fund
Other loans
Total Department of Commerce
Department of Defense:
Army loans
Total Department of Defense
Department of Education
College housing loans
Higher education
facilities loan and insurance fund
Other loans
Total Department of Education
Department of Energy
Bonneville Power Administration loans
Other loans
Total Department of Energy
Department of Health and Human Services:
Health professions. graduate student loan fund
Medical
facilities guarantee and loan fund
Student loan program
Other Health Resources and Services Administration loans
Nurse training fund
Health maintenance organization loan fund
Total Department of Health and Human Services
9,326,312

87
FEDERAL AGENCIES FINANCIAL REPORTS
TABLE FAFR-1.--Direct and Guaranteed Loans, Dec. 31, 1991, Con.
Agency and program
Direct loans or credit
Amount
outstanding
Maximum
authority
Guarantees or insurance
Amount
outstanding
Maximum
authority
I—Wholly owned Government enterprises
U.S. dollar loans
Department of Housing and Urban Development,
Federal Housing Administration tund
Housing for the elderly or handicapped
Low-rent public housing programs
Other housing loans
Guarantees of mortgage-backed securities
Urban renewal programs
Community disposal operations fund
Community planning and development loans
Nonprofit sponsor assistance
Flexible subsidy fund
Total Department of Housing and Urban Development
2,258.936

88
FEDERAL AGENCIES FINANCIAL REPORTS
TABLE FAFR-1.--Direct and Guaranteed Loans, Dec. 31, 1991, Con.
Agency and program
Direct loans or credit
Amount
outstanding
Maximum
authority
Guarantees or insurance
Amount
outstanding
Maximum
authority
I—Wholly owned Government enterprises
U.S. dollar loans
Environmental Protection Agency:
Loans
Total Environmental Protection Agency
.
General Services Administration
Federal buildings fund
Other funds
Total General Services Administration
,
Small Business Administration:
Business loans
Disaster loan fund
Other loans
Total Small Business Administration
.
.
Other independent agencies
Loans to D C Government
Export-Import Bank ot the United States
FSLIC resolution lund
...
Federal Emergency Management Agency
National Credit Union Administration
Tennessee Valley Authority
.
.
.
.
Total Other independent agencies
Total Part
I
II—Wholly owned Government enterprises
Loans repayable in foreign currencies
Loans repayable in foreign currencies
Agency lor International Development
United States Information Agency
Total Pan
II
....
Ill— Privately owned Government-sponsored
enterprises
Privately owned Government-sponsored enterprises
:
Student Loan Marketing Association
Federal National Mortgage Association
Banks for cooperatives
Farm credit banks
Federal Housing Finance Board
Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation
Total Part
III
Grand
total,
all parts
110,804

FEDERAL AGENCIES' FINANCIAL REPORTS
CHART FA-A."
Direct and Guaranteed Loans, Dec. 31, 1991
(Wholly owned U.S. Government enterprises-U.S. dollar loans)
Agriculture
58
DIRECT LOANS
CUARANTEED LOANS
Education
7%
Eximbank
5%


INTERNATIONAL
STATISTICS


93
INTRODUCTION: International Financial Statistics
The tables in this section provide statistics on the U.S. Govern-
ment's reserve assets,
liabilities to foreigners, and
its international
financiaJ position.
•
Table IFS-1 shows U.S. reserve assets, including gold stock
and special drawing rights held in ttie Special Drawing account in the
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The table also shows U.S. reserve
holdings and holdings of convertible foreign currencies in the IMF.
•
Table IFS-2 contains statistics on
liabilities to foreign official
institutions, and selected
liabilities to
all
oti-ier foreigiiers, which are
used in the United States balance of payments statistics.
• Tatsle IFS-3 shows nonmar)<etable bonds and notes that Treas-
ury issues
to
official
institutions and
oUier
residents
of
foreign
countries. The figures are in dollars or dollar equivalents.
• Table IFS-4 presents the general foreign exchange value of the
U.S.
dollar. Values presented are broader than those provided
tjy
single exchange rate levels and do not daim to represent a guide to
measuring the impact of exchange rate levels on IJnited States inter-
national transactions. Indices are computed as geometric averages of
individual currency levels with weights derived from Uie share of each
country's trade with ttie United States during Bie years 1982 and 1983.

94
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STATISTICS
TABLE IFS-l.-U.S. Reserve Assets
[In millions of dollars]
End of calendar
year or month

INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STATISTICS
TABLE IFS-2.--SeIected U.S. Liabilities to Foreigners
95
[In millions ot dollars]
Endol
calendar
year or
month
Total
(1)
Total
(2)
Liabililies to loreign counlries
Otttcial institutions
'
Labili-
t©s
reported
by banl^s
in U.S.
(3)
Marlvet-
able U.S.
Treasury
bonds
and
notes 2
(4)
NonmarKet-
able U.S.
Treasury
bonds and
nrtes 3
(5)
Other
readily
market-
able
liabili-
ties*
(6)
Liabili-
ties to
ban lis 5
(7)
Total
(8)
Liabilities to
other foreigners
Liabili-
ties
reported
by banks
in U.S.
(9)
Market-
able U.S.
Treasury
bonds and
notes 2 6
(10)
Liabilities
to nonmone-
tary in-
ternation-
al and re-
gional or-
ganizations 7
(11)
1987
873,446
254,824
120,667
125,805
300
8.052
468.096
140,214
79,463
60.751
10,312
1988
1.011,241
297.446
135.241
152,429
523
9,253
534.403
169,658
87,351
82,307
9,734
1989
1.111,071
303,758
113,481
179,269
568
10,440
582.958
210,996
103,228
107.768
13,359
1990
1,158,854
337.310
119,367
202,487
4,491
10,965
611.088
195,868
93,625
102,243
14,588
1991 -Mar
1.147,511
340.200
126.789
197,982
4,580
10,849
591,014
201,387
94,870
106,517
14.910
Apr
1,133,211
333,654
120,831
197,609
4,611
10,604
580,646
203,915
95,680
108,235
14,996
May
1,143,272
340,642
125.706
199.630
4,641
10,665
570.895
217,258
96,015
121.243
14.477
June
1,128,884
335,582
126,382
193.798
4.672
10,731
565.546
214,047
92,244
121.803
13.709
July
1,127.144
338,879
130.179
193.078
4.703
10,919
558.580
215.331
92.414
122.917
14.354
Aug
1,135.618
345,111
136.648
192.620
4,734
11,109
561,060
214,000
89,903
124,097
15,447
Sepi
1,139,783
339,149
129,519
193,450
4,764
11,415
574.840
211,208
90,760
120.448
14.586
Oa
1,160,904
346,943
135.933
193,962
4,796
11,252
678.859
210.426
90.661
119.765
15,676
Nov
1.165.275
353,816
135.640
201.156
4.827
12,193
584,422
210,211
92,290
117.921
16.826
Dec
1.178.229
352.265
131.053
203.677
4,868
12,676
694.821
213,269
94,097
119,172
17,874
1992-Jan
1.185.864
364,277
134,129
212,364
4,892
12,892
690,209
211,799
91,448
120,351
19,579
Feb
1.192.161
367,186
137,220
212,171
4,923
12,872
591,231
213,828
89,729
124,099
19,916
Mar
1.201.209
373.145
145.999
208.757
4.956
13.433
600.798
207.152
89.188
117.964
20.114
1 Includes Bank for International Settlements.
2 Derived by applying reported transactions lo tjenchmark data.
3 Beginning
in March 1988. includes current value of zero-coupon. 20-year maturity Treas-
ury bond issue to the Government of
Mexico. Beginning March 1990, also includes current
value of zero-coupon, 30-year maturity Treasury bond issue to the Govemmenl of Mexico.
Beginning Decemt>er
1990, also includes current value of zero-coupon, 30-year
maturity
Treasury bond issue lo the Republic of Venezuela. Also see footnotes
1 and 2. table IFS-3.
* Includes debt securities of U.S. tjovemment corporations, federally sponsored agencies,
and private corporations.
^ Includes
liabilities payable
in
dollars
to foreign banks and
liabilities payable
in loreign
currencies to foreign banks and to "other foreigners."
6 Includes marketable U.S. Government bonds and noles held by loreign banks.
7 Principally the International Bank for Reconslruction and Development, the Inter-American
Devetopment Bank, and the Asian Development Bank.
Note.-Table is based on Treasury Department data and on data reported to the Treas-
ury Department by banks, other depository institutions, and brokers
in the United Slates.
Data correspond generally
to statistics
follov^'ing
in
this section and
in the "Capital Move-
ments" section. Table excludes International Monetary Fund "holdings of dollars" and hold-
ings ol U.S. Treasury
letters
ol credit and nonnegotiable noninteresl-bearing special U.S.
noles hekj by other international and regional organizations.

96
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STATISTICS
TABLE IFS-3.--NonmarketabIe U.S. Treasury Bonds and Notes Issued
To Official Institutions and Other Residents of Foreign Countries
[In millkjns ot dollars Of dollar equivalenl)

97
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STATISTICS
TABLE IFS-4.--Trade-Weighted Index of Foreign Currency Value of the Dollar
[Source: Office o1 Foreign Exchange OpefalJons-lnternational Affairs]
Date
Index of industrial
country currencies
'
Annual average
(1»80= 100)2
1982
119.7
1983
125.2
1984
133.5
1985
139.2
1986
119.9
1987
107.5
1988
100.4
1989
102.8
1990
98.8
1991
98.0
End of period
(Dec. 1980 = 100)
1982
119.5
1983
127.9
1984
140.8
1985
127.8
1986
1 14.4
1987
97.8
1988
98.4
1989
1000
1990
944
1991
93.7
1991
- May ,
99.2
June
101.0
Mi
99.8
Aug
99.4
Sepi
97.0
Oct
96.8
Nov
96.2
Dec
93.7
1992- Jan
96.0
Feb
97.3
Mar
98.4
Apr
98.6
1 Each index covers
(a) 22 currencies
of counlnes represented
in the Organization
for
Note- These indices are presented to provide measures of the general foreign exchange
Economk: Cooperation and Development (OECD): Australia. Austria. Belgium-Luxembourg.
value
of the dollar that are broader than those provided by single exchange
rate
levels.
Canada. Denmark, Finland. France. Germany. Greece,
Iceland.
Ireland,
Italy. Japan, the
They do not purport to represent a guide to measuring the impact of exchange rale levels
Netherlands. New Zealand, Norway. Portugal, Spain, Sv»eden, Switzerland, Turkey, and the
on
U.S.
internatbnal transactions. The indtees are computed as geometric averages
of
United Kingdom; and
(b) currencies ol 4 major trading economies outside the OECD: Hong
individual currency levels with weights derived from the share of each country's trade with
Kong. Korea. Singapore, and
Taiwan. Exchange
rates are drawn from
Ihe
Inlernalonal
the United States during 1982-83.
Monetary Fund's "International Financial Statistics" when available.
2 Index includes average annua! rates as reported in "International Financial Statistics."

98
INTRODUCTION: Capital Movements
Treasury collects information about the transference of financial
assets and other portfolio capital movements between the
United
States and foreigners, aixJ has since 1935. Commercial banks and
other depository institutions, bank holding companies, securities bro-
kers ana dealers, and nontsanking enterprises in the United States file
capital movement reports with district Federal Reserve thanks.
Forms and instructions are developed with the cooperation of
other Government agencies and the Federal Reserve System, and in
consultations
with
representatives
of tanks,
securities
firms, and
nonbanking enterprises.
Copies of the reporting forms and instruc-
tions may be obtained from the Office of Data Management, Office of
the Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy, Department of the Treas-
ury, Washington, D.C., 20220, or from district Federal Reserve t»ank3.
In general, information
is reported opposite the country or qeo-
graphical area where the foreigner is located, as shown on records of
reporting institutions. However, information may not always reflect tfie
ultimate ownership of assets. Reporting institutions are not required to
go beyond addresses shown on tneir records, and so may not be aware
of the actual country of domicile of the ultimate beneficiary.
United States liabilities arising from the deposits of dollars vwth
foreign banks appear as liat)ilities to foreign tanks, although the liability
of
thie foreign bank receiving the deposit may be
to
foreign offidal
institutions or to residents of another country.
Transactions with t)ranches or agencies of foreign official institu-
tions, wherever k)cated, are reporled opposite the country that has
sovereignty over the institutions. Transactions with international and
regional organizations are not reported opposite any country, but are
accounted for in regional groupings of such organizations. The only
exception is information prtaining to the Bank for International Settle-
ments, which is reported opposite "OUier Europe.'
Banks and other depository institutions, taank holding companies,
Intemational Banking Facilities (IBFs), securities brokers and dealers,
and nonbanking enterprises
in the United States must
file
reports.
These enterprises include the branches, agencies, subsidiaries, and
other affiliates in the United States of foreign banking and nonbanking
firms. Those with
liatiilities, daims, or securities tiBnsactions below
specified exemption levels are exempt from reporting.
Banks and other depository institutior«, and some brokers and
dealers, file monthly reports covering tiieir dollar liabilities to, and dollar
claims on, foreigners in a number of countries. Twice a year, June 30
and December 31
, they also report the same liabilities and claims items
to foreigners in countries not shown separately on the monthly reports.
Quarterly
reports are
filed for liabilities and claims denominated
in
foreign currencies in relation to foreigners. The exemption level appli-
cable to ttiese banking reports is $15 million.
Banks and other depository institutions, securities brokers and
dealers, and other enterprises report monthly
ttieir transactions with
foreigners in long-term securities. They must report securities transac-
tions wiUi foreigners
if their aggregate purchases or ttieir aggregate
sales amount to at least $2 million during the covered monUi.
Exportere, importers, industrial and commercial concerns, finan-
cial institutions (otner than banks, otiier depository
institijtions, and
brokers), and other nonbanking enterprises must file reports quarteriy
if liabilities to, or daims on, unaffiliated foreigners amount to $1
million
or more during the covered quarter.
Nonbanking enterprises also report each month their U.S. dollar-
denominated deposit and certificates of deposit daims of $10 million
or more on banks abroad.
The data in these tables do not cover all types of reported capital
movements t)etween
tfie
United
States ana
otiier countries. The
prindpal exclusions are the intercompany capital transactions of non-
banking business enterprises
in the United States
wittn
their own
branches and subsidiaries abroad {own foreign offices) or with their
foreign parent companies, and capital ti^nsactions of the U.S. Gov-
ernment.
Consoliaated data on
all
types
of
intemational
capital
transactions are published by
ttie Department of Commerce
in
its
regular reports on the United States balance of payments.
•
Section
t presents
liabilities
to foreigners reported by U.S.
banks and otiier depository institijtions, as well as brokers and dealers.
Dollar liabilities are reported monttily;
tiiose denominated
in foreign
currendes are reported quarteriy. Respondents report certain of tiieir
own liat3Jlities and all of their custody liabilities to foreigners.
• Section
II presents daims on foreignere also reported by U.S.
banks and otiier depository institutions, brokers, and dealers. Data on
bank daims held for tiieir own account are collected monthly. Informa-
tion on daims held for their domestic customers, as well as foreign
cunency daims,
is collected on a quarteriy basis only. Maturity data
are reported according to time remaining to maturity. Reporting also
covers certain items held by brokers and dealers in tne United States.
•
In section
III are supplementary
statistics on U.S.
banks'
liabilities to, and daims on, foreigners. Supplementary data on bank
kans and credits to nonbank foreigners combine selected information
from tile TIC reports with data from tfie montiily Federal Reserve 2502
reports submitted for major foreign branches of U.S. tanks.
Otiier
supplementary data on U.S. bank dollar liabilities to, and dollar daims
on, countries not regularty reported separately appear in the June and
December issues or the Treasury Bulletin.
•
Section IV shows tine liabilities to, and daims on, unaffiliated
foreigners by exporters,
importers,
industrial and commercial con-
cerns,
financial
institutions
(other than
banks,
other depository
institutions, and brokers), and
otiier nonbanking enterprises
in Hie
United States. Information does not include accounts of nonbanking
enterprises in tiie United States with their own branches and subsidi-
aries abroad or witii theirforeign parent companies. These are reported
by business enterprises to the Departinent of Commerce on its direct
investinent forms. Data exclude daims on foreigners held through
banks in the United States.
• Section V contains information on tiansactions in all types of
long-term domestic and foreign securities wiUi foreigners reported by
baiTKs, brokers, and otiier entities in tiie United States. The data cover
tiansactions executed in the United States for tiie accounts of foreign-
ers, and transactions executed abroad for tiie accounts of reporting
institijtions and their domestic customers. This includes tiansactions
in newly issued securities as well as transactions in, and redemptions
of, outstanding issues.
Also, some transactions dassified as direct
investinents in
tiie balance of payments accounts may be included.
However, tiie data do not include nonmari<etable Treasury bonds and
notes shown in table IFS-3.
In the case of outstanding securities, the geographical breakdown
of
the
transactions data does
not
necessarily
reflect
tiie
ultimate
owners of or tiie original issuers of tiie securities. This is because Uie
patii of a security
is not tiBcked prior to
its being purchased from, or
after
it is sold to, a foreigner in a TIC reportable transaction. That
is,
before
it enters and after it departs Uie reporting system, ownership of
a security may be transferred between foreigners of different countries.
Such tiansfere may occur any number of times and are concealed
among Uie net figures for U.S. tiansactions opposite individual coun-
tries. Hence, the geographical breakdown shows only the country of
domidle of the foreign buyers and sellers of securities in a particular
round of transactions.

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
99
SECTION
I.-Liabilities to Foreigners Reported by Banks in the United States
TABLE CM-I-l.--Total Liabilities by Type of Holder

100
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-I-2.--TotaI Liabilities by Type, Payable in Dollars
Part A.~Foreign Countries
(In millions of dollars)
End of
calendar
year
or month
Official institutions
'
Banks
Other Foreigners
Total
foreign
coun-
tries
Deposits
Demand
Time
_gL
_eL
us.
Treasury
bills &
certif-
icates
!D
other
Ua-
bili-
ties'
(5)
Deposits
Demand
Time
U.S.
Treasury
Other
bills &
lia-
To own
certif-
btii'
foreign
icates
ties
^
offices
Deposfts
Den^nd
Time
JBL
JZL
JBL
J9L
J10L
JUL.
_t12L
us.
Treasury
bills &
certif-
icates
(13)
Other
lia-
blli-
Ues'
1887
612.888
1.757
12.843
88,829
17.238
10.898
79.717
9.134
1988
682,115
1.917
9.767
103,722
19,836
9.948
80.189
7.602
1989
731.984
2.196
10.495
76,985
23,805
10,279
90,557
9,367
1990
r
753,797
1,940
14,405
79,424
23,597
10,053
88,541
10,669
1991
-
Mar.
r
748,629
1,702
14,460
83,990
26,637
10,054
83,635
10,674
Apr. r
733,113
1,633
14,264
81,087
23847
9,076
78,739
10,030
May
r
728,572
1,448
15,190
82,421
26,647
8,677
71,598
8,712
June
r
725,042
1,542
16,323
84,526
24.992
8,589
68,987
8,664
July
r
722.042
1,396
15.706
86.071
27,006
8,424
69,516
7,970
Aug. r
728,480
1,683
15,465
88,596
30,904
8,254
70,595
8.242
Sept. r
732.214
1.645
13.951
90.394
23.529
8,990
74,589
8.161
Oct.
r
742,548
1,307
14.544
94.428
25654
8.164
78181
8363
Nov
749.447
1.621
13.145
92.855
28,019
11,396
80,199
7.855
Deo
745,256
2,642
16,474
92.692
19,245
8,630
82,936
7,471
1992- Jan
741.071
1.480
16.307
92.711
23.631
8.807
73,988
7,713
Feb. p
743,465
1,297
14,655
94,731
26,537
8.369
74,560
7,733
Mar. p
761.270
1.342
17.667
102.143
24,857
8,543
74,473
8,344
65373
247,635
72,646
289,138
86,208
318,864
109,874
321,667
107,452
106,243
103,383
101,401
97,470
97,383
100,214
101,126
98,065
93,246
94,111
92,726
96,272
315,154
312,514
314,481
318,774
316,069
317,455
319,981
320,120
324,002
327,823
330,875
333,128
338,451
9,604
54,277
3,515
12,068
9.928
61.025
3,675
12,723
9,460
66,801
4,551
22,415
9,710
64,086
6,339
13,490
8,500
8,970
8,718
8,645
8,066
8,460
9,218
8,138
8,589
9004
8,983
9,205
9,257
63,839
62,405
62,925
62,026
61,779
59,526
59,364
59,478
68,578
57,670
55,839
54,588
54,386
6,354
5919
6,224
6,399
6,367
7,218
7,432
8,243
8.698
8,841
8,248
8,391
8,170
16,176
18,387
18,149
15,174
16,202
14,699
14,746
14,802
16,425
18,582
18,378
17,545
17,375
PART B."Nonmonetary International and Regional Organizations
{In millions of dollars)
End of
calendar
year or month
Total
(1)
Demand
deposfts
(2)

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
101
TABLE CM-I-3.--Total LiabiUties by Country
(Poflition at end ol period in millions o< dollafB)
Calendar yeai
1992
Countiy
Europe:
Austria
BelgiunvLuxenibourg
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
Denmailt
Finland
France
Qerman Oemocfatic Republic
Gefmany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turi<ey
United Kingdom
U.S.S.R
YugosJavia
Other Europe
Total Europe
Canada
Latin America and Caribbean:
Argentina
Bahamas
Bermuda
Brazil
British West Indies
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Guatemala
Jamaica
Mexico
Netherlands Antilles
Panama
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Other Latin America
and Caribbean
Total Latin America and
Caribbean
Sm footnotes at end of table.
1980 r
Nov.
Jan.
Feb. p
Mar, p
1.259
11,467
144
52
2.364
292
27.318
126
8,500
676
157
974
16.924
5671
1.571
73
907
110
5556
1.308
36.284
1.078
120.902
138
529
8,840
7.951
87.948
2.686
6.363
116.796
2.073
4.383
10
1.386
1.201
269
15.316
7.485
4.570
1.688
297
1.915
9.631
1.358
12.926
67
83
1.589
674
29.680
113
11.947
1.031
227
1.070
18,748
7,302
2,401
66
2.462
76
4.490
1,498
36,226
1,858
112,387
477
1,474
13,516
1,404
15,459
62
68
1,563
661
34,594
n.a
12,389
1,462
337
1,000
21,335
6,742
2.361
1.018
3.007
60
7.772
1.840
39.643
1.265
125.007
119
928
12.238
1,637
17.512
146
258
1,256
1,126
34,659
n a.
12,648
898
440
843
15,893
7,552
1,502
2,492
2,244
163
11,349
1.178
39.568
1.930
111.974
236
544
15.885
1.450
16,199
199
287
1,075
1,409
35,140
n.a.
14,548
787
455
898
15,835
8,419
1,998
2,386
2,199
166
11,527
2,406
41,222
1,761
113,952
251
623
9,104
1,298
16,210
102
229
1,129
961
32.576
n.a.
13.781
695
416
641
13.092
9.223
2.054
2.537
1.129
138
9.507
2.071
39.653
1.639
116.085
171
484
13,992
7,410
100,576
2,979
6,373
142,499
3.299
4.670
10
1.408
1.320
209
15.487
7,615
4.541
2.006
388
2.316
9.582
7.498
107.751
3.076
6.907
154.335
3.226
4.509
11
1.392
1.556
257
17.108
8.652
4.647
1.310
393
2,573
12,579
7,628
101,147
3,535
5,906
168,714
3,495
4,834
12
1,262
1,608
201
20,948
6,978
4,620
1,261
295
2,444
12,758
7,940
100,848
3,379
6066
166,881
3,398
4,705
2
1,255
1,608
231
20,900
6,587
4,773
1,277
390
2,183
14,067
8,081
101,703
3,858
5,909
169,502
3,436
4,670
6
1,271
1,568
234
21,315
7,277
4,427
1,261
301
2,385
14,406
1,287
18,018
132
280
1,135
691
29,781
n.a.
15,163
917
390
727
11,848
8,580
1,530
3,258
2,555
121
10,789
2,728
38,713
1,840
115,865
248
530
14,160
8,060
100,228
3,679
5,884
171,373
3,522
4,756
5
1,240
1,563
227
21,262
7,236
4,482
1,248
301
2,230
13,310
1,487
18,152
175
259
1,030
1,258
29,189
n.a.
15,459
1,080
366
1,065
12,187
10,512
1,418
2,841
2,086
75
13,623
2,290
41,097
1,761
117,120
178
505
15,252
252,219

102
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-I-3.--Total Liabilities by Country, Con.
(PoeMion at and of period in millions o< doHarel
Calendar year
1991
1992
Countiy
1968
1989
1990 r
Nov.
Dee.
Jan.
Feb. p
Mar, p
tela:
China.
Mainland
Taiwan
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Israel
Japan
Korea
Lebanon
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Syria
Thailand
Oil-exporting countries
^
.
.
.
.
.
Other Asia
Total Asia
Africa:
Egypt
Ghana
Uberia
Morocco
South Africa
Zaire
Oii-exporting countries ^
.
.
.
.
Other Africa
Total Africa
Other countries:
Australia
All other
Total other countries
Total foreign countries
International and regional:
International
European regional
Latin American regional
Asian regional
African regional
Middle East regior^
Total international and regional
Qrand total
1,895
26,087
14,417
703
1,183
1,480
118,272
2,548
331
778
852
1,172
10,588
68
1,240
12,172
1,318
195,104
914
125
431
68
449
85
1.054
984
4,060
2,547
58
641
18
58
1
3,323
1,788
10,625
14,503
781
1,285
1,247
111,724
3,226
489
1,749
1,169
1,775
13,041
120
2,096
13,588
1,286
189,504
688
120
518
78
217
82
1,158
1,024
2,43S
11,327
15,066
1,237
1,245
2,771
83,760
2,299
402
1,445
746
1,591
13,578
152
1,445
16,913
1,435
2,783
11,806
15,820
2,615
1,416
2,118
62,249
2,558
441
1,214
804
2,145
11,698
124
3,584
16,567
1,471
2,625
11,779
16,742
2,421
1,465
2,024
71,829
2,541
412
1,341
984
2,456
11,913
177
2,266
15,888
1,606
2,738
11,235
17,530
2,300
1.039
2,202
70,886
2,445
388
1.580
857
2.263
11.052
185
2,947
16,038
1,486
157,846
139,513
148,469
147,182
1.451
128
482
105
228
53
1.125
1.111
1,060
148
471
94
173
32
1,283
1,226
1,621
145
455
80
228
31
1,085
1,201
1,620
174
427
87
201
28
1,217
1,322
3,896
4,498
4,856
5,076
4,072
151
703
48
62
10
4,512
61
1.122
132
282
5
6.265
288
1,438
447
439
6.643
296
1.260
427
582
7.631
279
1,501
310
444
1
5,047
6,113
9,218
10,166
2.607
10.872
17.235
2.359
1.278
2.146
68.621
2.757
388
1,450
836
2,469
10,585
182
3,238
18,547
1,550
148,131
1,632
149
448
83
188
30
1,227
1,185
4,953
8,484
281
1,579
219
323
10.886
2.677
10.880
17.084
2.031
1,518
2,545
74,383
2,830
361
1,303
1.006
2.645
9.834
174
3.344
18.417
1.607
153,748
1,337
130
422
91
191
35
1,441
1,273
4.920
5,372
883

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
103
TABLE CM-I-4.-TotaI Liabilities by Type and Country, Mar. 31, 1992, Preliminary
(Poartion in mitona o( dollaral
Total liabilitiw
Liabilitiea payable in dollara
To foreign otfidaJ
Institutions and
Liabilities to
unaffiliated foreign banlo
all other foreigners
Uabil-
Payable
Totals
Short-
itiesto
Short-
in
lerniUS
banks'
term US
Payable
foreign
Banks'
Custody
Deposits
Treasury
Other
own
Deposits
Treasury
in
cunen-
own
lia-
liabil-
oblig^
liabil-
foreign
obligit:
Country
Total
dollars
cies
'
bilrties
ities
Demand
Trme
tions
Jies
offices
Demand
Time '
tions
(n
W
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(8)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
Europe;
Austria
1.487
1.230
257
1.094
136
SO
559
86
306
180
19
22
1
Belgium
19.152
16.290
2.862
13.551
2,739
175
5.900
1.460
2.618
4.687
102
171
117
Bulgaria
176
175
-
108
67
39
5
66
62
1
2
Czechoslovakia.
.
,
259
259
-
113
146
36
19
145
56
1
-
2
Denmark
1.030
892
138
740
152
100
240
88
155
123
15
3
52
Finland
1.258
1,190
68
959
231
19
-
196
770
9
13
1
France
29.189
25.857
3.332
16,497
9,360
307
6,192
8,749
3,913
5.727
125
540
57
German Denxx^ratic
figpyyjg
na.
n.a.
na
na
n.a.
n.a.
na.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
na
Germany
15,459
9,531
5,928
7,024
2,507
366
2,152
2,328
2,605
1,379
186
372
60
Greece
1,080
1,058
22
801
257
45
54
247
142
304
49
205
4
Hungary
366
349
17
260
89
54
60
69
141
5
Ireland
1,065
955
110
724
231
22
157
180
71
398
33
80
5
Italy
12,187
9,893
2,294
7,842
2,051
270
3,318
1,303
3,331
1,029
115
294
134
Netherlands
...
10,512
9,254
1,258
5,449
3,805
93
3,303
3,677
764
547
616
128
35
Norway
1,418
1.286
132
445
841
24
11
820
196
67
79
72
Poland
2,841
2,832
9
911
1,921
29
69
1,920
682
125
2
6
Portugal
2,086
2,071
15
269
1,802
42
25
1,735
71
17
14
80
23
Ronnania
75
75
-
75
-
12
5
-
6
52
Spain
13,623
13,487
136
4,568
8,919
219
886
8,742
1,507
302
95
780
16
Sweden
2,290
2,106
184
2,022
84
94
81
60
300
1,490
17
18
17
Switzerland
41,097
37,111
3,986
11,711
25,400
380
1,947
21.147
3,452
7,195
125
520
1,700
Turkey
1,761
1.598
163
942
656
139
309
629
359
93
7
18
15
United Kingdom
117,120
103,415
13,705
89,426
13,989
641
21,278
8,584
9,736
55,006
490
930
3,073
USSR
178
168
10
168
-
77
30
-
38
5
13
5
•/ugoslavia
505
504
1
504
-
46
75
-
124
212
4
43
Other Europe ....
15.252
14.484
768
13.564
920
72
7.206
377
6510
175
14
116
11
Total Europe
291,465
256,070
35.395
179,767
76,303
3,341
53,881
62,422
37,341
79,884
2,130
4,424
5.321
Canada
22,335
20,884
1,451
16,869
4,015
242
3,532
3,459
1,852
7,915
433
2,764
188
Latin America:
Argentina
8,492
8,310
182
5,850
2,460
330
26
2,331
249
162
629
4,423
42
Bahamas
102,693
101,679
1,014
88,234
13,446
164
5,094
137
16,718
78,954
115
853
397
Bermuda
3,540
3,339
201
2,525
814
9
913
133
527
91
152
336
217
BrazU
6,894
5,770
124
5,415
355
236
378
-
301
453
441
3,516
28
British West Indies
.
169,926
165,472
4,464
126,885
38,587
82
9,495
115
41,327
107,032
216
3,404
450
Chile
3,737
3,623
114
2,482
1,141
63
73
924
373
88
223
1,746
36
Colombia
4,955
4,912
43
3,409
1,503
72
731
790
1,021
21
259
1.927
5
Cuba
11
11
10
1
-
6
-
-
-
3
1
1
Ecuador
1,191
1,168
23
1,142
26
57
41
-
52
31
129
830
11
Guatemala
1,553
1,639
14
1,471
68
40
244
50
11
-
135
1,012
4
Jamaica
271
271
-
262
9
34
25
-
104
6
21
62
Mexteo
22,483
21,640
943
12,696
8,844
241
921
8,004
2,764
1,029
1,102
6,965
259
Netherlands Antilles
6,224
5,219
1,005
4,821
398
29
138
21
113
3,361
54
919
140
Panama
4.222
4.144
78
3.832
312
41
186
11
250
1.007
171
2.171
100
Peru
1.215
1.187
28
1.123
64
37
30
46
138
1
78
827
Trinidad and Tobago
317
312
5
306
6
36
38
-
56
10
17
148
1
Uruguay
2.126
2.054
72
1.988
66
29
71
-
157
729
120
893
12
Venezuela
13.269
12.383
886
10.176
2.207
128
1,458
1,078
1,565
821
612
6,552
26
Other Latin Amerka
6613
6508
105
6.612
896
224
606
574
617
249
530
3.462
132
Total Latin Amerka
358,732
349,441
9,291
278,239
71,202
1,842
20,474
14,214
65.333
194.035
5,007
40.047
1,861

104
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-1.4.--Total Liabilities by Type and Country, Mar. 31, 1992, Preliminary, Con.
(Position in mllliom ot dollaral
Country
Total liabilitiea
Liabilities payable in dollars
To foreign offictaJ
institutions and
unaffiliated foreign banks
Total
(1)
Payable
in
doHars
(2)
Payable
in
foreign
curren-
cies
'
(3)
Totals
Banks'
own Ba-
biUties
(4)
Custody
Babil-
ities
(5)
Deposits
Demand
Time
Shoil-
term US
Treasury
Other
oblig^
liabr^
(6)
(7)
tions
(8)
Hies
(8)
Liabil-
Klesto
banks'
own
foreign
offces
(10)
Liabilities to
all otfier foreigners
Momo-
randum
Deposits
Demand
Time
(11)
(12)
Short-
term US,
Treasury
obliga-
tbns
(13)
Negoti-
Other
able CDs
lia-
hekj for
bil-
all for-
ities
eigners
(14)
(15)
Asia:
China
Mainland
2,677
2.677
Taiwan
10,880
10,596
HonflKong
17,084
14,716
India
2,031
2,028
Indonesia
1,518
1,516
Israel
2,545
2,536
Japan
74,383
48,593
Korea
2,830
2,827
Lebanon
361
360
lulalaysta
1,303
1,303
Pakistan
1,006
1,006
Philippines
2,645
2,638
Singapore
9,934
9,582
Syria
174
174
Thailand
3,344
3330
Other Asia
21.024
20.884
Total Asia
153,749
125.766
Africa:
Egypt
1.337
1,337
Ghana
130
130
Uberia
422
413
Morocoo
91
90
South Africa
191
191
Zaire
35
35
Other Africa
2,714
2,690
Total Alrba....
'^^°
^'^
Other countries:
Australia
All other
Total other countries
Total foreign
countries
.
.
.
-

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
105
CHART CM-A.--International Liabilities
Reported by International Banking Facilities and Banks in the United States
900
800
-
700
-
600
-
500
-
400
-
300
-
200
-
100
-
(In billions of dollars)
International Banking Facilities
U.S. Banks
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991, r
1992, IstQtr.
END OF PERIOD

106
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
SECTION IL-Claims on Foreigners Reported by Banks in the United States
TABLE CM-n-l.--Total Claims by Type
(Position at end of period in millions o< dollars)
Calendar
year
Type of claim
19B8
Total daims
661,721
Payable in dollars
593.087
Banks' own claims on foreigners
534.492
Fofoign public borrowers
60.51
1
Unaffiliated foreign banks
Deposits
78.185
Otfier
56,700
Own foreign offk:es
296.011
All dlier foreigners
43.085
Claims of tanks' domestic customers
58,594
Deposits
13.019
Negotiable and readily transferable
instruments
30,983
Collectksns and other
14,592
Payable in foreign currencies
68,634
Banks* own claims on foreigners
65,127
Claims of banks' domeste customers
3,507
Memoranda:
Claims reported by IBFs
343,205
Payable in dollara
290,061
Payable in foreign currencies
53,144
Customer liat>ility on acceptances
12,699
Claims wrtfi remaining maturity of
1 year or less:
On foreign publk; txDrrowers
23,916
On all other unaffiliated foreigners
154,430
Claims with renr^ning maturity of more than
1 year
On foreign public borrowers
36,014
On all other unaffHialed foreigners
23,762
1991
Sept
r
Dec
r
Mar.
r
Sept
Dec p
12,921
629,707
12.832
650.711
634.043
635.686
649,989

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
107
TABLE CM-n-2.-TotaI Claims by Country
(PocHion al end of penod in millions o( dollarel
CaJendaf
year
Counliy
1989
Europe:
*"""•
661
BelgiunvLuxembourg
_,._
Bulflaria
' ^
Czechoslovakia
_„
Denmark
g^
f'*'*^
1232
''"^
18,836
Qerman Dennocratic Republic
.
.
.
oso
°"*™"''
6,119
Q'««»
818
Hungufy
384
I"*""
616
•^^
8.631
Nelheriand*
2674
No™">y
677
Poland
258
P°'<"9"l
426
Romania
„,
^'"
2,063
^*^'"
2,971
Switzerland
yggg
''"^
3,'024
United Kingdom
94 261
USSR
*"
1,340
Yufloslavia
, 35q
Other Europe
g^g
Total Europe
164.912
Canada
19,690
Latin America and Caribtiean:
^O'^'
9790
^o™*
79,374
Bemuda
,3^
^"'
24!256
British Weet Indies
82 177
°'^"«
4696
C<it"rbt>
2.917
Cuba
,
^""'^'^
1,768
Quatemala
2og
•""™^
303
""""*
24.997
Nethertands Antilles
2 027
'''""™
l!98S
''"'"
793
TrinWad and Tobago
203
""«'"1'
962
V»"»^«"»
10.210
Other Latin America
and Caribbean
, g^
Tc*al LaSn Amenca
and Caribbean
249.655
658
7.007
87
28
1,037
1.395
17.128
245
6.346
549
221
601
8,527
2.827
805
230
747
16
2.286
4.539
6.184
3.284
85,211
919
1.111
393
152.383
20.720
8.139
68,790
2.234
21.350
93.292
3.830
2,738
1.570
209
263
14.073
1.808
1,794
714
220
867
8.741
1.377
Sept
r
Dec
r
613

108
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-n-2.--Total Claims by Country, Con.
(Pottlian at and ol p«riod In nmlliona o( dollare)
Calendar
year
Country
1989
Asia:
China:
Mainland
703
Taiwan
2,873
HongKons
13.189
'"di*
668
Indonesia
qqq
'*••'
6,334
"•"P*"
15S.162
''Of"
5.422
Lebanon
74
Malaysia
477
PaKtatan
^ ^37
Philippines
^ 347
Singapore
1, ,03
Syria
45
Thailand
^ ^35
Oil-expoitng countries
'
10 419
Other Asia
g22
Total Asia
.
211,420
Africa:
Egypt
508
Qhana
g
Liberia
902
Morocco
730
South Alrica
^ g73
Zaire
^7
Oil-exporling countries ^
-I 537
Other Africa
72i
TolalAtrica
6,247
Other countries:
Australia
Another
Total other countries
....
Total foreign oountries
.
.
.
International and regional:
Inlernational
3.962
European regional
3
L^in AnDerican regional
57
Asian regional
^4
African regional
^^
Middle Eastern regional
Total inlernational
and regional
4.056
Grand total
55^ 72^
1990
1991
Sept. r
Dec. r
Juner
Sept
Dec. p
593

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
109
TABLE CM-n-3.-Total Claims on Foreigners by Type and Country, Dec. 31, 1991
{Position at end of period in millions of dollars)
Country
Reporting banks' own ctainis
Total
claims
(1)

110
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-n-3.--Total Claims on Foreigners by Type and Country, Dec. 31, 1991, Con.
{Position at end of period In milliona of doBars)
Country
Reporting banks' own clainns
Total
daims
(1)
Total
tsanks'
own
claims
(2)
On loreign
put>tic
borrowers
and
unaffiliated
foreigners
(3)
On own
foreign
offices
(4)
Payable
in
foreign
currencies
(S)
Memorandum
Customers'
liablity
on accept-
ances
(6)
Claims of tanks'
domestic custonners
Total
(7)
Payable
in
dollars
(8)
Payable
in
foreign
currencies
(9)
Asia:
China:
Mainland
78^
Taiwan
2,205
Hong Kong
49 931
India
522
Indonesia
^ 004
'«'»^
6,450
J»P»n
127,023
Korea
g202
Lebanon
gg
Malaysia
269
Pakistan
^ ^gg
Philippines
2 004
Singapore
ygg!
Syria
27
Thailand
^ 7gg
Other Asia
g 53g
TctalAsIa
179,012
Africa:
EwPt
305
Qhana
3
Liberia
g53
Morocco
832
South Africa
'I 253
Zaire
4
Other Africa
2082
Total Africa
6432
Other countries:
Australa
At o«hor
Total other countries
...
Total foreign oountiiee
.
.
Intematkinal and regional:
International
G3U
European regional
Latin Anwrk»n regional
gj
Asian regional
^4
African regional
^^
Middle Eastern regional
Total intemalional and regional
.
.
g 393
Qrand total
ggg 75g
Less than $500,000.
753

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
111
SECTION IIL-Supplementary Liabilities and Claims
Data Reported by Banks in the United States
TABLE CM-ra-l.-Dollar Claims on Nonbank Foreigners
(Pogftion at end of period In millions of dollare)

112
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-III-2.~Dollar Liabilities to, and Dollar Claims on, Foreigners
in Countries and Areas Not Regularly Reported Separately
fPosilion at end of period in millions o* dollare)
Total liabilities
Total banks' own ctaims
Calendar year
Calendar year
Country
Other Europe:
Cyprus
Iceland
Ireland
Monaoo
Other Latin America and Caribbean:
Aniba
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
CcetaRica
Dominica
Dominican Republio
B Salvador
French West Indies
and French Guiana
Quyana
Haiti
Honduras
Nicaragua
Paraguay
Surirume
Other Asia:
Afgtianistan
Bangladesh
Brunei
Burma
Cambodia (formerly Kampuchea)
.
Jordan
Macau
Nepal
Sri Lanka
Vietnam
Yemen (Aden)
Yemen (Sanaa)
Other Alrksa:
Angola
BururKJi
Cameroon
Djibouti
Ethiopia, including Eritrea
Guinea
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Madagascar
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozamt»que
Niger
Rwanda
Senegal
Somalia
Sudan
Tanzania
Tunisia
Uganda
Zanibia
Zimbabwe
All other
Fiji
Marshall Islands
New Zealand
Papua New Guinea
U.S. Trust Tenltory
of the Pacifk} Islands
Vanuatu (formerly New Hebrides)
.
Dec
p
1987
1988
1989
1990
Dec p
19
644
9B
31
215
32
423
678
18
844
738
20
211
235
609
87
520
51
68
97
14
4
7
208
30
74
44
155
18
19
15
16
32
65
37
5
69
71
85
18
13
SO
3
14
10
27
45
33
29
58
68
31
22
1
480
31
153
9
40
n.a.
905
195
36
564
971
132
927
783
26
263
614
87
595
60
85
134
316
15
57
230
25
83
58
195
22
30
7
22
16
67
38
2
50
85
78
17
9
25
8
13
19
18
52
34
58
43
104
26
20
618
54
122
51
51
n.a.
41
226
53
531
956
43
995
938
121
26
288
612
79
726
76
82
126
306
8
7
168
28
55
77
213
30
103
20
12
41
61
33
5
38
78
65
22
42
48
8
12
23
15
46
35
63
38
85
28
21
35
88
SO
35
111
70
n.a.
290
58
271
60
565
1,148
14
969
989
299
38
311
600
123
750
78
70
222
318
6
2
161
44
46
129
211
149
28
21
10
87
37
4
S2
141
9
8
17
61
5
7
22
21
73
35
62
45
72
49
40
25
26
29
6
168
n.a.
n.a.
209
41
253
47
484
1,250
12
1,294
878
n.a.
n.a.
263
615
219
562
62
n.a.
82
6
4
184
42
67
138
244
132
36
22
9
n.a.
95
31
27
76
24
15
n.a.
37
n.a
23
13
18
85
83
138
38
58
105
n.a.
n.a.
821
67
n.a.
n.a.
48
71
436
5
8
28
1
134
442
3
413
162
2
6
12
167
116
67
8
2
17
1
1
135
39
7
37
86
15
2
134
33
2
1
2
28
2
12
8
36
23
97
3
12
953
41
176
n.a.
356
9
40
2
110
384
394
220
4
1
15
152
55
60
1
45
1
151
23
8
SS
6
42
73
6
9
56
1
178
72
3
3
21
22
22
3
2
11
176
22
95
14
788
69
n.a.
643
3
151
1
30
328
2
443
261
13
124
55
81
6
3
60
1
1
176
19
8
51
60
60
2
8
54
113
45
2
3
22
1
26
39
1
9
130
3
26
90
14
460
76
2
17
67
61
n.a.
26
4
21
1
55
176
1
297
281
2
1
22
88
56
71
11
11
46
1
214
30
122
51
106
6
7
19
1
60
29
6
19
1
19
131
14
3
130
413
42
2
15
72
40
n.a.
n.a.
9
46
n.a.
53
142
n.a.
243
216
n.a.
n.a.
10
47
27
95
10
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
174
38
n.a.
n.a.
6
11
14
48
43
n.a.
n.a
18
n.a.
1
n.a.
123
n.a.
557
58
' Less thari $500,000.
Note. "Data represent a partial breakdown of the arTX>unts shown for the correspondirig dates
for the 'other' geographkial categories in the regular monthly series in the Troasury Bulletin.

113
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
CHART CM-B.--Claims on Internationals
Reported by International Banking Facilities and Banks in the United States
(In billions of dollars)
700
600 -
500
-
400
-
300
-
200 -
100 -
International Banking Facilities
U.S. Banks
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990, r
1991,
p
END OF PERIOD

114
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
SECTION IV.--Liabilities to, and Claims on, Foreigners
Reported by Nonbanking Business Enterprises
in the United States
TABLE CM-IV-l.--Total Liabilities and Claims by Type
(Po8Kion at end ol period In millions ol doBare)
Calendar year
1890
1991
Type o( liability or dalm
Total liabilities
Payable In dollars
Financial
Commercial:
Trade payables
Advance receipts and other
.
.
.
Payable in foreign currencies
.
.
.
Financial
Commercial;
Trade payables
Advance receipts and other
Total clainns
Payable In dollars
Financial:
Deposits
Other
Commercial:
Trade receivables
Advance payments and other
Payable in foreign currencies
.
.
.
Financial:
Deposits
Other
Commercial:
Trade receivables
Advance payments and other
.
.
1987
1988
1989r
Dec
r
l^r
r
Juner
Sept
r
Dec. p
22.785
8.643
5.754
8.388
5.517
3.781
1.S5t
185
30.964
28.502
13,765
4.656
9.084
997
1.128
814
451
68
27,335
10,608
4.924
11.803
5.617
3.900
1.580
137
33.805
31.425
14.544
5220
10,697
1,063
1,099
777
494
12
38.764
33.973
14,035
7,191
12,747
4,791
3,844
33.173
30.773
11.364
6,190
11.618
1,601
2.400
989
754
635
22
43.417
38,535
14,737
9,556
14,242
4,882
3,730
938
214
35,008
32.499
12.400
6.247
12.994
1.858
2.509
1.095
666
528
20
36.414
14.187
7.872
14.355
4,506
3,309
228
35,337
33,021
11,977
5894
13,101
2.049
2.316
1.023
727
549
17
35,317
13,928
7.722
13.667
4,477
3.352
977
148
36.837
34.779
11.644
7.637
13,344
2.154
2.058
773
688
568
29
36.174
14.686
8.375
13.113
4.479
3.489
G64
37.898
35.585
15070
5,493
12,681
2,341
2,313
985
673
554
101
36,098
15,186
8.089
12,823
4,725
3,504
929
292
41,330
38,890
16,209
6,646
13,449
2,586
809
820
655
156

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
115
TABLE CM-IV.2.--TotaI Liabilities by Country
{Posilbn al end d period in millions ol dolars)
Calendar year
1990
Country
1986
Europe:
Austria
26
Belgiunrt-Luxembourg
37q
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
•
Denmark
42
Finland
224
France
1013
Qerman Democratic Republic. ...
-ig
Qefmany
1 083
Greece
ig
Hungary
7
Ireland
na
Itaty
342
Netherlands
qqq
Norway
201
Poland
1
Portugal
g
Romania
^^
Spain
157
Sweden
151
Swilzeriand
1 031
Turtcey
g
United Kingdom
6481
u.s.s.R
e
Yugoslavia
22
Other Europe
146
Total Europe
Canada
Latin America and Caribbean:
Argentina
29
Bahamas
545
Bermuda
160
Brazil
93
British West Indies
Iigg
Chile
34
Colombia
21
Cuba
Ecuador
12
Guatemala
5
Jamaica
13
Mexico
239
Netherlands Antiltes
qq
Panama
25
Peru
22
Trinidad and Tobago
3
Uruguay
5
Venezuela
216
Other Latin America
and Caribbean
qq
Total Latin America
and Caribbean
2.868
1989
Dec
r
Sept
Dec. p
IB

116
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-IV-2.-TotaI Liabilities by Country, Con.
(Position at end ol period in millions c4 dollare)
Calendar year
t990
1991
Countiy
1086
Asia:
China:
Mainland
264
Taiwan
1^3
Hona Kong
^^2
India
26
Indonesia
79
l«f»»l
198
J»P«n
3440
Korea
572
Lebanon
•
Malaysia
^3
Pakistan
^4
Philippines
^7
Singapore
215
Syria
2
Thailand
-Iq^
Oil-exporting countries
1
^ qqq
Other Asia
34
Total Asia
6885
Africa:
Eaypt
209
Qhana
^
Liberia
.
Morocco
5
South Africa
^g5
Zaire
^
Oil-exporting countries 2
^gg
Other Africa
42
Total Africa
g2o
Other countries:
Australia
All other
Total other countries
....
Total foreign countries
.
.
.
International and regional:
International
547
European regional
42
Latin American regional
Asian regional
African regional
Middle Eastern regioiuil
Total MarnatioiuU and regional
.
.
ggg
Grand total
25 587
Sept.
Dec. p
204

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
117
TABLE CM-IV-3.--Total Liabilities by Type and Country, Dec. 31, 1991, Preliminary
(Posilion at end ol period in milliore cH dollars)
Country
Total
liabilities
(1)
Total
(2)
Financial liabilities
Payabte
in dollars
(3)
PayaUe
in foreign
currencies
(1)
Commercial
liabilities
(5)
Europe
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg ....
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
Denmark
Finland
France
German Democratic Republk;
Germany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Sweden
Switzeriand
Turlwy
United Kingdom
USSR
Yugoslavia
Other Europe
Total Europe
Canada
I^n America and Caribt>ean:
Argentina
Bahamas
Bermuda
Brazil
British West Indies
Chile
Cotombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Quatenuda
Jamaica
Mexico
Netherlands Antilles
Panama
Peru
Trinidad ar>d Tobago
Unjguay
Venezuela
Other Latin America
and Caribbean
Total Latin America
and Caribbean
130
409
9
4
63
109
2,127
na
1.601
177
26
337
60S
1,636
439
32
55
39
412
305
787
64
9,123
57
38
26
515
310
218
2,844
41
16
15
6
6
310
642
6
10
17
1
97
125
S3
162
7
60
1,247
n.a,
658
109
115
932
217
17
1
18
316
5,955
512
1
2,737
8
590
70
149
7
60
1,225
n.a.
645
108
3
683
217
17
162
5,532
1
590
13
13
22
n.a.
13
1
112
1
15
154
423
1
46
47
247
2
4
63
49
943
177
26
228
483
704
222
15
54
39
394
305
471
64
3,168
57
39

118
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-rV-3.--TotaI Liabilities by Type and Country, Dec. 31, 1991, Preliminary, Con.
(Positron at end of period in millions at dollare)
Country
Asia:
China:
Mainland
Taiwan
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Israel
Japan
Korea
Lebanon
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Syria
Thailand
Other Asia
Total Asia
Africa:
Egypt
Ghana
Liberia
Morocco
South Africa
Zaire
Other Afrca
Total Africa
Other countries:
Australia
All other
Total other countries
Total foreign countries
....
International and regional:
International
European regional
Latin American regional
Asian regional
African regional
Middle Eastern regional
Total international and regional
Grand total
Total
liabilities
(1)
Financial liabilities
Total
(2)
PayaUe
in dollars
(3)
Payable
in foreign
currencies
(4)
Contmercial
llabilitiee
(S)
534
727
761
59
1S3
124
7,143
1,549
3
298
25
25
554
2
255
1,601
13.843
161
35
77
3
491
767
40
477
1
12
4
3.533
333
236
4.610
12
4
1.202
333
233
12
1
534
727
284
58
171
120
3,610
1,216
3
297
25
25
318
2
255
1,588
9.233
160
35
76
487
072
109

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
119
TABLE CM-IV-4.--TotaI Claims by Country
(Posllion at and o< pariod In mHliona o< dollare)
Calendar year
Countiy
1986
Europe:
Austria
24
Belgium-Luxembourg
^74
Bulgaria
7
Czechoslovakia
j
Oannnarit
g2
Finland
83
France
ggg
German [democratic Republic ....
22
Qermany
ggO
Greece
77
Hungary
g
Ireland
n.a.
Il»ly
458
Netherlands
3^5
Norway
^23
Poland
7
Portugal
g
Romania
22
Spain
205
Sweden
^4^
Switzeriand
402
Turi<By
52
United Kingdom
.|0 354
U.S.S.R
84
Yugoslavia
j5g
Other Europe
70
Total Europe
Canada
Latin America and Caribbean:
Argentina
^27
Bahamas
2,656
Bermuda
^gg
Brazil
320
British West Indies
6,118
Chile
83
Colombia
ig3
Cuba
^
Ecuador
72
Guatemala
35
Jamaica
47
Mexico
587
Netherlands AntHtes
85
Panama
33
Peru
75
Trinidad and Tobago
28
Uruguay
10
Venezuela
258
Other Latin America
and Caribt>ean
261
Total Latin America
and Caribbean
^^ .|43
1989 r
Dec
r
Mar.
r
Sept
Dec p
33

120
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-IV-4."TotaI Claims by Country, Con.
(Poertion at end of period in millions of dollars)
Calendar year
1991
Countiy
1986
Asia:
CNna:
Mainland
^3^
Taiwan
^21
Hong Kong
217
India
1,0
Indonesia
gi
Israel
igg
Japan
1 881
Korea
24S
Lebanon
g
Malaysia
£5
Pakistan
44
Philippines
40
Singapore
210
Syria
4
Thailand
54
Oil-exporting countries 1
57O
Other Asia
,qo
Total Asia
4 072
Africa;
Eoypt
196
Qhana
1
Uberia
4
Morocco
15
South Africa
gj
Zaire
3
Oil-exporllng countries 2
1gg
Other Africa
13g
Total Africa
535
Other countries:
Australia
All other
Total other countries
...
Total foreign countries
.
.
.
International and regional:
International
2
European regional
1g
Latin American regional
*
Asian regional
African regional
•
Middle Eastern regional
Total international and regional
.
.
20
Grand total
3g 265
Sept.
Dec. p
133

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
121
TABLE CM-IV-5.--TotaI Claims by Type and Country, Dec. 31, 1991, Preliminary
(Posilicyi at end of period in millions dl dollars)
Financial claims
Country
Europe:
Austria
BelgiunrvLuxembourg ....
Quigana
Czechoslovakia
Denmart(
Finland
Franco
German Democratic Repiiblic
Gefmany
Greece
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Sweden
Switzeriand
Turtoy
United Kingdom
USSR
Yugoslavia
Other Europe
Total Europe
Canada
Latin America and Caribt>ean:
Argentina
Bahamas
Bermuda
Brazil
British West Indies
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Guatemala
Jamaica
Mexico
Netherlands Antilles
Panama
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago ....
Uruguay
Venezuela
Other Latin Auwrica
and Caribbean
Total Latin America
and Carit>t>ean
Total
daiiTB
(1)
Total
(2)
Denominated
rn dollars
(3)
Denominated
in foreign
currencies
(4)
Commercial
claims
(5)
206
2
18
85
140
1,790
n.a.
1,268
51
21
286
625
1,023
129
43
140
4
318
217
876
102
13,222
274
113
206
1.728
271
603
5.368
82
lis
2
95
15
23
1.009
38
43
35
18
7
241
311
45
13
62
252
n.a
337
2
5
249
33
386
11
111
58
15
sag
1
11.160
18
14
11
1,717
a
115
5,327
3
25
61
2
1
182
28
11
1
1
40
28
2
21
235
n.a
312
5
247
18
56
21
5
549
10.639
18
14
10
1,714
7
114
5.289
60
2
1
153
28
7
1
20
1
41
17
n.a.
25
2
2
15
3
2
55
37
10
40
1
521
1
3
1
1
38
2
1
29
4
1
2
8
48
192
2
18
82
78
1,538
n.a.
931
49
16
37
592
637
118
43
29
4
260
202
287
101
2,062
256
135

122
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-IV-5.--Total Claims by Type and Country, Dec. 31, 1991, Preliminary, Con.
(Position at end ol period in millions ot dollars)
Country
Asia:
China:
Mainland
Taiwan
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Istael
Japan
Korea
Lebanon
Malaysia
Pakistan
Philippines
Singapore
Syria
Thailand
Other Asia
Total Asia
Africa:
Egypt
Qhana
Ut>eria
Morocco
South Africa
Zaire
Other Africa
Total Africa
Other countries:
Australia
All other
Total other countries
Total foreign countries
....
International and regional:
International
European regional
Latin American regional
Asian regional
African regional
Middle Eastern regional
Total intemational and regional
Grand total

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
123
CHART CM-C.--Net Purchases of Long-Term
Domestic Securities By Selected Countries
(In billions of dollars)
1988
1989
1990
1991, r
CALENDAR YEARS
1992, IstQtr.

124
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
SECTION V.~Transactions in Long-Term Securities by Foreigners Reported by
Banks and Brokers in the United States
TABLE CM-V-l."Foreign Purchases and Sales of Long-Term Domestic Securities by Type
(In mlllione ot dollara. neqallve tiqures indicate net sales by foreignere of a net ouWow ol capital Irom the United Slates)
Calendar
year
or month
Marketable Treasuiy bonds and notes

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
125
TABLE CM-V-3.-Net Foreign Transactions in Long-Term Domestic Securities
by Type and Country
fln miniona ot dollara: nagalive fiqufM indicata ngl sales by loreigrwre Of a n«< oulllow ol capital from the United Slalea)
Countiy
Marttetable Treasury
tx>nds and notes
U.S. Qovl. corporations
and Federal agency twnds
Corporate bonds
Calen-
dar
year
1991
1991
Oct
through
Dec
1992
Jan.
through
Mar. p
Calen-
dar
year
1991
1991
Oct.
through
Dae
1992
Jan.
through
Mar. p
Calen-
dar
year
1991
Oct
through
Deo
1992
Jan.
through
Mar
p
Corporate stocks
Calerv
dar
year
1991
1991
1992
Oct.
Jan.
through
through
Dec.
Mar. p
Europe:
Austria
Belgium-Luxembourg
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
.
.
.
Denmark
Finland
France
Qerman Democratic
Republic
Qermany
Qreeoe
Hungary
Ireland
Italy
Netherlands
....
Norway
Poland
Portugal
Romania
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
Turkey
United Kingdom
.
.
U.S.S R
Yugoslavia
Other Europe ....
Total Europe
.
.
.
Canada
Latin America and
Caribbean:
Argentina
Bahamas
Bermuda
Brazil
British West Indies
.
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Quaten%ala
Jamaica
Mexico
Netherlands Antilles
Panama
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Other Latin Amerk;a
and Caribbean
. _
Total Latin ArT>erca
and Caribbean
. —
See footnotes at end of table.
17
61
-3
344
-1,088
-1,073
aa.
-4,726
308
16
430
3,270
-3.735
-216
848
6,855
-662
1,008
-521
5,641
21
1,459
-2,180
-1
-78
127
326
-18
-2
-21
2,820
6,213
215
2
-2
15
10
61
-46
176
41
168
1,313
a a.
883
33
-3
396
710
-364
-27
227
1,094
554
518
-510
2,250
-3
764
-234
-15
2,114
n.a.
779
-25
GO
-213
146
-2,658
-93
78
-201
582
-657
-321
7,039
-229
-44
425
n.a
-08
7
-16
38
104
64
65
14
555
-52
•101
1,300
-2
11
77
•40
-43
259
n.a.
11
-22
•2
2
-30
130
16
642
-12
3
865
11
82
27
-8
-5
a a.
-16
20
12
-368
16
132
-1,410
72
-36
420
n.a.
1,672
39
-23
123
933
419
-36
-1
47
-482
13
-14
-too
n.a.
589
6
-32
•24
610
179
-5
-20
-219
-37
14
27
n.a.
1,009
-6
-29
2
249
-7
403

126
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-V-S.—Net Foreign Transactions in Long-Term Domestic Securities
by Type and Country, Con.
fin miHiona of dollars; nepalivo figures indicatq net sales by foreignere or a net outflow erf capital from the Unitod Stataa)
Country

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
127
TABLE CM-V-4.-Foreign Purchases and Sales of Long-Term Securities, by Type and Country,
During the First Quarter 1992, Preliminary

128
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-V-4.~Foreign Purchases and Sales of Long-Term Securities, by Type and Country,
During the First Quarter 1992, Preliminary, Con.
(In millions of dollars)
Country
Qross purchases by foreigners
Gross sales by foreigners

CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
129
TABLE CM-V-5.--Foreign Purchases and Sales of Long-Term Securities, by Type and
Country, During Calendar Year 1991
(In minions ol dollars)
Country
Total
pur-
chases
(1)
Gross purchases by torctgners
Domestic securities
Market-
able
Treas-
ury &
Federal
Financ-
ing
Bank
bonds
& notes
(2)
Bonds
or U.S.
Qov^
corp
and Fed-
erally
sporv
sored
agencies
(3)
Corporate
and other
Bonds
Stocks
(4)
(S)
Foreign
securities
(6)
(7)
Total
saJes
(8)
Gross sales by foreigners
Domestic securities
Market-
at)le
Treas-
ury &
Federal
Financ-
ing
Bank
bonds
Bonds
olU.S,
Govt
Corp.
and Fed-
erally
spon-
sored
Corporate
and
other
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
Foreign
securities
& notes
agencies
Bonds
Stocks
Bonds
(13)
(14)
Europe:
Austria
5.464
BelgiurivLuxembourg
27.591
Bulgaria
35
Czechoslovakia
.
.
1
Denmark
16,270
Finland
3,459
France
72,014
German Democratic
Republic
"^
Germany
66.621
Greece
1.525
Hungaiy
122
Ireland
8,969
Italy
15.853
Netherlands
48.170
Norway
13,032
Poland
4
Portugal
2,645
Romania
Spain
62,589
Sweden
22,225
Switzerland
48,532
Turkey
2.697
United Kingdom
.
.
886.684
USSR
4
Yugoslavia
.
.
Other Europe
Total Europe
Canada
Latin America and
Carribean:
Argentina
Bahamas
Bermuda
Brazil
British West Indies
Chile
Colombia
Cuba
Ecuador
Guatemala
Jamaica
Mexico
Netherlands Antilles
Panama
Peru
Trinidad and Tobago
Uruguay
Venezuela
Other Latin Amerk»
and Caribt»an
.
.
Total Latin America
and Caribbean
.
1.262
15.445
66.690
2.250
28.600
1.954
852
160
146
67
14.882
70.669
4.426
72
19
636
1.251
3.681
11.782
35
11.744
2,811
47,518
n.a
42,461
1,152
99
7,036
4,980
35,215
10.662
2,454
55,956
15,031
20,333
2,553
608,591
49
1,758
399
118
692
na
144
63
6
164
117
506
251
39
2.217
74
lis
1
11.809
laO
1.993
992
31
1.918
na
3,178
61
11
462
1.268
754
33
17
190
68
2.942
23
38.629
1
R48
39
1
535
na
5.963
204
2
497
3.148
4.435
666
3
19
361
1.425
17.155
21
54,911
3
766
5,122
2.373
378
8.482
na
10.762
47
5
667
4.926
3116
1.004
99
2,002
4.510
3.803
20
126.886
130
897
5,591
28,606
38
226
16,177
52
4.706
6.014
76.294
na
69.572
1.141
143
8.449
11.745
54.9^2
13.128
2
1.733
n.a
4.113
7
143
1.424
4.144
417
17
1.863
1,118
4.184
78
45.859
55,937
22,740
47,274
3,295
886,278
20
3,664
11,264
38
11,401
3,899
48,591
n.a
47,188
843
83
6,606
1.710
38,950
10,878
1,605
49,000
15,693
19,325
3,074
602,950
18
1.098
627
162
267
n.a
242
56
22
125
13
442
185
26
1,662
126
216
10610
2
58
3,403
921
67
1.498
n.a
1.506
12
34
339
325
335
68
17
120
516
2.272
72
30.684
695
6.194
543
87
7,387
n.a
6,021
182
1
364
2,691
4,657
749
1
21
385
1,042
17,325
23
55.168
988
5.737
2.415
421
11.097
n.a
8,984
20
3
865
4,967
6.127
653
18
2.222
3.654
3.623
14
142.831
17
82
5.376
52.663
1.320
9.732
790
438
52
19
7
7.694
46.157
563
2
85
261
63
285
1.329
11
4,028
619
20
7
5
5
213
1,954
510
5
1
5
101
234
553
2,971
161
2.281
114
88
32
33
14
266
2,989
451
13
4
125
155
402
5.068
5.097
230
7.323
157
205
63
77
15
1.141
10.043
1,590
36
10
241
372
395
3.676
3938
228
4.248
256
87
6
9
26
607
7.341
1,176
13
5
164
269
486
691
300
988
117
15
1
3
2
4,961
2,184
137
3
16
93
13,339
68,076
2.628
26.196
1.449
338
143
109
61
14,154
62,141
3,267
63
13
935
947
61
3,916
54,853
1,321
9,811
664
112
21
28
4,775
38,944
348
1
2
70
251
64
134
1.365
15
3.943
560
38
11
11
4
129
1,997
370
7
1
7
86
72
465
2,445
70
1.481
53
27
13
15
7
174
2.674
217
9
2
47
87
280
5.066
5.325
181
6.578
71
128
46
58
6
937
9.522
1.296
25
6
139
282
373
3.319
3,481
415
3.543
68
24
3
4
5
1.108
5.429
768
20
2
661
197
167
911
271
69
7.455
n.a.
5.632
28
149
2.039
4.422
594
47
2.548
1.708
4.512
111
54.145
3
12.995

130
CAPITAL MOVEMENTS
TABLE CM-V-5.~Foreign Purchases and Sales of Long-Twm Securities, by Type and
Country, During Calendar Year 1991, Con.
(In millions of doHare)
Country
Qross purchaes by foreigners
Qross sales by foreigners

131
INTRODUCTION: Foreign Currency Positions
Information on holdings of foreign currencies, or foreign currency
positions, of banks and notibanking firms in the United States has been
collected since 1974.
It has also been collected on those of foreign
branches,
majority-owned foreign partnerships and subsidiaries of
United States banks and nonbanking firms.
Reports cover five major foreign exchange mar1<et currencies and
U.S. dollars held abroad. This information is published in the Treasury
Bulletin
in seven
sections.
FCP-I
is a summary
of worldwide
net
positions in all of the currencies reported. FCP-II through -VI present
information on specified foreign currencies. FCP-VII presents the U.S.
dollar positions of the foreign branches and subsidiaries of U.S. firms
that are required
to report
in one or more of the specified foreign
cunsncies. Reporting is required by title
II of Public Law 93-1 10, which
is an amendment to the Par Value Modification Act of September 21
1973, and by implementing Treasury regulations.
Information for the United States includes amounts reported by
sole
proprietorships,
partnerships, and
corporations
in
the
United
States, including the U.S. branches and subsidiaries of foreign non-
banking concerns. The Weekly Bank
Positions category
includes
figures reported by agencies, branches, and subsidianes of foreign
banks as well as banking institutions located in the United States. Data
for "foreign branches" and "abroad" include amounts reported by the
brancfies and by majority-owned partnerships and subsidiaries of^U.S.
banking and nonbanking concerns.
Data generally do not reflect foreign currency positions of foreign
parents or their subsidiaries located abroad except through intercom-
pany accounts.
Data do include the
foreign subsidiaries of a few
foreign-owned U.S. corporations. Assets,
liabilities, and foreign ex-
change contract data are leported based on time remaining to maturity
as of the date of the report, regardless of the original maturity of the
instrument involved.
Since January 1982, the exemption level for banks and banking
institutions has been $100 million. The exemption level for nonbanking
films is also $100 million on positions in the United States, and on
foreign branch's and subsidianes' positions since li^arch 1982.
Rrms must report their entire position in a foreign currency
if the
specified U.S. dollar equivalent exemption level
is exceeded
in any
category of assets, liabilities, exchange contracts bought and sold, or
in the net position of that currency.
In general, exemption levels are applied
to the entire
fiim.
In
reports on their foreign branches and majonty-owned partnerships and
subsidiaries, U.S. banks and nonbanks are required to report the U.S.
dollar-denominated assets, liabilities, exchange contracts bought and
sold, and net positions of those branches, partnerships, and subsidi-
aries with nonexempt holdings in the specified foreign currencies.

132
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
SECTION I.--Summary Positions
TABLE FCP-I-l.--Nonbanking Firms' Positions
[In millions o( foreign currency units, except yen, which are in billions]
Report
date
Canadian

133
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
SECTION II.--Canadian Dollar Positions
TABLE FCP-II-l.--Nonbanking Firms' Positions
<
In millions of dollars]
Report
dale

134
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
SECTION III.--German Mark Positions
TABLE FCP-ni-l.--Nonbanking Firms' Positions
[In millions of marks]
Report
dale

FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
135
SECTION IV.--Japanese Yen Positions
TABLE FCP-IV-l.--Nonbanking Firms' Positions

136
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
SECTION V.--Swiss Franc Positions
TABLE FCP-V-l.-Nonbanking Firms' Positions
[In millions of francs]
Report
date

137
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
SECTION VI.--SterIing Positions
TABLE FCP-VI-l.--Nonbanking Firms' Positions
[In millions of pounds]
Report
date

138
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
SECTION VII.--U.S. Dollar Positions Abroad
TABLE FCP-VII-l."Nonbanking Firms' Foreign Subsidiaries' Positions
[In millions o1 dollars]
Report
dale
Assets 2
(1)
Liabilities 3
(2)
Exchange bought *
(3)
Exchange sold
*
(4)
Net
posi-
tion 5
(5)
Position
held in:
S'SOfll

139
FOREIGN CURRENCY POSITIONS
FOOTNOTES: Tables FCP-I through FCP-VII
SECTION
I
^ Worldwide nel positions on the last business day o( the calendar quarter of nonbanking
business
concerns
in
the
United
States,
their
foreign
branches
and
majority-owned
partnerships and subsidiaries. Excludes receiv^es and installment paper that have been
sold
Of
discounted
before
maturity,
U.S.
parent
companies'
investments
in
their
majority-owned loretgn subsidiaries,
fixed assets
(plant and equipment), and capitalized
leases (or plant and equipment.
Foreign branches, majority-owned partnerships and subsidiaries only.
^ Weei<Jy worldwide net positions
of banks and banking
institutions
in the United Stales.
their foreign branches, and majority-owned foreign suteidiaries. Excludes
capital assets
and liabilities.
* Foreign branches and majority-owned subsidiaries only.
SECTIONS II THROUGH VII
Positions ol nonbanking business concerns
in ihe United States, their loreign branches.
majority-owned partnerships, and subsidiaries.
In section VII. positions of foreign branches,
majority-owned partnerships and subskjiarles only.
Excludes receivables and
installment paper sold
or discounted before
maturity,
fixed
assets
(plant
and
equipment),
and
parents'
investment
in
majority-owned
foreign
subsidiaries.
^ Capitalized plant and equiprnent leases are excluded.
* Includes both spot and (onward exchange rates.
Columns
1 and 3 less columns 2 and 4.
^ Representative rales on the report date. Canadian dollar and United Kingdom pound rates
are expressed
in U.S. dollars per unit ol foreign currency, all others in foreign units per U.S.
dollar. The source of the automated representative rates changed as of June 30, 1988.
Banks
and
banking
institutions
in
the
United
States,
their
foreign
branches,
and
majority-owned
subsidiaries.
In
sectbn
VII.
foreign
branches
and
majority-owned
subsidiaries only.
Excludes capital assets.
Excludes capital liabilities.
'° Includes both spot and lonward exchange contracts.
" Columns 3and 9 less columns 6and 12.
'^ See footnote 6.

140
INTRODUCTION: Exchange Stabilization Fund
To
stabilize
the exchange value
of the
dollar,
the Exchange
Stabilization Fund (ESF) was established under the Gold Resen/e Act
of January 30, 1934(31 U.S.C. 822aV which authorized establishment
of a Treasury Department fund to be operated under the exclusive
control of the Secretary, with approval of the President.
Subsequent amendment of the Gold Reserve Act modified the
original purpose somewhat to reflect termination of the fixed exchange
rate system.
Resources of Ihe fund Include dollar balances, partially invested
in U.S. Government securities,
Special drawing rights (SuRs), and
balances of foreign cunBncies.
Principal sources of income (losses^
for the fund are profits (losses) on SDRs and foreign exchange, as well
as interest earned on assets.
• Table ESF-1 presents the assets, liabilities, and capital of the
fund.
The
figures
are
in
U.S. dollars or their equivalents based on
current exchange rates computed according to the accrual method of
accounting. The capital account represents the original capital appro-
priated to the fund by Congress of $2
billion, minus a sutisequent
transfer of $1 .8 billion to pay for the
initial U.S. quota subscription to
the IMF. Gains and losses are reflected in the cumulative net income
(loss) account.
•
Table ESF-2 shows
the
results
of operations by
quarter.
Figures are in U.S. dollars or their equivalents computed accoriding to
tfie accrual method.
"Profit
(loss) on
foreign exchange" includes
realized profits or losses on currencies held.
Adjustment for change
in valuation of SDR iToldings and allocations
' reflects net gain or loss
on revaluation of SDR holdings and allocations for the quarter.

EXCHANGE STABILIZATION FUND
TABLE ESF-l.-Balances as of Sept. 30, 1991, and Dec. 31, 1991
141
[In thousands ol dollars]
Assets, liabilities, and capital
Sept. 30, 1991
Sept. 30, 1991
through
Dec. 31, 1991
Dec. 31, 1991
Assets
U.S. dollars:
Held al Federal Reserve Bank of New York
2,022,61
9
Held with Treasury:
U.S. Government securities
355,230
Other
1,067,000
Special drawing rights
i
10.721.922
Foreign exchange and securities: 2
German marks
8,504,086
Japanese yen
9.152,225
Pounds sterling
26,645
Swiss francs
31 ,322
Accounts receivable
273,392
Total assets
32,154,441
Liabilities and capital
Current liabilities:
Accounts payable
83.660
Advance from U.S. Treasury (U.S. drawing
on IMF) 3
1,067,000
Total current liabilities
Other liabilities:
Special drawing rights certificates
Special drawing rights alkjcatbns
Total other liabilities
Capital:
Capital account
Net income (loss) (see table ESF-2)
Total capital
Total liabilities and capital
1,078.388
4,523
517.744
-153.635
783.051
2.404
2,670
20,647
3,101.007
359.753
1.067,000
11,239,666
8,350,451
9,935,276
29,049
33,992
252,745
34.368.939
81,960
1,067,000
1,150,660

142
Glossary
Expanded, With References to Applicable Sections and Tables
Accrued discount (SBN-1,
-2,
-3)-lnterest
that accumulates on
savings bonds from die date of purchase until the date of redemption
or final maturity, whichever comes first. Series A, B, C, D, E, EE,
F,
and J are discount or accrual
type bonds-meanirig
principal and
interest are paid when bonds are redeemed. Series G, H, HH, and K
are cument-income bonds, and the semiannual interest paid to their
holders is not included in accrued discount.
Amounts outstanding and In circulation (USCC)-lncludes
all
is-
sues by the Bureau ofthe Mint purposely intended as a medium of
exchange. Coins sold by the Bureau of the Mint at premium prices are
excluded; however,
uncirculated coin sets sold at face value plus
handling charge are included.
Average discount rate (PDO-2, -3)-ln Treasury
bill auctions, pur-
chasers tender competitive bids on a discount rate basis. The average
discount rate is the weighted, or adjusted, average of all bids accepted
in the auction.
Budget authority ("Federal Rscal Operatlons")"Congress passes
laws giving budget authority to Government entities, which gives the
agencies the power to spend Federal funds. Congress can stipulate
various criteria forttie spending of these funds For example. Congress
can stipulate that a given agency must spend within a specific year,
number of years, or any time in the future.
The basic forms of budget authority are appropriations, authority to
borrow, and contract authority. The period or time during which Con-
gress makes funds available may be specified as 1 -year, multiple-year,
or no-year. The available amount may tie classified as either definite
or indefinite; a specific amount or an unspecified amount can be made
available. Authtority may also be classified as current or permanent.
Permanent authonty requires no current action by Congress,
Budget deficit"The total, cumulative amount by which budget outlays
(spending) exceed budget receipts (income).
Capital ("Federal Obllgatlons")~Assets, such as land, equipment,
and financial reserves.
Cash management bills (PDO-2)-Mari<etable Treasury
bills of
ir-
regular maturity
lengths,
sold
periodically
to fund short-term cash
needs of Treasury. Their sale, having higher minimum and multiple
purchase requirements than those oT other issues,
is generally
re-
stricted to competitive bidders.
Competitive tenders C'Treasury Financing Operatlons")-A bid to
purchase a stated amount of one issue of Treasury securities at a
specified yield or discount. The bid is accepted
if
it is within the range
accepted in the auction. (See Noncompetitive tenders.)
Coupon Issue-The issue of bonds or notes (public debt).
Currency no longer Issued (USCC)-Old and new series gold and
silver certificates, Federal Reserve notes, national bank notes, and
1890 Series Treasury notes.
Current Income bonds ("U.S. Savings Bonds and Note8"|-Bonds
paying semiannual
interest
to holders.
Interest
is not included
in
accrued discount.
Debt outstanding subject to limitation (FD-6)-The debt incurred by
the Treasury subject to the statutory limit set by Congress. Until Woria
War
1, a specific amount of debt was authorized to each separate
security issue. Beginning with the Second Liberty Loan Act of 1917,
the nature of the limitation was modified until, in 1941
, it developed into
an overall limit on the outstanding Federal debt. In 1991
, the debt limit
was $4,145,000 million; the limit may change from year to year.
The debt subject to limitation includes most of Treasury's public debt
except securities issued to the Federal Financing Bank, ufXDn which
there is a limitation of $15 billion, and certain categories of older debt
(totaling approximately $595 million as of February 1991).
Discount-The interest deducted in advance when purchasing notes
or bonds. (See Accrued discount)
Discount rate (PD0-2)-The difference between par value and the
actual purchase price paid, annualized over a 360-day year. Because
this rate is less than the actual yield (coupon-equivalent rate), the yield
should be used in any comparison with coupon issue securities.
Dollar coins (USCC)-lnclude standard silver and nonsilver coins.
Domestic series (FD-2)-Nonmari<etable,
interest and non-interest-
bearing securities issued periodically by Treasury to the Resolution
Funding Corporation (RFC) lor investment of funds authorized under
section 21 B of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1441b).
Federal Intrafund transactions ("Federal Fiscal Operatlons">-ln-
trabudgetary transactions in which payments and receipts both occur
within he same Federal fund group (F^ederal funds or tmst funds).
Federal Reserve notes (USCC)-lssues by the U.S. Government to
the public through the Federal Reserve tjanksand their member banks.
They represent money owed by the Government to the public. Cur-
rently, tne item "Federal Resen/e notes-amounts outstanding' con-
sists of new series issues. The Federal Reserve note is the only class
of currency currently issued.
Foreign ("Foreign Currency Positions," IFS-2, -3)-(international)
Locations other than those included under the definition of the United
States. (See United States.)
Foreigner ("Capital Movements," IFS-2)~AII
institutions and
indi-
viduals living outside the United States, including U.S. citizens living
abroad, and"branches, subsidiaries, and other affiliates abroad of U.S.
banks and business concerns; central governments, central banks,
and other official institutions of countries other than the United States,
and international and regional organizations, wherever located. Also,
refers to persons in the United States to the extent that they are known
by reporting institutions to be acting for foreigners.
Foreign official Institutions ("Capital Movements")~lncludes cen-
tral govemments of foreign countnes, including
all departments and
agencies of national govemments; central banks, exchange authori-
ties, and all fiscal agents of foreign national govemments that under-
take
activities
similar
to those
of a
treasury,
central
bank,
or
stabilization fund; diplomatic and consular establishments of foreign
national govemments; and any international or regional organization,
including
subordinate and
affiliate
agencies,
created
by
treaty or
convention between sovereign states.
Forelan public borrower ("Capital Movements")~lncludes foreign
official institutions, as defined above, the corporations and agencies
of foreign central govemments,
including development banks and
institutions, and other agencies that are majority-owned by the central
govemment or its departments; and state provincial and local govem-
ments of foreign countries and their departments and agencies.
Forelgn-taraeted Issue (PDO-1,
-3)-- Foreign-targeted issues were
notes sold between October 1984 and
February 1986
to
foreign
institutions, foreign branches of U.S. institutions, foreign central banks
or monetary authorities, or to intemational organizations in which the
United States held membership. Sold as companion issues, they could
be converted
to domestic (normal) Treasury notes with the same
maturity and interest rates. Interest was paid annually.
Fractional coins (USCC)-Coins minted in denominations of 50, 25,
and
1
cents, and minor coins (5 cents and
1 cent).
Govemment account series (FD-2)-C6r1ain trust fund statutes re-
quire the Secretary of the Treasury to apply monies held by these funds
toward ttie issuance of nonmarketable special securities. These secu-
rities are sold directly by Treasury to a specific Govemment agency,
trust fund, or account, their rate
is based on an average of market
yields on outstanding Treasury obligations, and they may be redeemed
at the option of the holder. Roughly 80 percent of these are issued to

Glossary
143
five holders: the Federal old-age and survivors insurance trust fund;
the
civil sen/ice retirement and disability fund;
the Federal
fiospitai
insurance trust fund; the military retirement fund; and the unemploy-
ment trust fund.
International Monetary Fund ("Exchange
Stabilization
Fund,"
IFS-I)-(IMF) Established by the United Nations, the IMF promotes
international trade, stability of exchange, and monetary cooperation.
Members are allovi^ed to draw from the fund.
Interfund transactions ("Federal Rscal Operatlon3")-Trans-ac-
tions in which payments are made from one fund group (either Federal
funds or trust funds) to a receipt account in another group.
Intrabudgetary transactions ("Federal Rscal Operatlons")-These
occur when payment and receipt both occur within the budget, or when
payment
is made
from
off-budget
Federal
entities whose budget
authority and outlays are excluded from the budget totals.
Majority-owned foreign partnerships ("Foreign Currency Posl-
tlon8")-Partnerships organized under the laws of a foreign country in
which one or more U.S. nonbanking concerns or nonprofit institutions,
directly or indirectly, owns more than 50 percent protit interest.
Majority-owned foreign subsidiaries ("Foreign Currency
Posi-
tions")— Foreign corporations in which one or more nonbanking busi-
ness concerns or nonprofit institutions located
in the United States,
directly or indirectly, owns stock with more than 50 percent of the total
combined voting power, or of the total value of all classes of stock.
Matured non-lnterest-bearing debt (SBN-1,
-2, -3)-The value of
outstanding savings bonds ana notes that have reached final maturity
and no longer earn interest. Includes
all Series A-D,
F, G, J, and K
bonds. Series E bonds (issued between May 1941 and November
1965), Series EE fissued since January 1980), Series H (issued from
June 1952 througn December 1979), and savings notes issued t>6-
tween May 1967 and October 1970 have a final maturity of 30 years.
Series Hhl bonds (issued since January 1 980) mature after 20 years.
Noncompetitive tenders ("Treasury Rnancing Operatlon8")-Of-
fers by an
investor
to purchase
Treasury
securities
at the
price
equivalent to the weighted average discount rate or yield of accepted
competitive tenders in a Treasury auction. Noncompetitive tenders are
always accepted in full.
Obligation ("Federal Obllgatlons")-An unpaid commitment to ac-
quire goods or services.
Off-budget Federal entitles ("Federal Fiscal Operation8")~Feder-
ally owned and controlled entitles whose transactions are excluded
from the budget totals under provisions of law. Their receipts, outlays,
and surplus or deficit are not included in budget receipts, outlays, or
deficits. Their budget authority is not included in totals of the budget.
Own foreign offices ("Capital l\/lovements")-Refers to U.S. report-
ing institutions' parent oiiganizations, branches and/or majority-owned
siJDsidiaries located outside the United States.
Outlays ("Federal Rscal Operatlons")-(expendltures, net disburse-
ments) Payments on obligations
in the form
of cash, checks,
the
issuance of bonds or notes, or the maturing of interest coupons.
Par value-The face value of bonds or notes, including interest.
Quarterly financing ("Treasury Rnancing Operations")- Treasury
has historically offered packages of several "coupon" security issues
on the 15th of February, May, August, and November, or on the next
wori<ing day. These issues currently consist of a 3-year note, a 1 0-year
note, and a 30-year bond.
Treasury sometimes
offers additional
amounts of outstanding long-term notes or txsnds, rather than selling
new security issues. (See Reopening.)
Receipts ("Federal Fiscal Operatlons")-Funds collected from sell-
ing land,
capital, or sen/ices, as well as collections from the public
(budget receipts), such as taxes, fines, duties, and fees.
Reopening (PDO-3, -4)-The offer for sale of additional amounts of
outstanding issues,
rather than an entirely new issue. A reopened
issue will always have the same maturity date, CUSIP-number. and
interest rate as the original issue.
Short-term ("Foreign Currency Posltlons")-Securilies maturing in
1 year or less.
Special drawing tights ("Exchanae Stabilization Fund," IFS-1)-
Intemational assets created by IMF fiat serve to increase international
liquidity and provide additional intemational reserves. SDRs may be
purchased and sold among eligible holders through IMF. (See IMF.)
SDR allocations are the counterpart to SDRs issued by IMF based
on members' quotas in IMF. Although shown in exchange stabilization
fund (ES(^ statements as liabilities, they must iDe redeemed by ESF
only in the event of liquidation of, or U.S. withdrawal from,
tfie SDR
department of IMF or cancellation of SDRs.
SDR certificates are issued to the Federal Reserve System against
SDRs when SDRs are legalized as money. Proceeds of monetization
are deposited into an ESF account at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New Yori<.
Spot ("Foreign Currency Posltlons")-Due for receipt or delivery
witfiin 2 wori<aays.
Slate and local government series (FD-2)~(SLUGs) Special non-
mari^etable certificates, notes, and bonds offered to State and local
qove mments as a means to invest proceeds from thei rown tax-exem pt
financing.
Interest
rates and
maturities comply with IRS arbitrage
provisions. SLUGS
are offered
in
iDoth time deposit and demand
deposit forms. Time deposit certificates have matunties of up to 1 year.
Notes mature in 1 to 1
years and txinds mature in more than 1
years.
Demand deposit securities are 1 -day certificates rolled over with a rate
adjustment daily.
Statutory debt limit (FD-6)-By Act of Congress there is a limit, either
temporary or permanent, on the amount of public debt that may be
outstanding. When this limit is reached. Treasury may not sell new debt
issues untrT Congress increases or extends the
limit. For a detailed
listing of changes in the limit since 1941
, see the Budget of the United
States Govemment. (See Debt outstanding subject to limitation.)
STRIPS fPDO-1, -3)-Separate Trading of Registered
Interest and
Principal Securities. Long-term notes and bonds may be divided into
principal and interest-paying components, which may be transferred
and sold in amounts as small as $1,000. STRIPS are sold at auction
at a minimum par amount, varying for each issue. The amount is an
arithmetic function of the issue s interest rate.
Treasury bllls-The shortest term Federal security (maturity dates
normally varying from 3 to
1 2 months), they are sold at a discount.
Trust fund transaction ("Federal
Fiscal Operatlon8")-An
infra-
budgetary transaction
in which both payments and
receipts occur
within the same trust fund group.
United States-Includes the 50 States, District of Columbia, Common-
wealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Midway Island, Virgin Islands,
Wake Island, and all other territories and possessions.
U.S. notes (USCC)~Legal tender notes of five different issues: 1862
($5-$1 ,000 notes); 1862 ($1-$2 notes);
1 863 ($5-$1 ,000 notes); 1863
($1 -$10,000 notes); and 1901 ($10 notes).
Worldwide ("Foreign Currency Poslllon")-Sum of "United States"
and "foreign
trade.

3
3
a s
<A. Li3
is
-
w
-T
1
s
I
1^^
-5
s
fi;
1 ^
a
'I
Mil
^

Information about the Superintendent of Documents Subscription Service
Current Subscribers
To know when to expect your renewal notice and keep a good thing coming ...
to keep subscription prices down, the
Government Printing Office mails each subscriber only one renewal notice . You can learn when you will get your renewal
notice by checking the number that follows ISSDUE on the top line of your label as shown in this example :
When
this
digit
is
0,
a
renewal
notice
/
7..
will
be
sent.
.
TRBU
SMITH212J
ISSDUEOOO
R
1
.
JOHN
SMITH
.
212
MAIN
ST
,
FORESTVILLE
MD
20747
When that number reads ISSDUEOOO, you have received your last issue unless you renew. You should receive your renewal
notice around the same time that you receive the issue with ISSDUEOOO on the top line.
To be sure that your service continues without interruption, please return your renewal notice prompdy.
If your subscription
service is discontinued, simply send your mailing label from any issue to the Superintendent of Documents, Washington, DC
20402-9372 with the proper remittance, and your service will be reinstated.
To change your address
.
.
. please SEND YOUR MAILING LABEL, along with your new address, to the Superintendent of
Documents, Attn: Chief, Mail List Branch, Mail Stop: SSOM, Washington, DC 20402-9373.
To inquire about your subscription service
.
.
. please SEND YOUR MAILING LABEL, along with your correspondence, to
the Superintendent of Documents, Attn: Chief, Mail List Branch, Mail Slop: SSOM, Washington, DC 20402-9375.
New Subscribers
To order a new subscription
.
.
. please use the order form provided below.
Superintendent of Documents Subscriptions Order Form
Charge your order.
It's Easy!
To fax your orders (202) 512-2233
CO

rf-
y^
,-,.
£>£;>
^i!j\l-'p
^13^4liY

M
i%9i.

DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT SERVICE
OFFICE OF THE COMMISSIONER
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20227
OFFICIAL BUSINESS
PENALTY FOR PRIVATE USE, .$300
New this Issue
FIRST-CLASS MAIL
POSTAGE & FEES PAID
Department of the Treasury
Permit No. G-4
PROFILE OF THE ECONOMY
LEADING INDICATORS
The index of leading indicators
edged up in a modest 0.2 percent in
March after gains of 0.8 percent
in
February and
1 .0 percent in January.
It was the first time the index has
risen for 3 straight months since mid-
1991. The March increase was less
than expected and not broadly based-
only consumer expectations and
commodity prices were significantly
improved. Two other of the
1
1
components were slightly positive,
while the remaining seven were
weak. But several components, such
as initial unemployment claims, could
contribute to a rise in April.
150
Ratio Scale:1 982=1 00
M91 A
1
1
1
1
r
O
N
D J92
F
M
69 70 71
72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81
82 83
84
85 86 87
88
89 90 91
92
* Note: Gray bare indicale recessions. The end of the current recession, which off icially began in July of 1990. has not yet been determined
See page 23 for more of Profile of the Economy

