Table of Contents
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019
OR
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from             to            
Commission file number: 001-34028
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
51-0063696
(State or other jurisdiction of incorporation or organization)
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
1 Water Street, Camden, NJ 08102-1658
(Address of principal executive offices) (Zip Code)
(856) 955-4001
(Registrant’s telephone number, including area code)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Title of each class
Trading Symbol
Name of each exchange on which registered
Common stock, par value $0.01 per share
AWK
New York Stock Exchange
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None.
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act.    Yes  ☒    No  ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act.     Yes  ☐    No  ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12 months
(or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days.    Yes  ☒    No  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this
chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files).    Yes  ☒    No  ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, a smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth company. See
the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer
 
☒
  
Accelerated filer
 
☐
Non-accelerated filer
 
☐
Smaller reporting company
 
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial accounting
standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Act).    Yes  ☐    No  ☒
State the aggregate market value of the voting and non-voting common equity held by non-affiliates computed by reference to the price at which the common equity was last sold, or the
average bid and asked price of such common equity, as of the last business day of the registrant’s most recently completed second fiscal quarter.
Common Stock, $0.01 par value—$18,615,800,000 as of June 28, 2019 (solely for purposes of calculating this aggregate market value, American Water has defined its affiliates to
include (i) those persons who were, as of June 28, 2019, its executive officers, directors or known beneficial owners of more than 10% of its common stock, and (ii) such other persons who were
deemed, as of June 28, 2019, to be controlled by, or under common control with, American Water or any of the persons described in clause (i) above).
Indicate the number of shares outstanding of each of the registrant’s classes of common stock as of the latest practicable date: Common Stock, $0.01 par value per share—180,974,719
shares as of February 13, 2020.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Portions of the American Water Works Company, Inc. definitive proxy statement for the 2020 Annual Meeting of Shareholders to be filed with the Securities and
Exchange Commission within 120 days after December 31, 2019 are incorporated by reference into Part III of this report.

TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 
Page
Forward-Looking Statements
1
 
Part I
 
Item 1.
Business
4
Item 1A.
Risk Factors
20
Item 1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
35
Item 2.
Properties
36
Item 3.
Legal Proceedings
36
Item 4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
42
 
Part II
 
Item 5.
Market For Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
43
Item 6.
Selected Financial Data
43
Item 7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
44
Item 7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
71
Item 8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
73
Item 9.
Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
126
Item 9A.
Controls and Procedures
126
Item 9B.
Other Information
127
 
Part III
 
Item 10.
Directors, Executive Officers of the Registrant and Corporate Governance
128
Item 11.
Executive Compensation
128
Item 12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
128
Item 13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions and Director Independence
128
Item 14.
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
128
 
Part IV
 
Item 15.
Exhibits and Financial Statement Schedules
129
Exhibit Index
129
Signatures
134

Table of Contents
FORWARD-LOOKING STATEMENTS
Statements included in Item 1—Business, Item 1A—Risk Factors, and Item 7—Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results
of Operations, and in other sections of this Form 10-K, or incorporated by reference into this Form 10-K, are forward-looking statements within the meaning of
Section 27A of the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, Section 21E of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended (the “Exchange Act”), and the Private
Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. In some cases, these forward-looking statements can be identified by words with prospective meanings such as “intend,”
“plan,” “estimate,” “believe,” “anticipate,” “expect,” “predict,” “project,” “propose,” “assume,” “forecast,” “likely,” “uncertain,” “outlook,” “future,” “pending,”
“goal,” “objective,” “potential,” “continue,” “seek to,” “may,” “can,” “should,” “will” and “could” or the negative of such terms or other variations or similar
expressions. Forward-looking statements may relate to, among other things: the Company’s future financial performance; liquidity and future cash flows; rate and
revenue adjustments, including through general rate case filings, filings for infrastructure surcharges and other governmental agency authorizations and filings to
address regulatory lag; growth and portfolio optimization strategies, including the timing and outcome of pending or future acquisition activity, the completion of
the announced sale of New York American Water Company, Inc. and the amount of proceeds anticipated to be received therefrom; the amount and allocation of
projected capital expenditures and related funding requirements; the Company’s ability to repay or refinance debt; the ability to execute its current and long-term
business, operational and capital expenditures strategies; its ability to finance current operations, capital expenditures and growth initiatives by accessing the debt
and equity capital markets; the outcome and impact on the Company of legal and similar governmental and regulatory proceedings and related potential fines,
penalties and other sanctions; the ability to complete, and the timing and efficacy of, the design, development, implementation and improvement of technology and
other strategic initiatives; the ability to capitalize on existing or future utility privatization opportunities; trends in the industries in which the Company operates,
including macro trends with respect to the Company’s efforts related to customer, technology and work execution;  regulatory, legislative,  tax policy or legal
developments; and projected impacts that the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (the “TCJA”) may have on the Company and on its business, results of operations, cash flows
and liquidity.
Forward-looking statements are predictions based on the Company’s current expectations and assumptions regarding future events. They are not guarantees
or assurances of any outcomes, financial results, levels of activity, performance or achievements, and readers are cautioned not to place undue reliance upon them.
These forward-looking statements are subject to a number of estimates, assumptions, known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors. The Company’s
actual results may vary materially from those discussed in the forward-looking statements included herein as a result of the factors discussed under Item 1A—Risk
Factors, and the following important factors:
•
the decisions of governmental and regulatory bodies, including decisions to raise or lower customer rates;
•
the timeliness and outcome of regulatory commissions’ actions concerning rates, capital structure, authorized return on equity, capital investment,
system acquisitions and dispositions, taxes, permitting and other decisions;
•
changes in customer demand for, and patterns of use of, water, such as may result from conservation efforts;
•
limitations on the availability of the Company’s water supplies or sources of water, or restrictions on its use thereof, resulting from allocation rights,
governmental or regulatory requirements and restrictions, drought, overuse or other factors;
•
changes in laws, governmental regulations and policies, including with respect to environmental, health and safety, consumer privacy, water quality
and water quality accountability, emerging contaminants, public utility and tax regulations and policies, and impacts resulting from U.S., state and
local elections;
•
weather  conditions  and  events,  climate  variability  patterns,  and  natural  disasters,  including  drought  or  abnormally  high  rainfall,  prolonged  and
abnormal  ice  or  freezing  conditions,  strong  winds,  coastal  and  intercoastal  flooding,  earthquakes,  landslides,  hurricanes,  tornadoes,  wildfires,
electrical storms, sinkholes and solar flares;
•
the outcome of litigation and similar governmental and regulatory proceedings, investigations or actions;
•
the risks associated with the Company’s aging infrastructure, and its ability to appropriately maintain and replace current infrastructure, including its
operational and technology systems, and manage the expansion of its businesses;
•
exposure or infiltration of the Company’s technology and critical infrastructure systems, including the disclosure of sensitive, personal or confidential
information contained therein, through physical or cyber attacks or other means;
•
the Company’s ability to obtain permits and other approvals for projects;
•
changes in the Company’s capital requirements;
•
the Company’s ability to control operating expenses and to achieve operating efficiencies;
•
the intentional or unintentional actions of a third party, including contamination of the Company’s water supplies or water provided to its customers;
1

Table of Contents
•
the Company’s ability to obtain adequate and cost-effective supplies of chemicals, electricity, fuel, water and other raw materials;
•
the Company’s ability to successfully meet growth projections for the Regulated Businesses and the Market-Based Businesses (each as defined in
this Form 10-K), either individually or in the aggregate, and capitalize on growth opportunities, including, among other things, with respect to:
•
acquiring, closing and successfully integrating regulated operations and market-based businesses;
•
entering into contracts and other agreements with, or otherwise obtaining, new customers or partnerships in the Market-Based Businesses; and
•
realizing anticipated benefits and synergies from new acquisitions;
•
risks and uncertainties associated with contracting with the U.S. government, including ongoing compliance with applicable government procurement
and security regulations;
•
cost overruns relating to improvements in or the expansion of the Company’s operations;
•
the Company’s ability to successfully develop and implement new technologies and to protect related intellectual property;
•
the Company’s ability to maintain safe work sites;
•
the Company’s exposure to liabilities related to environmental laws and similar matters resulting from, among other things, water and wastewater
service provided to customers;
•
changes in general economic, political, business and financial market conditions;
•
access to sufficient capital on satisfactory terms and when and as needed to support operations and capital expenditures;
•
fluctuations in interest rates;
•
restrictive covenants in or changes to the credit ratings on the Company or any of its subsidiaries, or on any of their current or future indebtedness,
that could increase the Company’s financing costs or funding requirements or affect the ability to borrow, make payments on debt or pay dividends;
•
fluctuations in the value of benefit plan assets and liabilities that could increase the Company’s cost and funding requirements;
•
changes in federal or state general, income and other tax laws, including any further rules, regulations, interpretations and guidance by the U.S.
Department of the Treasury and state or local taxing authorities (collectively, the “Related Interpretations”) related to the enactment of the TCJA, the
availability of tax credits and tax abatement programs, and the Company’s ability to utilize its U.S. federal and state income tax net operating loss
(“NOL”) carryforwards;
•
migration of customers into or out of the Company’s service territories;
•
the  use by  municipalities  of  the  power  of eminent  domain  or  other  authority  to  condemn  the  systems  of  one  or more  of  the  Company’s  utility
subsidiaries, or the assertion by private landowners of similar rights against such utility subsidiaries;
•
any difficulty or inability to obtain insurance for the Company, its inability to obtain insurance at acceptable rates and on acceptable terms and
conditions, or its inability to obtain reimbursement under existing insurance programs and coverages for any losses sustained;
•
the incurrence of impairment charges related to the Company’s goodwill or other assets;
•
labor actions, including work stoppages and strikes;
•
the Company’s ability to retain and attract qualified employees;
•
civil disturbances or terrorist threats or acts, or public apprehension about future disturbances or terrorist threats or acts; and
•
the impact of new, and changes to existing, accounting standards.
2

Table of Contents
These forward-looking statements are qualified by, and should be read together with, the risks and uncertainties set forth above and the risk factors included
in Item 1A—Risk Factors and other statements contained in this Form 10-K, and readers should refer to such risks, uncertainties and risk factors in evaluating such
forward-looking statements. Any forward-looking statements the Company makes shall speak only as of the date this Form 10-K was filed with the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission (“SEC”). Except as required by the federal securities laws, the Company does not have any obligation, and it specifically disclaims any
undertaking or intention, to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events, changed circumstances
or otherwise. New factors emerge from time to time, and it is not possible for the Company to predict all such factors. Furthermore, it may not be possible to assess
the impact of any such factor on the Company’s businesses, either viewed independently or together, or the extent to which any factor, or combination of factors,
may cause results to differ materially from those contained in any forward-looking statement. The foregoing factors should not be construed as exhaustive.
3

Table of Contents
PART I
ITEM 1.
BUSINESS
The Company
With a history dating back to 1886, American Water is the largest and most geographically diverse, publicly-traded water and wastewater utility company in
the United States, as measured by both operating revenues and population served. A holding company originally incorporated in Delaware in 1936, the Company
employs approximately 6,800 professionals who provide drinking water, wastewater and other related services to approximately 15 million people in 46 states. The
Company conducts the majority of its business through regulated utilities that provide water and wastewater services, collectively presented as the “Regulated
Businesses.” The Company also operates market-based businesses that provide complementary services. Individually, these businesses do not meet the criteria of a
reportable segment in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles in the United States (“GAAP”), and are collectively presented as the “Market-
Based Businesses,” which is consistent with how management assesses the results of these businesses.
Throughout this Form 10-K, unless the context otherwise requires, references to “we,” “us,” “our,” the “Company,” and “American Water” mean American
Water Works Company, Inc. and its subsidiaries, taken together as a whole. References to “parent company” mean American Water Works Company, Inc., without
its subsidiaries.
Regulated Businesses
The  Company’s  primary  business  involves  the  ownership  of  utilities  that  provide  water  and  wastewater  services  to  residential,  commercial,  industrial,
public authority, fire service and sale for resale customers. The Company’s utilities operate in approximately 1,700 communities in 16 states in the United States,
with over 3.4 million active customers in its water and wastewater networks. Services provided by the Company’s utilities are subject to regulation by multiple
state utility commissions or other entities engaged in utility regulation, collectively referred to as public utility commissions (“PUCs”). Federal, state and local
governments also regulate environmental, health and safety, and water quality matters. The Company reports the results of the services provided by its utilities in
the Regulated Businesses segment. Operating revenues for the Regulated Businesses were $3,094 million for 2019, $2,984 million for 2018 and $2,958 million for
2017, accounting for 86%, 87% and 88%, respectively, of the Company’s total operating revenues for the same periods.
Presented in the table below is a geographic summary of the Regulated Businesses’ operating revenues and the number of customers the Company serves,
by type of service, for and as of the year ended December 31, 2019:
Operating Revenues (in millions)
Number of Customers (in thousands)
 
Water (a)
Wastewater
Total
% of Total
Water
Wastewater
Total
% of Total
New Jersey
$
718
$
42
$
760
24.6%
651
51
702
20.4%
Pennsylvania
627
62
689
22.3%
666
74
740
21.6%
Missouri
314
11
325
10.5%
470
15
485
14.1%
Illinois
281
24
305
9.9%
286
51
337
9.8%
California
228
4
232
7.5%
177
3
180
5.2%
Indiana
223
1
224
7.2%
314
2
316
9.2%
West Virginia
158
1
159
5.1%
166
1
167
4.9%
Total—Top Seven States (b)
2,549
145
2,694
87.1%
2,730
197
2,927
85.2%
Other states (c)
378
22
400
12.9%
475
32
507
14.8%
Total Regulated Businesses
$
2,927
$
167
$
3,094
100.0%
3,205
229
3,434
100.0%
(a)
Includes other operating revenues consisting primarily of miscellaneous utility charges, fees and rents.
(b)
The Company’s “Top Seven States” are determined based upon operating revenues.
(c)
Includes the Company’s utilities in the following states: Georgia, Hawaii, Iowa, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, New York, Tennessee and Virginia.
Customers
The Company’s Regulated Businesses have a large and geographically diverse customer base. A customer is defined as a person, business, municipality or
any other entity that purchases the Company’s water or wastewater services as of the last business day of a reporting period. One single customer may purchase the
Company’s services for use by multiple individuals or businesses, such as homes, apartment complexes, businesses and governmental entities.
4

Table of Contents
The vast majority of the Company’s regulated water customers are metered, which allows the Company to measure and bill for its customers’ water usage,
typically on a monthly basis. The Company employs a variety of methods of customer meter reading to monitor consumption. These methods range from meters
with mechanical registers where consumption is manually recorded by meter readers, to meters with electronic registers capable of transmitting consumption data
to proximity devices or via radio frequency to mobile or fixed network data collectors. The Company’s wastewater customers are billed either a flat rate or based
upon their water consumption.
Residential customers make up a substantial portion of the Company’s customer base in all of the states in which it operates. The Company also serves (i)
commercial customers, such as food and beverage providers, commercial property developers and proprietors, and energy suppliers, (ii) fire service customers,
where the Company supplies water through its distribution systems to public fire hydrants for firefighting purposes and to private fire customers for use in fire
suppression systems in office buildings and other facilities, (iii) industrial customers, such as large-scale manufacturers, mining and production operations, (iv)
public authorities, such as government buildings and other public sector facilities, including schools and universities, and (v) other utilities and community water
and wastewater systems in the form of bulk contracts for the supply of water or the treatment of wastewater, for their own customers.
The following chart depicts the allocation of the Company’s Regulated Businesses’ operating revenue of $3,094 million by type, including a breakout of the
total water services revenues by class of customer, for the year ended December 31, 2019:
(a)
Includes water revenues from public authorities and other utilities and community water systems under bulk contracts.
(b)
Includes other operating revenues consisting primarily of miscellaneous utility charges, fees and rents.
Presented in the table below is the number of water and wastewater customers the Company served by class as of December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
(In thousands)
Water
Wastewater
Water
Wastewater
Water
Wastewater
Residential
2,914
215
2,892
188
2,872
182
Commercial
222
13
222
11
221
11
Fire service
49
—
48
—
47
—
Industrial
4
—
4
—
4
—
Public and other (a)
16
1
16
1
16
—
Total
3,205
229
3,182
200
3,160
193
(a)
Includes public authorities and other utilities and community water and wastewater systems under bulk contracts. Bulk contracts, which are accounted for as a single customer in the
table above, generally result in service to multiple customers.
5

Table of Contents
Customer growth in the Company’s Regulated Businesses is primarily from (i) adding new customers to its customer base through acquisitions of water
and/or wastewater utility systems, (ii) population growth in its authorized service areas, and (iii) sale of water to other water utilities and community water systems.
Capital Investment
Excluding acquisitions, the Company plans to invest $8.2 billion over the next five years and between $18 billion and $19 billion over the next 10 years,
including $1.6  billion in 2020,  for  capital  improvements  to  its Regulated  Businesses’  water  and  wastewater  infrastructure,  largely  for  pipe  replacement  and
upgrading aging water and wastewater treatment facilities. The Company has proactively improved its pipe renewal rate from a 250-year replacement cycle in
2009 to an expected 115-year replacement cycle by 2024, which it anticipates will enable the Company to replace nearly 2,000 miles of mains and collection pipes
between 2020 and 2024. In addition, from 2020 to 2024, the Company’s capital investment in treatment plants, storage tanks and other key, above-ground facilities
is  expected  to  increase,  further  addressing  infrastructure  renewal,  resiliency,  water  quality,  operational  efficiency,  technology  and  innovation,  and  emerging
regulatory compliance needs. Additionally, the Company is investing significantly in resiliency projects to address the impacts of climate and weather variability
by hardening its assets. Recently completed projects include the $25 million raised floodwall project at New Jersey’s Raritan Millstone Water Treatment Plant
which  provides  protection  against  a  500  year  flood,  and  the  $15  million  Bel  Air,  Maryland  Reservoir  project  which  provides  90  million  gallons  of  drought
mitigation water storage for the region.
Regulation and Rate Making
The operations of the Company’s Regulated Businesses are generally subject to regulation by PUCs in the states in which they operate, with the primary
responsibility of the PUCs to promote the overall public interest by balancing the interest of customers and utility investors. Specific authority might differ from
state to state, but in most states, PUCs review and approve rates charged to customers, accounting treatments, long-term financing programs and cost of capital,
operation and maintenance (“O&M”) expenses, capital expenditures, taxes, affiliated transactions and relationships, reorganizations and mergers and acquisitions,
along with imposing certain penalties or granting certain incentives. Regulatory policies vary from state to state and could potentially change over time. These
policies will affect the timing, as well as the extent, of recovery of expenses and the realized return on invested capital.
Periodic changes in customer rates generally occur through the filing of a rate case by the utility with the PUC. The timing of rate case filings is typically
determined by either periodic requirements in the regulatory jurisdiction or by the utility’s need to increase its revenue requirement to recover capital investment
costs, changes in operating revenues, operating costs or other market conditions. The Company attempts to minimize “regulatory lag,” which is the time between
the occurrence of an event that triggers a change in the utility’s revenue requirement and its recognition in rates.
6

Table of Contents
The Company’s Regulated Businesses support regulatory practices at the PUCs and state legislatures that mitigate the adverse impact of regulatory lag.
Presented in the table below are examples of approved regulatory practices:
Regulatory Practices
Description
States Allowed
Infrastructure replacement
surcharges
Allows rates to change periodically, outside a general rate case proceeding, to reflect recovery of capital investments made to
replace infrastructure necessary to sustain  safe, reliable  services for the  Company’s customers.  These mechanisms  typically
involve periodic filings and reviews to ensure transparency.
IA, IL, IN, KY, MO,
NJ, NY, PA, TN, VA,
WV
Future test year
A test period used for setting rates, which begins with the date new rates are effective. This allows current or projected revenues,
expenses and capital investments to be collected on a more timely basis.
CA, HI, IA, IL, IN,
KY, NY, PA, TN, VA
Hybrid test year
Allows an update to historical data for “known and measurable” changes that occur subsequent to the historical test year.
MD, MO, NJ, WV
Utility plant recovery
mechanisms
Allows recovery of the full return on utility plant costs during the construction period, instead of capitalizing an allowance for
funds used during construction. In addition, some states allow the utility to seek pre-approval of certain capital projects and
associated costs. In this pre-approval process, the PUC may assess the prudency of such projects.
CA, IL, KY, NY, PA,
TN, VA
Expense mechanisms
Allows  changes  in  certain  operating  expenses,  which  may  fluctuate  based  on  conditions  beyond  the  utility’s  control,  to  be
recovered outside of a general rate case proceeding or deferred until the next general rate case proceeding.
CA, IL, MD, MO, NJ,
NY, PA, TN, VA
Revenue stability
mechanisms
Separates  a  utility’s  cost  recovery  from  the  amount  of  water  it  sells  to  recover  its  fixed  costs  and  ongoing  infrastructure
investment needs. Such a mechanism adjusts rates periodically to ensure that a utility’s revenue will be sufficient to cover its
costs, regardless of sales volume, including recognition of declining sales resulting from reduced consumption, while providing
an incentive for customers to use water more efficiently.
CA, IL, NY
Consolidated tariffs
Use of a unified rate structure for water systems owned and operated by a single utility, which may or may not be physically
interconnected.  The  consolidated  tariff  pricing  structure  may  be  used  fully  or  partially  in  a  state,  and  is  generally  used  to
prioritize capital investments and moderate the impact of periodic fluctuations in local costs, while lowering administrative costs
for customers. Pennsylvania also permits a blending of water and wastewater revenue requirements.
CA, IA, IL, IN, KY,
MD, MO, NJ, NY, PA,
VA, WV
The Company pursues enhancement to these regulatory practices to facilitate efficient recovery of its costs and capital investments in order to continue to
provide safe, clean, reliable and affordable services to its customers. The ability to seek regulatory treatment as described above does not guarantee that the PUCs
will accept the Company’s proposal in the context of a particular rate case, and these regulatory practices may reduce, but not eliminate, regulatory lag associated
with traditional rate making processes. It is also the Company’s strategy to expand the use of these mechanisms in areas where they may not currently apply.
Acquisitions and Strategic Growth
The U.S. water and wastewater industries include investor-owned systems as well as municipal systems that are owned and operated by local governments
or governmental subdivisions. According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”), as of 2017, approximately 84% of the water market is served by
municipal systems and approximately 98% of the country’s wastewater systems are government owned. The EPA also estimates that there are approximately
50,000 community water systems and approximately 15,000 community wastewater systems in the United States, with approximately 80% of the community water
systems serving a population of 3,000 or less.
A fundamental aspect of the Company’s growth strategy is to pursue acquisitions of small and medium water and/or wastewater systems in geographic
proximity to areas where the Company operates its Regulated Businesses. The proximity of acquisition opportunities to the Company’s regulated footprint allows it
to integrate and manage the acquired systems and operations primarily using its existing management, although the Company typically retains the majority, if not
all, of the employees, and to achieve operational efficiencies and prioritize capital investment needs. The Company’s current customer mix of 93% water and 7%
wastewater also presents strategic opportunities for wastewater growth and systems consolidation, allowing it to add wastewater customers where the Company
already serves water customers. The Company intends to continue to expand its regulated footprint geographically by acquiring water and wastewater systems in
its existing markets and, if appropriate, pursuing acquisition opportunities in certain domestic markets where the Company does not currently operate its Regulated
Businesses. Before entering new regulated markets, the Company will evaluate the business and regulatory climates to ensure that it will have the opportunity to
achieve an appropriate rate of return on its investment while maintaining its high standards for providing safe, reliable and affordable services to its customers, as
well as a line of sight to grow the Company’s base customers to attain efficiencies after entering the new domestic market.
Increasingly stringent environmental, health and safety, and water quality regulations, the amount of infrastructure in need of significant capital investment,
financial challenges and industry legislation are several elements that may drive more municipalities to consider selling their water and wastewater assets.
7

Table of Contents
Industry Legislation
In 2017, New Jersey enacted the Water Quality Accountability Act (the “WQAA”), which sets operational standards for all water utilities in New Jersey,
including municipal and investor-owned utilities with more than 500 service connections. This law imposes requirements in areas such as cybersecurity, asset
management, water quality reporting, remediation of notices of violation, and hydrant and valve maintenance. The WQAA requires the most senior water manager,
or either the executive director for municipal utility authorities or the mayor or chief executive officer for municipally owned public water systems, to certify that
the system meets the requirements under the WQAA. In 2019, the New Jersey Senate held three hearings on the WQAA and is expected to introduce legislation in
the new 2020 legislative session that would strengthen accountability for obligations under the WQAA.
In 2018, similar legislation was passed in Indiana that set new operational requirements for water and wastewater treatment plants as part of the permitting
process for construction, installation, or modification of sources, facilities, equipment or devices. These requirements include capital asset management plans that
include annual reviews of infrastructure needs, engineering analysis of useful life, and a rate analysis to support the capital asset management plan. A life cycle
cost-benefit analysis must be done comparing owning and operating a plant to other alternatives to supply water or wastewater services. Cybersecurity plans must
also be developed. In 2019, additional legislation was passed which set requirements for access to loans or grants such as participation in regional planning events,
use of current capital asset management programs, and elimination of the causes of non-revenue water. The finance authority was also required to establish project
prioritization that included consideration of project effects on public health and safety, user rates and charges, plans for collaboration, plans to manage non-revenue
water and use of best practices.
Also, in 2018, America’s Water Infrastructure Act of 2018 was signed into law. The legislation includes policies intended to improve water and wastewater
system management and authorization for states to assess consolidation options for systems that do not comply with the federal Safe Drinking Water Act and its
rules and regulations. The legislation increases funding to water system funding programs, including the State Revolving Loan Fund program and the Water
Infrastructure Finance and Innovation Act of 2014 (“WIFIA”).
The Company’s regulated subsidiaries in California, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Maryland, Missouri, New Jersey and Pennsylvania have access to fair market
value legislation for private sector investment in public sector water and wastewater systems. The Company supports full optionality for municipalities, including
state legislation that enables the consolidation of the largely fragmented water and wastewater industries through third-party fair market valuations of purchased
property. Fair market value assessment of water and wastewater systems is an alternative to the traditional depreciated original cost method of valuation, providing
municipalities with a purchase price that is reflective of the assets’ market value, while the utility has increased assurance of recovering the purchase price over the
life of the assets, subject to state regulatory commission approval.
Consolidated tariffs use a unified rate structure for systems owned and operated by a single utility, which may or may not be physically interconnected.
Consolidated tariff pricing moderates the impact of periodic fluctuations in local costs and promotes a more universal water infrastructure investment in the state.
As a result, consolidated tariffs can make it easier to incorporate new systems into an existing utility and can ensure economies of scale for even the smallest of
systems  and prioritize  capital  needs  across  the  state.  Overall,  this  brings  cost-effective,  higher  quality  services  to  a  larger  number  of citizens.  Twelve  of  the
Company’s  regulated  jurisdictions  currently  have  some  form  of  consolidated  tariff  pricing,  including  California,  Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Kentucky,  Maryland,
Missouri, New Jersey, New York, Pennsylvania, Virginia and West Virginia.
In 2018, legislation  was enacted  in the Company’s Missouri and California  subsidiaries  changing the public vote requirement  for the sale of water or
wastewater systems. In Missouri, the public vote requirement for the sale of a municipal water or wastewater system changed to a simple majority for more than
500 small  towns. Historically,  only  larger  communities  required  a  simple  majority,  while  smaller  communities  needed  a  two-thirds  majority.  This  legislation
increases the options for small towns, should they decide to address their water and sewer challenges through an asset sale. In California, the vote required to allow
cities to sell sewer systems changed to a simple majority from a two-thirds majority.
Competition
The Company’s Regulated Businesses generally do not face direct competition in their existing markets because (i) the Company operates in those markets
pursuant to franchises, charters, certificates of public convenience and necessity or similar authorizations (collectively, “CPCNs”) issued by state PUCs or other
authorities, and (ii) the high cost of constructing a new water and wastewater system in an existing market creates a significant barrier to market entry. However,
the Company’s Regulated Businesses do face competition from governmental agencies, other investor-owned utilities, large industrial customers with the ability to
provide  their  own  water  supply/treatment  process  and  strategic  buyers  that  are  entering  new  markets  and/or  making  strategic  acquisitions.  When  pursuing
acquisitions, the Company’s largest investor-owned competitors, based on a comparison of operating revenues and population served, are Essential Utilities, Inc.
(formerly known as Aqua America, Inc.), Suez North America, American States Water Company and California Water Service Group. From time to time, the
Company also faces competition from infrastructure funds, multi-utility companies and others, such as Algonquin Power and Utilities Corp., Eversource Energy
and Corix.
8

Table of Contents
Condemnation and Eminent Domain
All or portions of the Regulated Businesses’ utility assets could be acquired by state, municipal or other government entities through one or more of the
following methods: (i) eminent domain (also known as condemnation); (ii) the right of purchase given or reserved by a municipality or political subdivision when
the original CPCN was granted; and (iii) the right of purchase given or reserved under the law of the state in which the utility subsidiary was incorporated or from
which  it  received  its  CPCN.  The  acquisition  consideration  related  to  such  a  proceeding  initiated  by  a  local  government  may  be  determined  consistent  with
applicable eminent domain law, or may be negotiated or fixed by appraisers as prescribed by the law of the state or in the particular CPCN.
As such, the Regulated Businesses are periodically subject to condemnation proceedings in the ordinary course of business. For example, a citizens group in
Monterey,  California  successfully  added  “Measure  J”  to  the  November  2018  election  ballot  asking  voters  to  decide  whether  the  Monterey  Peninsula  Water
Management District (the “MPWMD”) should conduct a feasibility study concerning the potential purchase of the Monterey water service system assets (the
“Monterey system assets”) of the Company’s California subsidiary, and, if feasible, to proceed with a purchase of those assets without an additional public vote.
This service territory represents approximately 40,000 customers. In November 2018, Measure J was certified to have passed. 
On August 19, 2019, the MPWMD’s General Manager issued a report that recommends that the MPWMD board (1) develop criteria to determine which
water systems should be considered for acquisition, (2) examine the feasibility of acquiring the Monterey system assets and consider public ownership of smaller
systems only if the MPWMD becomes the owner of a larger system, (3) evaluate whether it is in the public interest to acquire the Monterey system assets and
sufficiently satisfy the criterion of “feasible” as provided in Measure J, (4) ensure there is significant potential for cost savings before agreeing to commence an
acquisition, and (5) develop more fully alternate operating plans before deciding whether to consider a Resolution of Necessity.
On November 6, 2019, the MPWMD issued a preliminary valuation and cost of service analysis report, finding in part that (1) an estimate of the Monterey
system assets’ total value plus adjustments would be approximately $513 million, (2) the cost of service modeling results indicate significant annual reductions in
revenue requirements and projected monthly water bills, and (3) the acquisition of the Monterey system assets by the MPWMD would be economically feasible.
The MPWMD will hold public hearings regarding the findings contained in this preliminary report. If the MPWMD were to make a final determination that an
acquisition  of  the  Monterey  system  assets  is  feasible,  then  the  MPWMD  would  commence  a  multi-year  eminent  domain  proceeding  against  the  Company’s
California subsidiary to first establish the MPWMD’s right to take the Monterey system assets and, if such right is established, to determine the amount of just
compensation to be paid to the California subsidiary for such assets.
Also, five municipalities in the Chicago, Illinois area (approximately 30,300 customers in total) formed a water agency and filed an eminent domain lawsuit
against the Company’s Illinois subsidiary in January 2013, seeking to condemn the water pipeline that serves those five municipalities. Before filing its eminent
domain lawsuit, the water agency made an offer of $38 million for the pipeline. A jury trial will take place to establish the value of the pipeline. The parties have
filed with the court updated valuation reports. Although the date of the valuation trial has not currently been scheduled, it is not likely to commence before the
second quarter of 2020.
Furthermore,  the  law  in  certain  jurisdictions  in  which  the Regulated  Businesses operate  provides  for  eminent  domain  rights  allowing  private  property
owners to file a lawsuit to seek just compensation against a public utility, if a public utility’s infrastructure has been determined to be a substantial cause of damage
to that property. In these actions, the plaintiff would not have to prove that the public utility acted negligently. In California, lawsuits have been filed in connection
with large-scale natural events such as wildfires. Some have included allegations that infrastructure of certain utilities triggered the natural event that resulted in
damage to the property. In some cases, the PUC has allowed certain costs or losses incurred by the utility to be recovered from customers in rates, but in other
cases such recovery in rates has been disallowed. Also, the utility may have obtained insurance that could respond to some or all of such losses, although the utility
would be at risk for any losses not ultimately subject to rate or insurance recovery or losses that exceed the limits of such insurance.
Water Supply and Wastewater Services
The Company’s Regulated Businesses generally own the physical assets used to store, pump, treat and deliver water to its customers and collect, treat,
transport and recycle wastewater. Typically, the Company does not own the water, which is held in public trust and is allocated to the Company through contracts,
permits and allocation rights granted by federal and state or multi-state agencies or through the ownership of water rights pursuant to local law. The Company is
dependent  on  defined  sources  of  water  supply  and  obtains  its  water  supply  from  surface  water  sources  such  as  reservoirs,  lakes,  rivers  and  streams;  from
groundwater sources, such as wells and aquifers; and water purchased from third-party water suppliers. The level of water treatment the Company applies varies
significantly depending upon the quality of the water source and customer stipulations. Surface water sources typically generally require significant treatment,
while groundwater sources often require chemical treatment only.
9

Table of Contents
Presented in the chart below are the Company’s sources of water supply as of December 31, 2019:
Presented in the table below are the percentages of water supply by source type for the Company’s top seven states for 2019:
 
Surface Water
Ground Water
Purchased Water
New Jersey
72%
24%
4%
Pennsylvania
91%
7%
2%
Missouri
77%
22%
1%
Illinois
55%
35%
10%
California
—
64%
36%
Indiana
44%
56%
—
West Virginia
100%
—
—
The  Company’s  ability  to  meet  the  existing  and  future  water  demands  of  its  customers  depends  on  an  adequate  water  supply.  Drought,  governmental
restrictions, overuse of sources of water, the protection of threatened species or habitats, contamination or other factors may limit the availability of ground and
surface water. The Company employs a variety of measures in an effort to obtain adequate sources of water supply, both in the short-term and over the long-term.
The geographic diversity of the Company’s service areas may mitigate some of the economic effects on the water supply associated with weather extremes it might
encounter in any particular service territory. For example, in any given summer, some areas may experience drier than average weather, which may reduce the
amount of source water available, while other areas the Company serves may experience wetter than average weather.
10

Table of Contents
The Company evaluates quality, quantity, growth needs and alternate sources of water supply as well as transmission and distribution capacity. Water
supply is seasonal in nature and weather conditions can have a pronounced effect on supply. In order to ensure that the Company has adequate water supply, it uses
long-term planning processes and maintains contingency plans to minimize the potential impact on service caused by climate variability and a wide range of
weather fluctuations. In connection with supply planning for most surface or groundwater sources, the Company employs models to determine safe yields under
different rainfall and drought conditions. Surface and ground water levels are routinely monitored so that supply capacity deficits may, to the extent possible, be
predicted and mitigated through demand management and additional supply development. An example of the Company’s use of long-term planning to ensure that
it has adequate water supply is its involvement in the Monterey Peninsula Water Supply Project (the “Water Supply Project”) in California. The Water Supply
Project includes the construction of a desalination plant, owned by the Company’s California subsidiary, and the construction of wells that would supply water to
the desalination plant. In addition, the Water Supply Project also includes the California subsidiary’s purchase of water from a groundwater replenishment project
(the “GWR Project”) between Monterey One Water (formerly known as the Monterey Regional Water Pollution Control Agency) and the MPWMD. The Water
Supply Project is intended, among other things, to fulfill obligations of the California subsidiary to eliminate unauthorized diversions from the Carmel River as
required under orders of the California State Water Resources Control Board (the “SWRCB”). For more information, see Item 3—Legal Proceedings—Alternative
Water Supply in Lieu of Carmel River Diversions.
Wastewater services involve the collection of wastewater from customers’ premises through sewer lines. The wastewater is then transported through a
sewer network to a treatment facility, where it is treated to meet required regulatory standards for wastewater before being returned to the environment. The solid
waste by-product of the treatment process is disposed of or recycled in accordance with applicable standards and regulations.
Seasonality
Customer  demand  for  the  Company’s  water  service  is  affected  by  weather  and  tends  to  vary  with  temperature  and  amount  and  frequency  of  rainfall.
Customer demand is generally greater during the warmer months, primarily due to increased water usage for irrigation systems and other outdoor water use. As
such, the Company typically expects its operating revenues to be the highest in the third quarter of each year. Weather that is hotter and/or drier than average
generally increases operating revenues, whereas, weather that is cooler and/or wetter than average generally serves to suppress customer water demand and can
reduce water operating revenues. Three of the Company’s jurisdictions, California, Illinois and New York, have adopted revenue stability mechanisms which
permit the Company to collect state PUC-authorized revenue for a given period which is not tied to the volume of water sold during that period, thereby lessening
the impact of weather variability. See “Regulation and Rate Making” for additional information regarding revenue stability mechanisms.
Market-Based Businesses
The Company’s Market-Based Businesses provide complementary home services primarily to residential and smaller commercial customers and water and
wastewater services to the U.S. government on military installations, as well as municipalities, utilities and industrial customers. These businesses are not subject
to regulation by state PUCs and the services provided generally do not require significant capital investment. Operating revenues for the Company’s Market-Based
Businesses were $539 million for 2019, $476 million for 2018 and $422 million for 2017, accounting for 15%, 14% and 13%, respectively, of the Company’s total
operating revenues for the same periods.
The Company’s primary Market-Based Businesses include the following operating segments:
•
Homeowner Services Group (“HOS”), which provides various warranty protection programs and other home services to residential customers;
•
Military Services Group (“MSG”), which enters into long-term contracts with the U.S. government to provide water and wastewater services on
various military installations.
The Company also has five contracts with municipal customers to operate and manage water and wastewater facilities and provide other related services
through its Contract Services Group (“CSG”).
Previously, the Company provided customized water transfer services for shale natural gas exploration and production companies through its Keystone
Clearwater Solutions, LLC (“Keystone”) operations. On December 12, 2019, as part of a strategic review undertaken by the Company, the Company sold all of its
interest  in  Keystone  to  a  natural  gas  and  oil  industry  investment  group.  See Note  4—Acquisitions  and  Divestitures in  the  Notes  to  Consolidated  Financial
Statements for additional information.
11

Table of Contents
Homeowner Services Group
The  Company’s Homeowner  Services  Group,  which  includes  the  operations  of  Pivotal  Home  Solutions  (“Pivotal”)  acquired  in  June  2018,  provides
warranty protection programs and other home services to residential customers for interior and exterior water and sewer lines, interior gas and electric lines,
heating and cooling systems, water heaters and other home appliances, as well as power surge protection and other related  services. The Company develops
partnerships with municipalities, utilities and other organizations to offer protection programs to customers serviced by, or affiliated with, those municipalities,
utilities and organizations. The term of these partnership agreements with the municipalities, utilities and other organizations is typically three to five years, with
mutual optional renewals. As of December 31, 2019, HOS had approximately 3 million customer contracts in 43 states.
Military Services Group
The  Company’s Military  Services  Group operates  on 16 military  installations  under  50-year  contracts  with  the  U.S.  government  as  part  of  its  Utility
Privatization Program. The scope of these contracts generally includes the operation and maintenance of the installation’s water and wastewater systems and a
capital program focused on asset replacement and, in certain instances, systems expansion. The replacement of assets assumed when a contract is awarded to the
Company is completed either through a discrete set of projects executed in the first five years of the contract or through the long term recapitalization program
performed over the life of the contract. Traditionally, both of these programs are funded from the contract fee. At times, new assets are required to support the
installation’s mission and the construction of these assets are funded by the U.S. government as separate modifications or amendments to the contract. The capital
program historically has not used the Company’s equity or debt borrowings; rather, the Company has used limited working capital for short-term needs under these
contracts. In April 2018, the U.S. Army instituted a requirement that a bidder must offer financing in its proposal for these new capital projects. However, the U.S.
Army’s implementation of this requirement has limited the need for financing of these projects and the Company has been awarded several projects without any
requirement to provide financing.
The contract price for nine of the Company’s contracts with the U.S. government is subject to redetermination two years after commencement of operations,
and every three years thereafter. Price redetermination is a contract mechanism to periodically adjust the service fee in the next period, to reflect changes in
contract obligations and anticipated market conditions. The remaining seven contracts with the U.S. government are subject to annual price adjustments under a
mechanism similar to price redetermination called “Economic Price Adjustment.” All of these contracts could be terminated, in whole or in part, prior to the end of
the 50-year term for convenience of the U.S. government, or as a result of default or non-performance by the subsidiary performing the contract. In either event,
pursuant to termination provisions applicable to all of these contracts, the Company would be entitled to recover allowable costs that it may have incurred under
the contract, plus the contract profit margin on incurred costs. The Company’s backlog of revenue associated with its contracts  with the U.S. government is
approximately $5.4 billion, with an average remaining contract term of 42 years.
Competition
The Company’s Market-Based Businesses face competition from a number of service providers, including HomeServe USA and Cinch Home Services in
HOS, and American States Water Company, Suez North America, and Veolia Environnement S.A. in MSG.
Environmental, Health and Safety, Water Quality and Other Regulation
The Company’s water and wastewater operations, including the services provided by both its Regulated Businesses and Market-Based Businesses, are
subject  to  extensive  federal,  state  and  local  laws  and  regulations  governing  the  protection  of  the  environment,  health  and  safety,  the  provision  of  water  and
wastewater services, particularly with respect to the quality of water the Company delivers to its customers, and the manner in which it collects, treats, discharges,
recycles and disposes of wastewater. In the United States, these regulations are developed under legislation including the Safe Drinking Water Act, the Reduction
of Lead in Drinking Water Act and the Clean Water Act. Environmental, health and safety, and water quality regulations are complex and may vary from state to
state in those instances where a state has adopted a standard that is more stringent than the Federal standard. For example, while the EPA has issued a non-
enforceable Health Advisory for the combined level of two perfluorinated compounds (perfluorooctanoic acid, or PFOA, and perfluorooctane sulfonate, or PFOS),
the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection is developing drinking water standards for these two compounds and has adopted a standard for a third
compound, perfluorononanoic acid, or PFNA, as well as other perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances, or PFAS. The Company is also subject to various
federal, state, local laws and regulations governing the storage of hazardous materials, the management and disposal of hazardous and solid wastes, discharges to
air and water, the cleanup of contaminated sites, dam safety and other matters relating to the protection of the environment and health and safety. PUCs also set
conditions and standards for the water and wastewater services the Company delivers.
12

Table of Contents
The Company maintains an environmental program that includes responsible business practices, compliance with environmental laws and regulations, and
effective use of natural resources, which is important given the overall trend that drinking water standards have become increasingly more stringent over time. As
newer  or  stricter  standards  are  introduced,  the  Company’s  capital  and  operating  costs  could  increase.  The  Company  incurs  substantial  costs  associated  with
compliance with the environmental, health and safety, and water quality standards to which its operations are subject and the Company invests in technology
solutions for enhanced detection and monitoring. The Company estimates that it will make capital expenditures of approximately $600 million over the next five
years for environmental control facilities, which the Company defines for this purpose as any project (or portion thereof) that involves the preservation of air, water
or  land.  The  Company  believes  that  its  operations  are  materially  in  compliance  with,  and  in  many  cases  surpass,  minimum  standards  required  by  applicable
environmental laws and regulations.
The  Company’s  operations  also  involve  the  use,  storage  and  disposal  of  hazardous  substances  and  wastes.  For  example,  the  Company’s  water  and
wastewater  treatment  facilities  store  and  use  chlorine  and  other  chemicals  that  generate  wastes  that  require  proper  handling  and  disposal  under  applicable
environmental requirements. The Company also could incur remedial costs in connection with any contamination relating to its operations or facilities or its off-
site disposal of wastes. The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (“CERCLA”), authorizes the EPA, and comparable
state laws authorize state environmental authorities, to issue orders and bring enforcement actions to compel responsible parties to investigate and take remedial
actions at any site that is determined to present an actual or potential threat to human health or the environment because of an actual or threatened release of one or
more hazardous substances. Parties that generated or transported hazardous substances to such sites, as well as current and former owners and operators of such
sites, may be deemed liable, without regard to fault, under CERCLA or comparable state laws. Although the Company is not aware of any material cleanup or
decontamination obligations, the discovery of contamination or the imposition of such obligations in the future could result in additional costs. The Company’s
facilities and operations are also subject to requirements under the U.S. Occupational Safety and Health Act and inspections thereunder. Certain of the Company’s
subsidiaries are involved in pending legal proceedings relating to environmental matters. See Item 3—Legal Proceedings for additional information.
Safe Drinking Water Act
The Safe Drinking Water Act and related regulations establish national quality standards for drinking water. The EPA has issued rules governing the levels
of numerous, naturally occurring and man-made chemical and microbial contaminants and radionuclides allowable in drinking water, and continues to propose new
rules.  These  rules  also  prescribe  testing  requirements  for  detecting  regulated  contaminants,  the  treatment  systems  that  may  be  used  for  removing  those
contaminants, and other requirements. To date, the EPA has set standards for approximately 90 contaminants and indicators for drinking water, and there is a
process in place to make a regulatory determination on at least five additional compounds every five years.
To help formulate the basis for future regulations, the EPA has the authority to require monitoring for additional, unregulated contaminants under the
Unregulated Contaminant Monitoring Rule (the “Monitoring Rule”). The Company’s facilities have participated in the data gathering effort for the Monitoring
Rule in previous rounds, which occurs every five years, and are also a participant in the ongoing fourth round, which is scheduled for completion by the end of
2020. There are millions of other chemical compounds that are not regulated, many of which are lacking a testing methodology, occurrence data, health effects
information and/or treatment technology. The process of developing new drinking water standards is long and complex, but the Company actively participates with
the  EPA  and  other  water  industry  groups  by  sharing  research  and  water  quality  operational  knowledge.  See  “Research  and  Development—Emerging
Containments” for additional information.
To effect the removal or inactivation of microbial organisms, the EPA has established various rules to improve the disinfection and filtration of drinking
water and to reduce consumers’ exposure to disinfectants and by-products of the disinfection process. In 2006, the EPA issued the Long-Term 2 Enhanced Surface
Water  Treatment  Rule  and  the  Stage  2  Disinfectants  and  Disinfection  Byproduct  Rule  and  finalized  the  Ground  Water  Rule,  which  is  applicable  to  systems
providing water from underground sources. In 2016, the revised Total Coliform Rule implemented a “find and fix” process where exceeding bacterial trigger levels
requires an assessment to correct any sanitary defects. The Company is within the EPA’s time frame for compliance with these standards, which includes sample
collection, data analysis, engineering planning and system implementation. Recent monitoring under the Long-Term 2 Rule has resulted in the need for more than
30 of the Company’s surface water systems to provide additional protection against cryptosporidium. In many cases, this will involve installing UV disinfection,
and although several plants have already completed assessments and upgrades, an estimated $150 million to $250 million of investment will still be required for
the remaining facilities. Further, the EPA is actively considering regulations for a number of contaminants, including strontium, hexavalent chromium, fluoride,
nitrosamines, perchlorate, some pharmaceuticals and certain volatile organic compounds. The Company does not anticipate that any such regulations, if enacted,
will require implementation in 2020.
13

Table of Contents
The  Company  conducts  over  one  million  water  quality  tests  each  year  at  its  laboratory  facilities  and  plant  operations,  including  continuous  online
instrumentations  such  as  monitoring  turbidity  levels,  disinfectant  residuals  and  adjustments  to  chemical  treatment  based  on  changes  in  incoming  water.  The
Company participates in the Partnership for Safe Water, the EPA’s voluntary program to meet more stringent goals for reducing microbial contaminants. With 69
of the Company’s 80 surface water treatment plants receiving the EPA program’s prestigious “Director” award, which recognizes utilities that (i) have completed a
comprehensive  self-assessment  report,  (ii)  created  an  action  plan  for  continuous  improvement,  and  (iii)  produced  high-quality  drinking  water,  the  Company
accounts  for  approximately  one-third  of  the  plants  receiving  such  awards  nationwide.  In  addition, 67 of  the  Company’s  surface  water  treatment  plants  have
received the “Five-Year Phase III” award, 62 plants have received the “Ten-Year Phase III” award, 58 plants have received the “Fifteen-Year Phase III” award,
and three plants have received the “Twenty-Year Phase III” award; these awards recognize plants that have met the Director award status for five, 10, 15 and 20
years, respectively. Further, nine of the Company’s surface water plants have received the “Presidents” award, which recognizes treatment plants that achieve the
Partnership’s rigorous individual filter effluent turbidity standards.
Although it is difficult to project the ultimate costs of complying with the above or other pending or future requirements, the Company expects current
requirements under the Safe Drinking Water Act and other similar laws to be recoverable through the regulatory process and therefore compliance costs are not
expected to have a material impact on its operations or financial condition. In addition, capital expenditures and operating costs to comply with environmental
mandates have been traditionally recognized by PUCs as appropriate for inclusion in establishing rates. As a result, the Company expects to recover the operating
and capital costs resulting from these pending or future requirements.
Lead and Copper Rule and Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water Act
In 1991, the EPA published the Lead and Copper Rule (“LCR”) to control lead and copper in drinking water and, since that time, has issued minor revisions
in 2000, 2004 and 2007, enhancing monitoring, reporting and public education requirements. In 2011, Congress enacted the Reduction of Lead in Drinking Water
Act regarding the use and introduction into commerce of lead pipes, plumbing fittings for fixtures, solder and flux. While these advances have made an impact in
reducing lead exposure in drinking water, legacy lead plumbing materials, primarily in building plumbing, still remain in many communities. The failure of certain
water systems in the United States to comply with the requirements of the LCR has received recent media attention and scrutiny, and in certain cases, has led to a
number of investigations and the imposition of significant penalties and sanctions against the operators of those systems and others. As part of its ongoing water
main replacement and service line renewal projects, the Company has started to replace LSLs in accordance with current scientific guidance. Also, the Company
utilizes appropriate corrosion control techniques as necessary to comply with current water quality regulatory requirements. The EPA proposed revisions to the
LCR in November 2019 designed to provide more effective protection of public health by reducing exposure to lead and copper in drinking water. The Company
continues to review the implications of the LCR and comments on the proposed revisions to the rule were due to the EPA by February 12, 2020. The Company will
develop an implementation strategy to comply with the new requirements, if and when adopted, prior to the compliance effective dates in the final rule. Capital
expenditures and operating costs associated with compliance with any of these rule revisions cannot be determined until the final rule is promulgated, but costs
associated with compliance with federal regulations have been traditionally recognized by PUCs as appropriate for inclusion in establishing rates.
The Company currently estimates that approximately 5% of the service lines within its regulated service territories contain lead on either the Company or
customer portion of the service line (“LSLs”). The Company is replacing LSLs as part of ongoing water main replacement and service line renewal projects. The
Company’s goal is to work with the communities it currently serves to replace a significant majority of presently known LSLs in most service areas by the end of
2030, at an estimated cost ranging from $600 million to $1.2 billion. The Company believes this will be attainable for most service areas where public policy is
supportive of this goal. With regard to future acquisitions, the Company will work with those communities as part of the acquisition process to set LSL removal
goals appropriate for those systems. The prioritization of LSL removal plan is dependent on several factors, including the Company’s planned water main and
service line renewal projects, adjacent projects by municipalities or other utilities, LCR compliance monitoring results, and cooperation with its customers with
respect  to  replacing  the  customer-owned  portion  of  the  LSL  as  necessary.  In  certain  cases  these  factors  may  result  in  a  shorter  or  longer  time  frame  for
replacement. Because replacing the external LSL in its entirety is advised by several water industry organizations including the U.S. National Drinking Water
Advisory Council, the Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative, and the American Water Works Association, the Company’s preferred approach is to replace
the entire external LSL if lead is found on either the Company or customer portion of the service line. The Lead Service Line Replacement Collaborative is a
diverse group of public health, water utility, environmental, labor, consumer and housing organizations from across the country working together to encourage
communities to accelerate the full replacement of LSLs through collaborative efforts at the local level.
14

Table of Contents
Clean Water Act
The Clean Water Act regulates discharges from drinking water and wastewater treatment facilities into lakes, rivers, streams and groundwater. In addition to
requirements  applicable  to  the  Company’s  wastewater  collection  systems,  its  operations  require  discharge  permits  under  the  National  Pollutant  Discharge
Elimination System (“NPDES”) permit program established under the Clean Water Act, which must be renewed every five years. Pursuant to the NPDES permit
program, the EPA and implementing states set maximum discharge limits for wastewater effluents and overflows from wastewater collection systems. Discharges
that exceed the limits specified under NPDES permits can lead to the imposition of fines and penalties, and persistent non-compliance could lead to significant
fines and penalties and other compliance costs. In addition, the difficulty of obtaining and complying with NPDES permits, and renewing expiring permits, may
impose time and cost burdens on the Company’s operations. From time to time, discharge violations occur at the Company’s facilities, some of which result in
fines. The Company does not expect any such violations or fines to have a material impact on its results of operations or financial condition.
Environmental, Social Responsibility and Governance
The Company considers environmental, social responsibility and governance (“ESG”) to include: environmental leadership and sustainability; operational
excellence; employee engagement, safety and equality; active community engagement, civic and charitable involvement; and transparency and good governance.
Integration of these principles into the Company’s daily operations emphasizes its belief that “how” a company operates is just as important as “what” a company
does.
This focus is derived from the Company’s vision statement, “clean water for life,” and its core values: (i) safety; (ii) trust; (iii) environmental leadership;
(iv) teamwork; and (v) high performance, which are the principles by which it operates. The Company’s vision and values drive its company strategy, which is
centered on five central themes:
•
Safety—The safety of the Company’s employees and its customers is the number one focus for American Water.
•
Customers—The Company’s customers are at the center of everything it does, helping the Company to shape its strategic priorities. The Company
challenges itself so that if its regulated utility customers were to have a choice of providers, the Company would want them to choose American
Water.
•
People—Maintaining an environment which is open, transparent, diverse and inclusive, and where the Company’s people feel valued, included and
accountable, is critical to the Company’s ability to serve its customers every day.
•
Operational  Excellence—The  Company’s  operational  excellence  strategy  helps  it  to  find  better  and  more  efficient  ways  to  do  business,  and  to
provide safe, clean and affordable water services for its customers.
•
Growth—The Company believes that when companies grow, they can invest more in creating stable jobs, training, benefits, infrastructure and their
communities. The Company’s growth benefits all of its stakeholders, including its shareholders.
In 2019, the Company issued its fifth biennial Sustainability Report, covering its sustainability performance for calendar years 2018 and 2017. This report
can be accessed on the Company’s website, https://amwater.com, and was prepared in accordance with the GRI Standards: Core Option, as well as standards from
the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board and Edison Electric Institute. The Company’s first report was issued in 2011, making American Water the first
large water services company to measure its performance against the Global Reporting Index. In addition, the Company’s sustainability practices have supported
its inclusion in the Euronext Vigeo® U.S. 50 index, FTSE4Good index series, 2018 NAACP Equity Inclusion and Empowerment Index, 2019 Constituent MSCI
ESG Leaders Indexes, 2020 Bloomberg Gender-Equality Index, and ranked 16th on the Corporate Knights’ 2020 Global 100 Most Sustainable Corporations in the
World.
The following highlights the Company’s commitment to its ESG policies and practices:
Environmental and Sustainability Practices
•
Energy Use
•
The Company lowered its greenhouse gas emissions through December 31, 2018 by approximately 31% since its base year of 2007 with a
goal of achieving a 40% reduction by 2025.
•
The Company’s headquarters building in Camden, New Jersey attained LEED Platinum certification, and earned all possible points within the
sustainable site credit category.
•
Design, construct, operate and maintain the Company’s systems for efficiency and best practices.
15

Table of Contents
•
Water Supply
•
Constructed a new 90 million gallon reservoir and intake in Bel Air, Maryland in response to water supply demands during times of drought
and in order to meet levels required by Maryland regulators. The new reservoir provides a long-term, safe and reliable water supply and
economic opportunity in that region.
•
Water Policy Leadership
•
Expect to spend between $8.8 billion and $9.4 billion from 2020 to 2024 and between $20 billion and $22 billion from 2020 to 2029 on capital
investments to address aging infrastructure, reduce or eliminate leaks, improve cyber and physical security, and increase resiliency of critical
assets  against  the  impacts  of  climate  variability.  Approximately 8% of  the  Company’s  total  projected  capital  investment  is  dedicated  to
resiliency.
•
More than $1.5 billion per year is allocated to renewing and improving regulated assets through a long-term perspective.
•
Scientists dedicated to research and partnering with water research foundations, on water quality and technology-water source monitoring.
•
Collaboration  and  partnerships  with  federal  and  state  agencies  to  support  effective  environmental,  health  and  safety  and  water  quality
standards and regulations.
Social Responsibility
•
People
•
During 2019, nearly 96,000 hours of safety training were completed by the Company’s employees.
•
As a result of the Company’s continued focus on safety, the Company has made significant progress towards its zero injuries goal, reducing
workplace injuries by 61% over the past five years, and the Company’s 2019 safety performance was the best in its recorded history. Through
year end 2019, the Company has further reduced its recordable injury rate to 1.13, approximately 62% better than the industry average.
•
During 2019, approximately 86% of the Company’s job requisitions had a diverse candidate pool, with approximately 57% of transfers or
promotions filled by minority, female, veteran or disabled individuals.
•
Customers
•
Achieved a customer satisfaction rating in the top quartile among the Company’s industry peer group.
•
Communities
•
More than 5,000 hours of Company-sponsored community service performed during 2019 by its employees.
•
Company-sponsored workplace giving campaigns with the United Way and Water For People.
•
Through annual contributions from the American Water Charitable Foundation, the Company focused on supporting its employees in their
own  charitable  endeavors,  providing  support  for  disaster  relief  efforts,  and  providing  funding  for  initiatives  related  to  clean  water,
conservation, education and community sustainability.
Governance
•
Board and Committees
•
The Board of Directors and each of its committees are led by an independent, non-executive chairperson.
•
The Board of Directors met 12 times in 2019.
•
In July 2019, the Board of Directors added three additional directors, increasing its size from eight to 11 members. The three new directors
represent gender, racial and experiential diversity, and all three have extensive regulated utility backgrounds.
•
Diversity
•
With the addition of three new directors in 2019, the percentage of women on the Board of Directors increased to 54.5% as of December 31,
2019.
•
The Company’s average director tenure was approximately 5.8 years as of December 31, 2019.

16

Table of Contents
•
Demonstrated and Representative Expertise
•
The  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  has  demonstrated  expertise,  including  experience  in  utility  and  finance  operations,  customer  service,
cybersecurity, the military, financial services and capital markets, service as a public company CEO and board member, and management of
global operations.
Research and Development
The Company’s Research and Development Program
The Company maintains an industry-leading Research and Development (“R&D”) program that is designed to enhance its services, help ensure compliance,
improve quality and operational effectiveness, and provide environmental leadership. For more than three decades from its inception, American Water’s R&D
program has evolved into an industry leading effort and has achieved numerous advancements in the science of drinking water, wastewater, and desalination.
Through laboratory and industry resources and the team’s expertise, efforts are focused on contaminants of emerging concern, including but not limited to PFAS,
Legionella, cyanotoxin-forming algal blooms, pathogens and disinfection byproducts. The Company’s R&D personnel are located at the Company’s corporate
headquarters and at two laboratory testing facilities in New Jersey and Illinois, the latter housing its quality control and testing laboratory, which supports the
Company’s R&D activities through testing and analysis.
The Company continues to leverage its expertise and collaborate with the EPA and state agencies to help establish effective environmental, health and
safety, and water quality standards and regulation. This relationship includes the sharing of the Company’s research, such as its treatment and distribution system
optimization  research  and  its  national  water  quality  monitoring  data.  The  Company’s  engagement  with  the  EPA  provides  it  with  early  insight  into  emerging
regulatory  issues  and  initiatives,  thereby  allowing  the  Company  to  anticipate  and  to  accommodate  its  future  compliance  requirements.  The  Company  also
frequently  engages  with  the  Centers  for  Disease  Control,  other  state  environmental  agencies,  and  national  and  international  water  research  foundations.  The
Company believes that continued R&D activities are critical for providing safe, reliable and affordable services, as well as maintaining its leadership position in the
industry, which provides the Company with a competitive advantage as it seeks additional business with new and existing customers.
Emerging Contaminants
Emerging  contaminants  include  numerous  chemicals  such  as  pharmaceuticals,  personal  care  products,  pesticides,  herbicides  and  endocrine  disrupting
compounds, as well as some naturally occurring microbes, such as bacteria, viruses and parasites, which have been detected in drinking water supplies, for which
the risk to the public’s health is not fully understood and/or has not been quantified. While these contaminants have been present in drinking water for as long as
they have been in use, technological advances have only recently made it possible to detect many of them. The ability to detect contaminants, even at trace levels,
has raised questions among regulators and government agencies, further affecting the public’s perception of drinking water quality.
The Chemicals Abstract Service Registry contains over 159 million registered chemicals, with an estimated 1,400 species of disease-causing microbes that
can  affect  humans.  The  Company  is  continually  investigating  new  substances  and  contaminants,  employing  a  team  of  scientists,  engineers  and  public  health
professionals  to  identify  threats  to  its  water  supply,  to  act  on  emerging  regulations  and  new  health  advisories,  and  to  evaluate  the  benefits  of  alternative  or
advanced treatment technologies. The Company maintains state-of-the-art water quality testing equipment and implements new and emerging technologies to help
predict and manage potential water supply contamination issues. Examples of the Company’s efforts include:
•
using its research findings to communicate information to its customers on the actions they can take to manage Legionella (the Centers for Disease
Control  statistics  indicate  that  water-associated  disease  from  Legionella  is  on  the  rise,  with  exposure  typically  associated  with  customer-owned
plumbing systems in large buildings);
•
aerial  drone  testing  to  detect  harmful  algal  blooms  and  testing  ultrasonic  technology  to  help  prevent  taste  and  odor  events  and  to  eliminate
cyanotoxins before they get to the water treatment plant;
•
the implementation of water source assessment tools, including sensors and analytics, to evaluate and track chemical storage and aid in the detection
of source water contamination events;
•
development of methodology and measurement techniques for emerging contaminants to investigate transport, occurrence and treatment; and
•
the implementation of activated carbon, biofiltration and ion exchange for the control of emerging contaminants.
17

Table of Contents
Service Company and Security
American  Water  Works  Service  Company,  Inc.  (the  “Service  Company”)  is  a  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  the  Company  that  provides  support  and
operational services to the Company’s operating subsidiaries. These services are predominantly provided to the Company’s Regulated Businesses under contracts
that have been approved by PUCs, where necessary, and are also provided to its Market-Based Businesses organized under American Water Enterprises, LLC, the
Company’s wholly owned subsidiary (“AWE”) as requested or may otherwise be necessary. Services provided by the Service Company may include accounting
and  finance,  administration,  business  development,  communications,  compliance,  education  and  training,  engineering,  health  and  safety,  human  resources,
information  systems,  internal  audit,  investor  relations,  legal  and  governance,  operations,  procurement,  R&D,  rates  and  regulatory  support,  security,  risk
management and insurance, treasury, and water quality. The Service Company also operates two national customer service centers located in Alton, Illinois and
Pensacola, Florida, which provide customer relations, field service and operational support to the Company’s Regulated Businesses. Services are provided by the
Service Company at cost, enabling the Company’s operating subsidiaries to fulfill their responsibilities in a cost-effective manner, while providing them access to
in-depth, functional expertise.
The  Company’s  security  team  provides  oversight  and  policy  guidance  on  physical,  cyber  and  information  security,  as  well  as  business  continuity,
throughout  its  operations.  It  is  responsible  for  designing,  implementing,  monitoring  and  supporting  effective  physical  and  technical  security  controls  for  the
Company’s physical assets, business systems and operational technologies. Risk assessments are conducted periodically to evaluate the effectiveness of existing
security controls and serve as the basis for additional safeguards, security controls and measures. Operational and technical security controls are deployed and
integrated as safeguards against unauthorized access to the Company’s information systems. These controls (i) are aimed at assuring the continuity of business
processes  that  are  dependent  upon  automation,  (ii)  seek  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  Company’s  data,  (iii)  support  regulatory  and  legislative  compliance
requirements, and (iv) are aimed at maintaining safe and reliable service to the Company’s customers. The Company engages in partnerships with U.S. federal,
state and local law enforcement agencies to coordinate and improve the security of its water delivery systems and to safeguard its water supply and operations.
Employee Matters
As of December 31, 2019, approximately 46% of the Company’s workforce was represented by unions, which include 71 collective bargaining agreements
with 14 different  unions.  Additionally,  as  of December  31,  2019 the  Company  had  four  collective  bargaining  agreement  beyond  expiration,  affecting
approximately 371 employees, all of which are actively working under the terms of the existing agreement, and another collective bargaining agreement in its
initial stage of renegotiation, affecting approximately 66 employees. During 2020, 14 of the Company’s collective bargaining agreements will be expiring in
accordance with their terms and the Company expects to be able to negotiate these agreements during the course of the year.
18

Table of Contents
Information About Our Executive Officers
Presented in the table below is the name, age, offices held and business experience for each of the Company’s executive officers, as of February 18, 2020:
Name
Age
Office and Experience
Susan N. Story
60
President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer. Ms. Story  has served  as President  and Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the  Company  and  a
director since May 2014, and has announced her retirement from these positions, effective April 1, 2020. Ms. Story served as Senior
Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of the Company from April 2013 until May 2014. Prior to joining American Water, she
served as President and Chief Executive Officer of Southern Company Services, a subsidiary of Southern Company, from January
2011 until March 2013 and President and Chief Executive Officer of Gulf Power Company, also a subsidiary of Southern Company,
from  2003  until  December  2010.  Since  2008,  Ms.  Story  has  served  as  a  member  of  the  Board  of  Directors  of  Raymond  James
Financial, Inc., a diversified financial services company, and as lead director since 2016. Since January 2017, Ms. Story has also
served on the Board of Directors of Dominion Energy, Inc., a producer and transporter of energy.
Brian Chin
46
Senior Vice President, Strategic Financial Planning. Mr. Chin joined the Company as its Senior Vice President, Planning and
Strategy Integration in June 2017. He has had his current title since February 15, 2019, and he also served as Interim Treasurer from
October 26, 2018 until February 15, 2019. Prior to joining the Company, from May 2013 to April 2017, Mr. Chin served as the lead
utility analyst for the North America research function at Bank of America Merrill Lynch. From 2001 to 2013, Mr. Chin worked in
Electric Utilities Research at Citigroup. Within that period, Mr. Chin was the global head of Electric Utilities Research for Citigroup.
M. Susan Hardwick
57
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. Ms. Hardwick joined American Water on June 3, 2019 as its Executive
Vice  President—Finance  and  became  its  Executive  Vice  President  and  Chief  Financial  Officer  on  July  1,  2019.  Ms.  Hardwick
previously served as the Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of Vectren Corporation, which was sold to CenterPoint
Energy, Inc. on February 1, 2019. Ms. Hardwick joined Vectren Corporation in January 2000 and served in a variety of positions,
including Vice President, Controller and Assistant Treasurer; Senior Vice President, Finance; Senior Vice President, Chief Financial
Officer; and Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer. Prior to joining Vectren, Ms. Hardwick was Assistant Corporate
Comptroller at Cinergy Corp. She began her career with Arthur Andersen & Co., leaving there as a senior manager to join Cinergy
Corp. Ms. Hardwick is a Certified Public Accountant.
Melanie M. Kennedy
46
Senior Vice President, Human Resources. Since March 2017, Ms. Kennedy has served as the Company’s Senior Vice President,
Human Resources. From August 2014 until March 2017, Ms. Kennedy served as Vice President, Human Resources of the Company,
and from August 2012 to August 2014, she served as Director, Human Resources in the Company’s Northeast Division. Ms. Kennedy
initially joined the Company in 2007, and before that time, she practiced law for nine years.
Walter J. Lynch
57
Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer. Mr. Lynch has over 20 years of experience in the water and wastewater
industry.  He  has  served  as  the  Company’s  Executive  Vice  President  and  Chief  Operating  Officer  since  January  2016,  as  Chief
Operating Officer of Regulated Operations from February 2010 to December 2015, and President of Regulated Operations from July
2008 to December 2015. Mr. Lynch joined the Company in 2001. Mr. Lynch is on the Board of Directors of the National Association
of Water Companies and serves on its Executive Committee. In addition, Mr. Lynch also serves on the Water Research Foundation
Board  of  Trustees.  Effective  April  1,  2020,  Mr.  Lynch  will  succeed  Ms.  Story  as  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  the
Company and a member of the Board of Directors.
James S. Merante
45
Vice President and Treasurer. Mr. Merante was appointed as the Company’s Vice President and Treasurer on February 15, 2019.
Prior to that, Mr. Merante was Vice President, Internal Audit from February 2018 to February 15, 2019, and served as Divisional
Chief Financial Officer for the Company’s Mid-Atlantic Division from July 2014 until February 2018. Prior to joining American
Water, Mr. Merante served as Vice President of Operations for FSM, Inc., a private digital media company, from February 2010 until
July 2014. Mr. Merante is licensed as a Certified Public Accountant in Pennsylvania.
Michael A. Sgro
61
Executive  Vice  President,  General  Counsel  and  Secretary. Mr.  Sgro  has  25  years  of  experience  in  the  water  and  wastewater
industry.  He  has  served  as  the  Company’s  Executive  Vice  President,  General  Counsel  and  Secretary  since  January  2016  and  its
Senior  Vice  President,  General  Counsel  and  Secretary  from  February  2015  until  January  2016.  Prior  to  that,  he  served  as  the
Company’s Interim General Counsel and Secretary from January 2015 until February 2015 and as Vice President, General Counsel
and Secretary of American Water’s Northeast Division from 2002 to 2015.
Loyd “Aldie” Warnock
60
Senior Vice President, Chief External Affairs and Corporate Business Development Officer. Mr. Warnock has served as the
Company’s Senior Vice President, Chief External Affairs and Corporate Business Development Officer since January 1, 2020 and as
the Company's Senior Vice President of External Affairs and Business Development from August 1, 2017 to December 31, 2019.
From  April  2014  until  August  2017,  Mr.  Warnock  served  as  the  Company’s  Senior  Vice  President  of  External  Affairs,
Communications and Public Policy. Prior to joining the Company, he served as Senior Vice President of External Affairs at Midwest
Independent System Operator, Inc., a non-profit, self-governing organization, from March 2011 to April 2014. Prior to that, he served
as Vice President of External Affairs for Allegheny Energy, Inc. from December 2005 to February 2011 and Senior Vice President of
Governmental and Regulatory Affairs at Mirant Corporation from July 2004 to November 2005. Mr. Warnock serves on the Board of
Directors of the National Association of Water Companies and on the Executive Advisory Board of the Mississippi State University
College of Business.
Melissa K. Wikle
54
Vice President and Controller. Ms. Wikle joined the Company in July 2016 as its Vice President and Controller, and assumed the
duties of the Company’s principal accounting officer in August 2016. Prior to joining the Company, Ms. Wikle served as Corporate
Controller and Chief Accounting Officer of Columbus McKinnon Corporation, a publicly-traded worldwide designer, manufacturer
and marketer of material handling products, systems and services, since April 2011. Ms. Wikle is a Certified Public Accountant.
19

Table of Contents
Each executive officer is elected annually by the Board of Directors and serves until his or her respective successor has been elected and qualified or his or
her earlier death, resignation or removal.
Available Information
The Company is subject to the reporting requirements of the Exchange Act. The Company files or furnishes annual, quarterly and current reports, proxy
statements and other information with the SEC. Readers may obtain a copy of the Company’s annual reports on Form 10-K, its quarterly reports on Form 10-Q or
its current reports on Form 8-K, or any amendments to them, that are filed with or furnished to the SEC, free of charge, from the Investor Relations section of the
Company’s website, https://ir.amwater.com, as soon as reasonably practicable after the Company files or furnishes the information to the SEC.
The Company maintains a website at https://amwater.com. Information contained on the Company’s website shall not be deemed incorporated into, or to be
a part of, this report, and any website references included herein are not intended to be made through active hyperlinks. The Company recognizes its website as a
key channel of distribution to reach public investors and as a means of disclosing information to comply with SEC Regulation FD.
The American Water corporate governance guidelines and the charters for each of the standing committees of the Board of Directors, together with the
American  Water  Code  of  Ethics  and  additional  information  regarding  the  Company’s  corporate  governance,  are  available  on  its  Investor  Relations  website,
https://ir.amwater.com, and  will  be  made  available,  without  charge,  in  print  to  any  shareholder  who  requests  such  documents  from  its  Investor  Relations
Department, American Water Works Company, Inc., 1 Water Street, Camden, NJ, 08102.
ITEM 1A.    RISK FACTORS
We  operate  in  a  market  and  regulatory  environment  that  involves  significant  risks,  many  of  which  are  beyond  our  control.  In  addition  to  the  other
information included or incorporated by reference in this Form 10-K, the following factors should be considered in evaluating our business and future prospects.
Any of the following risks, either alone or taken together, could materially and adversely affect our business, financial position, results of operations, cash flows
and liquidity.
Risks Related to Our Industry and Business Operations
Our utility operations are subject to extensive regulation by state PUCs and other regulatory agencies, which significantly affects our business, financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows. Our utility operations also may be subject to fines, penalties and other sanctions for the inability to meet these
regulatory requirements.
Our Regulated Businesses provide water and wastewater services to our customers through subsidiaries that are subject to regulation by state PUCs. This
regulation affects the rates we charge our customers and has a significant impact on our business and results of operations. Generally, the state PUCs authorize us
to charge rates that they determine are sufficient to recover our prudently incurred operating expenses, including, but not limited to, operating and maintenance
costs, depreciation, financing costs and taxes, and provide us the opportunity to earn an appropriate rate of return on invested capital.
Our ability to successfully implement our business plan and strategy depends on the rates authorized by the various state PUCs. We periodically file rate
increase applications with state PUCs. The ensuing administrative process may be lengthy and costly. Our rate increase requests may or may not be approved, or
may be partially approved, and any approval may not occur in a timely manner. Moreover, a PUC may not approve a rate request to an extent that is sufficient to:
•
cover our expenses, including purchased water and costs of chemicals, fuel and other commodities used in our operations;
•
enable us to recover our investment; and
•
provide us with an opportunity to earn an appropriate rate of return on our investment.
Approval of the PUCs is also required in connection with other aspects of our utilities’ operations. Some state PUCs are empowered to impose financial
penalties, fines and other sanctions for non-compliance with applicable rules and regulations. Our utilities are also required to have numerous permits, approvals
and certificates from the PUCs that regulate their businesses and authorize acquisitions, dispositions, and, in certain cases, affiliated transactions. Although we
believe that each utility subsidiary has obtained or sought renewal of the material permits, approvals and certificates necessary for its existing operations, we are
unable to predict the impact that future regulatory activities may have on our business.
In any of these cases, our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity may be adversely affected. Even if rates are sufficient,
we face the risk that we will not achieve the rates of return on our invested capital to the extent permitted by state PUCs. This could occur if certain conditions
exist, including, but not limited to, if water usage is less than the level anticipated in establishing rates, or if our investments or expenses prove to be higher than
the level estimated in establishing rates.
20


Table of Contents
Our operations and the quality of water we supply are subject to extensive and increasingly stringent environmental, water quality and health and safety laws
and regulations, including with respect to emerging contaminants, compliance with which could impact both our operating costs and capital expenditures, and
violations of which could subject us to substantial liabilities and costs, as well as damage to our reputation.
Our regulated water and wastewater operations and the operations of our Market-Based Businesses are subject to extensive federal, state and local laws and
regulations. These requirements include, among others, the Clean Water Act, the Safe Drinking Water Act, the LCR and CERCLA. EPA requirements and similar
federal and state laws and regulations. For example, state PUCs and environmental regulators set conditions and standards for the water and wastewater services
we deliver. If we deliver water or wastewater services to our customers that do not comply with regulatory standards, or otherwise violate environmental laws,
regulations or permits, or other health and safety and water quality regulations, we could incur substantial fines, penalties or other sanctions or costs, as well as
damage to our reputation. In the most serious cases, regulators could reduce requested rate increases or force us to discontinue operations and sell our operating
assets to another utility or to a municipality. Given the nature of our business which, in part, involves supplying water for human consumption, any potential non-
compliance with, or violation of, environmental, water quality and health and safety laws or regulations would likely pose a more significant risk to us than to a
company not similarly involved in the water and wastewater industry.
In addition, CERCLA authorizes the EPA to issue orders and bring enforcement actions to compel responsible parties to investigate and take remedial
actions with respect to actual or threatened releases of hazardous substances, and can impose joint and several liability, without regard to fault, on responsible
parties for the costs thereof. We are also required to obtain various environmental permits from regulatory agencies for our operations.
We  incur  substantial  operating  and  capital  costs  on  an  ongoing  basis  to  comply  with  environmental,  water  quality  and  health  and  safety  laws  and
regulations. These laws and regulations, and their enforcement, generally have become more stringent over time, and new or stricter requirements could increase
our costs. Although we may seek to recover ongoing compliance costs in our Regulated Businesses through customer rates, there can be no guarantee that the
various state PUCs or similar regulatory bodies that govern our Regulated Businesses would approve rate increases that would enable us to recover such costs or
that such costs will not materially and adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
We  may  also  incur  liabilities  if,  under  environmental  laws  and  regulations,  we  are  required  to  investigate  and  clean  up  environmental  contamination,
including potential releases of hazardous chemicals, such as chlorine, which we use to treat water, or at off-site locations where we have disposed of waste or
caused an adverse environmental impact. The discovery of previously unknown conditions, or the imposition of cleanup obligations in the future, could result in
significant costs and could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity. Such remediation costs may not be covered by
insurance and may make it difficult for us to secure insurance at acceptable rates in the future.
Attention is being given to emerging contaminants, including, without limitation, chemicals and other substances that currently do not have any regulatory
standard in drinking  water or have been  recently  created  or discovered  (including  by means of scientific  achievements  in the analysis  and  detection  of trace
amounts  of  substances).  Examples  of  sources  of  emerging  contaminants  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  newly  created  chemical  compounds  (including,  for
example, manufactured nanomaterials); human and veterinary products; perfluorinated and polyfluorinated compounds; bacteria, microbes, viruses, amoebae and
other pathogens; and residual by-products of disinfection. We rely upon governmental agencies to set appropriate regulatory standards to protect the public from
these and other contaminants, and our role is to provide service that meets these standards, if any. In some of our states, PUCs may disapprove of cost recovery, in
whole or in part, for implementation of treatment infrastructure for an emerging contaminant in the absence of a regulatory standard. Furthermore, given the rapid
pace at which emerging contaminants are being created and/or discovered, we may not be able to detect and/or mitigate all such substances in our drinking water
system or supplies, which could have a material adverse impact on our financial condition, results of operations and reputation. In addition, we believe emerging
contaminants may form the basis for additional or increased federal or state regulatory initiatives and requirements in the future, which could significantly increase
the cost of our operations.
21

Table of Contents
Limitations on availability of water supplies or restrictions on our use of water supplies as a result of government regulation or action may adversely affect our
access to sources of water, our ability to supply water to customers or the demand for our water services.
Our ability to meet the existing and future demand of our customers depends on the availability of an adequate supply of water. As a general rule, sources of
public water supply, including rivers, lakes, streams and groundwater aquifers, are held in the public trust and are not owned by private interests. As a result, we
typically do not own the water that we use in our operations, and the availability of our water supply is established through allocation rights (determined by
legislation or court decisions) and passing-flow requirements set by governmental entities. Passing-flow requirements set minimum volumes of water that must
pass through specified water sources, such as rivers and streams, in order to maintain environmental habitats and meet water allocation rights of downstream users.
Allocation rights are imposed to ensure sustainability of major water sources and passing-flow requirements are most often imposed on source waters from smaller
rivers, lakes and streams. These requirements, which can change from time to time, and vary by state or region, may adversely impact our water supply. Supply
issues, such as drought, overuse of sources of water, the protection of threatened species or habitats, contamination or other factors may limit the availability of
ground and surface water.
For example, in our Monterey County, California operations, we are seeking to augment our sources of water supply, principally to comply with an October
20, 2009 cease and desist order (the “2009 Order”), as amended by an order in July 2016 (the “2016 Order”), of the SWRCB that requires California-American
Water Company, our wholly owned subsidiary (“Cal Am”), to significantly decrease its diversions from the Carmel River in accordance with a reduction schedule
that terminates on December 31, 2021 (the “2021 Deadline”). We are also required to augment our Monterey County sources of water supply to comply with the
requirements of the Endangered Species Act. We cannot predict whether Cal Am will be able to secure alternative sources of water, or if Cal Am will be exposed
to liabilities, including fines and penalties, if it is unable to meet the 2021 Deadline under the 2016 Order. Furthermore, Cal Am continues to work constructively
with all appropriate agencies to provide necessary information to obtain the required approvals for the Water Supply Project; however, due to the delay in the
approval  schedule,  Cal  Am  currently  does  not  believe  that  it  will  be  able  to  fully  comply  with  the  diversion  reduction  requirements  and  other  remaining
requirements under the 2009 Order and the 2016 Order, including the 2021 Deadline. If Cal Am or any of our other subsidiaries are unable to secure an alternative
source of water, or if other adverse consequences result from the events described above, our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows
could  be  adversely  affected.  See Item  3—Legal  Proceedings—Alternative  Water  Supply  in  Lieu  of  Carmel  River  Diversions,  which  includes  additional
information regarding this matter.
Climate variability may cause increased volatility in weather and may impact water usage and related revenue or require additional expenditures, all of which
may not be fully recoverable in rates or otherwise.
The issue of climate variability is receiving increasing attention nationally and worldwide. Some scientific experts are predicting a worsening of weather
volatility in the future associated with climate variability. Many climate variability predictions, if true, present several potential challenges to water and wastewater
utilities, including us, such as:
•
increased frequency and duration of droughts;
•
increased precipitation and flooding;
•
increased frequency and severity of storms and other weather events;
•
challenges associated with changes in temperature or increases in ocean levels;
•
potential degradation of water quality;
•
decreases in available water supply and changes in water usage patterns;
•
increases in disruptions in service;
•
increased costs to repair damaged facilities; or
•
increased costs to reduce risks associated with the increasing frequency of natural events, including to improve the resiliency and reliability of our
water production and delivery facilities and systems.
Because of the uncertainty of weather volatility related to climate variability, we cannot predict its potential impact on our business, financial condition,
results of operations, cash flows and liquidity. Although some or all potential expenditures and costs with respect to our Regulated Businesses could be recovered
through rates, infrastructure replacement surcharges or other regulatory mechanisms, there can be no assurance that state PUCs would authorize rate increases to
enable us to recover such expenditures and costs, in whole or in part.
22

Table of Contents
The current regulatory rate setting process may result in a significant delay, also known as “regulatory lag,” from the time that we invest in infrastructure
improvements, incur increased operating expenses or experience declining water usage, to the time at which we can seek to address these events in rate case
applications; our inability to minimize regulatory lag could adversely affect our business.
There is typically a delay, known as “regulatory lag,” between the time one of our regulated subsidiaries makes a capital investment or incurs an operating
expense increase and the time when those costs are reflected in rates. In addition, billings permitted by state PUCs typically are, to a considerable extent, based on
the volume of water usage in addition to a minimum base rate. Thus, we may experience regulatory lag between the time our revenues are affected by declining
usage and the time we are able to adjust the rate per gallon of usage to address declining usage. Our inability to reduce regulatory lag could have an adverse effect
on our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
We  endeavor  to  reduce  regulatory  lag  by  pursuing  constructive  regulatory  policies.  For  example,  three  of  our  states  have  approved  revenue  stability
mechanisms that adjust rates periodically to ensure that a utility’s revenue will be sufficient to cover its costs regardless of sales volume, including recognition of
declining sales resulting from reduced consumption, while providing an incentive for customers to use water more efficiently. In addition, 11 of our state PUCs
permit rates to be adjusted outside of the general rate case application process through surcharges that address certain capital investments, such as replacement of
aging  infrastructure.  These  surcharges  are  adjusted  periodically  based  on  factors  such  as  project  completion  or  future  budgeted  expenditures,  and  specific
surcharges are eliminated once the related capital investment is incorporated in new PUC approved rates. Furthermore, in setting rates, ten of our state PUCs allow
us to use future test years, which extend beyond the date a rate request is filed to allow for current or projected revenues, expenses and investments to be reflected
in rates on a more timely basis. Other examples of such programs include states that allow us to increase rates for certain cost increases that are beyond our control,
such as purchased water costs, property or other taxes, or power, conservation, chemical or other expenditures. These surcharge mechanisms enable us to adjust
rates in less time after costs have been incurred than would be the case under the general rate case application process.
While these programs have reduced regulatory lag in several of our regulated states, we continue to seek expansion of programs to reduce regulatory lag in
those jurisdictions that have not approved such programs. Furthermore, PUCs may fail to adopt new surcharge programs and existing programs may not continue
in their current form, or at all. Although we intend to continue our efforts to expand state PUC approval of surcharges to address issues of regulatory lag, our
efforts may not be successful, or even if successful they may not completely address our regulatory lag, in which case our business, financial condition, results of
operations, cash flows and liquidity may be materially and adversely affected.
Changes in laws and regulations and changes in certain agreements can significantly affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows
and liquidity.
New legislation, regulations, government policies or court decisions, including, without limitation with respect to federal and state income and other tax
laws,  can  materially  affect  our  operations,  results  of  operations  and  cash  flows.  The  individuals  who  serve  as  regulators  are  elected  or  political  appointees.
Therefore, elections which result in a change of political administration or new appointments may also result in changes in the individuals who serve as regulators
and the policies of the regulatory agencies that they serve. New laws or regulations, new interpretations of existing laws or regulations, changes in agency policy,
including those made in response to shifts in public opinion, or conditions imposed during the regulatory hearing process could have the following consequences,
among others:
•
making it more difficult for us to increase our rates and, as a consequence, to recover our costs or earn our expected rates of return;
•
changing the determination of the costs, or the amount of costs, that would be considered recoverable in rate cases;
•
restricting  our ability  to terminate  our services  to customers  who owe us money for services  previously  provided or limiting  our bill collection
efforts;
•
requiring us to provide water or wastewater services at reduced rates to certain customers;
•
limiting or restricting our ability to acquire water or wastewater systems, purchase or dispose of assets or issue securities, or making it less cost-
effective for us to do so;
•
negatively impacting the deductibility of expenses under federal or state tax laws, the amount of tax credits or tax abatement benefits that may be
available, the amount of taxes owed, the timing of tax effects on rates, or the ability to utilize our net operating loss carryforwards;
•
changing regulations that affect the benefits we expected to receive when we began offering services in a particular area;
•
increasing the associated costs of, or difficulty complying with, environmental, health, safety, consumer privacy, water quality, and water quality
accountability laws and regulations to which our operations are subject;
23

Table of Contents
•
changing or placing additional limitations on change in control requirements relating to any concentration of ownership of our common stock;
•
making it easier for governmental entities to convert our assets to public ownership via condemnation, eminent domain or other similar process, or
for governmental agencies or private plaintiffs to assess liability against us for damages under these or similar processes;
•
placing limitations, prohibitions or other requirements with respect to the sharing of information and participation in transactions by or between a
regulated subsidiary and us or our other affiliates, including Service Company and any of our other subsidiaries;
•
restricting or prohibiting our extraction of water from rivers, streams, reservoirs or aquifers; and
•
revoking or altering the terms of a CPCN issued to us by a state PUC.
Any of the foregoing consequences could have an adverse effect on our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
In addition, new Federal, state and local laws, changes in existing laws, rules or regulations, or administrative interpretations thereof, could impact us. In
December 2017, the TCJA was signed into law, which, among other things, enacted significant and complex changes to the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as
amended (the “Code”), including a reduction in the maximum U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% as of January 1, 2018, and certain other
provisions related specifically to the public utility industry, including the normalization of our deferred income taxes. The enactment of the TCJA required re-
measurement of our deferred income taxes, which materially impacted our 2017 results of operations and financial position and had a lesser impact on our 2018
results of operations and financial position. Following enactment of the TCJA, the Company adjusted its customer rates and deferred income taxes to reflect the
lower income tax rate as mandated by PUCs in jurisdictions that have addressed the issue. We expect that further impacts to our deferred income taxes will
continue to occur through pending or future rate cases or other proceedings in the remaining jurisdictions. At this time, we cannot predict the impacts on us of the
regulatory treatment of the TCJA in these remaining proceedings, or of the enactment or adoption of any Related Interpretations, if and when issued. Moreover, we
are unable to determine or predict the potential impacts, if any, of any other new or amended laws, rules or regulations, or interpretations thereof, including,
without limitation, further amendments to the Code or applicable Treasury regulations, to the extent they may be ultimately enacted, adopted or issued, on us or our
businesses, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
Service disruptions caused by severe weather conditions, climate variability patterns or natural disasters may disrupt our operations or reduce the demand for
our water services, which could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
Service interruptions  due to severe weather, climate  variability  patterns  and other natural  events are possible across all our businesses. These include,
among other things, storms, freezing conditions, high wind conditions, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes, landslides, drought, wildfires, coastal and intercoastal
floods or high water conditions, including those in or near designated flood plains, severe electrical storms, sinkholes and solar flares. Weather and other natural
events  such  as  these  may  affect  the  condition  or  operability  of  our  facilities,  limiting  or  preventing  us  from  delivering  water  or  wastewater  services  to  our
customers,  or  requiring  us  to  make  substantial  capital  expenditures  to  repair  any  damage.  Tariffs  in  place  or  cost  recovery  proceedings  with  respect  to  our
Regulated Businesses may not provide reimbursement to us, in whole or in part, for any of these impacts.
Government restrictions on water use may also result in decreased use of water services, even if our water supplies are sufficient to serve our customers,
which may adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Seasonal drought conditions that may impact our water services are
possible across all of our service areas. Governmental restrictions imposed in response to a drought may apply to all systems within a region independent of the
supply adequacy of any individual system. Responses may range from voluntary to mandatory water use restrictions, rationing restrictions, water conservation
regulations, and requirements to minimize water system leaks. While expenses incurred in implementing water conservation and rationing plans may generally be
recoverable provided the relevant PUC determines they were reasonable and prudent, we cannot assure that any such expenses incurred will, in fact, be fully
recovered. Moreover, reductions in water consumption, including those resulting from installation of equipment or changed consumer behavior, may persist even
after drought restrictions are repealed and the drought has ended, which could adversely affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash
flows.
24

Table of Contents
A  loss  of  one  or  more  large  industrial  customers  could  have  a  material  adverse  impact  upon  the  results  of  operations  of  one  or  more  of  our  Regulated
Businesses.
Adverse economic conditions or other factors can cause our customers, particularly industrial customers, to curtail operations. A curtailment of operations
by an industrial customer would typically result in reduced water usage by that customer. In more severe circumstances, the decline in usage could be permanent.
Any decrease in demand resulting from difficult economic conditions affecting these industrial customers could adversely affect our financial condition and results
of operations. Tariffs in place with respect to our Regulated Businesses may not reimburse us, in whole or in part, for any of these impacts.
Our Regulated Businesses require significant capital expenditures and may suffer if we fail to secure appropriate funding to make investments, or if we
experience delays in completing major capital expenditure projects.
The water and wastewater utility business is capital intensive. We invest significant amounts of capital to add, replace and maintain property, plant and
equipment, and to improve aging infrastructure. In 2019, we invested $1.7 billion in net Company-funded capital improvements. The level of capital expenditures
necessary to maintain the integrity of our systems will continue into the future and may increase. We expect to fund capital improvement projects using cash
generated from operations, borrowings under our revolving credit facility and commercial paper programs and issuances of long-term debt and equity. We may not
be able to access our revolving credit facility or the commercial paper, long-term debt and equity capital markets, when necessary or desirable to fund capital
improvements  on  favorable  terms  or  at  all.  If  we  are  not  able  to  obtain  sufficient  financing,  we  may  be  unable  to  maintain  our  existing  property,  plant  and
equipment,  fund  our  capital  investment  strategies,  meet  our  growth  targets  and  expand  our  rate  base  to  enable  us  to  earn  satisfactory  future  returns  on  our
investments. Even with adequate financial resources to make required capital expenditures, we face the additional risk that we will not complete our major capital
projects on time, as a result of construction delays, permitting delays, labor shortages or other disruptions, environmental restrictions, or other obstacles. Each of
these outcomes could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Aging infrastructure may lead to service disruptions, property damage and increased capital expenditures and O&M costs, all of which could negatively impact
our financial results.
We  have  risks  associated  with  aging  infrastructure,  including  water  and  sewer  mains,  pumping  stations  and  water  and  wastewater  treatment  facilities.
Additionally, the nature of information available on buried and newly acquired assets may be limited, which may challenge our ability to conduct efficient asset
management  and  maintenance  practices.  Assets  that  have  aged  beyond  their  expected  useful  lives  may  experience  a  higher  rate  of  failure.  Failure  of  aging
infrastructure could result in increased capital expenditures and O&M costs, and negatively impact our future O&M efficiency ratio. In addition, failure of aging
infrastructure may result in property damage, and in safety, environmental and public health impacts. To the extent that any increased costs or expenditures are not
fully recovered in rates, our results of operations, liquidity and cash flows could be negatively impacted.
Seasonality could adversely affect the volume of water sold and our revenues.
The volume of water we sell during the warmer months, typically in the summer, is generally greater than during other months, due primarily to increased
water usage for irrigation systems, swimming pools, cooling systems and other applications. Throughout the year, and particularly during typically warmer months,
the volume of water sold tends to vary with temperature, rainfall levels and rainfall frequency. In the event that temperatures during the typically warmer months
are cooler than normal, or if there is more rainfall than normal, the amount of water we sell may decrease and adversely affect our revenues.
Three of our jurisdictions, California, Illinois, and New York, have adopted revenue stability mechanisms that permit us to collect state PUC-authorized
revenue for a given period, which is not tied to the volume of water sold during that period. Revenue stability mechanisms are designed to allow utilities to recover
the fixed cost of operations while supporting water conservation goals. In those jurisdictions that have not adopted a revenue stability mechanism, operating results
could continue to be affected by seasonality.
Regulatory and environmental risks associated with the collection, treatment and disposal of wastewater may impose significant costs.
The wastewater collection, treatment and disposal operations of our subsidiaries are subject to substantial regulation and involve environmental risks. If
collection, treatment or disposal systems fail, overflow, or do not operate properly, untreated wastewater or other contaminants could spill onto nearby properties
or into nearby streams and rivers, causing damage to persons or property, injury to aquatic life and economic damages. This risk is most acute during periods of
substantial rainfall or flooding, which are the main causes of sewer overflow and system failure. Liabilities resulting from such damage could adversely and
materially affect our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
25

Table of Contents
Contamination  of  water  supplies  or  our  water  service  provided  to  our  customers  could  result  in  service  limitations  and  interruptions  and  exposure  to
substances not typically found in potable water supplies, and could subject us and our subsidiaries to reductions in usage and other responsive obligations,
government enforcement actions, damage to our reputation and private litigation.
The  water  supplies  that  flow  into  our  treatment  plants  or  are  delivered  through  our  distribution  system,  or  the  water  service  that  is  provided  to  our
customers, may be subject to contamination, including, among other items, contamination from naturally-occurring compounds, chemicals in groundwater systems,
pollution resulting from man-made sources (such as perchlorate, methyl tertiary butyl ether, lead and other materials, chemical spills or other accidents that result
in contaminants entering the water source), and possible terrorist attacks. In addition, new categories of these substances continue to emerge in the water industry.
If one of our water supplies or the water service provided to our customers is contaminated, depending on the nature of the contamination, we may have to take
responsive actions that could include, among other things (1) continuing limited use of the water supply under a “Do Not Use” protective order that enables
continuation of basic sanitation and essential fire protection, or (2) interrupting the use of that water supply. If service is disrupted, our financial condition, results
of operations, cash flows, liquidity and reputation may be adversely affected. In addition, we may incur significant costs in order to treat the contaminated source
through the expansion of our current treatment facilities or the development of new sources of supply or new treatment methods. We may be unable to recover
costs associated with treating or decontaminating water supplies through insurance, customer rates, tariffs or contract terms. Any recovery of these costs that we
are able to obtain through regulatory proceedings or otherwise may not occur in a timely manner. Moreover, we could be subject to claims for damages arising
from government enforcement actions or toxic tort or other lawsuits arising out of an interruption of service or human exposure to hazardous substances in our
drinking water and water supplies.
Since we engage in the business of providing water service to our customers, contamination of the water supply, or the water service provided to our
customers, could result in substantial injury or damage to our customers, employees or others and we could be exposed to substantial claims and litigation. Such
claims could relate to, among other things, personal injury, loss of life, business interruption, property damage, pollution, and environmental damage and may be
brought by our customers or third parties. Litigation and regulatory proceedings are subject to inherent uncertainties and unfavorable rulings can and do occur, and
we may not be protected from these claims or negative impacts therefrom in whole or in part by tariffs or other contract terms. Negative impacts to our reputation
may occur even if we are not liable for any contamination or other environmental damage or the consequences arising out of human exposure to contamination or
hazardous substances in the water or water supplies. In addition, insurance coverage may not cover all or a portion of these losses, and are subject to deductibles
and other limitations. Pending or future claims against us could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash
flows.
We may sustain losses that exceed or are excluded from our insurance coverage or for which we are self-insured.
We  maintain  insurance  coverage  as  part  of  our  overall  legal  and  risk  management  strategy  to  minimize  potential  liabilities  arising  from  our  utility
operations, as well as the operations of our Market-Based Businesses. Our insurance programs have varying coverage limits, exclusions and maximums, and
insurance companies may seek to deny claims we might make. Generally, our insurance policies cover property damage, worker’s compensation, employer’s
liability, general liability, cybersecurity, terrorism risks and automobile liability. Each policy includes deductibles or self-insured retentions and policy limits for
covered claims. As a result, we may sustain losses that exceed or that are excluded from our insurance coverage or for which we are self-insured.
Although in the past we have been generally able to obtain insurance coverage related to our business, there can be no assurance that we can secure all
necessary or appropriate insurance in the future, or that such insurance can be economically secured. For example, catastrophic events can result in decreased
coverage limits, more limited coverage, increased premium costs or deductibles.
We are subject to adverse publicity and reputational risks, which make us vulnerable to negative customer perception and could lead to increased regulatory
oversight or sanctions.
Our business and operations have a large direct and indirect customer base and, as a result, we are exposed to public criticism regarding, among other
things, the reliability of their water, wastewater and related or ancillary services, the quality of water provided, and the amount, timeliness, accuracy and format of
bills that are provided for such services. Adverse publicity and negative consumer sentiment may render legislatures and other governing bodies, state PUCs and
other regulatory authorities, and government officials less likely to view us in a favorable light, and may cause us to be susceptible to less favorable legislative,
regulatory  and  economic  outcomes,  as  well  as  increased  regulatory  or  other  oversight  and  more  stringent  regulatory  or  economic  requirements.  Unfavorable
regulatory and economic outcomes may include the enactment of more stringent laws and regulations governing our operations and less favorable economic terms
in our agreements related to our Market-Based Businesses, as well as fines, penalties or other sanctions or requirements. The imposition of any of the foregoing
could have a material negative impact on us and our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
26

Table of Contents
For example, New York American Water Company, Inc. (“NYAW”) has been the subject of a New York State Public Service Commission (“NYSPSC”)
investigation related to the unintentional provision of incorrect data to a taxing authority that resulted in an over-assessment of real property taxes. NYAW self-
reported this issue to the NYSPSC promptly after NYAW’s senior leadership became aware of it. Neither NYAW nor any of its employees received any financial
benefit as a result of this matter, as all customer overpayments were provided to the local taxing authorities. The NYSPSC investigation also related to the failure
of a few employees working on NYAW’s 2016 general rate case to properly disclose these issues in that rate case. In September 2018, a settlement of these matters
was approved by the Supreme Court of the State of New York, Albany County, and NYAW has been working with the New York State Department of Public
Service to implement its terms. While the settlement resolves the NYSPSC’s investigation involving NYAW and those matters set forth above, there can be no
assurance that NYAW will not be subject to additional federal, state or local proceedings regarding these and other related matters, and these proceedings could
result in increased oversight and civil, administrative and/or criminal sanctions, which may have a material adverse effect upon our reputation and perception.
The failure of, or the requirement to repair, upgrade or dismantle, any of our dams may adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations, cash
flows and liquidity.
The properties of our Regulated Businesses segment include 76 dams, the majority of which are earthen dams, and the failure of any of which could result
in personal injury and property damage, including without limitation downstream property damage, for which we may be liable. The failure of a dam would also
adversely affect our ability to supply water in sufficient quantities to our customers and could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
Any losses or liabilities incurred due to a failure of one of our dams might not be covered by insurance policies or be recoverable in rates, and such losses may
make it difficult for us to secure insurance at acceptable rates in the future.
We also are required from time to time to decommission, repair or upgrade the dams that we own. The cost of such repairs or upgrades can be and has been
material. The federal and state agencies that regulate our operations may adopt rules and regulations requiring us to dismantle our dams, which also could entail
material costs. Although in most cases, the PUC has permitted recovery of expenses and capital investment related to dam rehabilitation, we might not be able to
recover costs of repairs, upgrades or dismantling through rates in the future. The inability to recover these costs or delayed recovery of the costs as a result of
regulatory lag can affect our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
Any failure of our network of water and wastewater pipes and water reservoirs could result in losses and damages that may affect our financial condition and
reputation.
Our operating subsidiaries distribute water and collect wastewater through an extensive network of pipes and storage systems located across the United
States. A failure of major pipes or reservoirs could result in injuries, property and other damage for which we may be liable. The failure of major pipes and
reservoirs may also result in the need to shut down some facilities or parts of our network in order to conduct repairs. Such failures and shutdowns may limit our
ability to supply water in sufficient quantities to our customers and to meet the water and wastewater delivery requirements prescribed by government regulators,
including state PUCs with jurisdiction over our operations, and adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, liquidity and reputation.
Any business interruption or other losses might not be covered by insurance policies or be recoverable in rates, and such losses may make it difficult for us to
secure insurance at acceptable rates in the future. Moreover, to the extent such business interruptions or other losses are not covered by insurance, they may not be
recovered through rate adjustments.
An  important  part  of  our  growth  strategy  is  the  acquisition  of  water  and  wastewater  systems,  which  involves  risks,  including  competition  for  acquisition
opportunities from other regulated utilities, governmental entities and other buyers, that may hinder or limit our ability to grow our business.
An important element of our growth strategy is the acquisition and optimization of water and wastewater systems in order to broaden our current, and move
into new, service areas. We may not be able to acquire other systems or businesses if we cannot identify suitable acquisition opportunities or reach mutually
agreeable  terms  with  acquisition  candidates.  Further,  competition  for  acquisition  opportunities  from  other  regulated  utilities,  governmental  entities,  and  other
buyers may hinder our ability to expand our business.
The negotiation and execution of potential acquisitions as well as the integration of acquired systems or businesses with our existing operations could
require us to incur significant costs and cause diversion of our management’s time and resources. Future acquisitions by us could result in, among other things:
•
incurrence or assumption of debt, contingent liabilities and environmental liabilities of or with respect to an acquired business, including liabilities
that were unknown at the time of acquisition;
•
failure to recover acquisition premiums;
•
unanticipated capital expenditures;
•
failure to maintain effective internal control over financial reporting;
27

Table of Contents
•
the need to successfully integrate the acquired systems’ cybersecurity and infrastructure protection measures with those of the Company’s;
•
recording goodwill and other intangible assets at values that ultimately may be subject to impairment charges;
•
fluctuations in quarterly results;
•
unanticipated acquisition-related expenses;
•
failure to realize anticipated benefits, such as cost savings and revenue enhancements; and
•
difficulties in integrating or assimilating personnel, benefits, services and systems.
Some or all of these items could have a material adverse effect on our business. The systems and businesses we acquire in the future may not achieve
anticipated sales and profitability or other perceived synergies, and any difficulties we encounter in the integration process could interfere with our operations,
reduce our operating margins and adversely affect our internal control over financial reporting.
We compete with governmental entities, other regulated utilities, and strategic and financial buyers for acquisition opportunities. If consolidation becomes
more prevalent in the water and wastewater industries and competition for acquisitions increases, the prices for suitable acquisition candidates may increase and
limit our ability to expand through acquisitions.
Our Regulated Businesses are subject to condemnation and other proceedings through eminent domain or other similar authorized process, which could
materially and adversely affect their results of operations and financial condition.
Municipalities and other government subdivisions have historically been involved in the provision of water and wastewater services in the United States,
and organized efforts may arise from time to time in one or more of the service areas in which our Regulated Businesses operate to convert our assets to public
ownership  and  operation  through  exercise  of  the  governmental  power  of  eminent  domain,  or  another  similar  authorized  process.  A  municipality  or  other
government subdivision or a citizen group may seek to acquire our assets through eminent domain or such other process, either directly or indirectly as a result of a
citizen petition.
For example, in November 2018, Monterey, California ballot Measure J was certified as having been approved by a public vote, requiring the MPWMD
to conduct a study and submit a written plan concerning the feasibility of a potential purchase of the Monterey system assets without an additional public vote. On
November 6, 2019, the MPWMD issued a preliminary report finding, among other things, that the acquisition of the Monterey system assets by the MPWMD
would be economically feasible. Also, five municipalities in the Chicago, Illinois area formed a water agency that filed an eminent domain lawsuit against our
Illinois subsidiary in January 2013, seeking to condemn a water pipeline that serves those five municipalities. This lawsuit remains pending, and a valuation trial is
likely to be held in the near future. See Item 1—Business—Regulated Businesses—Condemnation and Eminent Domain, which includes additional information
regarding these matters.
Furthermore,  the law in certain  jurisdictions  in which our Regulated Businesses operate  provides  for  eminent  domain  rights  allowing  private  property
owners to file a lawsuit to seek just compensation against a public utility, if the public utility’s infrastructure has been determined to be a substantial cause of
damage to that property. In these actions, the plaintiff would not have to prove that the public utility acted negligently. In California, lawsuits have been filed in
connection with large-scale natural events such as wildfires. Some have included allegations that infrastructure of certain utilities triggered the natural event that
resulted in damage to the property. In some cases, the PUC has disallowed recovery in rates of losses incurred by these utilities as a result of such lawsuits.
Contesting an exercise of condemnation, eminent domain or other similar process, or responding to a citizen petition, may result in costly legal proceedings
and may divert the attention of management. Moreover, our efforts to resist the condemnation, eminent domain or other process may not be successful, which may
require us to sell the operations at issue in a condemnation proceeding or to pay a private property owner compensation for the property damage suffered. If a
municipality or other government subdivision succeeds in acquiring the assets of one or more of our Regulated Businesses through eminent domain or other
process, there is a risk that we will not receive adequate compensation for the business, that we will not be able to keep the compensation, or that we will not be
able to divest the business without incurring significant charges. Any of these outcomes may have a material adverse effect on our business, results of operations,
financial condition, cash flows and liquidity.
We rely on operational and technology systems to facilitate the management of our business and customer and supplier relationships, and a disruption of these
systems could adversely affect our business.
Our operational and technology systems are an integral part of our business, and any disruption of these systems could significantly limit our ability to
manage  and  operate  our  business  efficiently,  which,  in  turn,  could  cause  our  business  and  competitive  position  to  suffer  and  adversely  affect  our  results  of
operations. For example, we depend on these systems to bill customers, process orders, provide customer service, manage certain plant operations and construction
projects, manage our financial records, track assets, remotely monitor certain of our plants and facilities and manage human resources, supply chain, inventory and
accounts receivable collections.
28

Table of Contents
Although we do not believe that these systems are at a materially greater risk of failure than other similar organizations, our technology systems remain
vulnerable to damage or interruption from:
•
power loss, computer systems failures, and internet, telecommunications or data network failures;
•
operator error or improper operation by, the negligent or improper supervision of, or the intentional acts of, employees and contractors;
•
physical and electronic loss of customer or employee data due to security breaches, cyber attacks, hacking, denial of services action, misappropriation
of data or other property and similar events;
•
computer viruses; and
•
severe weather and other events, including without limitation, hurricanes, tornadoes, fires, floods, earthquakes and other disasters.
These events may result in physical and electronic loss of customer, employee or financial data, security breaches, misappropriation of property and other
adverse consequences. In addition, a lack of or inadequate levels of redundancy for certain of these systems, including billing systems, could exacerbate the impact
of any of these events on us. We may not be successful in developing or acquiring technology that is competitive and responsive to the needs of our business, and
we might lack sufficient resources to make the necessary upgrades or replacements of outdated existing technology to enable us to continue to operate at our
current level of efficiency. Any or all of these events could have a material adverse impact on our business, results of operations, financial condition and cash
flows.
We may be subject to physical and/or cyber attacks.
As operators of critical infrastructure, we may face a heightened risk of physical and/or cyber attacks from internal or external sources. Our water and
wastewater systems may be vulnerable to disability or failures as a result of physical or cyber attacks, acts of war or terrorism, vandalism or other causes. Our
operational and technology systems throughout our businesses may be vulnerable to unauthorized external or internal access, due to hacking, viruses, acts of war or
terrorism,  and  other  causes.  Unauthorized  access  to  confidential  information  located  or  stored  on  these  systems  could  negatively  and  materially  impact  our
customers, employees, suppliers and other third parties. Further, third parties, including vendors, suppliers and contractors, who perform certain services for us or
administer and maintain our sensitive information, could also be targets of cyber attacks and unauthorized access. While we have instituted safeguards to protect
our operational and technology systems, those safeguards may not always be effective due to the evolving nature of cyber attacks and cyber vulnerabilities. We
cannot guarantee that such protections will be completely successful in the event of a cyber attack.
If, despite our security measures, a significant physical attack or cyber breach occurred, our operations could be disrupted, property damaged, and customer
and other confidential information lost or stolen; experience substantial loss of revenues, response costs and other financial loss; suffer a loss of management time,
attention and resources from our regular business operations; and be subject to increased regulation, litigation, and damage to our reputation, any of which could
have a negative impact on our business, results of operations and cash flows. Experiencing a cyber security incident could also cause us to be non-compliant with
applicable laws and regulations or contracts that require us to securely maintain confidential data, causing us to incur costs related to legal claims or proceedings
and regulatory fines or penalties. These types of events, either impacting our facilities or the industry in general, could also cause us to incur additional security and
insurance related costs.
In  addition,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  business,  we  collect  and  retain  sensitive  information,  including  personally  identifiable  information,  about  our
customers and employees. In many cases, we outsource administration of certain functions to vendors that could be targets of cyber attacks. Any theft, loss and/or
fraudulent use of customer, employee or proprietary data as a result of a cyber attack could subject us to significant litigation, liability and costs, as well as
adversely impact our reputation with customers and regulators, among others.
We have obtained cyber insurance to provide coverage for a portion of the losses and damages that may result from a security breach, but such insurance is
subject to a number of exclusions and may not cover the total loss or damage caused by a breach. The market for cybersecurity insurance is relatively new and
coverage available for cybersecurity events may evolve as the industry matures. In the future, adequate insurance may not be available at rates that we believe are
reasonable, and the costs of responding to and recovering from a cyber incident may not be covered by insurance or recoverable in rates.
29

Table of Contents
Our inability to efficiently upgrade and improve our operational and technology systems, or implement new systems, could result in higher than expected costs
or otherwise adversely impact our internal controls environment, operations and profitability.
Upgrades and improvements to computer systems and networks, or the implementation of new systems, may require substantial amounts of management’s
time and financial resources to complete, and may also result in system or network defects or operational errors due to multiple factors, including employees’
ability to effectively use the new or upgraded system. We continue to implement technology to improve our business processes and customer interactions, and have
installed new, and upgraded existing, technology systems. These efforts support our broader strategic initiatives and are intended to improve our operations and
enhance our customer service capabilities. Any technical or other difficulties in upgrading and improving existing or implementing new technology systems may
increase costs beyond those anticipated and have an adverse or disruptive effect on our operations and reporting processes, including our internal control over
financial reporting. We may also experience difficulties integrating current systems with new or upgraded systems, which may impact our ability to serve our
customers effectively or efficiently. Although we make efforts to minimize any adverse impact on our controls, business and operations, we cannot assure that all
such impacts have been or will be mitigated, and any such impacts could harm our business (individually or collectively) and have a material adverse effect on our
results of operations, financial condition and cash flows.
An inability to successfully develop and implement new technologies poses substantial risks to our business and operational excellence strategies, which could
have a material adverse effect on our business and financial results.
A significant part of our long-term strategic focus on safety, operational excellence, O&M expense efficiency, water quality, asset and capital management
and the customer experience includes the development and implementation of new technologies to be used for, among other things: customer service and support;
environmental  compliance;  water  metering;  water  quality  and  source  monitoring;  cybersecurity;  business  development  and  growth;  data  analysis;  employee
development and training; and other initiatives. For example, we have made and plan to continue to make significant investments in developing, deploying and
maintaining customer-facing technologies, applications to support field service and customer service operations, water source sensor and evaluation technologies,
and data analysis and artificial intelligence technologies. Where appropriate, we also seek to align these new technologies with existing technology infrastructure
and systems.
There can be no assurance that we will be successful in designing, developing, deploying, integrating or maintaining these new technologies, and if they do
not perform effectively or adequately serve their respective business objectives, their value to us and our business and operations may be negatively and materially
impacted. Because these efforts can be long-term in nature, these new technologies may be more costly or time-consuming than expected to design, develop,
integrate and complete and may not ultimately deliver the expected or desired benefits upon completion. Technologies that do not perform as intended or desired
may need to be redesigned, redeveloped or abandoned. While we have and will continue to seek to recover costs and earn a return on capital expenditures with
respect to the costs and expenses of development and deployment of these new technologies in our Regulated Businesses, there can be no assurance that we will be
able to do so in every instance or at all. Our failure to timely and effectively invest in, develop, deploy and implement improvements to, and properly maintain the
operation and integrity of, our new technologies, including related data and other related systems, and/or adequately obtain recovery in rates of the costs and
expenses associated with such activities, may adversely affect our ability to achieve intended O&M expense efficiencies or other key performance results and,
ultimately, could materially and adversely impact our business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
All of the intellectual property that has been or is being used or developed in connection with these technologies, we believe we own, or have valid licenses
to use. However, competitors, contracting parties or other third parties may bring claims against us to challenge our right to use, license, sub-license, market or
monetize, in whole or in part, such intellectual property or derivatives thereof or works made therefrom, and the assertion, defense or protection of our intellectual
property rights could be expensive, time-consuming and ultimately unsuccessful. If we are unable to do so, or it is determined that we do not own or have valid
licenses or other rights to any of the intellectual property used in our technologies, we may lose valuable rights to what we regard as our intellectual property, the
carrying values of the affected technologies may need to be decreased significantly, and we may be required to obtain or purchase licenses at significant cost from
third parties to use the intellectual property. In any of these cases, we may be unable to execute our long-term strategy, and our financial condition, results of
operations and cash flows may be materially and adversely impacted.
Our business has inherently dangerous workplaces. If we fail to maintain safe work sites, we may experience workforce injuries or loss of life, and be exposed
to financial losses, including penalties and other liabilities.
Safety is a core value and a strategy at American Water. Our safety performance and continual progress to our ultimate desired goal of zero injuries is
critical to our reputation. We maintain health and safety standards to protect our employees, customers, contractors, vendors and the public. Although we intend to
adhere to such health and safety standards with a goal of achieving zero injuries, it is extremely challenging to eliminate all safety incidents at all times.
30

Table of Contents
At our business sites, including construction and maintenance sites, our employees, contractors and others are often in close proximity to large pieces of
equipment, moving vehicles, pressurized water, underground trenches and vaults, chemicals and other regulated materials. On many sites, we are responsible for
safety and, accordingly, must implement important safety procedures and practices above what governmental regulations require. If we fail to implement such
procedures  or  if  the  procedures  we  implement  are  ineffective  or  are  not  followed  by  our  employees  or  others,  our  employees,  contractors  and  others  may
experience minor, serious or fatal injuries. Unsafe work sites have the potential to increase employee turnover, expose us to litigation and raise our operating costs.
Any of the foregoing could result in financial losses, which could have a material adverse impact on our business, financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows.
In  addition,  our  operations  can  involve  the  delivery,  handling  and  storage  of  hazardous  chemicals,  which,  if  improperly  delivered,  handled,  stored  or
disposed of, could result in serious injury, death, environmental damage or property damage, and could subject us to penalties or other liabilities. We are also
subject to regulations dealing with occupational health and safety. Although we maintain functional employee groups whose primary purpose is to ensure we
implement effective health and, safety work procedures and practices throughout our organization, including construction sites and maintenance sites, the failure to
comply with such regulations or procedures could subject us to liability.
Work stoppages and other labor relations matters could adversely affect our results of operations.
As of December 31, 2019, approximately 46% of our workforce was represented by unions, and we had 71 collective bargaining agreements in place with
14 different unions representing our unionized employees. These collective bargaining agreements, including four which are beyond expiration and 14 which will
expire during 2020, are subject to periodic renewal and renegotiation. We may not be able to successfully renew or renegotiate these labor contracts on terms that
are fair to us. Any negotiations or dispute resolution processes undertaken in connection with our labor contracts could be delayed or affected by labor actions or
work stoppages. Labor actions, work stoppages or the threat of work stoppages, and our failure to obtain favorable labor contract terms during renegotiations, may
disrupt our operations and result in higher labor costs, which could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity. While
we have developed contingency plans to be implemented as necessary if a work stoppage or strike does occur, a strike or work stoppage may have a material
adverse impact on our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
Our continued success is dependent upon our ability to hire, retain, and utilize qualified personnel.
The success of our business is dependent upon our ability to hire, retain, and utilize qualified personnel, including engineers, licensed operators, water
quality and other operating and craft personnel, and management professionals who have the required experience and expertise. From time to time, it may be
difficult  to attract  and retain  qualified  individuals  with the expertise  and in  the timeframe  demanded for our business needs. In certain  geographic  areas,  for
example, we may not be able to satisfy the demand for our services because of our inability to successfully hire and retain qualified personnel.
In addition, as key personnel approach retirement age, we need to have appropriate succession plans in place and to successfully implement such plans. If
we cannot attract and retain qualified personnel or effectively implement appropriate succession plans, our business, financial condition, results of operations and
cash flows may be materially and adversely impacted.
Financial and Market-Related Risks
Our indebtedness could affect our business adversely and limit our ability to plan for or respond to changes in our business, and we may be unable to generate
sufficient cash flows to satisfy our liquidity needs.
As of December 31, 2019, our aggregate long-term and short-term debt balance (including preferred stock with mandatory redemption requirements) was
$9.5  billion,  and  our  working  capital  (defined  as  current  assets  less  current  liabilities)  was  in  a  deficit  position.  Our  indebtedness  could  have  important
consequences, including:
•
limiting our ability to obtain additional financing to fund future working capital requirements or capital expenditures;
•
exposing us to interest rate risk with respect to the portion of our indebtedness that bears interest at variable rates;
•
limiting our ability to pay dividends on our common stock or make payments in connection with our other obligations;
•
impairing our access to the capital markets for debt and equity;
•
requiring that an increasing portion of our cash flows from operations be dedicated to the payment of the principal and interest on our debt, thereby
reducing funds available for future operations, dividends on our common stock or capital expenditures;
•
limiting our ability to take advantage of significant business opportunities, such as acquisition opportunities, and to react to changes in market or
industry conditions; and
•
placing us at a competitive disadvantage compared to those of our competitors that have less debt.
31


Table of Contents
In order to meet our capital expenditure needs, we may be required to make additional borrowings under our revolving credit facility or issue a combination
of  new  short-term  and  long-term  debt  securities  and  equity.  Moreover,  additional  borrowings  may  be  required  to  refinance  outstanding  indebtedness.  Debt
maturities and sinking fund payments in 2020, 2021 and 2022 will be $28 million, $310 million and $14 million, respectively. We can provide no assurance that
we will be able to access the debt or equity capital markets on favorable terms, if at all. Moreover, if new debt is added to our current debt levels, the related risks
we now face could intensify, limiting our ability to refinance existing debt on favorable terms.
In an attempt to manage our exposure to interest rate risk associated with our issuance of variable and fixed rate debt, we have in the past entered into, and
in the future may enter into, financial derivative instruments, including without limitation, interest rate swaps, forward starting swaps, swaptions and U.S. Treasury
lock agreements. See Item 7A—Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk. However, these efforts may not be effective to fully mitigate interest
rate risk, and may expose us to other risks and uncertainties, including quarterly “mark to market” valuation risk associated with these instruments, that could
negatively and materially affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Our ability to pay our expenses and satisfy our debt service obligations depends in significant part on our future performance, which will be affected by the
financial, business, economic, competitive, legislative (including tax initiatives and reforms, and other similar legislation or regulation), regulatory and other risk
factors described in this section, many of which are beyond our control. If we do not have sufficient cash flows to pay the principal and interest on our outstanding
debt, we may be required to refinance all or part of our existing debt, reduce capital investments, sell assets, borrow additional funds or sell additional equity. In
addition, if our business does not generate sufficient cash flows from operations, or if we are unable to incur indebtedness sufficient to enable us to fund our
liquidity needs, we may be unable to plan for or respond to changes in our business, which could cause our financial condition, operating results and prospects to
be affected materially and adversely.
Our inability to access the capital or financial markets or other events could affect our ability to meet our liquidity needs at reasonable cost and our ability to
meet long-term commitments, which could adversely affect our financial condition and results of operations.
In addition to cash from operations, we rely primarily on our revolving credit facility, commercial paper program, and the capital markets to satisfy our
liquidity needs. In this regard, our principal external sources of short-term liquidity are our $2.10 billion commercial paper program and our $2.25 billion revolving
credit facility. Our revolving credit facility currently expires in accordance with its terms in March 2024, although under those terms we may request to extend the
expiration  date  for  up  to  one  year.  We  regularly  use  our  commercial  paper  program  under  this  revolving  credit  facility  as  a  principal  source  of  short-term
borrowing due to the generally more attractive rates we generally can obtain in the commercial paper market. As of December 31, 2019, American Water Capital
Corp. (“AWCC”), our wholly owned financing subsidiary, had no outstanding borrowings under the revolving credit facility, and had $786 million of commercial
paper outstanding and $76 million in outstanding letters of credit. There can be no assurance that AWCC will be able to continue to access its commercial paper
program or its revolving credit facility, when, as and if desired, or that the amount of capital available thereunder will be sufficient to meet all of our liquidity
needs at a reasonable, or any, cost.
Under the terms of our revolving credit facility, our consolidated debt cannot exceed 70% of our consolidated capitalization, as determined under the terms
of the credit facility. If our equity were to decline or debt were to increase to a level that caused our debt to exceed this limit, lenders under the credit facility would
be entitled to refuse any further extension of credit and to declare all of the outstanding debt under the credit facility immediately due and payable. To avoid such a
default, a waiver or renegotiation of this covenant would be required, which would likely increase funding costs and could result in additional covenants that would
restrict our operational and financing flexibility.
Our ability to comply with this and other covenants contained in the revolving credit facility and our other consolidated indebtedness is subject to various
risks and uncertainties, including events beyond our control. For example, events that could cause a reduction in equity include, without limitation, a significant
write-down of our goodwill. Even if we are able to comply with this or other covenants, the limitations on our operational and financial flexibility could harm our
business by, among other things, limiting our ability to incur indebtedness or reduce equity in connection with financings or other corporate opportunities that we
may believe would be in our best interests or the interests of our shareholders to complete.
32

Table of Contents
Disruptions in the capital markets or changes in our credit ratings could also limit our ability to access capital on terms favorable to us or at all. For
example, on April 1, 2019, Moody’s Investors Service changed the Company’s senior unsecured debt rating to Baa1, from A3, with a stable outlook. While the
lending banks that participate in our revolving credit facility have met all of their obligations, disruptions in the credit markets, changes in our credit ratings, or
deterioration of the banking industry’s financial condition could discourage or prevent lenders from meeting their existing lending commitments, extending the
terms of such commitments, or agreeing to new commitments. These or other occurrences may cause our lenders to not meet their existing commitments, and we
may not be able to access the commercial paper or loan or capital markets in the future on terms acceptable to us or at all. Furthermore, our inability to maintain,
renew or replace commitments under this facility could materially increase our cost of capital and adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and
liquidity. Longer-term disruptions in the capital and credit markets as a result of economic, legislative, political or other uncertainty, including as a result of
changes in U.S. tax and other laws, reduced financing alternatives, or failures of significant financial institutions could adversely affect our access to the liquidity
needed for our business. Any significant disruption in the capital, debt or credit markets, or financial institution failures could require us to take measures to
conserve cash until the market stabilizes or until alternative financing can be arranged. Such measures could include deferring capital expenditures, reducing or
suspending dividend payments, and reducing other discretionary expenditures.  Finally, there is no assurance that we will be able to access the equity capital
markets to obtain financing when necessary or desirable and on terms that are reasonable or acceptable to us.
Any of the foregoing events that impede our access to the capital markets, or the failure of any of our lenders to meet their commitments that result from
financial market disruptions, could expose us to increased interest expense, require us to institute cash conservation measures or otherwise adversely and materially
affect our business, financial condition, results of operations, cash flows and liquidity.
Parent company may be unable to meet its ongoing and future financial obligations and to pay dividends on its common stock if its subsidiaries are unable to
pay upstream dividends or repay funds.
Parent company is a holding company and, as such, it has no substantive operations of its own. Substantially all of our consolidated assets are held by
subsidiaries. Parent company’s ability to meet its financial obligations and to pay dividends on its common stock is primarily dependent on the net income and cash
flows of its subsidiaries and their ability to pay upstream dividends or repay indebtedness to parent company. Prior to paying dividends to parent company, our
regulated  subsidiaries  must  comply  with  applicable  regulatory  restrictions  and  financial  obligations,  including,  for  example,  debt  service  and  preferred  and
preference stock dividends, as well as applicable corporate, tax and other laws and regulations and agreements, and our covenants and other agreements. Our
subsidiaries are separate legal entities and have no obligation to pay or upstream dividends to parent company. A failure or inability of any of these subsidiaries to
pay such dividends or repay intercompany obligations could have a material adverse impact on our liquidity and parent company’s ability to pay dividends on its
common stock and meet its other obligations.
We may not be able to fully utilize our U.S. and state net operating loss carryforwards.
As  of December  31,  2019,  we  had  U.S.  federal  and  state  NOL  carryforwards  of  approximately $673  million and $453  million,  respectively,  and
management believes it is more likely than not that these NOL carryforwards will be recovered in the future. With the enactment of the TCJA, the Company
analyzed the impacts of the reduction in the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% on the Company’s deferred tax assets and liabilities, including
its NOL carryforwards, and as a result, remeasured those NOL carryforwards as of the date of enactment of the TCJA based on this tax rate change.
Our federal NOL carryforwards will begin to expire in 2028, and our state NOL carryforwards began to expire in 2019 and will continue to expire through
2038. We expect to fully utilize our federal NOL balance before it expires, and our ability to do so is primarily dependent upon our ability to generate sufficient
taxable income. We have, in the past, been unable to utilize certain of our state NOL carryforwards, and the establishment or increase of a valuation allowance in
the future would reduce our deferred income tax assets and our net income.
Our actual results may differ from those estimated by management in making its assessment as to our ability to use the NOL carryforwards. Moreover,
adoption of Related Interpretations with respect to the TCJA and other changes in income tax laws, the economy and the general business environment could affect
the future utilization of our NOL carryforwards. If we are unable to fully utilize our NOL carryforwards to offset taxable income generated in the future, our
financial position, results of operations and cash flows could be materially adversely affected.
33

Table of Contents
We have recorded a significant amount of goodwill, and we may never realize the full value of our intangible assets, causing us to record impairments that may
negatively affect our results of operations.
Our total assets include $1.5 billion of goodwill at December 31, 2019. The goodwill is primarily associated with the acquisition of American Water by an
affiliate of our previous owner in 2003, the acquisition of E’town Corporation by a predecessor to our previous owner in 2001 and our acquisition of Pivotal in
2018. Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price the purchaser paid over the fair value of the net tangible and other intangible assets acquired. Goodwill
is recorded at fair value on the date of an acquisition and is reviewed annually or more frequently if changes in circumstances indicate the carrying value may not
be recoverable. As required by the applicable accounting rules, we have taken significant non-cash charges to operating results for goodwill impairments in the
past.
We may be required to recognize an impairment of goodwill in the future due to market conditions or other factors related to our performance or the
performance of an acquired business. These market conditions could include a decline over a period of time of our stock price, a decline over a period of time in
valuation multiples of comparable water utilities, market price performance of our common stock that compares unfavorably to our peer companies, decreases in
control premiums, or other circumstances. For example, in the third quarter of 2018, prior to our sale of Keystone, we strategically narrowed the scope of that
business and, as a result, we recorded a non-cash, pre-tax impairment charge of $57 million. See Note 8—Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets in the Notes to
Consolidated Financial Statements for further information.
A decline in the results forecasted in our business plan due to events such as changes in rate case results, capital investment budgets or interest rates, could
also result in an impairment charge. Recognition of impairments of goodwill would result in a charge to income in the period in which the impairment occurred,
which may negatively affect our financial condition, results of operations and total capitalization. The effects of any such impairment could be material and could
make it more difficult to maintain our credit ratings, secure financing on attractive terms, maintain compliance with debt covenants and meet the expectations of
our regulators.
Market volatility and other conditions may impact the value of benefit plan assets and liabilities, as well as assumptions related to the benefit plans, which may
require us to provide significant additional funding.
The performance of the capital markets affects the values of the assets that are held in trust to satisfy significant future obligations under our pension and
postretirement  benefit  plans.  The value of these  assets is subject  to market  fluctuations  and volatility,  which may  cause investment  returns  to  fall below our
projected return rates. A decline in the market value of the pension and postretirement benefit plan assets can increase the funding requirements under our pension
and postretirement benefit plans. Additionally, our pension and postretirement benefit plan liabilities are sensitive to changes in interest rates. If interest rates
decrease, our liabilities would increase, potentially increasing benefit expense and funding requirements. Further, changes in demographics, such as increases in
life  expectancy  assumptions  and  increasing  trends  in  health  care  costs  may  also  increase  our  funding  requirements.  Future  increases  in  pension  and  other
postretirement costs as a result of reduced plan assets may not be fully recoverable in rates, in which case our results of operations and financial position could be
negatively affected.
In addition, market factors can affect assumptions we use in determining funding requirements with respect to our pension and postretirement plans. For
example, a relatively modest change in our assumptions regarding discount rates can materially affect our calculation of funding requirements. To the extent that
market data compels us to reduce the discount rate used in our assumptions, our benefit obligations could be materially increased, which could adversely affect our
financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
New  accounting  standards  or  changes  to  existing  accounting  standards  could  materially  impact  how  we  report  our  results  of  operations,  cash  flow  and
financial condition.
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP. The SEC, the Financial Accounting Standards Board or other authoritative
bodies  or  governmental  entities  may  issue  new  pronouncements  or  new  interpretations  of  existing  accounting  standards  that  may  require  us  to  change  our
accounting policies. These changes are beyond our control, can be difficult to predict and could materially impact how we report our results of operations, cash
flow and financial condition. We could be required to apply a new or revised standard retroactively, which could also adversely affect our previously reported
results of operations, cash flow and financial condition.
Undetected errors in internal controls and information reporting could result in the disallowance of cost recovery and noncompliant disclosure.
Our internal controls, accounting policies and practices and internal information systems are designed to enable us to capture and process transactions and
information  in  a  timely  and  accurate  manner  in  compliance  with  GAAP,  taxation  requirements,  federal  securities  laws  and  regulations  and  other  laws  and
regulations  applicable  to  us.  Such  compliance  permits  us  to,  among  other  things,  disclose  and  report  financial  and  other  information  in  connection  with  the
recovery of our costs and with the reporting requirements under federal securities, tax and other laws and regulations.
34

Table of Contents
We have implemented corporate governance, internal control and accounting policies and procedures in connection with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
(the “Sarbanes-Oxley Act”) and relevant SEC rules, as well as other applicable regulations. Such internal controls and policies have been and continue to be
closely  monitored  by  our  management  and  Board  of  Directors  to  ensure  continued  compliance  with  these  laws,  rules  and  regulations.  Management  is  also
responsible for establishing and maintaining internal control over financial reporting and is required to assess annually the effectiveness of these controls. While
we believe these controls, policies, practices and systems are adequate to verify data integrity, unanticipated and unauthorized actions of employees or temporary
lapses in internal controls due to shortfalls in oversight or resource constraints could lead to undetected errors that could result in the disallowance of cost recovery
and non-compliant disclosure and reporting. The consequences of these events could have a negative impact on our results of operations and financial condition.
The inability of management to certify as to the effectiveness of these controls due to the identification of one or more material weaknesses in these controls could
also harm our reputation, increase financing costs or adversely affect our or AWCC’s ability to access the capital markets.
Additional Risks Related to Our Market-Based Businesses
We (excluding our regulated subsidiaries) provide performance guarantees with respect to certain obligations of our Market-Based Businesses, including
financial guarantees or deposits, to our public-sector and public clients, and these clients may seek to enforce the guarantees if our Market-Based Businesses
do not satisfy these obligations.
Under the terms of some of our agreements for the provision of services to water and wastewater facilities with municipalities, other governmental entities
and  other  customers,  American  Water  (excluding  our  regulated  subsidiaries)  provides  guarantees  of  specified  performance  obligations  of  our Market-Based
Businesses, including financial guarantees or deposits, primarily related to MSG. In the event our Market-Based Businesses fail to perform these obligations, the
entity holding the guarantees may seek to enforce the performance commitments against American Water (excluding our regulated subsidiaries) or proceed against
the deposit. In that event, our financial condition, results of operations, cash flows, and liquidity could be adversely affected.
At December 31, 2019, we had remaining performance commitments as measured by remaining contract revenue totaling approximately $5.4 billion related
to MSG’s contracts, and this amount is likely to increase if the number of bases served by MSG increases. The presence of these commitments may adversely
affect our financial condition and make it more difficult for us to secure financing on attractive terms.
Our Market-Based Businesses’ operations under MSG are subject to various risks associated with doing business with the U.S. government.
MSG  enters  into  contracts  with  the  U.S.  government  for  the  operation  and  maintenance  of  water  and  wastewater  systems,  which  contracts  may  be
terminated, in whole or in part, prior to the end of the 50-year term for convenience of the U.S. government or as a result of default or non-performance by the
subsidiary  performing  the  contract.  In  addition,  the  contract  price  for  each  of  these  military  contracts  is  typically  subject  to  either  an  annual  economic  price
adjustment, or a redetermination two years after commencement of operations and every three years thereafter. Annual economic price adjustment is an inflation
index-based contract price increase mechanism. Price redetermination is a contract mechanism to periodically adjust the service fee in the next period to reflect
changes  in  contract  obligations  and  anticipated  market  conditions.  Any  early  contract  termination  or  unfavorable  annual  economic  price  adjustment  or  price
redetermination could adversely affect our financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
Moreover, entering into contracts with the U.S. government subjects us to a number of operational and compliance risks, including dependence on the level
of  government  spending  and  compliance  with  and  changes  in  governmental  procurement  and  security  regulations.  We  are  subject  to  potential  government
investigations of our business practices and compliance with government procurement and security regulations, which are complex, and compliance with these
regulations can be expensive and burdensome. If we were charged with wrongdoing as a result of an investigation, we could be suspended or barred from bidding
on or receiving awards of new contracts with the U.S. government or our existing contracts could be terminated, which could have a material adverse effect on our
results of operations and cash flows.
ITEM 1B.
UNRESOLVED STAFF COMMENTS
None.
35

Table of Contents
ITEM 2.
PROPERTIES
The  Company’s  properties  consist  primarily  of  (i)  water  and  wastewater  treatment  plants,  (ii)  mains  and  pipes  used  for  transmission,  distribution  and
collection of water and wastewater, (iii) wells and other sources of water supply, such as reservoirs, (iv) water and wastewater pumping stations, (v) meters and fire
hydrants, (vi) general structures, including buildings, dams and treated water storage facilities, (vii) land and easements, (viii) vehicles, (ix) software rights, and (x)
other equipment and facilities, the majority of which are used directly in the operation of its systems. Substantially all of the Company’s properties are owned by
its subsidiaries, with a large percentage subject to liens of its mortgage bonds. A wholly owned subsidiary of parent company owns the Company’s corporate
headquarters, located in Camden, New Jersey, and it leases office space, equipment and furniture from certain of its wholly owned subsidiaries. These properties
are utilized by the Company’s directors, officers and staff in the conduct of the business.
The properties of the Company’s Regulated Businesses consist mainly of approximately:
•
80 surface water treatment plants;
•
520 groundwater treatment plants;
•
140 wastewater treatment plants;
•
52,500 miles of transmission, distribution and collection mains and pipes;
•
1,000 groundwater wells;
•
1,500 water and wastewater pumping stations;
•
1,300 treated water storage facilities; and
•
76 dams.
The Company has ongoing infrastructure renewal programs in all states in which its Regulated Businesses operate. These programs consist of both the
rehabilitation of existing mains and equipment, and the replacement of mains and equipment that have been damaged or have reached, or are near, the end of their
useful service lives. The properties of its Market-Based Businesses consist mainly of office furniture and IT equipment. Approximately 51% of all properties that
the Company owns are located in New Jersey and Pennsylvania.
The Company maintains property insurance against loss or damage to its properties by fire or other perils, subject to certain exceptions. For insured losses,
the Company is self-insured to the extent that any losses are within the policy deductible or exceed the amount of insurance maintained.
The Company believes that its properties are generally maintained in good operating condition and in accordance with current standards of good water and
wastewater industry practice.
ITEM 3.
LEGAL PROCEEDINGS
Alternative Water Supply in Lieu of Carmel River Diversions
Compliance with SWRCB Orders to Reduce Carmel River Diversions
Under the 2009 Order, Cal Am is required, among other things, to decrease significantly its yearly diversions of water from the Carmel River according to a
set reduction schedule. The 2009 Order responded to claims that Cal Am had not sufficiently implemented actions to terminate its unpermitted diversions of water
from the Carmel River as required by a 1995 order of the SWRCB. In July 2016, at the request of Cal Am and several Monterey County government agencies, the
SWRCB issued the 2016 Order approving the 2021 Deadline.
The 2009 Order includes a condition prohibiting Cal Am from diverting water from the Carmel River for new service connections or for any increased use
of water at existing service addresses resulting from a change in zoning or use. In 2011, the California Public Utilities Commission (the “CPUC”) issued a decision
directing modifications in Cal Am’s tariffs to recognize the moratorium mandated by the 2009 Order, and directing Cal Am to seek written guidance from the
SWRCB with respect to any unresolved issues of interpretation or implementation of this condition. In 2012, the Deputy Director of the SWRCB sent a letter to
Cal Am providing an interpretation as to the calculation of a baseline to determine increases in use of water at existing service addresses. In March 2018, the
MPWMD adopted a resolution directing Cal Am to interpret the baseline in a manner that conflicts with the SWRCB’s written interpretation. In May 2018, Cal
Am notified the MPWMD and the SWRCB that it intends to seek declaratory relief concerning the conflicting regulatory interpretations under the 2009 Order. In
an attempt to resolve these conflicting interpretations prior to seeking judicial intervention, Cal Am has met with the MPWMD and the SWRCB several times. The
SWRCB agreed to circulate revisions to its 2012 interpretive letter, which would be subject to a public comment period. Any failure to follow the MPWMD’s
resolution or the SWRCB’s written interpretation, despite these conflicting interpretations, could potentially result in fines, penalties and other actions against Cal
Am.

36

Table of Contents
The 2016 Order provides that if the CPUC authorizes Cal Am to acquire more than 1,000 acre-feet per year of water from a source other than the Water
Supply Project, proponents of the alternative water source could submit revised milestones to the SWRCB for consideration. In May 2018, certain parties to the
Water Supply Project proceeding submitted a petition to the SWRCB to add parallel milestones to the 2009 Order for 2019, 2020, and 2021, based on the proposed
expansion of the Pure Water Monterey project, another groundwater replenishment project under construction on the Monterey peninsula. Petitioners claim that
compliance with the alternate milestones would still provide for cessation of Cal Am’s unauthorized diversions from the Carmel River by 2021. A preliminary
report on feasibility concluded that the expanded Pure Water Monterey project could provide an additional 2,250 acre-feet of water per year. Cal Am believes that
(i) the petition is premature, (ii) the expanded Pure Water Monterey project is not yet a sufficiently certain or reliable water supply and, even if construction is
successfully  completed,  would  provide  an  insufficient  quantity  of  water  to  allow  full  compliance  with  the  2009  Order,  and  (iii)  the  imposition  of  parallel
milestones would distract from completion of the Water Supply Project. On December 13, 2019, the SWRCB dismissed the petition without prejudice.
Cal Am continues to work constructively with all appropriate agencies to provide necessary information in connection with obtaining required approvals for
the Water Supply Project. However, based on the matters discussed below in “Monterey Peninsula Water Supply Project,” there can be no assurance that the Water
Supply Project in its current configuration will be completed on a timely basis, if ever. Due to the delay in the approval schedule, Cal Am currently does not
believe that it will be able to fully comply with the diversion reduction requirements and other remaining requirements under the 2009 Order and the 2016 Order,
including  the  2021  Deadline.  The  CPUC’s  final  decision  approving  the  Water  Supply  Project  permits  recovery  of  all  of  Cal  Am’s  prudently  incurred  costs
associated therewith, subject to the frameworks set forth in the final decision related to cost caps, O&M costs, financing, ratemaking and contingency matters.  Cal
Am currently believes that its expenditures to date have been prudent and necessary to comply with the 2009 Order and the 2016 Order.  Further attempts to
comply with the 2009 Order and the 2016 Order, or the 2021 Deadline, may result in material additional costs or obligations to Cal Am, and failure to comply
could lead to fines and penalties against Cal Am.
Regional Desalination Project Litigation
Review of CPUC-Approved Settlement Agreement
The Regional Desalination Project (the “RDP”) involved the construction of a desalination facility in the City of Marina, north of Monterey. The RDP was
intended  to,  among  other  things,  eliminate  unauthorized  diversions  from  the  Carmel  River  as  required  under  the  2009  Order.  In  December  2010,  the  CPUC
approved the RDP, which was to be implemented through a Water Purchase Agreement and ancillary agreements (collectively, the “Agreements”) among the
Marina  Coast  Water  District  (“MCWD”),  the  Monterey  County  Water  Resources  Agency  (“MCWRA”)  and  Cal  Am.  In  2011,  due  to  a  conflict  of  interest
concerning  a  former  member  of  MCWRA’s  Board  of  Directors,  MCWRA  stated  that  the  Agreements  were  void,  and,  as  a  result,  Cal  Am  terminated  the
Agreements. In April 2015, the CPUC approved a settlement agreement among Cal Am, MCWRA and the County of Monterey to resolve these matters among the
parties signing the agreement. In March 2016, the Supreme Court of California granted MCWD’s petition for review of the CPUC approval, and following the
court’s disposition of a related issue in another case, MCWD’s petition for review of the CPUC-approved settlement agreement was remanded to the CPUC. On
September 19, 2019, the CPUC issued a decision affirming its prior decisions with respect to the settlement agreement that resolved matters among the parties
thereto associated with the termination of the RDP agreements, after considering the issue remanded by the California Supreme Court.
Cal Am’s Action for Damages Following RDP Termination
In October 2012, Cal Am filed a Complaint for Declaratory Relief against MCWRA and MCWD, which was ultimately transferred to the San Francisco
County Superior Court, seeking a determination as to whether the Agreements are void as a result of the alleged conflict of interest. In June 2015, the court entered
a final judgment agreeing with Cal Am’s position that four of the five Agreements are void, and one, the credit line agreement, is not void. In November 2016, the
Supreme Court of California  denied MCWD’s final appeal of this judgment, which allows further proceedings, discussed below, to determine the amount of
damages that may be awarded in the proceeding.
In  July  2015,  Cal  Am  and  MCWRA  filed  a  Complaint  in  San  Francisco  County  Superior  Court  against  MCWD  and  RMC  Water  and  Environment
(“RMC”), a private engineering consulting firm which has since been acquired by a national engineering, science and operations company, seeking to recover
compensatory damages in excess of $10 million associated with the failure of the RDP, as well as punitive and treble damages, statutory penalties and attorneys’
fees. Shortly thereafter, complaints seeking similar damages were filed in the same court by MCWD and RMC against Cal Am and MCWRA in excess of $19
million in the aggregate. In December 2015, the court consolidated all of these complaints into a single action. On February 15, 2019, the court granted Cal Am’s
motion for summary judgment, and as a result, no claims remain pending against Cal Am in this action. On February 25, 2019, the court granted RMC’s motion for
judgment on the pleadings as to certain of Cal Am’s tort claims against it. On June 20, 2019, the court granted MCWD’s motion for summary judgment related to
Cal Am’s tort claims against MCWD, which Cal Am appealed to the California Court of Appeal, and on January 14, 2020, this appeal was denied. On January 17,
2019, a motion filed by MCWD for summary judgment against Cal Am relating to the contract claims in Cal Am’s complaint was denied.
37

Table of Contents
Trial in this lawsuit had been scheduled to take place in January 2020. On January 27, 2020, the parties to this lawsuit reached a tentative agreement, which
was entered into the court record and would resolve the litigation in part without trial. Under the terms of this tentative agreement, MCWD and RMC would pay
Cal Am an aggregate of $5.2 million in settlement of Cal Am’s contract claims against MCWD and all claims against RMC relating to the RDP. Under this
agreement, Cal Am’s and MCWRA’s right to appeal the dismissal of their tort claims against MCWD would be expressly reserved. A draft settlement agreement is
being reviewed and negotiated by the parties. Once executed, the settlement agreement would be subject to approval of the San Francisco County Superior Court.
Monterey Peninsula Water Supply Project
CPUC Final Approval of Water Supply Project
Cal  Am’s  ability  to  move  forward  on  the  Water  Supply  Project  is  and  has  been  subject  to  extensive  administrative  review  by  the  CPUC  and  other
government  agencies,  obtaining  necessary  permits,  and  intervention  from  other  parties.  In  September  2016,  the  CPUC  unanimously  approved  a  decision  to
authorize Cal Am to enter into a water purchase agreement for the GWR Project and to construct a pipeline and pump station facilities and recover up to $50
million in associated costs, subject to meeting certain criteria. If construction costs exceed $50 million, Cal Am would be allowed to seek additional cost recovery.
In September 2018, the CPUC unanimously adopted a final decision finding that (i) the Water Supply Project, based on Cal Am’s request for a 6.4 million
gallons per day desalination plant, meets the CPUC’s requirements for a CPCN, (ii) the issuance of the final decision should not be delayed, and (iii) an additional
procedural phase was not necessary to consider alternative projects. The CPUC’s decision directs Cal Am to enter into negotiations regarding expansion of the
GWR Project between Monterey  One Water and the MPWMD and to indicate  whether Cal Am plans to file an application  for approval  of an agreement  to
purchase additional water from the GWR Project. The decision notes, however, that the CPUC will only consider such an application if the Water Supply Project is
delayed such that Cal Am would not be able to meet the 2021 Deadline. The decision accepts Cal Am’s estimates of future water demand in Monterey and
concludes that the Water Supply Project is the best project to address those needs, and adopts Cal Am’s most recent cost estimates. The decision also allows Cal
Am  to  earn  an  allowance  for  funds  used  during  construction,  or  AFUDC,  at  a  rate  representative  of  its  actual  financing  costs.  The  final  decision  adopted
frameworks as to cost caps, O&M costs, financing, ratemaking and contingency matters.
In addition, the CPUC final decision imposes numerous reporting and filing requirements to ensure the expenditures for the Water Supply Project are
reasonable, including that the financing is the lowest cost and most beneficial for ratepayers, and that construction is progressing in a timely manner and within the
authorized cost caps. The reasonableness of Water Supply Project costs will be reviewed in the first general rate case filed by Cal Am after the Water Supply
Project becomes operational. Cal Am is also required to implement mitigation measures to avoid, minimize or offset significant environmental impacts from the
construction and operation of the Water Supply Project and comply with a mitigation monitoring and reporting program, a reimbursement agreement for CPUC
costs associated with that program, and reporting requirements on plant operations following placement of the Water Supply Project in service.
In February 2019, the City of Marina and MCWD filed petitions for writ of review before the Supreme Court of California challenging the sufficiency of
the final Environmental Impact Report/Environmental Impact Statement adopted by the CPUC in September 2018, which the court declined to consider on August
28, 2019.
On July 2, 2019, Cal Am notified MPWMD and Monterey One Water (collectively, the “Agencies”) that an event of default occurred under the water
purchase agreement for the GWR Project because the Agencies failed to deliver to Cal Am by July 1, 2019 advanced treated recycled water produced by the GWR
Project. Under the water purchase agreement,  upon the occurrence  of this event of default, Cal Am had the right to terminate  the water purchase agreement
immediately. Cal Am has elected not to exercise its right to terminate the water purchase agreement at this time, but in its notification to the Agencies, Cal Am
expressly reserved its right to terminate the water purchase agreement until such time as the Agencies commence their required delivery of water from the GWR
Project. On July 16, 2019, MPWMD and Monterey One Water responded to Cal Am’s event of default notice and estimated that water delivery would begin by
mid-October 2019. On December 12, 2019, Cal Am sent a letter to the Agencies requesting a status update with respect to the event of default. On January 2, 2020,
Cal Am notified the Agencies that a second event of default occurred under the water purchase agreement because the Agencies failed to achieve the Performance
Start Date (the date upon which MPWMD’s performance obligations under the water purchase agreement were to commence) by January 1, 2020. Under the water
purchase agreement, upon the occurrence of this event of default, Cal Am had the right to terminate the water purchase agreement immediately. Cal Am has
elected not to exercise its right to terminate the water purchase agreement at this time, but in its notification to the Agencies, Cal Am expressly reserved its right to
terminate the water purchase agreement until such time as the Performance Start Date has occurred. On January 9, 2020, the Agencies responded to Cal Am’s
December 12, 2019 and January 2, 2020 letters. In the response, the Agencies acknowledged they remain in default under the water purchase agreement but
indicated that corrective action is being taken to attain the Performance Start Date in the near future.
38

Table of Contents
On April 17, 2019, Water Ratepayers Association of the Monterey Peninsula (“WRAMP”), a citizens’ advocacy group, filed an amended complaint in
Monterey County Superior Court asserting a “qui tam” claim under the California False Claims Act on behalf of itself and the State of California against Cal Am
and certain environmental consultants who worked on the CPUC’s environmental analysis of the MPWSP. The State Attorney General declined to proceed with
this action after it was originally filed in 2016. On July 10, 2019, defendants filed a joint demurrer challenging the legal sufficiency of the allegations of the
amended complaint. At an August 27, 2019 hearing on the demurrer, the court dismissed the petition without leave to amend. On October 17, 2019, WRAMP filed
motions seeking clarification and a reconsideration of the court’s ruling. A hearing on these motions was set for December 3, 2019, but on November 26, 2019,
WRAMP abandoned its motions and instead filed an appeal of the court’s dismissal. This appeal remains pending.
Coastal Development Permit Application
In June 2018, Cal Am submitted a coastal development permit application to the City of Marina for those project components of the Water Supply Project
located within the City of Marina’s coastal zone. Members of the City’s Planning Commission, as well as City councilpersons, have publicly expressed opposition
to the Water Supply Project. On March 7, 2019, the City of Marina Planning Commission adopted a resolution denying Cal Am’s coastal development permit
application. Cal Am appealed the Marina Planning Commission's decision to the City Council, which set a public hearing on the appeal for April 30, 2019. On
April 25, 2019, Cal Am submitted a letter to the City challenging the impartiality of the City and three of its council members with respect to the Water Supply
Project.  On  April  29,  2019,  the  City  informed  Cal  Am  that  it  intended  to  proceed  with  the  hearing  with  the  participation  of  the  challenged  City  Council
members. As a result, on April 29, 2019, Cal Am notified the City that it was withdrawing its appeal, as Cal Am believes it could not receive a fair and impartial
hearing before the City Council.
On May  10,  2019,  the  City  issued  a  notice  of  final  local  action  based  upon  the  Marina  Planning  Commission’s  decision.  On May  22,  2019, Cal  Am
appealed this decision to the California Coastal Commission (the “Coastal Commission”), as permitted under the City’s code and the California Coastal Act. On
October 28, 2019, staff of the Coastal Commission issued a report recommending a denial of Cal Am’s application for a coastal development permit with respect to
the Water Supply Project, largely based on a memorandum prepared by the general manager of the MPWMD that contradicted findings made by the CPUC in its
final  decision  approving  the  Water  Supply  Project.  Staffs  of  the  CPUC  and  the  Coastal  Commission  met  to  discuss  the  Coastal  Commission’s  staff
recommendation, at which time the CPUC raised questions about the Coastal Commission staff’s findings on water supply and demand, groundwater impacts and
other matters. On November 4, 2019, Coastal Commission staff released an addendum to the staff report, concluding that additional groundwater modeling was
needed before staff could find that the Water Supply Project would not prevent depletion of groundwater supplies. At its November 14, 2019 hearing on both the
appeal from the City of Marina’s denial and Cal Am’s application for a coastal development permit within the Coastal Commission’s original jurisdiction, Coastal
Commission staff advised that no vote would be taken at the meeting and that further investigation was required in light of the CPUC staff’s questions. The hearing
was continued to a later date. On January 28, 2020, Coastal Commission staff recommended to Cal Am that it withdraw its application for a coastal development
permit within the Coastal Commission’s original jurisdiction and resubmit such application at a later date, as the staff believes that its additional investigation
could not be completed in time for a vote on Cal Am’s existing application. The staff indicated that such a withdrawal would not affect Cal Am’s appeal of the City
of Marin’s denial, which would remain pending. Cal Am has declined to withdraw its application, and instead, on February 12, 2020, Cal Am and the Coastal
Commission entered into a stipulation extending by 90 days, to July 24, 2020, the deadline for the Coastal Commission to vote on Cal Am’s original jurisdiction
application.
Desalination Plant Development Permit
The proposed desalination plant for the Water Supply Project is to be located in an unincorporated portion of Monterey County, California on a site owned
by CEMEX, Inc. (“CEMEX”), and requires a combined development permit from the County of Monterey prior to commencement of construction. On April 24,
2019, the County’s Planning Commission voted to approve the permit. On July 15, 2019, the Board of Supervisors heard appeals filed by MCWD and a public
advocacy group, at which time it denied the appeals and approved the permit. On August 21, 2019, MCWD filed a petition in Monterey County Superior Court
challenging Monterey County’s approval of Cal Am’s combined development permit application and seeking injunctive relief to enjoin Monterey County and Cal
Am from commencing construction of the desalination plant. On October 9, 2019, after a hearing, the court denied, without prejudice, MCWD’s motion for a
preliminary injunction, but issued a stay of the County’s approval of the combined development permit, precluding commencement of physical construction of the
desalination plant until November 19, 2019, at which time the parties were to advise the court of the Coastal Commission’s decision on Cal Am’s application for a
coastal development permit for the slant wells needed to source water for the desalination plant. In the interim, Cal Am is allowed to continue to obtain permits
needed for the desalination plant’s construction. On November 19, 2019, the parties informed the court that the Coastal Commission had continued its public
hearing on the slant wells and had not yet made a determination about permitting the slant wells. In response, the court continued its stay until March 24, 2020.
39

Table of Contents
Proposed Zoning Changes at CEMEX Site for Slant Wells
In August 2018, the City circulated a public review draft of proposed amendments to its local coastal program and zoning ordinance, and placed the matter
for consideration on the Planning Commission’s agenda for its September 2018 meeting. The proposed amendments would change zoning at the CEMEX site to
open space and restrict future uses, including with respect to Cal Am’s planned use of the site for the slant wells for the Water Supply Project. Any change to the
City's local coastal  program  must ultimately  be approved by the Coastal Commission. Cal Am, CEMEX and the Coastal Commission each submitted  letters
opposing the proposed amendments. At its November 2018 meeting, the Planning Commission adopted a resolution recommending that the Marina City Council
consider approving the amendments.
In December 2018, the Marina City Council considered the proposed amendments. Cal Am, CEMEX and the Coastal Commission again submitted letters
opposing the proposed  changes, but the City Council unanimously  adopted a resolution  amending  its local  coastal  plan  and a draft  amendment  to its zoning
ordinance. Changes to the ordinance require a second reading before becoming final, which occurred at the City’s December 2018 meeting. The changes to the
local coastal plan must be submitted to the Coastal Commission for approval and are not effective until such approval is obtained.
Test Slant Well Permitting
A preliminary step to building the Water Supply Project desalination plant is the construction and operation of a test slant well to confirm the suitability of
the  property  on  which  intake  wells  will  be  located  to  draw  water  from  under  Monterey  Bay.  In  November  2014,  the  Coastal  Commission  approved  coastal
development permits for the test slant well, enabling Cal Am to construct and operate the test slant well. Because Cal Am may use the test slant well as one of the
slant wells for the Water Supply Project, Cal Am sought and obtained from the Coastal Commission permit amendments to allow the test slant well to remain in
place and be maintained until February 28, 2020. On November 27, 2019, Cal Am filed an application with the Coastal Commission for a permit amendment to
allow the test slant well to remain in place and be maintained until February 28, 2021. A required lease obtained from the California State Lands Commission, as
amended, will expire on December 16, 2022. Effective February 28, 2018, test slant well pumping ceased, except for minimal maintenance pumping activities, in
accordance with Cal Am’s coastal development permits.
In November 2015, MCWD filed a Petition for Writ of Mandate and Complaint for Declaratory and Injunctive Relief in Santa Cruz County Superior Court
against the Coastal Commission and Cal Am challenging the amendment of the coastal development permits and seeking an injunction against further test well
pumping. In orders issued in September 2016 and October 2017, the court denied MCWD’s challenges. In January 2018, MCWD filed a notice of appeal of the
court’s judgment. On June 28, 2019, the California Court of Appeal dismissed MCWD’s appeal. On July 15, 2019, MCWD filed a petition for rehearing with the
Court of Appeal, which was denied on July 19, 2019. This decision is now final.
Water Supply Project Land Acquisition and Slant Well Site Use
In July 2017, the Coastal Commission adopted a consent agreement and cease and desist order requiring sand mining operations on the property owned by
CEMEX on which intake wells for the Water Supply Project will be located, to cease by the end of 2020 and the property to be sold to either a non-profit or
governmental entity. The consent agreement strictly limits future use of the property but preserves Cal Am’s existing property rights and allows uses consistent
with existing easements and other rights of record. A permanent easement granted by CEMEX to Cal Am was recorded in June 2018 to allow Cal Am access to the
property and to construct, operate and maintain the Water Supply Project intake wells. On November 26, 2019, the City of Marina notified CEMEX that, based on
this easement and Cal Am’s proposed use of the site for the intake wells, CEMEX has breached or will soon breach a prior 1996 annexation agreement (to which
Cal Am was not a party). The City states that it intends to seek declaratory relief from CEMEX and Cal Am ordering that Cal Am’s extraction is limited to 500
acre-feet per year of groundwater, that Cal Am cannot export extracted water out of the basin, and that the permanent easement granted by CEMEX to Cal Am is
void. The City has requested a meeting with CEMEX as part of a mandatory dispute resolution process under the annexation agreement prior to filing a lawsuit.
CEMEX has denied the City’s claims and requested indemnification from Cal Am under the terms of the permanent easement. Cal Am and CEMEX believe that
there is no valid limitation under the annexation agreement on Cal Am’s right to pump brackish groundwater and seawater at the site for desalination and use by
Cal Am’s customers.
Under  California’s  Sustainable  Groundwater  Management  Act  (“SGMA”)  enacted  in  2015,  groundwater  basins  designated  by  the  state  as  critically
overdrafted must be managed by a groundwater sustainability agency (“GSA”) by 2020 in accordance with an approved groundwater sustainability plan (“GSP”)
designed  to  achieve  sustainability  by  2040.  Under  the  SGMA,  GSAs  have  broad  powers  to  achieve  sustainability  including,  but  not  limited  to,  regulating
groundwater extraction by imposing fees on groundwater extractions and controlling groundwater extractions by regulating, limiting or suspending extractions
from  wells.  The  400-acre  CEMEX  site  overlies  a  small  portion  of  the  180/400  Subbasin  of  the  Salinas  Valley  Groundwater  Basin;  the  84,000-acre  180/400
Subbasin has been designated by the state as critically overdrafted, mainly due to seawater intrusion into the subbasin.
40

Table of Contents
In late 2016, the Salinas Valley Basin Groundwater Sustainability Agency (“SVBGSA”) was formed as a joint powers authority to become the GSA for the
Salinas Valley Groundwater Basin and prepare a GSP. In April 2018, the City of Marina filed a notice to become the GSA for the CEMEX site, creating an overlap
with the SVBGSA’s filing for the 180/400 Subbasin. In 2016, the SVBGSA commenced preparation of a GSP covering the entire 180/400 subbasin, including the
CEMEX site, but in August 2019 the City filed a notice that it intends to prepare its own GSP for the CEMEX site with the intent to severely limit or prohibit
groundwater pumping at that site. The State Department of Water Resources (“SDWR”) has taken the position that until the overlap is resolved, it will not accept
the GSP from either agency, placing the subbasin at risk of being placed in a probationary status and subject to state management. In December 2019, the County
of Monterey filed its own notice to become the exclusive GSA at the CEMEX site in order to resolve the overlap, which is permitted under SGMA. SDWR
accepted the County’s filing on December 18, 2019, and now lists the County as the exclusive GSA for the site.
On December 30, 2019, the City of Marina filed a lawsuit in the Supreme Court of California challenging the County’s filing, and SDWR’s acceptance of
the filing, as the exclusive GSA for the CEMEX site. The City has named the County and its Board of Supervisors, the County GSA, and SDWR and its director as
defendants, and the SVBGSA and its Board of Directors as real parties. The City seeks to invalidate the County’s filing, as well as injunctive relief to preserve the
City’s status as a GSA for the site. To protect its interest in the matter, Cal Am filed an application to intervene in this lawsuit, which is scheduled to be heard on
February 18, 2020.
West Virginia Elk River Freedom Industries Chemical Spill
See Note 16—Commitments and Contingencies—Contingencies—West Virginia Elk River Freedom Industries Chemical Spill in the Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements for information regarding the final court approval of the global settlement with respect to the January 2014 Freedom Industries, Inc. chemical
spill.
Dunbar, West Virginia Water Main Break Class Action Litigation
On the evening of June 23, 2015, a 36-inch pre-stressed concrete transmission water main, installed in the early 1970s, failed. The water main is part of
WVAWC’s West Relay pumping station located in the City of Dunbar. The failure of the main caused water outages and low pressure to up to approximately
25,000 WVAWC customers. In the early morning hours of June 25, 2015, crews completed a repair, but that same day, the repair developed a leak. On June 26,
2015, a second repair was completed and service was restored that day to approximately 80% of the impacted customers, and to the remaining approximately 20%
by the next morning. The second repair showed signs of leaking but the water main was usable until June 29, 2015 to allow tanks to refill. The system was
reconfigured to maintain service to all but approximately 3,000 customers while a final repair was completed safely on June 30, 2015. Water service was fully
restored on July 1, 2015 to all customers affected by this event.
On June 2, 2017, a complaint captioned Jeffries, et al. v. West Virginia-American Water Company was filed in West Virginia Circuit Court in Kanawha
County on behalf of an alleged class of residents and business owners who lost water service or pressure as a result of the Dunbar main break. The complaint
alleges breach of contract by WVAWC for failure to supply water, violation of West Virginia law regarding the sufficiency of WVAWC’s facilities and negligence
by WVAWC in the design, maintenance and operation of the water system. The Jeffries plaintiffs seek unspecified alleged damages on behalf of the class for lost
profits, annoyance and inconvenience, and loss of use, as well as punitive damages for willful, reckless and wanton behavior in not addressing the risk of pipe
failure and a large outage.
In October 2017, WVAWC filed with the court a motion seeking to dismiss all of the Jeffries plaintiffs’ counts alleging statutory and common law tort
claims.  Furthermore,  WVAWC  asserted  that  the  Public  Service  Commission  of  West  Virginia,  and  not  the  court,  has  primary  jurisdiction  over  allegations
involving violations of the applicable tariff, the public utility code and related rules. In May 2018, the court, at a hearing, denied WVAWC’s motion to apply the
primary  jurisdiction  doctrine,  and  in  October  2018,  the  court  issued  a  written  order  to  that  effect.  On  February  21,  2019,  the  court  issued  an  order  denying
WVAWC’s motion to dismiss the Jeffries plaintiffs’ tort claims. On August 21, 2019, the court set a procedural schedule in this case, including a trial date of
September 21, 2020. Discovery in this case is ongoing. On February 4, 2020, the Jeffries plaintiffs filed a motion seeking class certification on the issues of breach
of contract and negligence, and to determine the applicability of punitive damages and a multiplier for those damages if imposed. A hearing on class certification is
currently scheduled for March 11, 2020.
The Company and WVAWC believe that WVAWC has meritorious defenses to the claims raised in this class action complaint and WVAWC will continue
to vigorously defend itself against these allegations.
Chattanooga, Tennessee Water Main Break Class Action Litigation
On September 12, 2019, Tennessee-American Water Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“TAWC”), experienced a break of a 36-inch
water transmission main, which caused service fluctuations or interruptions to TAWC customers and the issuance of a boil water notice. TAWC repaired the main
break by early morning on September 14, 2019, and restored full water service by the afternoon on September 15, 2019, with the boil water notice lifted for all
customers on September 16, 2019.
41

Table of Contents
On September 17, 2019, a complaint captioned Bruce, et al. v. American Water Works Company, Inc., et al. was filed in the Circuit Court of Hamilton
County, Tennessee against TAWC, the Company and the Service Company (collectively, the “Tennessee-American Water Defendants”), on behalf of an alleged
class of individuals or entities who lost water service or suffered monetary losses as a result of the Chattanooga main break (the “Tennessee Plaintiffs”). The
complaint alleges breach of contract and negligence against the Tennessee-American Water Defendants, as well as an equitable remedy of piercing the corporate
veil. The Tennessee Plaintiffs seek an award of unspecified alleged damages for wage losses, business and economic losses, out-of-pocket expenses, loss of use
and enjoyment of property and annoyance and inconvenience, as well as punitive damages, attorneys’ fees and pre- and post-judgment interest.
On November 22, 2019, the Tennessee-American Water Defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief
may be granted, and, with respect to the Company, for lack of personal jurisdiction. A hearing on this motion is scheduled for February 18, 2020.
The Tennessee-American Water Defendants believe that they have meritorious defenses to the claims raised in this class action complaint, and they are
vigorously defending themselves against these allegations.
CSG — East Palo Alto Water System Voluntary Report
In April 2017, AWE, the parent entity of CSG, voluntarily reported to the Division of Drinking Water of the SWRCB potential violations of the California
Safe Drinking Water Act (the “CSDWA”) in connection with AWE’s operation of the City of East Palo Alto’s water distribution system. Upon the resignation of
the system’s general manager in March 2017, AWE discovered that it may have operated the system without a properly certified operator for two years, the
triennial LCR sampling was not completed, and the 2015 Consumer Confidence Report improperly reported data for lead and copper samples from the system’s
upstream water provider. Promptly after discovering these issues, AWE engaged an outside law firm to conduct an internal investigation and reported the results of
that investigation to the SWRCB.
On June 15, 2017, the SWRCB issued to AWE a citation that required AWE to, among other things: comply with regulations related to water operator
certifications, lead and copper tap sampling requirements and the publishing of a Consumer Confidence Report; provide public notification of the LCR violation;
and prepare a corrective action plan to evaluate the causes leading to these incidents and measures to be taken to prevent recurrence of future incidents. The
citation did not impose on AWE any monetary penalties, but the SWRCB reserved the right to take additional enforcement action.
In October 2017, the SWRCB advised AWE that it is in compliance with all of the directives and relevant statutory and administrative provisions specified
in the SWRCB’s June 2017 citation. In February 2018, the SWRCB referred this matter to the San Mateo County, California District Attorney’s office for further
investigation. AWE continues to cooperate with the SWRCB, the City of East Palo Alto and the San Mateo County District Attorney regarding this matter. Proven
violations of the CSDWA may result in civil and criminal penalties.
General
Periodically, the Company is involved in other proceedings or litigation arising in the ordinary course of business. Other than those proceedings described
in this Item 3—Legal Proceedings, the Company does not believe that the ultimate resolution of these matters will materially affect its financial position or results
of operations. However, litigation and other proceedings are subject to many uncertainties, and the outcome of individual matters is not predictable with assurance.
It is possible that some litigation and other proceedings could be decided unfavorably to the Company, and that any such unfavorable decisions could have a
material adverse effect on its business, financial condition, results of operations and cash flows.
ITEM 4.
MINE SAFETY DISCLOSURES
Not applicable.
42

Table of Contents
PART II
ITEM 5.
MARKET FOR REGISTRANT’S COMMON EQUITY, RELATED STOCKHOLDER MATTERS AND ISSUER PURCHASES OF
EQUITY SECURITIES
Since April 23, 2008, the Company’s common stock has traded on the New York Stock Exchange (“NYSE”) under the symbol “AWK.” As of February 13,
2020, there were 180,974,719 shares of common stock outstanding held by approximately 2,546 record holders. Holders of the Company’s common stock are
entitled  to  receive  dividends  when  they  are  declared  by  its  Board  of  Directors.  See Note  9—Shareholders’  Equity in  the  Notes  to  Consolidated  Financial
Statements for additional information regarding the Company’s dividends.
In February 2015, the Board of Directors authorized an anti-dilutive stock repurchase program to mitigate the dilutive effect of shares issued through the
Company’s dividend reinvestment, employee stock purchase and executive compensation activities. The program allows the Company to purchase up to 10 million
shares of its outstanding common stock from time to time over an unrestricted period of time in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. The
program is conducted in accordance with Rule 10b-18 of the Exchange Act, and, to facilitate  these repurchases, the Company enters into Rule 10b5-1 stock
repurchase plans with a third-party broker, which allow the Company to repurchase shares of its common stock at times when it otherwise might be prevented from
doing so under insider trading laws or because of self-imposed trading blackout periods. Subject to applicable regulations, the Company may elect to amend or
cancel the program or the stock repurchase parameters at its discretion to manage dilution.
From  April  1,  2015,  the  date  repurchases  under  the  anti-dilutive  stock  repurchase  program  commenced,  through December  31,  2019,  the  Company
repurchased an aggregate of 4,860,000 shares of its common stock under the program, including 350,000 shares repurchased during the first quarter of 2019. There
were no repurchases of common stock in the last three quarters of 2019.
ITEM 6.
SELECTED FINANCIAL DATA
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
(In millions, except per share data)
2019
2018
2017
2016
2015
Statement of Operations data:
 
 
 
 
 
Operating revenues
$
3,610
$
3,440
$
3,357
$
3,302
$
3,159
Net income attributable to common shareholders
621
567
426
468
476
Net income attributable to common shareholders per
basic common share
$
3.44
$
3.16
$
2.39
$
2.63
$
2.66
Net income attributable to common shareholders per
diluted common share
3.43
3.15
2.38
2.62
2.64
Balance Sheet data:
 
 
 
 
 
Total assets
$
22,682
$
21,223
$
19,482
$
18,482
$
17,241
Long-term debt and redeemable preferred stock at
redemption value
8,644
7,576
6,498
5,759
5,874
Other data:
 
 
 
 
 
Cash dividends declared per common share
$
2.00
$
1.82
$
1.66
$
1.50
$
1.36
Net cash provided by operating activities (a) (b)
1,383
1,386
1,449
1,289
1,195
Net cash used in investing activities (b)
(1,945)
(2,036)
(1,672)
(1,590)
(1,459)
Net cash provided by financing activities (a) (b)
494
726
207
328
290
Capital expenditures included in net cash used in
investing activities
(1,654)
(1,586)
(1,434)
(1,311)
(1,160)
(a)
The information for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, has been revised to reflect the retrospective application of Accounting Standards Update 2016-09, Improvements to
Employee Share-Based Payment Accounting, which was adopted by the Company as of January 1, 2017.
(b)
The information for the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015, has been revised to reflect the retrospective application of Accounting Standards Update 2016-18, Restricted Cash,
which was adopted by the Company as of December 31, 2017.
43

Table of Contents
ITEM 7.
MANAGEMENT’S DISCUSSION AND ANALYSIS OF FINANCIAL CONDITION AND RESULTS OF OPERATIONS
The following discussion should be read together with the Consolidated Financial Statements and the Notes thereto included elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
This  discussion  contains  forward-looking  statements  that  are  based  on  management’s  current  expectations,  estimates  and  projections  about  the  Company’s
business, operations and financial performance. The cautionary statements made in this Form 10-K should be read as applying to all related forward-looking
statements whenever they appear in this Form 10-K. The Company’s actual results may differ materially from those currently anticipated and expressed in such
forward-looking statements as a result of a number of factors, including those that are discussed under “Forward-Looking Statements,” Item 1A—Risk Factors
and elsewhere in this Form 10-K. The Company has a disclosure committee consisting of members of senior management and other key employees involved in the
preparation of the Company’s SEC reports. The committee is actively involved in the review and discussion of the Company’s SEC filings. For a discussion and
analysis  of  the  Company’s  financial  statements  for  fiscal  2018  compared  to  fiscal  2017,  please  refer  to Item  7—Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of
Financial Condition and Results of Operations in the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2018, filed with the SEC on
February 19, 2019.
Overview
American Water is the largest and most geographically diverse, publicly-traded water and wastewater utility company in the United States, as measured by
both operating revenues and population served. The Company employs approximately 6,800 professionals  who provide drinking water, wastewater and other
related services to approximately 15 million people in 46 states. The Company’s primary business involves the ownership of utilities  that provide water and
wastewater services to residential, commercial, industrial, public authority, fire service and sale for resale customers, collectively presented as the “Regulated
Businesses.” The Company’s utilities operate in approximately 1,700 communities in 16 states in the United States, with over 3.4 million active customers with
services provided by its water and wastewater networks. Services provided by the Company’s utilities are generally subject to regulation by PUCs. The Company
also operates market-based businesses that provide complementary services to residential and smaller commercial customers, the U.S. government on military
installations, as well as municipalities, utilities and industrial customers, collectively presented as the “Market-Based Businesses.” These Market-Based Businesses
are not subject to regulation by state PUCs. See Item 1—Business for additional information.
44

Table of Contents
Financial Results
Presented in the table below are the Company’s diluted earnings per share, as determined in accordance with GAAP, and the Company’s adjusted diluted
earnings per share (a non-GAAP measure):
For the Years Ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
Diluted earnings per share (GAAP):
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
3.43
$
3.15
$
2.38
Adjustments:
Loss on sale of Keystone operations
0.24
—
—
Income tax impact
(0.05)
—
—
Net adjustment
0.19
—
—
Freedom Industries settlement activities
(0.02)
(0.11)
(0.12)
Income tax impact
0.01
0.03
0.05
Net adjustment
(0.01)
(0.08)
(0.07)
Gain on sale of Contract Services Group contracts
—
(0.08)
—
Income tax impact
—
0.02
—
Net adjustment
—
(0.06)
—
Keystone impairment charge
—
0.31
—
Income tax impact
—
(0.08)
—
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
—
(0.01)
—
Net adjustment
—
0.22
—
Early extinguishment of debt at parent company
—
—
0.03
Income tax impact
—
—
(0.01)
Net adjustment
—
—
0.02
Impact of re-measurement from the TCJA
—
0.07
0.70
Total net adjustments
0.18
0.15
0.65
Adjusted diluted earnings per share (non-GAAP)
$
3.61
$
3.30
$
3.03
For the year ended December 31, 2019, diluted earnings per share (GAAP) were $3.43, an increase of $0.28 per diluted share compared to the prior year,
which includes the net adjustments presented in the table above and discussed in greater detail in the “Adjustments to GAAP” section below.
Excluding the net adjustments presented in the table above, adjusted diluted earnings per share (non-GAAP) were $3.61 for the year ended December 31,
2019, an increase of $0.31 per diluted share compared to the prior year.
These results were driven by continued growth in the Regulated Businesses from infrastructure investment, acquisitions and organic growth, and growth in
the Market-Based Businesses, primarily from HOS’s 2018 acquisition of Pivotal and from MSG’s addition of two new military contracts in 2018 (Wright-Patterson
Air Force Base and Fort Leonard Wood).
45

Table of Contents
Adjustments to GAAP
Adjusted diluted earnings per share represents a non-GAAP financial measure and, as shown in the table above, is calculated as GAAP diluted earnings per
share, excluding the impact of one or more of the following events: (i) a loss on the sale in the fourth quarter of 2019 of the Keystone operations; (ii) previously
reported settlement activities related to the Freedom Industries chemical spill in West Virginia; (iii) a gain recognized in the third quarter of 2018 on the sale of the
majority of CSG’s O&M contracts; (iv) a goodwill and intangible impairment charge in the third quarter of 2018 related to the Keystone operations; (v) an early
extinguishment of debt charge at parent company in the third quarter of 2017; and (vi) non-cash re-measurement charges recorded in the fourth quarters of 2017
and 2018 resulting from the impact of the change in the federal corporate income tax rate on the Company’s deferred income taxes from the enactment of the
TCJA.
The Company believes that this non-GAAP measure provides investors with useful information by excluding certain matters that may not be indicative of
its ongoing operating results, and that providing this non-GAAP measure will allow investors to better understand the businesses’ operating performance and
facilitate a meaningful year-to-year comparison of the Company’s results of operations. Although management uses this non-GAAP financial measure internally to
evaluate its results of operations, the Company does not intend results reflected by this non-GAAP measure to represent results as defined by GAAP, and the
reader  should  not  consider  them  as  indicators  of  performance.  This  non-GAAP  financial  measure  is  derived  from  the  Company’s  consolidated  financial
information but is not presented in the financial statements prepared in accordance with GAAP. This measure should be considered in addition to, and not as a
substitute for, measures of financial performance prepared in accordance with GAAP. In addition, this non-GAAP financial measure as defined and used above,
may not be comparable to similarly titled non-GAAP measures used by other companies, and, accordingly, may have significant limitations on its use.
Growth—through  capital  investment  in  infrastructure  and  regulated  acquisitions,  as  well  as  strategic  growth  opportunities  in  the Market-Based
Businesses
The Company expects to continue to grow its businesses, with the majority of its growth to be achieved in the Regulated Businesses through (i) continued
capital investment in the Company’s infrastructure to provide safe, clean, reliable and affordable water and wastewater services to its customers, and (ii) regulated
acquisitions to expand the Company’s services to new customers. The Company also expects to continue to grow the Market-Based Businesses, which leverages
its core water and wastewater competencies. In 2019, the Company invested $1.9 billion, primarily in the Regulated Businesses, as discussed below:
Regulated Businesses Growth and Optimization
•
$1.7 billion capital investment in the Regulated Businesses, the majority for infrastructure improvements and replacements.
•
$235 million to fund acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses, which added approximately 53,100 water and wastewater customers.
•
The Company has entered into agreements for pending acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses to add approximately 44,200 customers.
On November  20,  2019,  the  Company  and  its  New  York  subsidiary  entered  into  a  Stock  Purchase  Agreement  with  Liberty  Utilities  Co.  (“Liberty”),
pursuant  to  which  Liberty  will  purchase  all  of  the  capital  stock  of  the  New  York  subsidiary  (the  “Stock  Purchase”)  for  an  aggregate  purchase  price  of
approximately $608 million in cash, subject to adjustment as provided in that agreement. The New York subsidiary includes all of the water and wastewater assets
of  the  Company’s  New  York  regulated  utility  operations,  with  approximately 125,000 customer  connections  in  the  State  of  New  York.  Algonquin  Power  &
Utilities Corp., Liberty’s parent company, executed and delivered an absolute and unconditional guaranty of the performance of all of Liberty’s obligations under
the stock purchase agreement.
The Stock Purchase is subject to various conditions, including obtaining regulatory approval, the expiration or termination of the applicable waiting period
under the U.S. Hart-Scott-Rodino antitrust law and other customary closing conditions. The stock purchase agreement may be terminated by either party if the
Stock Purchase is not completed by June 30, 2021, subject to extension for up to six months if all of the conditions to closing have been met, other than obtaining
regulatory  approvals.  Liberty  may  also  terminate  the  stock  purchase  agreement  if  any  governmental  authority  initiates  a  condemnation  or  eminent  domain
proceeding against a majority of the consolidated  properties  of the New York subsidiary, taken as a whole. The Company currently  estimates that the Stock
Purchase  is  to  be  completed  by  early  2021.  Accordingly,  the  assets  and  related  liabilities  of  the  New  York  subsidiary  were  classified  as  held  for  sale  on
the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019. See Note 4—Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for
additional information.
46

Table of Contents
Market-Based Businesses Growth and Optimization
During January 2020, HOS was selected by the San Francisco Public Utilities Commission (“SFPUC”) to offer optional water line and sewer line protection
services to homeowners across the City and County of San Francisco. This arrangement provides over 100,000 eligible San Francisco homeowners, served by the
SFPUC, the opportunity to purchase optional protection plans from the Company for the water line that runs from a residential property to the connection with the
water meter and the sewer line that runs from the residential property to the sewer main.
MSG was awarded contracts for ownership, operation and maintenance of the water and wastewater systems at Joint Base San Antonio in Texas, effective
September 26, 2019, and the United States Military Academy at West Point, New York, effective September 30, 2019. Highlights of these contract awards are
detailed below:
•
Joint Base San Antonio is comprised of Randolph Air Force Base, Fort Sam Houston, Camp Bullis and Lackland Air Force Base. The installation
spans  46,539  acres,  across  11  geographically  separated  parcels  of  land.  The  contract  award  includes  estimated  revenues  of  approximately  $448
million over a 50-year period, subject to an annual economic price adjustment.
•
The United States Military Academy is located at West Point, New York, the oldest continuously operated Army post in the United States. The
institution’s campus, central post and training areas expand across nearly 16,000 acres, and is home to a student body of approximately 4,400 cadets.
The total contract award includes estimated revenues of approximately $519 million over a 50-year period, subject to an annual economic price
adjustment.
On December 12, 2019, as part of a strategic review undertaken by the Company, the Company sold all of its interest in its Keystone operations to a natural
gas and oil industry investment group, for total cash consideration of $31 million, subject to adjustment based on post-closing working capital. As a result of the
sale, the Company recorded a pre-tax loss on sale of $44 million, or $35 million after-tax, during the fourth quarter of 2019, as discussed above. See Note 4—
Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Future Growth
Looking forward, the Company expects to invest between $8.8 billion to $9.4 billion from 2020 to 2024, and between $20 billion to $22 billion from 2020
to 2029, including a range of $1.7 billion to $1.9 billion in 2020. The Company’s expected future investments include:
•
capital investment for infrastructure improvements in the Regulated Businesses of $8.2 billion over the next five years, and between $18.2 billion and
$19.2 billion over the next 10 years, including $1.6 billion expected in 2020; and
•
growth from acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses to expand the Company’s water and wastewater customer base of between $600 million to $1.2
billion over the next five years, and between $2 billion to $3 billion over the next 10 years, including a range of $100 million to $300 million
expected in 2020.
47

Table of Contents
Presented in the following chart is the estimated allocation of the Company’s expected capital investment for infrastructure improvements in its Regulated
Businesses over the next five years, by purpose:
Operational Excellence
The Company continues to strive for industry-leading operational efficiency, driven largely by technology. The Company’s technology investments are
aimed at enhancing its customer experience and operational efficiency.
•
In 2019:
•
the Regulated Businesses achieved an adjusted O&M efficiency ratio (a non-GAAP measure) of 34.5% for the year ended December 31, 2019,
compared to 35.6% and 35.3% for the years ended December 31, 2018 and 2017, respectively. The improvement in the Company’s adjusted
O&M efficiency ratio in 2019, when compared to 2018, was due to an increase in operating revenues as well as continued focus on operating
costs of the Regulated Businesses;
•
the Company worked to decrease costs and deploy capital efficiently, including using trenchless technologies for pipeline rehabilitation and
leveraging its buying power and strategic sourcing to drive cost savings;
•
the  Company  continued  its  commitment  to  water  quality  and  the  environment  by  leveraging  new  technologies;  the  Company  now  has
advanced water quality sensors at all of its major drinking water intake sites and is automating its environmental reporting and compliance
systems; and
•
the  Company  implemented  other  technology  tools  that  will  enhance  communication,  collaboration  and  mobility,  enable  further  business
insights and process automation, and increase self-service capabilities, to help its employees work safely and efficiently, and enhance the
customer experience.
•
Looking forward, the Company will focus on technology and efficiency to:
•
be the leader in optimizing technology across the water and wastewater industry, with a focus on specific, innovative projects that will set it
apart from other utilities; aiding the Company in serving its customers with greater ease, making the Company’s employees safer and helping
the Company operate more efficiently; and
•
further improve the Company’s adjusted O&M efficiency ratio.
48

Table of Contents
The Company’s adjusted O&M efficiency ratio is defined as its operation and maintenance expenses from the Regulated Businesses, divided by the pro
forma operating revenues from the Regulated Businesses, where both operation and maintenance expenses and pro forma operating revenues were adjusted to
eliminate purchased water expense. Also excluded from operation and maintenance expenses are the allocable portion of non-operation and maintenance support
services costs, mainly depreciation and general taxes, which are reflected in the Regulated Businesses segment as operation and maintenance expenses, but for
consolidated financial reporting purposes, are categorized within other line items in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations.
In addition to the adjustments discussed above, for period-to-period comparability purposes, the estimated impact of the TCJA on operating revenues for
the Regulated Businesses has been presented on a pro forma basis for all periods prior to January 1, 2018, as if the lower federal corporate income tax rate was in
effect for these periods. The Company also made the following adjustments to the O&M efficiency ratio: (i) excluded from operation and maintenance expenses is
the impact of certain Freedom Industries chemical spill settlement activities recognized in 2017, 2018 and 2019 (see Note 16—Commitments and Contingencies in
the  Notes  to  Consolidated  Financial  Statements  for  additional  information);  and  (ii)  excluded  from  operation  and  maintenance  expenses  is  the  impact  of  the
Company’s January 1, 2018 adoption of Accounting Standards Update 2017-07, Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net Periodic Post-
Retirement Benefit Cost (“ASU 2017-07”), for 2017, 2018 and 2019. The items discussed above were excluded from the calculation as they are not reflective of
management’s ability to increase the efficiency of the Regulated Businesses.
The Company evaluates its operating performance using this ratio, and believes it is useful to investors, because it directly measures improvement in the
efficiency of the Regulated Businesses. This information is derived from the Company’s consolidated financial information but is not presented in its financial
statements  prepared  in  accordance  with  GAAP.  This  information  is  intended  to  enhance  an  investor’s  overall  understanding  of  the  Company’s  operating
performance. The Company’s adjusted O&M efficiency ratio is not an accounting measure that is based on GAAP, may not be comparable to other companies’
operating measures and should not be used in place of the GAAP information provided elsewhere in this Form 10-K.
49

Table of Contents
Presented  in  the  table  below  is  the  calculation  of  the  Company’s  adjusted  O&M  efficiency  ratio  and  a  reconciliation  that  compares  operation  and
maintenance expenses and operating revenues, each as determined in accordance with GAAP, to those amounts utilized in the calculation of its adjusted O&M
efficiency ratio:
For the Years Ended December 31,
(Dollars in millions)
2019
2018
2017
Total operation and maintenance expenses (a)
$
1,544
$
1,479
$
1,369
Less:
 
 
 
Operation and maintenance expenses—Market-Based Businesses
393
362
337
Operation and maintenance expenses—Other (a)
(31)
(42)
(44)
Total operation and maintenance expenses—Regulated Businesses (a)
1,182
1,159
1,076
Less:
 
 
 
Regulated purchased water expenses
135
133
128
Allocation of non-operation and maintenance expenses
31
31
29
Impact of Freedom Industries settlement activities (b)
(4)
(20)
(22)
Adjusted operation and maintenance expenses—Regulated Businesses (i)
$
1,020
$
1,015
$
941
Total operating revenues
$
3,610
$
3,440
$
3,357
Less:
Pro forma adjustment for impact of the TCJA (c)
—
—
166
Total pro forma operating revenues
3,610
3,440
3,191
Less:
 
 
 
Operating revenues—Market-Based Businesses
539
476
422
Operating revenues—Other
(23)
(20)
(23)
Total operating revenues—Regulated Businesses
3,094
2,984
2,792
Less:
 
 
 
Regulated purchased water revenues (d)
135
133
128
Adjusted operating revenues—Regulated Businesses (ii)
$
2,959
$
2,851
$
2,664
Adjusted O&M efficiency ratio—Regulated Businesses (i) / (ii)
34.5%
35.6%
35.3%
(a)
Includes the impact of the Company’s adoption of ASU 2017-07, Compensation - Retirement Benefits (Topic 715): Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost and Net
Periodic Post-Retirement Benefit, on January 1, 2018.
(b)
Includes the impact of settlements in 2017 and 2018 with two of the Company’s general liability insurance carriers, and a reduction in the first quarter of 2019 of a liability, each related
to the Freedom Industries chemical spill.
(c)
Includes the estimated impact of the TCJA on operating revenues for the Regulated Businesses for all periods presented prior to January 1, 2018, as if the lower federal corporate income
tax rate was in effect for these periods.
(d)
The calculation assumes regulated purchased water revenues approximate regulated purchased water expenses.
50

Table of Contents
Regulatory Matters
General Rate Cases
Presented in the table below are annualized incremental revenues, assuming a constant water sales volume, resulting from general rate case authorizations
that became effective during 2017 through 2019:
(In millions)
2019
2018
2017
General rate cases by state:
 
 
 
Indiana (a)
$
4
$
—
$
—
Kentucky (effective June 28, 2019)
13
—
—
California (b)
4
10
5
New York (c)
4
5
4
West Virginia (effective February 25, 2019)
19
—
—
Maryland (effective February 5, 2019)
1
—
—
New Jersey (d)
—
40
—
Missouri (effective May 28, 2018)
—
33
—
Pennsylvania (effective January 1, 2018)
—
62
—
Virginia (e)
—
—
5
Iowa (effective March 27, 2017)
—
—
4
Illinois (effective January 1, 2017)
—
—
25
Total general rate case authorizations
$
45
$
150
$
43
(a)
The Company’s Indiana subsidiary received an order approving a joint settlement agreement with all major parties with respect to its general rate case filing, authorizing annualized
incremental revenues of $4 million in the first rate year, effective July 1, 2019, and $13 million in the second rate year, effective approximately May 1, 2020.
(b)
The Company’s California subsidiary received approval for the second rate year (2019) step increase associated with its most recent general rate case authorization, effective May 11,
2019. On December 13, 2018, a settlement in this subsidiary’s general rate case filing was approved, authorizing rates effective January 1, 2018. In 2017, step rates were effective
January 13 through February 2.
(c)
The Company’s New York subsidiary implemented its third step increase associated with its most recent general rate case authorization, effective April 1, 2019.
(d)
The effective date was June 15, 2018. As part of the resolution of the general rate case, the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary’s customers received refunds for the amount of provisional
rates implemented as of June 15, 2018 and collected, to the extent that such rates exceeded the final rate increase plus interest.
(e)
The effective date was May 24, 2017, authorizing the implementation of interim rates as of April 1, 2016.
Pending General Rate Case Filings
There is no assurance that all or any portion of the following requests will be granted.
On December 16, 2019, the Company’s New Jersey subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $88 million annualized incremental revenues.
On November 12, 2019, the Company’s California subsidiary filed for the third year (2020) step increase requesting $5 million associated with its most
recent general case authorization. Step rates became effective on January 1, 2020, subject to refund. As of February 14, 2020, five of the seven districts’ step
increases were approved representing $4 million of the $5 million request.
On July 1, 2019, the Company’s California  subsidiary  filed  a general  rate  case requesting $26 million annualized incremental  revenues for 2021, and
increases of $10 million and $11 million in the escalation year of 2022 and the attrition year of 2023, respectively. On January 22, 2020, the Company’s California
subsidiary submitted a request to delay by one year its cost of capital filing and maintain its current authorized cost of capital through 2021. If the extension is not
granted, the subsidiary may file the cost of capital application by May 1, 2020 to adjust its authorized cost of capital beginning January 1, 2021.
In 2018, the Company’s Virginia subsidiary filed a general rate case requesting $5 million in annualized incremental revenues. On May 1, 2019, interim
rates under bond and subject to refund were implemented and will remain in effect until a final decision is received in this general rate case.
51

Table of Contents
Infrastructure Surcharges
A number of states have authorized the use of regulatory mechanisms that permit rates to be adjusted outside of a general rate case for certain costs and
investments, such as infrastructure surcharge mechanisms that permit recovery of capital investments to replace aging infrastructure. Presented in the table below
are annualized incremental revenues, assuming a constant water sales volume, resulting from infrastructure surcharge authorizations that became effective during
2017 through 2019:
(In millions)
2019
2018
2017
Infrastructure surcharges by state:
 
 
 
Missouri (a)
$
14
$
6
$
6
Pennsylvania (b)
11
—
1
Tennessee (effective September 1, 2019, April 10, 2018 and March 14, 2017)
1
1
2
New York (effective August 1, 2019)
2
—
—
New Jersey (c)
15
—
14
Illinois (effective January 1, 2019 and January 1, 2018)
8
3
—
West Virginia (effective January 1, 2019, January 1, 2018 and January 1, 2017)
2
3
2
Indiana (effective March 14, 2018 and March 22, 2017)
—
7
8
Virginia (effective March 1, 2018)
—
1
—
Total infrastructure surcharge authorizations
$
53
$
21
$
33
(a)
In 2019, $5 million was effective December 21 and $9 million was effective June 24. In 2018, the effective date was December 15. In 2017, the effective date was December 15.
(b)
In 2019, $6 million was effective October 1, $3 million was effective July 1 and $2 million was effective April 1. In 2017, the effective date was January 1.
(c)
In 2019, the effective date was July 1. In 2017, $4 million was effective December 10 and $10 million was effective June 1.
Presented  in  the  table  below  are  annualized  incremental  revenues,  assuming  a  constant  water  sales  volume,  resulting  from  infrastructure  surcharge
authorizations that became effective after January 1, 2020:
(In millions)
Amount
Infrastructure surcharge filings by state:
Pennsylvania (effective January 1, 2020)
$
10
New Jersey (effective January 1, 2020)
10
Illinois (effective January 1, 2020)
7
West Virginia (effective January 1, 2020)
3
Total infrastructure surcharge filings
$
30
Pending Infrastructure Surcharge Filings
On November 15, 2019, the Company’s Tennessee subsidiary filed for an infrastructure surcharge requesting $2 million in additional annualized revenues.
There is no assurance that all or any portion of this request will be granted.
Tax Matters
Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
On December 22, 2017, the TCJA was signed into law, which, among other things, enacted significant and complex changes to the Code, including a
reduction in the federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% as of January 1, 2018, and certain other provisions related specifically to the public utility
industry, including continuation of interest expense deductibility, the exclusion from utilizing bonus depreciation and the normalization of deferred income taxes.
In 2018, the Company’s 14 regulatory jurisdictions began to seek to address the impacts of the TCJA. The Company has adjusted customer rates to reflect the
lower income tax rate in 11 states. In one of those 11 states, a portion of the tax savings is being used to reduce certain regulatory assets. In one additional state, the
Company is using the tax savings to offset additional capital investment and to reduce a regulatory asset. Proceedings in the other two regulatory jurisdictions
remain pending.
52

Table of Contents
The enactment of the TCJA required a re-measurement of the Company’s deferred income taxes that materially impacted its 2017 results of operations and
financial  position.  The  portion  of  this  re-measurement  related  to  the  Regulated  Businesses  was  substantially  offset  by  a  regulatory  liability,  as  the  Company
believes it is probable that the excess accumulated deferred income taxes (“EADIT”) created by the TCJA will be used to benefit its regulated customers in future
rates. Six of  the  Company’s  regulated  subsidiaries  are  amortizing  EADIT  and  crediting  customers,  including one which  is  using  the  EADIT  to  offset  future
infrastructure investments. The Company expects the timing of the amortization of EADIT credits by the eight remaining regulated subsidiaries to be addressed in
pending or future rate cases or other proceedings.
On March 23, 2018, the Consolidated Appropriations Act of 2018 (the “CAA”) was signed into law. The CAA corrects and clarifies some aspects of the
TCJA related to bonus depreciation eligibility. Specifically, property that was either acquired, or as to which construction began prior to September 27, 2017, is
eligible for bonus depreciation. The Company had a federal NOL carryover balance as of December 31, 2019 that is not expected to be fully utilized until 2020,
which is when the Company expects that it will become a cash taxpayer for federal income tax purposes.
Legislative Updates
In Illinois, the Governor signed a 10-year extension of the Water Systems Viability Act, Illinois’ fair market value legislation, in 2018, which became
effective in 2019. In addition to extending the act, the updated law removes the previous restriction on the size of water or wastewater systems that can be acquired
and allows all municipalities to take advantage of the benefits of the program.
During 2019, the Company’s regulatory jurisdictions enacted the following legislation that has been approved and is effective as of December 31, 2019:
•
Indiana Senate Enrolled Act 472 allows non-municipal utilities to benefit from full appraisal recovery of their assets in a sale.
•
Indiana House Enrolled Act 1406 established the first state appropriation for water infrastructure investment at $20 million per year.
•
Indiana Senate Enrolled Act 4 extends leveling legislation to require biannual water loss audits and establishes the state revolving fund administrator
as the central coordinator for water issues in the state.
•
In Pennsylvania, House Bill 751, now Act 53 of 2019, allows water and wastewater utilities responsible for funding the income taxes on taxable
contributions and advances to record the income taxes paid in accumulated deferred income taxes for accounting and ratemaking purposes.
•
In West Virginia, House Bill 117 allows qualified low income customers to apply for a 20% discount on their wastewater bill.
53

Table of Contents
Consolidated Results of Operations
Presented in the table below are the Company’s consolidated results of operations:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
 
Operating revenues
$
3,610
$
3,440
$
3,357
Operating expenses:
 
 
 
Operation and maintenance
1,544
1,479
1,369
Depreciation and amortization
582
545
492
General taxes
280
277
259
Loss (gain) on asset dispositions and purchases
34
(20)
(16)
Impairment charge
—
57
—
Total operating expenses, net
2,440
2,338
2,104
Operating income
1,170
1,102
1,253
Other income (expense):
 
 
 
Interest, net
(382)
(350)
(342)
Non-operating benefit costs, net
16
20
(9)
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
(4)
(4)
(7)
Other, net
33
19
17
Total other income (expense)
(337)
(315)
(341)
Income before income taxes
833
787
912
Provision for income taxes
212
222
486
Consolidated net income
621
565
426
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
—
(2)
—
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
621
$
567
$
426
The main factors contributing to the $54 million increase in net income attributable to common shareholders for the year ended December 31, 2019 are
described in “Segment Results of Operations” below.
Segment Results of Operations
The  Company’s  operating  segments  are  comprised  of  the  revenue-generating  components  of  its  business  for  which  separate  financial  information  is
internally produced and regularly used by management to make operating decisions, assess performance and allocate resources. The Company operates its business
primarily through one reportable segment, the Regulated Businesses segment. The Company also operates market-based businesses that, individually, do not meet
the criteria  of a reportable  segment in accordance  with GAAP, and are collectively  presented as the Market-Based Businesses, which is consistent with how
management assesses the results of these businesses.
54

Table of Contents
Regulated Businesses Segment
Presented in the table below is financial information for the Regulated Businesses:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
 
 
 
Operating revenues
$
3,094
$
2,984
$
2,958
Operation and maintenance
1,182
1,159
1,076
Depreciation and amortization
529
500
462
General taxes
262
261
244
(Gain) on asset dispositions and purchases
(10)
(7)
(16)
Other income (expenses)
(262)
(247)
(266)
Income before income taxes
869
826
925
Provision for income taxes
215
224
367
Net income attributable to common shareholders
654
602
559
Operating Revenues
Presented in the tables below is information regarding the main components of the Regulated Businesses’ operating revenues, with explanations for the
material variances provided in the ensuing discussions:
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
Water services:
 
 
 
Residential
$
1,735
$
1,663
$
1,644
Commercial
639
616
601
Fire service
142
137
139
Industrial
138
136
137
Public and other
230
216
244
Total water services
2,884
2,768
2,765
Wastewater services
167
161
142
Other (a)
43
55
51
Total operating revenues
$
3,094
$
2,984
$
2,958
(a)
Includes other operating revenues consisting primarily of miscellaneous utility charges, fees and rents.
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
(Gallons in millions)
Billed water services volumes:
 
 
 
Residential
167,470
172,827
174,420
Commercial
81,268
82,572
82,147
Industrial
37,242
38,432
39,404
Fire service, public and other
50,501
50,651
51,341
Total billed water services volumes
336,481
344,482
347,312
In 2019, operating revenues increased $110 million primarily due to a:
•
$132 million increase from authorized rate increases, including infrastructure surcharges, principally to fund infrastructure investment in various
states; a

55

Table of Contents
•
$20 million increase from water and wastewater acquisitions, as well as organic growth in existing systems; partially offset by a
•
$24 million decrease from lower water services demand, including $10 million primarily driven by unusually wet weather conditions experienced in
the Northeast and Midwest during the second quarter of 2019 and ongoing customer usage reductions from conservation, partially offset by balancing
accounts, primarily in the Company’s California subsidiary; and a
•
$17 million decrease from the impacts of the TCJA, including the Company’s Missouri subsidiary’s 2018 general rate case decision which authorized
the adjustment of customer rates, effective May 28, 2018, to reflect the income tax savings resulting from the TCJA.
Operation and Maintenance
Presented  in  the  table  below  is  information  regarding  the  main  components  of  the Regulated  Businesses’  operating  and  maintenance  expense,  with
explanations for material variances provided in the ensuing discussions:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
 
Production costs
$
317
$
313
$
298
Employee-related costs
462
451
431
Operating supplies and services
237
227
209
Maintenance materials and supplies
74
81
70
Customer billing and accounting
55
60
51
Other
37
27
17
Total
$
1,182
$
1,159
$
1,076
Production Costs
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
 
Purchased water
$
135
$
133
$
128
Fuel and power
90
91
89
Chemicals
54
52
47
Waste disposal
38
37
34
Total
$
317
$
313
$
298
Employee-Related Costs
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
 
Salaries and wages
$
363
$
349
$
334
Pensions
12
19
14
Group insurance
60
57
57
Other benefits
27
26
26
Total
$
462
$
451
$
431
In 2019, employee-related costs increased $11 million primarily due to a $17 million increase in salaries and wages and group insurance from higher
headcount and related compensation expense supporting growth in the businesses, as well as the union-represented employees’ first full year participation in the
Company’s cash-based annual performance plan during 2019; partially offset by a $7 million decrease in pension expense primarily due to lower service costs.
56

Table of Contents
Operating Supplies and Services
In 2019, operating supplies and services increased $10 million primarily due to higher costs for technology services, including higher software licensing
costs and technical support, and expenses related to various projects in the Company’s California subsidiary, as well as an increase in other operating expenses.
Maintenance Materials and Supplies
In 2019, maintenance materials and supplies decreased $7 million primarily due to higher volume of main breaks and paving costs, driven by the colder
weather experienced during the first quarter of 2018.
Customer Billing and Accounting
In 2019, customer billing and accounting decreased $5 million from a decrease in customer uncollectible expense.
Other (Operation and Maintenance)
In 2019, other (operation and maintenance) increased $10 million primarily due to a $20 million benefit recorded in the second quarter of 2018, resulting
from an insurance settlement related to the Freedom Industries chemical spill in West Virginia, offset in part by (i) a $4 million reduction to the liability related to
the Freedom Industries chemical spill, recorded in the first quarter of 2019, and (ii) an increase in operating revenues and O&M expense during 2018 resulting
from the authorization for the Company’s West Virginia subsidiary to use a portion of the income tax savings resulting from the TCJA for accelerated recovery of
certain regulatory assets.
Depreciation and Amortization
In 2019, depreciation and amortization increased $29 million primarily due to additional utility plant placed in service from investments.
Other Income (Expenses)
In 2019, other income (expenses) decreased $15 million primarily due to an increase in interest expense from the issuance of incremental long-term debt in
the second quarter of 2019 and the third quarter of 2018 to support growth of the business, partially offset by interest savings from early debt redemptions and tax-
exempt bond refinancings during 2019.
Provision for Income Taxes
For the year ended December 31, 2019, the Company’s provision for income taxes decreased primarily due to a lower effective income tax rate.
Market-Based Businesses
Presented in the table below is information for the Market-Based Businesses, with explanations for material variances provided in the ensuing discussions:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
 
 
 
Operating revenues
$
539
$
476
$
422
Operation and maintenance
393
362
337
Depreciation and amortization
37
29
18
Loss (gain) on asset dispositions and purchases
44
(13)
—
Impairment charge
—
57
—
Income before income taxes
66
41
66
Provision for income taxes
20
11
28
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
—
(2)
—
Net income attributable to common shareholders
46
32
38
57

Table of Contents
Operating Revenues
In 2019, operating revenues increased $63 million primarily due to a:
•
$74 million increase in HOS from contract growth and from the acquisition of Pivotal, which occurred in the second quarter of 2018; and a
•
$20 million increase in MSG from the addition of two new contracts in 2018 (Wright-Patterson Air Force Base and Fort Leonard Wood); partially
offset by a
•
$18 million decrease in CSG from the sale of the majority of its O&M contracts in the third quarter of 2018; and a
•
$15 million decrease at Keystone from the exit of the construction business in the third quarter of 2018.
Operation and Maintenance
Presented in the table below is information regarding the main components of the Market-Based Businesses’ operating and maintenance expense, with
explanations for the material variances provided in the ensuing discussions:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
(Dollars in millions)
 
 
 
Production costs
$
29
$
32
$
37
Employee-related costs
109
104
97
Operating supplies and services
128
142
121
Maintenance materials and supplies
109
69
67
Other
18
15
15
Total
$
393
$
362
$
337
In 2019, operation and maintenance expense increased $31 million primarily due to a:
•
$40 million increase in maintenance materials and supplies primarily due to contract growth and increased claims expense in HOS; and a
•
$5 million increase in employee-related costs primarily in HOS and MSG due to growth in the business, partially offset by lower costs resulting from
the sale of the majority of CSG’s O&M contracts and the exit of the construction business at Keystone, both occurring during the third quarter of
2018; partially offset by a
•
$14 million decrease in operating supplies and services primarily due to the exit of the construction business in the third quarter of 2018 at Keystone,
higher advertising and marketing expense in HOS in 2018, and lower expenses due to the sale of the majority of CSG’s O&M contracts during the
third quarter of 2018, as discussed above.
Depreciation and Amortization
In 2019, depreciation and amortization increased $8 million primarily due to the acquisition of Pivotal in the second quarter of 2018.
Loss (Gain) on Asset Dispositions and Purchases
During the fourth quarter of 2019, the Company recognized a pre-tax loss on sale of $44 million, or $35 million after-tax, relating to the sale of its Keystone
operations. See Note 4—Acquisitions and Divestitures in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information. Additionally, during the third
quarter of 2018, the Company recognized a pre-tax gain of $14 million on the sale of the majority of CSG’s O&M contracts.
Impairment Charge
During the third quarter of 2018, a goodwill and intangible asset impairment charge of $57 million was recorded for Keystone, the result of operational and
financial challenges encountered in the construction business, and the Company’s determination to narrow the scope of the Keystone operations to focus on its core
operations  of  providing  water  transfer  services.  See Note  8—Goodwill  and  Other  Intangible  Assets in  the  Notes  to  Consolidated  Financial  Statements  for
additional information.
58

Table of Contents
Provision for Income Taxes
In 2019, provision for income taxes increased $9 million primarily due to an increase in pre-tax income.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
The  Company  regularly  evaluates  and  monitors  its  cash  requirements  for  capital  investments,  acquisitions,  operations,  commitments,  debt  maturities,
interest and dividends. The Company’s business is capital intensive, with a majority of this capital funded by cash flows from operations. When necessary, the
Company also obtains funds from external sources, primarily in the debt markets and through short-term commercial paper borrowings. The Company may also
access the equity capital markets to support its capital funding requirements, as needed. The Company’s access to external financing on reasonable terms depends
on its credit ratings and current business conditions, including that of the utility and water utility industry in general, as well as conditions in the debt or equity
capital markets, and the national and international economic and geopolitical arenas. Disruptions in the credit markets may discourage lenders from extending the
terms of such commitments or agreeing to new commitments. Market disruptions may also limit the Company’s ability to issue debt and equity securities in the
capital markets.
If these  business, market,  financial  and other conditions  deteriorate  to the  extent  that the  Company is no longer able to  access  the capital  markets  on
reasonable terms, AWCC has access to an unsecured revolving credit facility that expires in March 2024 with aggregate bank commitments of $2.25 billion. The
facility is used principally to fulfill its short-term liquidity needs by supporting AWCC’s $2.10 billion commercial paper program and to provide a sublimit of up
to $150 million for letters of credit. Subject to satisfying certain conditions, the credit agreement permits AWCC to increase the maximum commitment under the
facility by up to $500 million.
In order to meet short-term liquidity needs, AWCC issues commercial paper that is supported by its revolving credit facility. As of December 31, 2019,
AWCC had no outstanding borrowings and $76 million of outstanding letters of credit under its revolving credit facility, with $2.25 billion available to fulfill its
short-term liquidity needs, to issue letters of credit, and to provide support for $786 million in outstanding commercial paper. The Company believes that its ability
to access the debt and equity capital markets, the revolving credit facility and cash flows from operations will generate sufficient cash to fund the Company’s short-
term requirements. The Company believes it has sufficient liquidity and the ability to manage its expenditures, should there be a disruption of the capital and credit
markets. However, there can no assurance that the lenders will be able to meet existing commitments to AWCC under the revolving credit facility, or that AWCC
will be able to access the commercial paper or loan markets in the future on acceptable terms or at all. See “Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt” below for
additional information.
In addition, the Regulated Businesses receive advances and contributions from customers, home builders and real estate developers to fund construction
necessary to extend service to new areas. Advances for construction are refundable for limited periods, which vary according to state regulations, as new customers
begin  to  receive  service  or  other  contractual  obligations  are  fulfilled.  Amounts  which  are  no  longer  refundable  are  reclassified  to  contributions  in  aid  of
construction.
The Company uses its capital resources, including cash, primarily to (i) fund operating and capital requirements, (ii) pay interest and meet debt maturities,
(iii) pay dividends, (iv) fund acquisitions, (v) fund pension and postretirement benefit obligations, and (vi) the Company estimates, during 2020, to begin to pay
federal income taxes. The Company invests a significant amount of cash on regulated capital projects where it expects to earn a long-term return on investment.
Additionally, the Company operates in rate regulated environments in which the amount of new investment recovery may be limited, and where such recovery
generally  takes  place  over  an  extended  period  of  time,  and  certain  capital  recovery  is  also  subject  to  regulatory  lag.  See Item  1—Business—Regulated
Businesses—Regulation and Rate Making for additional information. The Company expects to fund future maturities of long-term debt through a combination of
external debt and, to the extent available, cash flows from operations. Since the Company expects its capital investments over the next few years to be greater than
its cash flows from operating activities, the Company currently plans to fund the excess of its capital investments over its cash flows from operating activities for
the  next  five  years  through  a  combination  of  long-term  debt  and  equity.  If  necessary,  the  Company  may  delay  certain  capital  investments  or  other  funding
requirements, or pursue financing from other sources to preserve liquidity. In this event, the Company believes it can rely upon cash flows from operations to meet
its obligations and fund its minimum required capital investments for an extended period of time.
With the enactment of the TCJA and the reduction of the U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21%, the Company anticipates a decrease in
future revenue authorizations associated with the Regulated Businesses, initially leading to lower cash flows. The Company expects this cash flow impact to
decline over time, as the Regulated Businesses’ rate base grows, the result of lower deferred income tax liabilities, which offset rate base. The lower deferred
income tax liabilities are mainly due to (i) a lower U.S. federal corporate income tax rate, (ii) the normalization (refunding to customers) of the re-measured
deferred income tax liabilities over the remaining life of the associated assets, and (iii) the loss of future bonus depreciation deductions on capital projects that
began after September 27, 2017.
59

Table of Contents
One  component  of  WIFIA  is  a  federal  credit  program  administered  by  the  EPA  for  eligible  water  and  wastewater  infrastructure  projects.  The  WIFIA
program accelerates investment in the U.S.’s water infrastructure by providing long-term, low-cost supplemental loans for regionally and nationally significant
projects. The Company is currently pursuing WIFIA financing of approximately $80 million for a project in the Company’s Missouri subsidiary.
Cash Flows Provided by Operating Activities
Cash flows provided by operating activities primarily result from the sale of water and wastewater services and, due to the seasonality of demand, are
generally greater during the warmer months. The Company’s future cash flows provided by operating activities will be affected by, among other things: economic
utility regulation inflation; compliance with environmental, health and safety standards; production costs; maintenance costs; customer growth; declining customer
usage of water; employee-related costs, including pension funding; weather and seasonality; taxes; and overall economic conditions.
The enactment of the TCJA is accretive to the Company’s consolidated earnings over time through (i) growth in rate base for the same level of expected
capital expenditures due to the impact of the lower U.S. federal corporate income tax rate and the re-measurement of its deferred income tax assets and liabilities,
(ii) increased earnings in the Market-Based Businesses due to the lower U.S. federal corporate income tax rate, all partially offset by (iii) the lower tax shield on
interest expense at parent company, as well as increased debt levels from lower cash flows from operations as the Company passes the lower tax rate benefits to its
regulated  customers.  The  Company  believes  that  it  will  likely  begin  paying  federal  income  taxes  during  2020,  when  the  Company  expects  its  federal  NOL
carryforwards balance will be fully used, although this timing could be impacted by any significant changes in its future results of operations and the outcome of
regulatory proceedings regarding the TCJA.
Cash flows provided by operating activities have been a reliable, steady source of funding, sufficient to meet operating requirements and fund the majority
of the Company’s capital investments. The Company expects to seek access to debt and equity capital markets to meet the balance of its capital investment, if any,
and fund its dividend payments, as needed. Operating cash flows can be negatively affected by changes in the Company’s rate regulated environments, changes in
the Market-Based Businesses, changes in the economy, interest rates, the timing of tax payments, and the Company’s customers’ ability to pay for service in a
timely  manner,  among  other  items.  The  Company  can  provide  no  assurance  that  its  customers’  historical  payment  pattern  will  continue  in  the  future.  The
Company’s current liabilities may exceed current assets mainly from debt maturities due within one year and the periodic use of short-term debt as a funding
source,  primarily  to  meet  scheduled  maturities  of  long-term  debt,  fund  acquisitions  and  construction  projects,  as  well  as  cash  needs  which  can  fluctuate
significantly due to the seasonality of the business. The Company addresses cash timing differences through the aforementioned liquidity funding mechanisms.
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows provided by operating activities:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
(In millions)
2019
2018
2017
Net income
$
621
$
565
$
426
Add (less):
 
 
 
Depreciation and amortization
582
545
492
Deferred income taxes and amortization of investment tax credits
208
195
462
Non-cash impairment charge
—
57
—
Other non-cash activities (a)
38
56
16
Changes in working capital (b)
(1)
30
123
Settlement of cash flow hedges
(30)
—
—
Pension and postretirement healthcare contributions
(31)
(22)
(48)
Impact of Freedom Industries settlement activities
(4)
(40)
(22)
Net cash flows provided by operating activities
$
1,383
$
1,386
$
1,449
(a)
Includes provision for losses on accounts receivable, loss (gain) on asset dispositions and purchases, pension and non-pension postretirement benefits and other non-cash, net. Details of
each component can be found on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
(b)
Changes in working capital include changes to receivables and unbilled revenues, accounts payable and accrued liabilities, and other current assets and liabilities, net, less the settlement
of cash flow hedges.
60

Table of Contents
In 2019, cash flows provided by operating activities decreased $3 million, primarily due to the settlement of cash flow hedges and increased interest costs in
connection  with  the  Company’s  $1.10  billion  debt  offering  that  closed  on  May  13,  2019  and  an  increase  in  pension  contributions.  Partially  offsetting  these
decreases was an increase in net income. The main factors contributing to the increase in net income are described in “Consolidated Results of Operations” and
“Segment Results of Operations” above.
The Company expects to make pension contributions to the plan trusts of $38 million in 2020. In addition, the Company estimates that contributions will
amount to $33 million, $34 million, $34 million and $32 million in 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024, respectively. Actual amounts contributed could change materially
from these estimates as a result of changes in assumptions and actual investment returns, among other factors.
Cash Flows Used in Investing Activities
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows used in investing activities:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
(In millions)
2019
2018
2017
Capital expenditures
$
(1,654)
$
(1,586)
$
(1,434)
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(235)
(398)
(177)
Proceeds from sale of assets
48
35
15
Removal costs from property, plant and equipment retirements, net
(104)
(87)
(76)
Net cash flows used in investing activities
$
(1,945)
$
(2,036)
$
(1,672)
 
In 2019, cash flows used in investing activities decreased $91 million primarily due to the acquisition of Pivotal for $365 million on June 4, 2018, partially
offset by an increase in capital expenditures, principally from incremental investments associated with the replacement and renewal of the Company’s transmission
and distribution infrastructure in the Regulated Businesses, as discussed below. The Company also had an increase of proceeds from sale of assets due to the sale
of Keystone for $31 million, in the fourth quarter of 2019.
The Company’s infrastructure investment plan consists of both infrastructure renewal programs, where the Company replaces infrastructure, as needed, and
major capital investment projects, where the Company constructs new water and wastewater treatment and delivery facilities to meet new customer growth and
water quality regulations. The Company’s projected capital expenditures and other investments are subject to periodic review and revision to reflect changes in
economic conditions and other factors.
Presented in the table below is a summary of the Company’s historical capital expenditures related to the upgrading of its infrastructure and systems:
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
(In millions)
2019
2018
2017
Transmission and distribution
$
661
$
572
$
551
Treatment and pumping
190
231
171
Services, meter and fire hydrants
346
303
281
General structure and equipment
234
371
281
Sources of supply
83
26
54
Wastewater
140
83
96
Total capital expenditures
$
1,654
$
1,586
$
1,434
In 2019, the Company’s capital expenditures increased $68 million primarily due to investment in transmission and distribution infrastructure.
The  Company  also  grows  its  business  primarily  through  acquisitions  of  water  and  wastewater  systems,  as  well  as  other  water-related  services.  These
acquisitions are complementary to the Company’s existing business and support continued geographical diversification and growth of its operations. Generally,
acquisitions are funded initially with short-term debt, and later refinanced with the proceeds from long-term debt, once reflected in rate base.
61

Table of Contents
The following is a summary of the acquisitions and dispositions affecting the Company’s cash flows from investing activities during 2019:
•
Paid $235 million for 21 water and wastewater systems, representing in the aggregate approximately 53,100 customers.
•
Received $48 million for the sale of assets, including $31 million from the sale of the Keystone operations.
As previously noted, the Company expects to invest between $8.8 billion to $9.4 billion from 2020 to 2024, with $8.2 billion of this range for infrastructure
improvements in the Regulated Businesses, and between $20 billion to $22 billion from 2020 to 2029. In 2020, the Company expects to invest between a range of
$1.7 billion to $1.9 billion in 2020, with $1.6 billion for infrastructure improvements in the Regulated Businesses. Also in 2020, the Company expects to invest
between $100 million to $300 million for acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses.
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Presented in the table below is a summary of the major items affecting the Company’s cash flows provided by financing activities:
For the Years Ended December 31,
2019
2018
2017
(In millions)
Proceeds from long-term debt
$
1,530
$
1,358
$
1,395
Repayments of long-term debt
(495)
(526)
(896)
Net short-term borrowings
(178)
60
55
Proceeds from issuance of common stock
—
183
—
Dividends paid
(353)
(319)
(289)
Anti-dilutive stock repurchases
(36)
(45)
(54)
Other financing activities, net (a)
26
15
(4)
Net cash flows provided by financing activities
$
494
$
726
$
207
(a)
Includes  proceeds  from  issuances  of  common  stock  under  various  employee  stock  plans  and  the  dividend  reinvestment  plan,  net  of  taxes  paid,  advances  and  contributions  for
construction, net of refunds, and debt issuance costs and make-whole premiums on early debt redemption.
In 2019, cash flows provided by financing activities decreased $232 million, primarily due to the issuance of common stock in 2018, the proceeds of which
were used to finance a portion of the 2018 acquisition of Pivotal, as well as an increase in cash used for dividend payments in 2019. AWCC issued $1.10 billion of
long-term debt as part of its May 13, 2019 debt offering, of which $51 million of the net proceeds was used to repay long-term debt obligations at maturity. Net
proceeds from the debt offering were also used to repay pre-existing short-term borrowings, which resulted in a net cash outflow for 2019 of $178 million.
The  Company’s  financing  activities,  primarily  focused  on  funding  regulated  infrastructure  expenditures,  regulated  and  market-based  acquisitions  and
payment of dividends. These activities included the issuance of long-term and short-term debt, primarily through AWCC and in 2018, included an equity issuance
for approximately 50% of the Pivotal acquisition. In addition, new infrastructure may be funded with customer advances and contributions in aid of construction,
net of refunds, which amounted to $26 million, $21 million and $28 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively. Based on the
needs of the Regulated Businesses and the Company, AWCC may borrow funds or issue its debt in the capital markets and then, through intercompany loans,
provide those borrowings to the Regulated Businesses and parent company. The Regulated Businesses and parent company are obligated to pay their portion of the
respective principal and interest to AWCC, in the amount necessary to enable AWCC to meet its debt service obligations. Parent company’s borrowings are not a
source of capital for the Regulated Businesses, therefore,  parent company is not able to recover the interest  charges on its debt through regulated  water and
wastewater rates. As of December 31, 2019, AWCC has made long-term fixed rate loans and commercial paper loans to the Regulated Businesses amounting to
$4.8 billion and $675 million, respectively. Additionally, as of December 31, 2019, AWCC has made long-term fixed rate loans and commercial paper loans to
parent company amounting $2.4 billion and $111 million, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, parent company has made long-term fixed rate loans to the
Market-Based Businesses amounting to $183 million related to the acquisition of Pivotal on June 4, 2018.
62

Table of Contents
On May 13, 2019, AWCC completed a $1.10 billion senior unsecured debt offering which included the sale of $550 million aggregate principal amount of
its 3.45% Senior Notes due 2029 and $550 million aggregate principal amount of its 4.15% Senior Notes due 2049. At the closing of the offering, AWCC received,
after deduction of underwriting discounts and before deduction of offering expenses, net proceeds of approximately $1.09 billion. AWCC used the net proceeds to:
(i) lend funds to parent company and its regulated subsidiaries; (ii) repay $25 million principal amount of AWCC’s 7.21% Series I Senior Notes at maturity on
May 19, 2019; (iii) repay $26 million aggregate principal amount of subsidiary debt at maturity during the second quarter of 2019; and (iv) repay AWCC’s
commercial paper obligations, and for general corporate purposes.
On May 6, 2019, the Company terminated five forward starting swap agreements with an aggregate notional amount of $510 million, realizing a net loss
of $30 million, to be amortized through interest, net over 10 and 30 year periods, in accordance with the terms of the new debt issued on May 13, 2019. No
ineffectiveness was recognized on hedging instruments for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
During 2019, AWCC and certain of the Company’s subsidiaries also issued tax-exempt bonds at various dates with a total principal amount of $417 million
and a weighted average interest rate of 2.5%. The bonds are scheduled to mature in 2039 and contain optional or mandatory redemption dates in 2029. The
proceeds from these bonds were used to repay $417 million of tax-exempt bonds with a weighted average interest rate of 5.8% and original maturities in 2039.
One of the principal market risks to which the Company is exposed is changes in interest rates. In order to manage the exposure, the Company follows risk
management  policies  and  procedures,  including  the  use  of  derivative  contracts  such  as  swaps. The  Company  reduces  exposure  to  interest  rates  by managing
commercial paper and debt maturities. The Company does not enter into derivative contracts for speculative purposes and does not use leveraged instruments. The
derivative  contracts  entered  into  are  for  periods  consistent  with  the  related  underlying  exposures.  The  Company  is  exposed  to  the  risk  that  counterparties  to
derivative contracts will fail to meet their contractual obligations. The Company minimizes the counterparty credit risk on these transactions by only dealing with
leading, credit-worthy financial institutions, having long-term credit ratings of “A” or better.
In May 2018, parent company and AWCC filed with the SEC a universal shelf registration statement that enables the Company to meet its capital needs
through  the  offer  and  sale  to  the  public  from  time  to  time  of  an  unlimited  amount  of  various  types  of  securities,  including  American  Water  common  stock,
preferred stock, and other equity and hybrid securities, and AWCC debt securities, all subject to market conditions and demand, general economic conditions, and
as applicable, rating status. The shelf registration statement will expire in May 2021. During 2019, 2018 and 2017, $1.10 billion, $1.33 billion, and $1.35 billion,
respectively, of debt securities were issued pursuant to this and the Company’s predecessor registration statement. Additionally, during 2018 under this registration
statement, the Company issued 2.32 million shares of its common stock for aggregate net proceeds of $183 million.
Presented in the table below are the issuances of long-term debt in 2019:
Company
Type
Rate
Maturity
Amount (in millions)
AWCC (a)
Senior notes—fixed rate
3.45%-4.15%
2029-2049
$
1,100
AWCC (a) (b)
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
2.45%
2039
100
Other American Water subsidiaries
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
0.00%-5.00%
2021-2048
330
Total issuances
 
 
 
$
1,530
(a)
This indebtedness is considered “debt” for purposes of a support agreement between parent company and AWCC, which serves as a functional equivalent of a guarantee by parent
company of AWCC’s payment obligations under such indebtedness.
(b)
This indebtedness has a mandatory redemption provision callable in 2029.
63

Table of Contents
Presented  in  the  table  below  are  the  retirements  and  redemptions  of  long-term  debt  in 2019 through  sinking  fund  provisions,  optional  redemption  or
payment at maturity:
Company
Type
Rate
Maturity
Amount (in millions)
AWCC
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
1.79%-6.25%
2021-2031
$
101
AWCC
Senior notes—fixed rate
7.21%
2019
25
Other American Water subsidiaries
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
0.00%-6.20%
2019-2048
333
Other American Water subsidiaries
Mortgage bonds—fixed rate
5.48%-9.13%
2019-2021
28
Other American Water subsidiaries
Mandatorily redeemable preferred stock
8.49%-9.18%
2031-2036
2
Other American Water subsidiaries
Term loan
5.76%-5.81%
2021
6
Total retirements and redemptions
 
 
 
$
495
From  time  to  time  and  as  market  conditions  warrant,  the  Company  may  engage  in  long-term  debt  retirements  through  tender  offers,  open  market
repurchases or other viable alternatives.
In February 2015, the Board of Directors authorized an anti-dilutive stock repurchase program to mitigate the dilutive effect of shares issued through the
Company’s dividend reinvestment, employee stock purchase and executive compensation activities. The program allows the Company to purchase up to 10 million
shares of its outstanding common stock from time to time over an unrestricted period of time in the open market or through privately negotiated transactions. The
program is conducted in accordance with Rule 10b-18 of the Exchange Act, and, to facilitate  these repurchases, the Company enters into Rule 10b5-1 stock
repurchase plans with a third-party broker, which allow the Company to repurchase shares of its common stock at times when it otherwise might be prevented from
doing so under insider trading laws or because of self-imposed trading blackout periods. Subject to applicable regulations, the Company may, at its discretion, elect
to enter into repurchase transactions or to amend or cancel the program or the stock repurchase parameters, all to manage dilution from the issuance of shares as
described above. As of December 31, 2019, the Company has repurchased an aggregate of 4,860,000 shares of common stock under this program.
Credit Facilities and Short-Term Debt
AWCC has an unsecured revolving credit facility of $2.25 billion that expires in March 2024. In April 2019, AWCC and its lenders agreed to extend the
termination date of the credit agreement with respect to AWCC’s revolving credit facility pursuant to its terms from March 2023 to March 2024. Subject to
satisfying certain conditions, the credit agreement also permits AWCC to increase the maximum commitment under the facility by up to an aggregate of $500
million, and to request extensions of its expiration date for up to two, one-year periods, as to which one such extension request remains.
Interest  rates  on  advances  under  the  facility  are  based  on  a  credit  spread  to  the  LIBOR  rate  (or  applicable  market  replacement  rate)  or  base  rate  in
accordance with Moody Investors Service’s and Standard & Poor’s Financial Services’ then applicable credit rating on AWCC’s senior unsecured, non-credit
enhanced debt. The facility is used principally to support AWCC’s commercial paper program and to provide up to $150 million in letters of credit. Indebtedness
under the facility is considered “debt” for purposes of a support agreement between parent company and AWCC, which serves as a functional equivalent of a
guarantee by parent company of AWCC’s payment obligations under the credit facility.
In March 2018, AWCC increased the maximum aggregate outstanding amount under its commercial paper program from $1.60 billion to $2.10 billion.
Presented in the table below is the aggregate credit facility commitments, letter of credit sublimit under the revolving credit facility and commercial paper
limit, as well as the available capacity for each as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
(In millions)
Credit Facility
Commitment
Available Credit
Facility Capacity
Letter of Credit
Sublimit
Available Letter of
Credit Capacity
Commercial Paper
Limit
Available Commercial
Paper Capacity
December 31, 2019
$
2,250
$
2,174
$
150
$
74
$
2,100
$
1,314
December 31, 2018
2,262
2,177
150
69
2,100
1,146
64

Table of Contents
The weighted average interest rate on AWCC short-term borrowings for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018 was approximately 2.54% and
2.28%, respectively.
Capital Structure
Presented in the table below is the percentage of the Company’s capitalization represented by the components of its capital structure as of December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Total common shareholders’ equity
39.2%
40.4%
41.0%
Long-term debt and redeemable preferred stock at redemption value
55.6%
52.4%
49.6%
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt
5.2%
7.2%
9.4%
Total
100%
100%
100%
The changes in the capital structure between periods were mainly attributable to an increase in long-term debt.
Debt Covenants
The Company’s debt agreements contain financial and non-financial covenants. To the extent that the Company is not in compliance with these covenants,
an event of default may occur under one or more debt agreements and the Company or its subsidiaries may be restricted in its ability to pay dividends, issue new
debt or access the revolving credit facility. The long-term debt indentures contain a number of covenants that, among other things, prohibit or restrict the Company
from issuing debt secured by the Company’s assets, subject to certain exceptions. Failure to comply with any of these covenants could accelerate repayment
obligations.
Covenants  in  certain  long-term  notes  and  the  revolving  credit  facility  require  the  Company  to  maintain  a  ratio  of  consolidated  debt  to  consolidated
capitalization (as defined in the relevant documents) of not more than 0.70 to 1.00. On December 31, 2019, the Company’s ratio was 0.61 to 1.00 and therefore the
Company was in compliance with the covenants.
Security Ratings
Presented in the table below are long-term and short-term credit ratings and rating outlooks as of February 18, 2020 as issued by the following rating
agencies:
Securities
Moody’s Investors
Service
Standard & Poor’s
Ratings Service
Rating Outlook
Stable
Stable
Senior unsecured debt
Baa1
A
Commercial paper
P-2
A-1
On June 7, 2019, Standard & Poor’s Ratings Service affirmed the Company’s long-term ‘A’ and short-term ‘A-1’ credit ratings, with a stable outlook.
On April 1, 2019, Moody’s Investors Service changed the Company’s senior unsecured debt rating to Baa1, from A3, with a stable outlook. The Company’s
commercial paper rating remained unchanged.
A security rating is not a recommendation to buy, sell or hold securities and may be subject to revision or withdrawal at any time by the assigning rating
agency, and each rating should be evaluated independently of any other rating. Security ratings are highly dependent upon the ability to generate cash flows in an
amount sufficient to service debt and meet investment plans. The Company can provide no assurances that its ability to generate cash flows is sufficient to maintain
its existing ratings. None of the Company’s borrowings are subject to default or prepayment as a result of the downgrading of these security ratings, although such
a downgrading could increase fees and interest charges under its credit facility.
65

Table of Contents
As part of its normal course of business, the Company routinely enters into contracts for the purchase and sale of water, energy, chemicals and other
services.  These  contracts  either  contain  express  provisions  or  otherwise  permit  the  Company  and  its  counterparties  to  demand  adequate  assurance  of  future
performance when there are reasonable grounds for doing so. In accordance with the contracts and applicable contract law, if the Company is downgraded by a
credit rating agency, especially if such downgrade is to a level below investment grade, it is possible that a counterparty would attempt to rely on such a downgrade
as a basis for making a demand for adequate assurance of future performance, which could include a demand that the Company must provide collateral to secure its
obligations. The Company does not expect to post any collateral which will have a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial
position or cash flows.
Access to the capital markets, including the commercial paper market, and respective financing costs in those markets, may be directly affected by the
Company’s securities ratings. The Company primarily accesses the debt capital markets, including the commercial paper market, through AWCC. However, the
Company has also issued debt through its regulated subsidiaries, primarily in the form of tax exempt securities or borrowings under state revolving funds, to lower
the overall cost of debt.
Dividends and Regulatory Restrictions
For discussion of the Company’s dividends, dividend restrictions and dividend policy, see Note 9—Shareholders’ Equity in the Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements for additional information.
Insurance Coverage
The Company carries various property, casualty, cyber and financial insurance policies with limits, deductibles and exclusions that it believes are consistent
with  industry  standards.  However,  insurance  coverage  may  not  be  adequate  or  available  to  cover  unanticipated  losses  or  claims.  Additionally,  annual  policy
renewals can be impacted by claims experience which in turn can impact coverage terms and conditions on a going-forward basis. The Company is self-insured to
the extent that losses are within the policy deductible or exceed the amount of insurance maintained. Such losses could have a material adverse effect on the
Company’s short-term and long-term financial condition and its results of operations and cash flows.
Contractual Obligations and Commitments
The Company enters into contractual obligations with third parties in the ordinary course of business. Presented in the table below is information related to
its contractual obligations as of December 31, 2019:
(In millions)
Total
1 year or less
2-3 years
4-5 years
More than 5 years
Long-term debt obligations (a)
$
8,692
$
28
$
324
$
632
$
7,708
Interest on long-term debt (b)
6,064
375
726
685
4,278
Operating lease obligations (c)
152
14
24
14
100
Purchase water obligations (d)
912
65
130
112
605
Other purchase obligations (e)
915
915
—
—
—
Pension plan obligations (f)
171
38
67
66
—
Other obligations (g)
1,055
465
245
69
276
Total
$
17,961
$
1,900
$
1,516
$
1,578
$
12,967
 
NOTE The above table reflects only financial obligations and commitments. Therefore, performance obligations associated with the Company’s Market-Based Businesses are not included in
the  above  amounts.  Also,  uncertain  tax  positions  of $110 million are  not  reflected  in  this  table  as  the  Company  cannot  predict  when  open  tax  years  will  close  with  completed
examinations. See Note 14—Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
(a)
Represents sinking fund obligations, debt maturities, finance lease obligations and preferred stocks with mandatory redemption requirements.
(b)
Represents expected interest payments on outstanding long-term debt and interest on preferred stock with mandatory redemption requirements. Amounts reported may differ from actual
due to future financing of debt.
(c)
Represents future minimum payments under non-cancelable operating leases, primarily for the lease of motor vehicles, buildings, land and other equipment including water facilities and
systems constructed by partners under public-private partnerships. For discussion of the Company’s public-private partnerships, see Note 19—Leases in the Notes to Consolidated
Financial Statements.
(d)
Represents future payments under water purchase agreements for minimum quantities of water.
(e)
Represents the open purchase orders as of December 31, 2019 for goods and services purchased in the ordinary course of business.
(f)
Represents contributions expected to be made to the Company’s pension plans for the years 2020 through 2024.
(g)
Includes an estimate of advances for construction to be refunded, capital expenditures estimated to be required under legal and binding contractual obligations, contracts entered into for
energy purchases, a liability associated with a conservation agreement, and service agreements.

66

Table of Contents
Performance Obligations
The Company has entered into agreements for the provision of services to water and wastewater facilities for the U.S. military, municipalities and other
customers. These obligations are not included in the table above. For discussion of the Company’s performance obligations see Note 3—Revenue Recognition in
the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information.
Critical Accounting Policies and Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with GAAP requires that management apply accounting policies and make estimates, assumptions and
judgments that could affect the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Actual results could differ from these estimates, assumptions
and judgments. Management believes that the areas described below require significant judgment in the application of accounting policy or in making estimates
and assumptions in matters that are inherently uncertain and that may change in subsequent periods. Accordingly, changes in the estimates, assumptions and
judgments applied to these accounting policies could have a significant impact on the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows, as
reflected in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. Management has reviewed the critical accounting polices described below with the Company’s
Audit, Finance and Risk Committee, including the estimates, assumptions and judgments used in their application. Additional discussion regarding these critical
accounting policies and their application can be found in Note 2—Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements.
Regulation and Regulatory Accounting
The Company’s regulated utilities are subject to regulation by PUCs and, as such, the Company follows the authoritative accounting principles required for
rate regulated utilities, which requires the Company to reflect the effects of rate regulation in its Consolidated Financial Statements. Use of this authoritative
guidance is applicable to utility operations that meet the following criteria: (i) third-party regulation of rates; (ii) cost-based rates; and (iii) a reasonable assumption
that rates will be set to recover the estimated costs of providing service, plus a return on net investment, or rate base. As of December 31, 2019, the Company
concluded that the operations of its utilities met the criteria.
Application of this authoritative guidance has a further effect on the Company’s financial statements as it pertains to allowable costs used in the ratemaking
process. The Company makes significant assumptions and estimates to quantify amounts recorded as regulatory assets and liabilities. Such judgments include, but
are not limited to, assets and liabilities related to regulated acquisitions, pension and postretirement benefits, depreciation rates and taxes. Due to timing and other
differences in the collection of revenues, these authoritative accounting principles allow a cost that would otherwise be charged as an expense by a non-regulated
entity, to be deferred as a regulatory asset if it is probable that such cost is recoverable through future rates. Conversely, the principles require the creation of a
regulatory liability for amounts collected in rates to recover costs expected to be incurred in the future, or amounts collected in excess of costs incurred and are
refundable to customers.
For each regulatory jurisdiction where the Company conducts business, the Company assesses, at the end of each reporting period, whether the regulatory
assets  continue  to  meet  the  criteria  for  probable  future  recovery  and  regulatory  liabilities  continue  to  meet  the  criteria  for  probable  future  settlement.  This
assessment includes consideration of factors such as changes in regulatory environments, recent rate orders (including recent rate orders on recovery of a specific
or similar incurred cost to other regulated entities in the same jurisdiction) and the status of any pending or potential legislation. If subsequent events indicate that
the regulatory assets or liabilities no longer meet the criteria for probable future recovery or probable future settlement, the Company’s Consolidated Statements of
Operations and financial position could be materially affected. In addition, if the Company concludes in a future period that a separable portion of the business no
longer meets the criteria, the Company is required to eliminate the financial statement effects of regulation for that part of the business, which would include the
elimination of any or all regulatory assets and liabilities  that had been recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements. Failure to meet the criteria of this
authoritative guidance could materially impact the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
On December 22, 2017, the TCJA was signed into law, which, among other things, enacted significant and complex changes to the Code, including a
reduction in the maximum U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% as of January 1, 2018. The TCJA created significant excess deferred income
taxes that the Company and its regulatory jurisdictions believe should be refunded to customers. As such, the Company recorded these amounts as regulatory
liabilities.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company’s regulatory asset balance was $1.1 billion and $1.2 billion, respectively, and its regulatory liability
balance was $1.8 billion and $1.9 billion, respectively. See Note 7—Regulatory Assets and Liabilities in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for further
information regarding the Company’s significant regulatory assets and liabilities.
67

Table of Contents
Revenue Recognition
Revenue from the Company’s Regulated Businesses is generated primarily from water and wastewater services delivered to customers. These contracts
contain a single performance obligation, the delivery of water or wastewater services, as the promise to transfer the individual good or service is not separately
identifiable  from  other  promises  within  the  contracts  and,  therefore,  is  not  distinct.  Revenues  are  recognized  over  time,  as  services  are  provided.  There  are
generally no significant financing components or variable consideration. Revenues include amounts billed to customers on a cycle basis, and unbilled amounts
calculated based on estimated usage from the date of the meter reading associated with the latest customer bill, to the end of the accounting period. The amounts
that the Company has a right to invoice are determined by each customer’s actual usage, an indicator that the invoice amount corresponds directly to the value
transferred to the customer.
Increases or decreases in the volumes delivered to customers and rate mix due to changes in usage patterns in customer classes in the period could be
significant to the calculation of unbilled revenue. In addition, changes in the timing of meter reading schedules and the number and type of customers scheduled for
each meter reading date would also have an effect on the unbilled revenue calculation. Unbilled revenue for the Company’s regulated utilities as of December 31,
2019 and 2018 was $142 million and $144 million, respectively.
The Company also recognizes revenue when it is probable that future recovery of previously incurred costs or future refunds that are to be credited to
customers will occur through the ratemaking process.
Revenue from the Company’s Homeowner Services Group is generated through various protection programs in which the Company provides fixed fee
services to domestic homeowners and smaller commercial customers for interior and external water and sewer lines, interior electric and gas lines, heating and
cooling systems, water heaters, power surge protection  and other related  services. Most of the contracts  have a one-year term and each service is a separate
performance obligation, satisfied over time, as the customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided from the service. Customers are obligated
to pay for the protection programs ratably over 12 months or via a one-time, annual fee, with revenues recognized ratably over time for these services. Advances
from customers are deferred until the performance obligation is satisfied.
The Company also has long-term, fixed fee contracts to operate and maintain water and wastewater systems for the U.S. government on various military
installations and facilities owned by municipal and industrial customers, and prior to the sale of Keystone, the Company had shorter-term contracts that provided
customized water transfer services for shale natural gas companies and customers. Billing and revenue recognition for the fixed fee revenues occurs ratably over
the term of the contract, as customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided by the Company. Additionally, these contracts allow the Company
to make capital improvements to underlying infrastructure, which are initiated through separate modifications or amendments to the original contract, whereby
stand-alone, fixed pricing is separately stated for each improvement. The Company has determined that these capital improvements are separate performance
obligations, with revenue recognized over time based on performance completed at the end of each reporting period. Losses on contracts are recognized during the
period in which the losses first become probable and estimable. Revenues recognized during the period in excess of billings on construction contracts are recorded
as unbilled revenues, with billings in excess of revenues recorded as other current liabilities until the recognition criteria are met. Changes in contract performance
and related estimated contract profitability may result in revisions to costs and revenues, and are recognized in the period in which revisions are determined.
Unbilled revenue for the Market-Based Businesses as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 was $30 million and $42 million, respectively.
Accounting for Income Taxes
Significant management judgment is required in determining the provision for income taxes, primarily due to the uncertainty related to tax positions taken,
as well as deferred tax assets and liabilities, valuation allowances and the utilization of NOL carryforwards.
In accordance with applicable authoritative guidance, the Company accounts for uncertain income tax positions using a benefit recognition model with a
two-step approach, including a more-likely-than-not recognition threshold and a measurement approach based on the largest amount of tax benefit that is greater
than 50% likely of being realized upon ultimate settlement. If it is not more-likely-than-not that the benefit of the tax position will be sustained on its technical
merits,  no benefit  is recorded.  Uncertain tax positions that relate  only to timing of when an item  is included  on a tax return are considered to have met the
recognition threshold. Management evaluates each position based solely on the technical merits and facts and circumstances of the position, assuming the position
will be examined by a taxing authority having full knowledge of all relevant information. Significant judgment is required to determine whether the recognition
threshold has been met and, if so, the appropriate amount of unrecognized tax benefit to be recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
The Company evaluates the probability of realizing deferred tax assets quarterly by reviewing a forecast of future taxable income and its intent and ability
to implement tax planning strategies, if necessary, to realize deferred tax assets. The Company also assesses its ability to utilize tax attributes, including those in
the form of carryforwards, for which the benefits have already been reflected in the financial statements. The Company records valuation allowances for deferred
tax assets when it concludes that it is more-likely-than-not such benefit will not be realized in future periods.
68

Table of Contents
Under  GAAP, specifically  Accounting  Standards  Codification  Topic  740, Income  Taxes (“ASC  740”),  the  tax  effects  of  changes  in  tax  laws  must  be
recognized in the period in which the law is enacted. ASC 740 also requires deferred tax assets and liabilities to be measured at the enacted tax rate expected to
apply when temporary differences are to be realized or settled. Thus, at the date of enactment of the TCJA, the Company’s deferred taxes were re-measured based
upon the new tax rate. For the Company’s regulated entities, the change in deferred taxes are recorded as either an offset to a regulatory asset or liability and may
be subject to refund to customers. For the Company’s unregulated operations, the change in deferred taxes are recorded as a non-cash re-measurement adjustment
to earnings.
Actual income taxes could vary from estimated amounts due to the future impacts of various items, including changes in income tax laws, the Company’s
forecasted financial condition and results of operations, failure to successfully implement tax planning strategies and recovery of taxes through the regulatory
process for the Regulated Businesses, as well as results of audits and examinations of filed tax returns by taxing authorities. The resulting tax balances as of
December 31, 2019 and 2018 are appropriately accounted for in accordance with the applicable authoritative guidance; however, the ultimate outcome of tax
matters could result in favorable or unfavorable adjustments to the Consolidated Financial Statements and such adjustments could be material. See Note 14—
Income Taxes in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding income taxes.
Accounting for Pension and Postretirement Benefits
The Company maintains noncontributory defined benefit pension plans covering eligible employees of its regulated utility and shared service operations.
See Note 15—Employee Benefits in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding the description of and accounting for the
defined benefit pension plans and postretirement benefit plans.
The Company’s pension and postretirement benefit costs are developed from actuarial valuations. Inherent in these valuations are key assumptions provided
by the Company to its actuaries, including the discount rate and expected long-term rate of return on plan assets. Material changes in the Company’s pension and
postretirement benefit costs may occur in the future due to changes in these assumptions as well as fluctuations in plan assets. The assumptions are selected to
represent the average expected experience over time and may differ in any one year from actual experience due to changes in capital markets and the overall
economy. These differences will impact the amount of pension and other postretirement benefit expense that the Company recognizes. The primary assumptions
are:
•
Discount Rate—The discount rate is used in calculating the present value of benefits, which are based on projections of benefit payments to be made
in the future. The objective in selecting the discount rate is to measure the single amount that, if invested at the measurement date in a portfolio of
high-quality debt instruments, would provide the necessary future cash flows to pay the accumulated benefits when due.
•
Expected Return on Plan Assets (“EROA”)—Management projects the future return on plan assets considering prior performance, but primarily
based upon the plans’ mix of assets and expectations for the long-term returns on those asset classes. These projected returns reduce the net benefit
costs the Company records currently.
•
Rate  of  Compensation  Increase—Management  projects  employees’  pay  increases,  which  are  used  to  project  employees’  pension  benefits  at
retirement.
•
Health Care Cost Trend Rate—Management projects the expected increases in the cost of health care.
•
Mortality—Management retained the Society of Actuaries RP-2014 mortality base table, which provides rates of mortality in 2006, but adopted the
new MP-2018 mortality improvement scale to gradually adjust future mortality rates downward due to increased longevity in each year after 2006.
The discount rate assumption, which is determined for the pension and postretirement benefit plans independently, is subject to change each year, consistent
with  changes  in  applicable  high-quality,  long-term  corporate  bond  indices.  The  Company  uses  an  approach  that  approximates  the  process  of  settlement  of
obligations tailored to the plans’ expected cash flows by matching the plans’ cash flows to the coupons and expected maturity values of individually selected
bonds. For each plan, the discount rate was developed as the level equivalent rate that would yield the same present value as using spot rates aligned with the
projected benefit payments. The discount rate for determining pension benefit obligations was 3.44%, 4.38% and 3.75% at December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017,
respectively. The discount rate for determining other postretirement benefit obligations was 3.36%, 4.32% and 3.73% at December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017,
respectively.
In selecting an EROA, the Company considered tax implications, past performance and economic forecasts for the types of investments held by the plans.
The long-term EROA assumption used in calculating pension cost was 6.20% for 2019, 5.95% for 2018, and 6.49% for 2017. The weighted average EROA
assumption used in calculating other postretirement benefit costs was 3.56% for 2019, 4.77% for 2018 and 5.09% for 2017.
69

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below are the allocations of the pension plan assets by asset category:
 
2020 Target Allocation
Percentage of Plan Assets as of December 31,
Asset Category
2019
2018
Equity securities
43%
45%
42%
Fixed income
50%
48%
52%
Real Estate
5%
7%
5%
Real estate investment trusts (“REITs”)
2%
—%
1%
Total
100%
100%
100%
Postretirement Medical Bargaining Plan Changes
On July 31, 2018, a new, five-year national benefits agreement was ratified, covering approximately 3,200 of the Company’s union-represented employees.
Most of the benefits under this new agreement became effective on January 1, 2019, and include, among other things, union-represented employees’ participation
in  the  Company’s  cash-based  annual  performance  plan,  additional  medical  plan  options  and  changes  to  certain  retiree  medical  benefits,  which  required  the
Company to remeasure its other postretirement benefit plan obligation during the third quarter of 2018.
For those eligible union retirees and dependents over age 65, the current supplemental retiree medical plan will be replaced with a Health Reimbursement
Arrangement (“HRA”) similar to the cap currently in place for non-union retirees. The Company is providing a subsidy allowing the post-65 retirees to purchase a
Medicare supplemental plan on a private exchange network. The pre-65 coverage plan was also amended to provide a cap on future employer costs designed to
limit the employer costs to 2018 levels. For pre-65 union members retiring early in 2019-2021 a supplemental benefit will be provided to alleviate the effect of the
cap.
On August 31, 2018, the Postretirement Medical Benefit Plan was remeasured to reflect this plan change. The plan change resulted in a $175 million
reduction in future benefits payable to plan participants, and, in combination with other experience reflected as of the remeasurement date, resulted in a $227
million reduction to the net accumulated postretirement benefit obligation. The plan amendment will be amortized over 10.2 years, the average future working
lifetime to full eligibility age for all plan participants.
After the remeasurement, the Retirement and Benefit Plans Investment Committee (the “Investment Committee”), which is responsible for overseeing the
investment of the Company’s pension and other postretirement benefit plans’ assets, determined that the funded status of the Postretirement Medical Bargaining
Plan was in excess of that needed to pay current and future benefits.
Given the change in funded status in 2018, the Investment Committee commissioned an asset-liability study for the Postretirement Medical Bargaining Plan.
This study concluded that it was prudent to decrease the investment risk in the plan due to its current funded status. The study also recommended reducing its
exposure to changes in interest rates by matching the assets of the plan to the projected cash flows for future benefit payments of the liability. The Investment
Committee approved the recommendations. Plan assets in excess of those securities designed to match the long-term liabilities are invested in shorter duration
fixed income securities and equities.
Presented in the table below are the allocations of the other postretirement benefit plan assets by asset category:
 
2020 Target Allocation
(a)
Percentage of Plan Assets as of December 31,
Asset Category
2019
2018
Equity securities
17%
17%
17%
Fixed income
83%
83%
83%
Total
100%
100%
100%
 
(a)
Includes  the  American  Water  Postretirement  Medical  Benefits  Bargaining  Plan,  the  New  York  Water  Service  Corporation  Postretirement  Medical  Benefits  Bargaining  Plan,  the
American Water Postretirement Medical Benefits Non-Bargaining Plan, and the American Water Life Insurance Trust.
The  investments  of  the  pension  and  postretirement  welfare  plan  trusts  include  debt  and  equity  securities  held  either  directly  or through  mutual  funds,
commingled funds and limited partnerships. The trustee for the Company’s defined benefit pension and postretirement welfare plans uses an independent valuation
firm to calculate the fair value of plan assets.
In selecting  a rate  of compensation  increase,  the Company considers  past experience  in light of movements  in  inflation  rates.  The Company’s rate of

compensation increase was 2.97% for 2019, 3.00% for 2018 and 3.02% for 2017.
70

Table of Contents
In selecting health care cost trend rates, the Company considers past performance and forecasts of increases in health care costs. As of January 1, 2018, the
Company’s health care cost trend rate assumption used to calculate the periodic cost was 6.75% in 2019 gradually declining to 5.00% in 2026 and thereafter. As of
December 31, 2019, the Company is projecting that medical inflation will be 6.50% in 2020 gradually declining to 5.00% in 2026 and thereafter.
The Company will use a discount rate and EROA of 3.44% and 6.50%, respectively, for estimating its 2020 pension costs. Additionally, the Company will
use a discount rate and expected blended return based on weighted assets of 3.36% and 3.68%, respectively, for estimating its 2020 other postretirement benefit
costs. A decrease in the discount rate or the EROA would increase the Company’s pension expense. The Company’s 2019 and 2018 pension and postretirement
benefit costs were $17 million and $21 million, respectively. The Company expects to make pension and postretirement benefit contributions to the plan trusts of
$38 million in 2020, and $33 million, $34 million, $34 million and $32 million in 2021, 2022, 2023 and 2024, respectively. Actual amounts contributed could
change significantly  from these estimates.  The assumptions  are reviewed  annually  and at any interim  re-measurement  of the plan obligations.  The impact  of
assumption changes is reflected in the recorded pension and postretirement benefit amounts as they occur, or over a period of time if allowed under applicable
accounting standards.
Accounting for Contingencies
The Company records loss contingencies when management determines that the outcome of future events is probable of occurring and when the amount of
the loss or a range of losses can be reasonably estimated. The determination of a loss contingency is based on management’s judgment and estimates about the
likely outcome of the matter, which may include an analysis of different scenarios. Liabilities are recorded or adjusted when events or circumstances cause these
judgments or estimates to change. In assessing whether a loss is reasonably possible, management considers many factors, which include, but are not limited to: the
nature of the litigation, claim or assessment, review of applicable law, opinions or views of legal counsel and other advisors, and the experience gained from
similar cases or situations. The Company provides disclosures for material contingencies when management deems there is a reasonable possibility that a loss or an
additional loss may be incurred. The Company provides estimates of reasonably possible losses when such estimates may be reasonably determined, either as a
single amount or within a reasonable range.
Actual amounts realized upon settlement or other resolution of loss contingencies may be different than amounts recorded and disclosed and could have a
significant impact on the liabilities, revenue and expenses recorded on the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 16—Commitments and Contingencies in
the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for additional information regarding contingencies.
New Accounting Standards
See Note 2—Significant Accounting Policies in the Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements for a description of recent accounting standards.
ITEM 7A.
QUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE DISCLOSURES ABOUT MARKET RISK
The Company is exposed to market risk associated with changes in commodity prices, equity prices and interest rates. The Company is exposed to risks
from changes in interest rates as a result of its issuance of variable and fixed rate debt and commercial paper. The Company manages its interest rate exposure by
limiting its variable rate exposure and by monitoring the effects of market changes in interest rates. The Company also has the ability to enter into financial
derivative instruments, which could include instruments such as, but not limited to, interest rate swaps, forward starting swaps, swaptions and U.S. Treasury lock
agreements to manage and mitigate interest rate risk exposure. As of December 31, 2019, a hypothetical increase of interest rates by 1% associated with the
Company’s short-term borrowings would result in a $7 million increase in short-term interest expense.
The Company’s risks associated with price increases for chemicals, electricity and other commodities are reduced through contractual arrangements and the
expected ability to recover price increases through rates, in the next general rate case proceeding or other regulatory mechanism, as authorized by each regulatory
jurisdiction. Non-performance by these commodity suppliers could have a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of operations, financial position and
cash flows.
The market price of the Company’s common stock may experience fluctuations, which may be unrelated to its operating performance. In particular, the
Company’s stock price may be affected by general market movements as well as developments specifically related to the water and wastewater industry. These
could include, among other things, interest  rate movements, quarterly  variations  or changes in financial  estimates  by securities  analysts and governmental  or
regulatory actions. This volatility may make it difficult for the Company to access the capital markets in the future through additional offerings of its common
stock or other equity securities, regardless of its financial performance, and such difficulty may preclude the Company from being able to take advantage of certain
business opportunities or meet business obligations.
71

Table of Contents
The Company is exposed to credit risk through its water, wastewater and other water-related services provided by the Regulated Businesses and Market-
Based Businesses. The Company’s Regulated Businesses serve residential, commercial, industrial and other customers, while the Market-Based Businesses engage
in business activities with developers, government entities and other customers. The Company’s primary credit risk is exposure to customer default on contractual
obligations and the associated loss that may be incurred due to the non-payment of customer accounts receivable balances. The Company’s credit risk is managed
through established credit and collection policies which are in compliance with applicable regulatory requirements and involve monitoring of customer exposure
and  the  use  of  credit  risk  mitigation  measures  such  as  letters  of  credit  or  prepayment  arrangements.  The  Company’s  credit  portfolio  is  diversified  with  no
significant  customer  or  industry  concentrations.  In  addition,  the Regulated  Businesses are  generally  able  to  recover  all  prudently  incurred  costs  including
uncollectible customer accounts receivable expenses and collection costs through rates.
The Company’s retirement trust assets are exposed to the market prices of debt and equity securities. Changes to the retirement trust asset values can impact
the Company’s pension and other benefits expense, funded status and future minimum funding requirements. Changes in interest rates can impact retirement
liabilities. The Company aims to reduce risk through asset diversification and by investing in long duration fixed-income securities that have a duration similar to
that of its pension liabilities, seeking to hedge some of the interest rate sensitivity of its liabilities. That way, if interest rates fall and liabilities increase, the
Company expects that the fixed-income assets in its retirement trust will also increase in value. The Company also expects its risk to be reduced through its ability
to recover pension and other benefit costs through rates.
The Company is also exposed to a potential national economic recession or deterioration in local economic conditions in the markets in which it operates.
The credit quality of the Company’s customer accounts receivable is dependent on the economy and the ability of its customers to manage through unfavorable
economic  cycles  and  other  market  changes.  In  addition,  there  can  be  no  assurances  that  regulators  will  grant  sufficient  rate  authorizations.  Therefore,  the
Company’s  ability  to  fully  recover  operating  expense,  recover  its  investment  and  provide  an  appropriate  return  on  invested  capital  made  in  the Regulated
Businesses may be adversely impacted.
72

Table of Contents
ITEM 8.
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS AND SUPPLEMENTARY DATA
INDEX TO CONSOLIDATED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
 
Page
Audited Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
74
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019 and 2018
76
Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
78
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
79
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
80
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017
81
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
82
73

Table of Contents
Report of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
American Water Works Company, Inc.
Opinions on the Financial Statements and Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the accompanying  consolidated  balance sheets of American Water Works Company, Inc. and its subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of
December 31, 2019 and 2018, and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows for
each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2019, including the related notes (collectively referred to as the “consolidated financial statements”). We
also have audited the Company's internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated
Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
In our opinion, the consolidated financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of
December 31, 2019 and 2018, and the results of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2019 in conformity
with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America. Also in our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective
internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019, based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the
COSO.
Change in Accounting Principle
As discussed in Note 2 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company changed the manner in which it accounts for leases in 2019.
Basis for Opinions
The Company's management is responsible for these consolidated financial statements, for maintaining effective internal control over financial reporting,
and  for  its  assessment  of  the  effectiveness  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  included  in  Management's  Report  on  Internal  Control  over  Financial
Reporting appearing under Item 9A. Our responsibility is to express opinions on the Company’s consolidated financial statements and on the Company's internal
control over financial reporting based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United
States) (PCAOB) and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and
regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audits to obtain reasonable
assurance about whether the consolidated financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud, and whether effective internal
control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects.
Our audits of the consolidated financial statements included performing procedures to assess the risks of material misstatement of the consolidated financial
statements, whether due to error or fraud, and performing procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence
regarding the amounts and disclosures in the consolidated financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant
estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall presentation of the consolidated financial statements. Our audit of internal control over financial
reporting  included  obtaining  an  understanding  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  assessing  the  risk  that  a  material  weakness  exists,  and  testing  and
evaluating the design and operating effectiveness of internal control based on the assessed risk. Our audits also included performing such other procedures as we
considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinions.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting
and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over
financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (i) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the
transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (ii) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial  statements  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles,  and  that  receipts  and  expenditures  of  the  company  are  being  made  only  in
accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the company; and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding prevention or timely detection of
unauthorized acquisition, use, or disposition of the company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
74

Table of Contents
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
Critical Audit Matters
The  critical  audit  matter  communicated  below  is  a  matter  arising  from  the  current  period  audit  of  the  consolidated  financial  statements  that  was
communicated or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (i) relates to accounts or disclosures that are material to the consolidated financial
statements and (ii) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way
our opinion on the consolidated financial statements, taken as a whole, and we are not, by communicating the critical audit matter below, providing a separate
opinion on the critical audit matter or on the accounts or disclosures to which it relates.
Accounting for the Effects of Rate Regulation
As described in Notes 2 and 7 to the consolidated financial statements, the Company’s consolidated regulatory assets and liabilities balances were $1,128
million and  $1,806  million,  respectively,  as  of December  31,  2019.  The  Company’s  regulated  utilities  are  subject  to  regulation  by  multiple  state  utility
commissions and the Company follows authoritative accounting principles required for rate regulated utilities, which requires the effects of rate regulation to be
reflected in the Company’s consolidated financial statements. As disclosed by management, for each regulatory jurisdiction where the Company conducts business,
management assesses, at the end of each reporting period, whether the regulatory assets continue to meet the criteria for probable future recovery and regulatory
liabilities  continue  to  meet  the  criteria  for  probable  future  settlement.  This  assessment  includes  consideration  of  factors  such  as  changes  in  regulatory
environments, recent rate orders, including recent rate orders on recovery of a specific or similar incurred cost to other regulated entities in the same jurisdictions,
and the status of any pending or potential legislation.
The principal considerations for our determination that performing procedures relating to accounting for the effects of rate regulation is a critical audit
matter are there was significant judgment by management related to the accounting for regulatory assets and liabilities, including assessing whether the regulatory
assets continue to meet the criteria for probable future recovery and regulatory liabilities continue to meet the criteria for probable future settlement as a result of
changes in regulatory environments, recent rate orders, including recent rate orders on recovery of a specific or similar incurred cost to other regulated entities in
the same jurisdictions, and the status of any pending or potential legislation. This in turn led to a high degree of auditor judgment, subjectivity, and effort in
performing audit procedures and evaluating audit evidence obtained relating to management’s judgments.
Addressing the matter involved performing procedures and evaluating audit evidence in connection with forming our overall opinion on the consolidated
financial statements. These procedures included testing the effectiveness of controls relating to the Company’s regulatory accounting process, including controls
over management’s assessment and consideration of factors related to the probability of future recovery or settlement. These procedures also included, among
others, evaluating the reasonableness of management’s judgments regarding the probability of recovery and settlement based on the Company’s correspondence
with regulators,  status  of regulatory  proceedings,  past  practices,  recent  rate  orders on specific  or similar  incurred  cost  to other regulated  entities  in the same
jurisdictions, and other relevant information; evaluating the related accounting and disclosure implications; and evaluating regulatory assets and liabilities balances
based on provisions and formulas outlined in rate orders and other correspondence with the Company’s regulators.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
February 18, 2020
We have served as the Company’s auditor since 1948.
75

Table of Contents
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(In millions, except share and per share data)
December 31, 2019
December 31, 2018
ASSETS
Property, plant and equipment
$
23,941
$
23,204
Accumulated depreciation
(5,709)
(5,795)
Property, plant and equipment, net
18,232
17,409
Current assets:
 
 
Cash and cash equivalents
60
130
Restricted funds
31
28
Accounts receivable, net
294
301
Unbilled revenues
172
186
Materials and supplies
44
41
Assets held for sale
566
—
Other
118
95
Total current assets
1,285
781
Regulatory and other long-term assets:
 
 
Regulatory assets
1,128
1,156
Operating lease right-of-use assets
103
—
Goodwill
1,501
1,575
Postretirement benefit asset
159
155
Intangible assets
67
84
Other
207
63
Total regulatory and other long-term assets
3,165
3,033
Total assets
$
22,682
$
21,223
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
76

Table of Contents
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Balance Sheets
(In millions, except share and per share data)
December 31, 2019
December 31, 2018
CAPITALIZATION AND LIABILITIES
Capitalization:
 
 
Common stock ($0.01 par value, 500,000,000 shares authorized, 185,903,727 and 185,367,158 shares issued,
respectively)
$
2
$
2
Paid-in-capital
6,700
6,657
Accumulated deficit
(207)
(464)
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(36)
(34)
Treasury stock, at cost (5,090,855 and 4,683,156 shares, respectively)
(338)
(297)
Total common shareholders' equity
6,121
5,864
Long-term debt
8,639
7,569
Redeemable preferred stock at redemption value
5
7
Total long-term debt
8,644
7,576
Total capitalization
14,765
13,440
Current liabilities:
 
 
Short-term debt
786
964
Current portion of long-term debt
28
71
Accounts payable
203
175
Accrued liabilities
596
556
Accrued taxes
46
45
Accrued interest
84
87
Liabilities related to assets held for sale
128
—
Other
174
196
Total current liabilities
2,045
2,094
Regulatory and other long-term liabilities:
 
 
Advances for construction
240
252
Deferred income taxes and investment tax credits
1,893
1,740
Regulatory liabilities
1,806
1,907
Operating lease liabilities
89
—
Accrued pension expense
411
390
Other
78
78
Total regulatory and other long-term liabilities
4,517
4,367
Contributions in aid of construction
1,355
1,322
Commitments and contingencies (See Note 16)
Total capitalization and liabilities
$
22,682
$
21,223
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements. 
77

Table of Contents
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(In millions, except per share data)
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Operating revenues
$
3,610
$
3,440
$
3,357
Operating expenses:
 
 
 
Operation and maintenance
1,544
1,479
1,369
Depreciation and amortization
582
545
492
General taxes
280
277
259
Loss (gain) on asset dispositions and purchases
34
(20)
(16)
Impairment charge
—
57
—
Total operating expenses, net
2,440
2,338
2,104
Operating income
1,170
1,102
1,253
Other income (expense):
 
 
 
Interest, net
(382)
(350)
(342)
Non-operating benefit costs, net
16
20
(9)
Loss on early extinguishment of debt
(4)
(4)
(7)
Other, net
33
19
17
Total other income (expense)
(337)
(315)
(341)
Income before income taxes
833
787
912
Provision for income taxes
212
222
486
Consolidated net income
621
565
426
Net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
—
(2)
—
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
621
$
567
$
426
Basic earnings per share: (a)
 
 
 
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
3.44
$
3.16
$
2.39
Diluted earnings per share: (a)
 
 
 
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
3.43
$
3.15
$
2.38
Weighted average common shares outstanding:
 
 
 
Basic
181
180
178
Diluted
181
180
179
(a)
Amounts may not calculate due to rounding.
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
78

Table of Contents
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
(In millions)
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
621
$
567
$
426
Other comprehensive income (loss), net of tax:
 
 
 
Change in employee benefit plan funded status, net of tax of $3, $20 and $2 in
2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively
8
60
7
Defined benefit pension plans:
 
 
 
Amortization of actuarial loss, net of tax of $1, $3 and $5 in 2019, 2018 and
2017, respectively
4
7
7
Pension reclassification from accumulated other comprehensive loss of tax effects
resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
—
(22)
—
Foreign currency translation adjustment
(1)
—
(1)
Unrealized loss on cash flow hedges, net of tax of $(5), $0 and $(4) in 2019, 2018
and 2017, respectively
(13)
(2)
(6)
Cash flow hedges reclassification from accumulated other comprehensive loss of
tax effects resulting from the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act
—
2
—
Net other comprehensive (loss) income
(2)
45
7
Comprehensive income attributable to common shareholders
$
619
$
612
$
433
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
79

Table of Contents
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(In millions)
 
For the Years Ended December 31,
 
2019
2018
2017
CASH FLOWS FROM OPERATING ACTIVITIES
 
 
 
Net income
$
621
$
565
$
426
Adjustments to reconcile to net cash flows provided by operating activities:
 
 
 
Depreciation and amortization
582
545
492
Deferred income taxes and amortization of investment tax credits
208
195
462
Provision for losses on accounts receivable
28
33
29
Loss (gain) on asset dispositions and purchases
34
(20)
(16)
Impairment charge
—
57
—
Pension and non-pension postretirement benefits
17
23
57
Other non-cash, net
(41)
20
(54)
Changes in assets and liabilities:
 
 
 
Receivables and unbilled revenues
(25)
(17)
21
Pension and non-pension postretirement benefit contributions
(31)
(22)
(48)
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities
66
25
38
Other assets and liabilities, net
(72)
22
64
Impact of Freedom Industries settlement activities
(4)
(40)
(22)
Net cash provided by operating activities
1,383
1,386
1,449
CASH FLOWS FROM INVESTING ACTIVITIES
 
 
 
Capital expenditures
(1,654)
(1,586)
(1,434)
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(235)
(398)
(177)
Proceeds from sale of assets
48
35
15
Removal costs from property, plant and equipment retirements, net
(104)
(87)
(76)
Net cash used in investing activities
(1,945)
(2,036)
(1,672)
CASH FLOWS FROM FINANCING ACTIVITIES
 
 
 
Proceeds from long-term debt
1,530
1,358
1,395
Repayments of long-term debt
(495)
(526)
(896)
Net short-term borrowings with maturities less than three months
(178)
60
55
Issuance of common stock
—
183
—
Proceeds from issuances of employee stock plans and direct stock purchase plan, net of taxes
paid of $11, $8 and $11 in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively
15
16
15
Advances and contributions for construction, net of refunds of $30, $22 and $22 in 2019, 2018
and 2017, respectively
26
21
28
Debt issuance costs and make-whole premium on early debt redemption
(15)
(22)
(47)
Dividends paid
(353)
(319)
(289)
Anti-dilutive share repurchases
(36)
(45)
(54)
Net cash provided by financing activities
494
726
207
Net (decrease) increase in cash and cash equivalents and restricted funds
(68)
76
(16)
Cash and cash equivalents and restricted funds at beginning of period
159
83
99
Cash and cash equivalents and restricted funds at end of period
$
91
$
159
$
83
Cash paid during the year for:
 
 
 
Interest, net of capitalized amount
$
383
$
332
$
338
Income taxes, net of refunds of $4, $0 and $0 in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively
$
12
$
38
$
30
Non-cash investing activity:
 
 
 
Capital expenditures acquired on account but unpaid as of year end
$
235
$
181
$
204
Acquisition financed by treasury stock
$
—
$
—
$
33
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
80

Table of Contents
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Subsidiary Companies
Consolidated Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity
(In millions, except per share data)
Common Stock
 
 
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Loss
Treasury Stock
Total Shareholders'
Equity
 
Shares
Par Value
Paid-in Capital
Accumulated
Deficit
Shares
At Cost
Balance as of December 31, 2016
181.8
$
2
$
6,388
$
(873)
$
(86)
(3.7)
$
(213)
$
5,218
Cumulative effect of change
in accounting principle
—
—
—
21
—
—
—
21
Net income attributable to common
shareholders
—
—
—
426
—
—
—
426
Direct stock reinvestment and
purchase plan
0.1
—
8
—
—
—
—
8
Employee stock purchase plan
0.1
—
7
—
—
—
—
7
Stock-based compensation activity
0.5
—
22
—
—
(0.1)
(7)
15
Acquisitions via treasury stock
—
—
7
—
—
0.4
27
34
Repurchases of common stock
—
—
—
—
—
(0.7)
(54)
(54)
Net other comprehensive income
—
—
—
—
7
—
—
7
Dividends ($1.66 declared per
common share)
—
—
—
(297)
—
—
—
(297)
Balance as of December 31, 2017
182.5
$
2
$
6,432
$
(723)
$
(79)
(4.1)
$
(247)
$
5,385
Cumulative effect of change
in accounting principle
—
—
—
20
—
—
—
20
Net income attributable to common
shareholders
—
—
—
567
—
—
—
567
Direct stock reinvestment and
purchase plan
0.1
—
8
—
—
—
—
8
Employee stock purchase plan
0.1
—
8
—
—
—
—
8
Stock-based compensation activity
0.4
—
26
(1)
—
(0.1)
(5)
20
Issuance of common stock
2.3
—
183
—
—
—
—
183
Repurchases of common stock
—
—
—
—
—
(0.5)
(45)
(45)
Net other comprehensive income
—
—
—
—
45
—
—
45
Dividends ($1.82 declared per
common share)
—
—
—
(327)
—
—
—
(327)
Balance as of December 31, 2018
185.4
$
2
$
6,657
$
(464)
$
(34)
(4.7)
$
(297)
$
5,864
Cumulative effect of change
in accounting principle
—
—
—
(2)
—
—
—
(2)
Net income attributable to common
shareholders
—
—
—
621
—
—
—
621
Direct stock reinvestment and
purchase plan
—
—
7
—
—
—
—
7
Employee stock purchase plan
0.1
—
10
—
—
—
—
10
Stock-based compensation activity
0.4
—
26
—
—
(0.1)
(5)
21
Repurchases of common stock
—
—
—
—
—
(0.3)
(36)
(36)
Net other comprehensive income
—
—
—
—
(2)
—
—
(2)
Dividends ($2.00 declared per
common share)
—
—
—
(362)
—
—
—
(362)
Balance as of December 31, 2019
185.9
$
2
$
6,700
$
(207)
$
(36)
(5.1)
$
(338)
$
6,121
 
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these Consolidated Financial Statements.
81

Table of Contents
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Subsidiary Companies
Notes to Consolidated Financial Statements
(Unless otherwise noted, in millions, except per share data)
Note 1: Organization and Operation
American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  (the  “Company”  or  “American  Water”)  is  a  holding  company  for  regulated  and  market-based  subsidiaries
throughout the United States. References to “parent company” mean American Water Works Company, Inc., without its subsidiaries. The Company’s primary
business involves the ownership of regulated utilities that provide water and wastewater services in 16 states in the United States, collectively referred to as the
“Regulated Businesses.” The Company also operates market-based businesses that provide complementary water and wastewater services within non-reportable
operating  segments,  collectively  referred  to  as  the  “Market-Based  Businesses.”  The  Company’s  primary Market-Based  Businesses include  the Homeowner
Services Group, which provides various warranty protection programs and other home services to residential customers; and the Military Services Group, which
enters into long-term contracts with the U.S. government to provide water and wastewater services on various military installations.
Note 2: Significant Accounting Policies
Regulation
The Company’s regulated utilities are subject to regulation by multiple state utility commissions or other entities engaged in utility regulation, collectively
referred to as Public Utility Commissions (“PUCs”). As such, the Company follows authoritative accounting principles required for rate regulated utilities, which
requires the effects of rate regulation to be reflected in the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements. PUCs generally authorize revenue at levels intended to
recover the estimated costs of providing service, plus a return on net investments, or rate base. Regulators may also approve accounting treatments, long-term
financing  programs  and  cost  of  capital,  operation  and  maintenance  (“O&M”)  expenses,  capital  expenditures,  taxes,  affiliated  transactions  and  relationships,
reorganizations, mergers, acquisitions and dispositions, along with imposing certain penalties or granting certain incentives. Due to timing and other differences in
the collection of a regulated utility’s revenues, these authoritative accounting principles allow a cost that would otherwise be charged as an expense by a non-
regulated entity, to be deferred as a regulatory asset if it is probable that such cost is recoverable through future rates. Conversely, these principles also require the
creation of a regulatory liability for amounts collected in rates to recover costs expected to be incurred in the future, or amounts collected in excess of costs
incurred and are refundable to customers. See Note 7—Regulatory Assets and Liabilities for additional information.
Use of Estimates
The  preparation  of  financial  statements  in  conformity  with  accounting  principles  generally  accepted  in  the  United  States  (“GAAP”)  requires  that
management make estimates, assumptions and judgments that could affect the Company’s financial condition, results of operations and cash flows. Actual results
could differ from these estimates, assumptions and judgments. The Company considers its critical accounting estimates to include (i) the application of regulatory
accounting  principles  and  the  related  determination  and  estimation  of  regulatory  assets  and  liabilities,  (ii)  revenue  recognition  and  the  estimates  used  in  the
calculation of unbilled revenue, (iii) accounting for income taxes, (iv) benefit plan assumptions and (v) the estimates and judgments used in determining loss
contingencies. The Company’s critical accounting estimates that are particularly sensitive to change in the near term are amounts reported for regulatory assets and
liabilities, income taxes, benefit plan assumptions and contingency-related obligations.
Principles of Consolidation
The accompanying Consolidated Financial Statements include the accounts of American Water and all of its subsidiaries in which a controlling interest is
maintained after the elimination of intercompany balances and transactions.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment consists primarily of utility plant utilized by the Company’s regulated utilities. Additions to utility plant and replacement of
retirement units of utility plant are capitalized and include costs such as materials, direct labor, payroll taxes and benefits, indirect items such as engineering and
supervision, transportation and an allowance for funds used during construction (“AFUDC”). Costs for repair, maintenance and minor replacements are charged to
O&M expense as incurred.
The cost of utility plant is depreciated using the straight-line average remaining life, group method. The Company’s regulated utilities record depreciation in
conformity with amounts approved by PUCs, after regulatory review of the information the Company submits to support its estimates of the assets’ remaining
useful lives.
Nonutility property consists primarily of buildings and equipment utilized by the Company’s Market-Based Businesses and for internal operations. This
property is stated at cost, net of accumulated depreciation, which is calculated using the straight-line method over the useful lives of the assets.
82

Table of Contents
When units of property, plant and equipment are replaced, retired or abandoned, the carrying value is credited against the asset and charged to accumulated
depreciation. To the extent the Company recovers cost of removal or other retirement costs through rates after the retirement costs are incurred, a regulatory asset
is recorded. In some cases, the Company recovers retirement costs through rates during the life of the associated asset and before the costs are incurred. These
amounts result in a regulatory liability being reported based on the amounts previously recovered through customer rates, until the costs to retire those assets are
incurred.
The costs incurred to acquire and internally develop computer software for internal use are capitalized as a unit of property. The carrying value of these
costs amounted to $345 million and $336 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Cash and Cash Equivalents, and Restricted Funds
Substantially all cash is invested in interest-bearing accounts. All highly liquid investments with a maturity of three months or less when purchased are
considered to be cash equivalents.
Restricted funds consist primarily of proceeds from financings for the construction and capital improvement of facilities, and deposits for future services
under O&M projects. Proceeds are held in escrow or interest-bearing accounts until the designated expenditures are incurred. Restricted funds are classified on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets as either current or long-term based upon the intended use of the funds.
Presented in the table below is a reconciliation of the cash and cash equivalents and restricted funds amounts as presented on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets to the sum of such amounts presented on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
Cash and cash equivalents
$
60
$
130
Restricted funds
31
28
Restricted funds included in other long-term assets
—
1
Cash and cash equivalents and restricted funds as presented on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
$
91
$
159
Accounts Receivable and Unbilled Revenues
Accounts receivable include regulated utility customer accounts receivable, which represent amounts billed to water and wastewater customers generally on
a monthly basis. Credit is extended based on the guidelines of the applicable PUCs and collateral is generally not required. Also included are market-based trade
accounts receivable and nonutility customer receivables of the regulated subsidiaries. Unbilled revenues are accrued when service has been provided but has not
been billed to customers and when costs exceed billings on market-based construction contracts.
Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts
Allowances for uncollectible  accounts are maintained for estimated probable losses resulting from the Company’s inability to collect receivables from
customers. Accounts that are outstanding longer than the payment terms are considered past due. A number of factors are considered in determining the allowance
for uncollectible accounts, including the length of time receivables are past due and previous loss history. The Company generally writes off accounts when they
become uncollectible or reserves accounts that exceed a certain number of days outstanding. See Note 6—Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts for additional
information.
Materials and Supplies
Materials and supplies are stated at the lower of cost or net realizable value. Cost is determined using the average cost method.
Leases
The Company has operating and finance leases involving real property, including facilities, utility assets, vehicles, and equipment. The Company determines
if an arrangement is a lease at inception. Operating leases are included in operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets, accrued liabilities and operating lease
liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. Finance leases are included in property, plant and equipment, accrued liabilities and other long-term liabilities on
the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The Company has made an accounting policy election not to include operating leases with a lease term of twelve months or less.
83


Table of Contents
ROU assets represent the right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and the lease liabilities represent the obligation to make lease payments arising
from the lease. ROU assets and lease liabilities are generally recognized at the commencement date based on the present value of discounted lease payments over
the lease term. As most of the Company’s leases do not provide an implicit rate, the Company uses its incremental borrowing rate based on the information
available at the commencement date in determining the present value of discounted lease payments. The implicit rate is used when readily determinable. ROU
assets also include any upfront lease payments and excludes lease incentives. The Company’s lease terms may include options to extend or terminate the lease
when it is reasonably certain that the option will be exercised. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
The  Company  has  lease  agreements  with  lease  components  (e.g.,  fixed  payments  including  rent,  real  estate  taxes  and  insurance  costs)  and  non-lease
components (e.g., common-area maintenance costs), which are generally accounted for separately; however, the Company accounts for the lease and non-lease
components  as  a  single  lease  component  for  certain  leases.  Certain  lease  agreements  include  variable  rental  payments  adjusted  periodically  for  inflation.
Additionally, the Company applies a portfolio approach to effectively account for the ROU assets and lease liabilities. The Company’s lease agreements do not
contain any material residual value guarantees or material restrictive covenants.
Goodwill
Goodwill represents the excess of the purchase price paid over the estimated fair value of the assets acquired and liabilities assumed in the acquisition of a
business. Goodwill is not amortized and must be allocated at the reporting unit level, which is defined as an operating segment or one level below, and tested for
impairment at least annually, or more frequently if an event occurs or circumstances change that would more likely than not, reduce the fair value of a reporting
unit below its carrying value.
The Company’s goodwill is primarily associated with (i) the acquisition of American Water by an affiliate of the Company’s previous owner in 2003, (ii)
the acquisition of E’town Corporation by a predecessor to the Company’s previous owner in 2001, and (iii) the acquisition of Pivotal Home Solutions (“Pivotal”)
in 2018; and has been allocated to reporting units based on the fair values at the date of the acquisitions. For purposes of testing goodwill for impairment, the
reporting units in the Regulated Businesses segment are aggregated into a single reporting unit. The Market-Based Businesses is comprised of the Homeowner
Services Group and Military Services Group reporting units.
The Company’s annual impairment testing is performed as of November 30 of each year, in conjunction with the completion of the Company’s annual
business plan. The Company assesses qualitative factors to determine whether quantitative testing is necessary. If it is determined, based upon qualitative factors,
that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not, greater than its carrying value, no further testing is required. If the Company bypasses the
qualitative assessment, or performs the qualitative assessment and determines that the estimated fair value of a reporting unit is more likely than not, less than its
carrying value, a quantitative, fair value-based test is performed. This quantitative testing compares the estimated fair value of the reporting unit to its respective
net carrying value, including goodwill, on the measurement date. An impairment loss will be recognized in the amount equal to the excess of the reporting unit’s
carrying value compared to its estimated fair value, limited to the total amount of goodwill allocated to that reporting unit.
Application of goodwill impairment testing requires management judgment, including the identification of reporting units and determining the fair value of
reporting units. Management estimates fair value using a discounted cash flow analysis. Significant assumptions used in these fair value estimations include, but
are not limited to, forecasts of future operating results, discount and growth rates.
The Company believes the assumptions and other considerations used to value goodwill to be appropriate, however, if actual experience differs from the
assumptions and considerations used in its analysis, the resulting change could have a material adverse impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note
8—Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets for additional information.
Intangible Assets
Intangible assets consist primarily of finite-lived customer relationships associated with the acquisition of Pivotal. Finite-lived intangible assets are initially
measured at their estimated fair values, and are amortized over their estimated useful lives based on the pattern in which the economic benefits of the intangible
assets are consumed or otherwise used. See Note 8—Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets for additional information.
84

Table of Contents
Impairment of Long-Lived Assets
Long-lived assets include property, plant and equipment, goodwill, intangible assets and long-term investments. The Company evaluates long-lived assets
for impairment when circumstances indicate the carrying value of those assets may not be recoverable. When such indicators arise, the Company estimates the fair
value of the long-lived asset from future cash flows expected to result from its use and, if applicable, the eventual disposition of the asset, comparing the estimated
fair value to the carrying value of the asset. An impairment loss will be recognized in the amount equal to the excess of the long-lived asset’s carrying value
compared to its estimated fair value.
The long-lived assets of the Company’s regulated utilities are grouped on a separate entity basis for impairment testing, as they are integrated state-wide
operations that do not have the option to curtail service and generally have uniform tariffs. A regulatory asset is charged to earnings if and when future recovery in
rates of that asset is no longer probable.
The Company holds other long-term investments in privately held companies and joint ventures accounted for using the equity method, and are classified as
other long-term assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The estimated fair value of the long-term investments is dependent on the financial performance and
solvency of the entities in which the Company invests, as well as volatility inherent in the external markets. If such long-term investments are considered impaired,
an impairment loss will be recognized in the amount equal to the excess of the investment’s carrying value compared to its estimated fair value.
The Company believes the assumptions and other considerations used to value long-lived assets to be appropriate, however, if actual experience differs
from the assumptions and considerations used in its estimates, the resulting change could have a material adverse impact on the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Advances for Construction and Contributions in Aid of Construction
Regulated utility subsidiaries may receive advances for construction and contributions in aid of construction from customers, home builders and real estate
developers to fund construction necessary to extend service to new areas.
Advances are refundable for limited periods of time as new customers begin to receive service or other contractual obligations are fulfilled. Included in
other current liabilities as of December 31, 2019 and 2018 on the Consolidated Balance Sheets are estimated refunds of $25 million and $23 million, respectively.
Those amounts represent expected refunds during the next 12-month period.
Advances that are no longer refundable are reclassified to contributions. Contributions are permanent collections of plant assets or cash for a particular
construction project. For ratemaking purposes, the amount of such contributions generally serves as a rate base reduction since the contributions represent non-
investor supplied funds.
Generally, the Company depreciates utility plant funded by contributions and amortizes its contributions balance as a reduction to depreciation expense,
producing a result which is functionally equivalent to reducing the original cost of the utility plant for the contributions. In accordance with applicable regulatory
guidelines, some of the Company’s utility subsidiaries do not amortize contributions, and any contribution received remains on the balance sheet indefinitely.
Amortization  of  contributions  in  aid  of  construction  was $29  million, $28  million and $27  million for  the  years  ended December  31,  2019, 2018 and 2017,
respectively.
Revenue Recognition
On  January  1,  2018,  the  Company  adopted  Accounting  Standards  Codification  Topic  606, Revenue  From  Contracts  With  Customers, and all  related
amendments (collectively, “ASC 606”), using the modified retrospective approach, applied to contracts which were not completed as of January 1, 2018. Under
this approach, periods prior to the adoption date have not been restated and continue to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
Under ASC 606, a performance obligation is a promise within a contract to transfer a distinct good or service, or a series of distinct goods and services, to a
customer. Revenue is recognized when performance obligations are satisfied and the customer obtains control of promised goods or services. The amount of
revenue  recognized  reflects  the  consideration  to  which  the  Company  expects  to be  entitled  to receive  in  exchange  for  goods  or services.  Under  ASC 606,  a
contract’s transaction price is allocated to each distinct performance obligation. To determine revenue recognition for arrangements that the Company determines
are within the scope of ASC 606, the Company performs the following five steps: (i) identifies the contracts with a customer; (ii) identifies the performance
obligations  within  the  contract,  including  whether  any  performance  obligations  are  distinct  and  capable  of  being  distinct  in  the  context  of  the  contract;  (iii)
determines the transaction price; (iv) allocates the transaction price to the performance obligations in the contract; and (v) recognizes revenue when, or as, the
Company satisfies each performance obligation.
85

Table of Contents
The Company’s revenues from contracts with customers are discussed below. Customer payments for contracts are generally due within 30 days of billing
and none of the contracts with customers have payment terms that exceed one year; therefore, the Company elected to apply the significant financing component
practical expedient and no amount of consideration has been allocated as a financing component.
Regulated Businesses Revenue
Revenue from the Company’s Regulated Businesses is generated primarily from water and wastewater services delivered to customers. These contracts
contain a single performance obligation, the delivery of water and/or wastewater services, as the promise to transfer the individual good or service is not separately
identifiable  from  other  promises  within  the  contracts  and,  therefore,  is  not  distinct.  Revenues  are  recognized  over  time,  as  services  are  provided.  There  are
generally no significant financing components or variable consideration. Revenues include amounts billed to customers on a cycle basis and unbilled amounts
calculated based on estimated usage from the date of the meter reading associated with the latest customer bill, to the end of the accounting period. The amounts
that the Company has a right to invoice are determined by each customer’s actual usage, an indicator that the invoice amount corresponds directly to the value
transferred to the customer. The Company also recognizes revenue when it is probable that future recovery of previously incurred costs or future refunds that are to
be credited to customers will occur through the ratemaking process.
Market-Based Businesses Revenue
Through various warranty protection programs and other home services, the Company provides fixed fee services to residential customers for interior and
exterior water and sewer lines, interior electric and gas lines, heating and cooling systems, water heaters and other home appliances, as well as power surge
protection and other related services. Most of the contracts have a one-year term and each service is a separate performance obligation, satisfied over time, as the
customers simultaneously receive and consume the benefits provided from the service. Customers are obligated to pay for the protection programs ratably over 12
months or via a one-time, annual fee, with revenues recognized ratably over time for these services. Advances from customers are deferred until the performance
obligation is satisfied.
The Company also has long-term, fixed fee contracts to operate and maintain water and wastewater systems for the U.S. government on various military
installations and facilities owned by municipal and industrial customers, and prior to the sale of Keystone Clearwater Solutions, LLC (“Keystone”), the Company
had shorter-term contracts that provided customized water transfer services for shale natural gas companies and customers. Billing and revenue recognition for the
fixed  fee  revenues  occurs  ratably  over  the  term  of  the  contract,  as  customers  simultaneously  receive  and  consume  the  benefits  provided  by  the  Company.
Additionally, these contracts allow the Company to make capital improvements to underlying infrastructure, which are initiated through separate modifications or
amendments to the original contract, whereby stand-alone, fixed pricing is separately stated for each improvement. The Company has determined that these capital
improvements are separate performance obligations, with revenue recognized over time based on performance completed at the end of each reporting period.
Losses on contracts are recognized during the period in which the losses first become probable and estimable. Revenues recognized during the period in excess of
billings on construction contracts are recorded as unbilled revenues, with billings in excess of revenues recorded as other current liabilities until the recognition
criteria are met. Changes in contract performance and related estimated contract profitability may result in revisions to costs and revenues, and are recognized in
the period in which revisions are determined. See Note 3—Revenue Recognition for additional information.
Income Taxes
The Company and its subsidiaries participate in a consolidated federal income tax return for U.S. tax purposes. Members of the consolidated group are
charged with the amount of federal income tax expense determined as if they filed separate returns.
Certain income and expense items are accounted for in different time periods for financial reporting than for income tax reporting purposes. The Company
provides  deferred  income  taxes  on  the  difference  between  the  tax  basis  of  assets  and  liabilities  and  the  amounts  at  which  they  are  carried  in  the  financial
statements. These deferred income taxes are based on the enacted tax rates expected to be in effect when these temporary differences are projected to reverse. In
addition,  the  regulated  utility  subsidiaries  recognize  regulatory  assets  and  liabilities  for  the  effect  on  revenues  expected  to  be  realized  as  the  tax  effects  of
temporary differences, previously flowed through to customers, reverse.
Investment tax credits have been deferred by the regulated utility subsidiaries and are being amortized to income over the average estimated service lives of
the related assets.
The Company recognizes accrued interest and penalties related to tax positions as a component of income tax expense and accounts for sales tax collected
from customers and remitted to taxing authorities on a net basis. See Note 14—Income Taxes for additional information.
86

Table of Contents
Allowance for Funds Used During Construction
AFUDC is a non-cash credit to income with a corresponding charge to utility plant that represents the cost of borrowed funds or a return on equity funds
devoted to plant under construction. The regulated utility subsidiaries record AFUDC to the extent permitted by the PUCs. The portion of AFUDC attributable to
borrowed funds is shown as a reduction of interest, net on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Any portion of AFUDC attributable to equity funds would
be included in other, net on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Presented in the table below is AFUDC for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Allowance for other funds used during construction
$
28
$
24
$
19
Allowance for borrowed funds used during construction
13
13
8
Environmental Costs
The Company’s water and wastewater operations and the operations of its Market-Based Businesses are subject to U.S. federal, state, local and foreign
requirements  relating  to  environmental  protection,  and  as  such,  the  Company  periodically  becomes  subject  to  environmental  claims  in  the  normal  course  of
business. Environmental expenditures that relate to current operations or provide a future benefit are expensed or capitalized as appropriate. Remediation costs that
relate to an existing condition caused by past operations are accrued, on an undiscounted basis, when it is probable that these costs will be incurred and can be
reasonably estimated. A conservation agreement entered into by a subsidiary of the Company with the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration in 2010
and amended in 2017 required the subsidiary to, among other provisions, implement certain measures to protect the steelhead trout and its habitat in the Carmel
River watershed in the State of California. The subsidiary agreed to pay $1 million annually commencing in 2010 with the final payment being made in 2021.
Remediation costs accrued amounted to $2 million and $4 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively.
Derivative Financial Instruments
The Company uses derivative financial instruments for purposes of hedging exposures to fluctuations in interest rates. These derivative contracts are entered
into for periods consistent with the related underlying exposures and do not constitute positions independent of those exposures. The Company does not enter into
derivative contracts for speculative purposes and does not use leveraged instruments.
All  derivatives  are  recognized  on  the  balance  sheet  at  fair  value.  On  the  date  the  derivative  contract  is  entered  into,  the  Company  may  designate  the
derivative as a hedge of the fair value of a recognized asset or liability (fair-value hedge) or a hedge of a forecasted transaction or of the variability of cash flows to
be received or paid related to a recognized asset or liability (cash-flow hedge).
Changes in the fair value of a fair-value hedge, along with the gain or loss on the underlying hedged item, are recorded in current-period earnings. The gains
and losses on the effective portion of cash-flow hedges are recorded in other comprehensive income, until earnings are affected by the variability of cash flows.
Any ineffective portion of designated cash-flow hedges is recognized in current-period earnings.
Cash flows from derivative contracts are included in net cash provided by operating activities on the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows. See Note 11—
Long-Term Debt for additional information.
87

Table of Contents
New Accounting Standards
Presented in the table below are new accounting standards that were adopted by the Company in 2019:
Standard
Description
Date of
Adoption
Application
Effect on the Consolidated Financial
Statements
Accounting for
Leases 
Updated the accounting and disclosure guidance for leasing
arrangements. Under this guidance, a lessee is required to recognize
the following for all leases, excluding short-term leases, at the
commencement date: (i) a lease liability, which is a lessee’s obligation
to make lease payments arising from a lease, measured on a
discounted basis; and (ii) a right-of-use asset, which is an asset that
represents the lessee’s right to use, or control the use of, a specified
asset for the lease term. A package of optional transition practical
expedients allows an entity not to reassess under the new guidance: (i)
whether any expired or existing contracts as of the adoption date are
or contain leases; (ii) lease classification; and (iii) initial direct costs.
Additional, optional transition practical expedients are available which
allow an entity not to evaluate expired or existing land easements as of
the adoption date if the easements were not previously accounted for
as leases; and to apply the new lease standard at the adoption date and
recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment in the opening balance of
retained earnings in the period of adoption.
January 1,
2019
Modified retrospective 
See Note 19—Leases.
Targeted
Improvements to
Accounting for
Hedging Activities 
Updated the accounting and disclosure guidance for hedging activities,
allowing for more financial and nonfinancial hedging strategies to be
eligible for hedge accounting. Under this guidance, a qualitative
effectiveness assessment is permitted for certain hedges if an entity
can reasonably support an expectation of high effectiveness
throughout the term of the hedge, provided that an initial quantitative
test establishes that the hedge relationship is highly effective. Also, for
cash flow hedges determined to be highly effective, all changes in the
fair value of the hedging instrument will be recorded in other
comprehensive income, with a subsequent reclassification to earnings
when the hedged item impacts earnings.
January 1,
2019
Modified retrospective
for adjustments related to
the measurement of
ineffectiveness for cash
flow hedges; prospective
for the updated
presentation and
disclosure requirements.
The adoption did not have a material impact on
the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Inclusion of the
Secured Overnight
Financing Rate
(“SOFR”)
Overnight Index
Swap (“OIS”) Rate
as a Benchmark
Interest Rate for
Hedge Accounting
Purposes
Designated the OIS rate based on SOFR as an eligible U.S. benchmark
interest rate for the purposes of applying hedge accounting.
January 1,
2019
Prospective 
The adoption did not have a material impact on
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
88

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below are recently issued accounting standards that have not yet been adopted by the Company as of December 31, 2019:
Standard
Description
Date of
Adoption
Application
Estimated Effect on the Consolidated
Financial Statements
Measurement of
Credit Losses on
Financial
Instruments
Updated the accounting guidance on reporting credit losses for
financial assets held at amortized cost basis and available-for-sale debt
securities. Under this guidance, expected credit losses are required to
be measured based on historical experience, current conditions and
reasonable and supportable forecasts that affect the collectability of
the reported amount of financial assets. Also, this guidance requires
that credit losses on available-for-sale debt securities be presented as
an allowance rather than as a direct write-down.
January 1,
2020; early
adoption
permitted
Modified retrospective
The standard will not have a material impact on
the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Changes to the
Disclosure
Requirements for
Fair Value
Measurement
Updated the disclosure requirements for fair value measurement. The
guidance removes the requirements to disclose transfers between
Level 1 and Level 2 measurements, the timing of transfers between
levels, and the valuation processes for Level 3 measurements.
Disclosure of transfers into and out of Level 3 measurements will be
required. The guidance adds disclosure requirements for the change in
unrealized gains and losses in other comprehensive income for
recurring Level 3 measurements, as well as the range and weighted
average of significant unobservable inputs used to develop Level 3
measurements.
January 1,
2020; early
adoption
permitted
Prospective for added
disclosures and for the
narrative description of
measurement uncertainty;
retrospective for all other
amendments.
The standard will not have a material impact on
the Consolidated Financial Statements. 
Simplifying the
Accounting for
Income Taxes
Simplified the accounting for income taxes by removing certain
exceptions and by adding certain requirements. The guidance removes
exceptions related to the incremental approach for intraperiod tax
allocation, the requirement to recognize a deferred tax liability for
changes in ownership of a foreign subsidiary or equity method
investment, and the general methodology for calculating income taxes
in an interim period when the year-to-date loss exceeds the anticipated
loss. The guidance adds requirements to reflect changes to tax laws or
rates in the annual effective tax rate computation in the interim period
in which the changes were enacted, to recognize franchise or other
similar taxes that are partially based on income as an income-based
tax and any incremental amounts as non-income-based tax, and to
evaluate when a step up in the tax basis of goodwill should be
considered part of the business combination in which the book
goodwill was originally recognized and when it should be considered
a separate transaction.
January 1,
2021; early
adoption
permitted
Modified retrospective
for amendments related
to changes in ownership
of a foreign subsidiary or
equity method
investment;
Modified retrospective or
retrospective for
amendments related to
taxes partially based on
income; Prospective for
all other amendments.
The Company is evaluating any impact on its
Consolidated Financial Statements, as well as
the timing of adoption.
Reclassifications
Certain reclassifications have been made to prior periods in the Consolidated Financial Statements and Notes to conform to the current presentation.
89

Table of Contents
Note 3: Revenue Recognition
Disaggregated Revenues
Presented in the table below are operating revenues disaggregated for the year ended December 31, 2019:
Revenues from
Contracts with
Customers
Other Revenues Not from
Contracts with Customers
(a)
Total Operating
Revenues
Regulated Businesses:
Water services:
 
Residential
$
1,734
$
1
$
1,735
Commercial
639
—
639
Fire service
142
—
142
Industrial
138
—
138
Public and other
214
—
214
Total water services
2,867
1
2,868
Wastewater services:
 
Residential
119
—
119
Commercial
31
—
31
Industrial
3
—
3
Public and other
14
—
14
Total wastewater services
167
—
167
Miscellaneous utility charges
36
—
36
Alternative revenue programs
—
16
16
Lease contract revenue
—
7
7
Total Regulated Businesses
3,070
24
3,094
Market-Based Businesses
539
—
539
Other
(22)
(1)
(23)
Total operating revenues
$
3,587
$
23
$
3,610
(a)
Includes revenues associated with provisional rates, alternative revenue programs, lease contracts and intercompany rent, which are outside the scope of ASC 606 and accounted for
under other existing GAAP.
Contract Balances
Contract assets and contract liabilities are the result of timing differences between revenue recognition, billings and cash collections. In the Company’s
Market-Based Businesses, certain contracts are billed as work progresses in accordance with agreed-upon contractual terms, either at periodic intervals or upon
achievement  of  contractual  milestones.  Contract  assets  are  recorded  when  billing  occurs  subsequent  to  revenue  recognition  and  are  reclassified  to  accounts
receivable  when  billed  and  the  right  to  consideration  becomes  unconditional.  Contract  liabilities  are  recorded  when  the  Company  receives  advances  from
customers prior to satisfying contractual performance obligations, particularly for construction contracts and home warranty protection program contracts, and are
recognized as revenue when the associated performance obligations are satisfied. Contract assets are included in unbilled revenues and contract liabilities are
included in other current liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019.
90

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below are the changes in contract assets and liabilities for the year ended December 31, 2019:
Amount
Contract assets:
Balance at January 1, 2019
$
14
Additions
27
Transfers to accounts receivable, net
(28)
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
13
Contract liabilities:
Balance at January 1, 2019
$
20
Additions
62
Transfers to operating revenues
(55)
Balance at December 31, 2019
$
27
Remaining Performance Obligations
Remaining performance obligations (“RPOs”) represent revenues the Company expects to recognize in the future from contracts that are in progress. The
Company enters into agreements for the provision of services to water and wastewater facilities for the U.S. military, municipalities and other customers. As of
December 31, 2019, the Company’s O&M and capital improvement contracts in the Market-Based Businesses have RPOs. Contracts with the U.S. government for
work on various military installations expire between 2051 and 2070 and have RPOs of $5.4 billion as of December 31, 2019, as measured by estimated remaining
contract  revenue.  Such  contracts  are  subject  to  customary  termination  provisions  held  by  the  U.S.  government,  prior  to  the  agreed-upon  contract  expiration.
Contracts with municipalities and commercial customers expire between 2021 and 2038 and have RPOs of $547 million as of December 31, 2019, as measured by
estimated remaining contract revenue. Some of the Company’s long-term contracts to operate and maintain a municipality’s, the federal government’s or other
party’s water or wastewater treatment and delivery facilities include responsibility for certain maintenance for some of those facilities, in exchange for an annual
fee. Unless specifically required to perform certain maintenance activities, the maintenance costs are recognized when the maintenance is performed.
Note 4: Acquisitions and Divestitures
Regulated Businesses
Acquisitions
During 2019, the Company closed on 21 acquisitions of various regulated  water and wastewater systems for a total aggregate  purchase price of $235
million. Assets acquired, principally utility plant, totaled $237 million. Liabilities assumed, primarily contributions in aid of construction, totaled $5 million. The
Company recorded additional goodwill of $3 million associated with three of its acquisitions, which is reported in its Regulated Businesses segment, all of which is
expected to be deductible for tax purposes. These acquisitions were predominately accounted for as business combinations, as the Company continues to grow its
business through regulated  acquisitions. The preliminary purchase price allocations related to these acquisitions  will be finalized once the valuation of assets
acquired has been completed, no later than one year after their acquisition date.
During 2018, the Company closed on 15 acquisitions of various regulated water and wastewater systems for a total aggregate purchase price of $33 million.
Assets acquired, principally utility plant, totaled $32 million. Liabilities assumed, primarily contributions in aid of construction, totaled $1 million. The Company
recorded additional goodwill of $2 million associated with one of its acquisitions, which is reported in its Regulated Businesses segment. Of this total goodwill,
none is expected to be deductible for tax purposes.
During 2017, the Company closed on 18 acquisitions of various regulated  water and wastewater systems for a total aggregate  purchase price of $210
million. This included the acquisition of the wastewater system assets of the Municipal Authority of the City of McKeesport, Pennsylvania, on December 18, 2017.
Assets acquired, principally utility plant, totaled $207 million. Liabilities assumed totaled $23 million, including $9 million of contributions in aid of construction
and  assumed  debt  of $7  million.  The  Company  recorded  additional  goodwill  of $29  million associated  with four of  its  acquisitions,  which  is  reported  in  its
Regulated  Businesses segment.  Of  this  total  goodwill,  approximately $1  million is  expected  to  be  deductible  for  tax  purposes.  Additionally,  the  Company
recognized a bargain purchase gain of $3 million associated with three of the acquisitions.
91

Table of Contents
Assets Held for Sale
On November  20,  2019,  the  Company  and  the  Company’s  New  York  subsidiary,  entered  into  a  Stock  Purchase  Agreement  (the  “Stock  Purchase
Agreement”)  with  Liberty  Utilities  Co.  (“Liberty”),  pursuant  to  which  Liberty  will  purchase  all  of  the  capital  stock  of  the  New  York  subsidiary  (the  “Stock
Purchase”) for an aggregate  purchase price of approximately $608 million in cash,  subject  to  adjustment  as  provided in the Stock  Purchase Agreement.  The
Company’s New York operations have approximately 125,000 customer connections in the State of New York. Algonquin Power & Utilities Corp., Liberty’s
parent company, executed and delivered an absolute and unconditional guaranty of the performance of all of the obligations of Liberty under the Stock Purchase
Agreement.
The Stock Purchase Agreement contains customary representations, warranties and covenants. The completion of the Stock Purchase is subject to various
conditions, including without limitation: (1) obtaining the approval of the New York State Public Service Commission without any terms or conditions that would
reasonably be expected to be adverse to the Company or its affiliates (other than the New York subsidiary or its affiliates) or have a material adverse effect (as
defined in the Stock Purchase Agreement) on the New York subsidiary or its affiliates or on Liberty and its affiliates; (2) the expiration or termination of the
applicable waiting period under the Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act of 1976, as amended; and (3) other customary closing conditions, including
(a) subject to materiality qualifiers, the accuracy of the parties’ representations and warranties contained in the Stock Purchase Agreement; (b) the absence of any
law  or  order  prohibiting  the  completion  of  the  Stock  Purchase  or  granting  substantial  damages  in  connection  therewith;  (c)  the  absence  of  any  proceeding
(excluding any such matter initiated by Liberty or any of its affiliates) pending before any governmental authority seeking to prohibit the completion of the Stock
Purchase or recover substantial damages from Liberty or any affiliate resulting from the Stock Purchase; and (d) the compliance by the parties with their respective
covenants, agreements and closing deliveries under the Stock Purchase Agreement. The Company currently estimates that the Stock Purchase is to be completed by
early 2021. Accordingly, the assets and related liabilities of the New York subsidiary were classified as held for sale on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of
December 31, 2019.
The Stock Purchase Agreement contains certain termination rights for both the Company and Liberty, including if the Stock Purchase is not consummated
by June 30, 2021 (subject to extension for an additional six months if all of the conditions to closing, other than the conditions related to obtaining regulatory
approvals, have been satisfied or are capable of being satisfied), as well as a termination right for Liberty if any governmental authority initiates a condemnation or
eminent domain proceeding against a majority of the consolidated properties of the New York subsidiary, taken as a whole. If the Stock Purchase Agreement is
terminated, such termination will be without liability of any party to the other parties to the Stock Purchase Agreement, except for liability or damages resulting
from a willful breach of a party’s representations, warranties, covenants or agreements in the Stock Purchase Agreement prior to termination.
Presented  in  the  table  below  are  the  components  of  assets  held  for  sale  and  liabilities  related  to  assets  held  for  sale  of  the  New  York  subsidiary  as
of December 31, 2019:
 
December 31, 2019
Current assets
$
14
Property, plant and equipment
456
Regulatory assets
55
Goodwill
39
Other assets
2
Assets held for sale
$
566
Current liabilities
24
Deferred income taxes
67
Regulatory liabilities
37
Liabilities related to assets held for sale
$
128
Market-Based Businesses
Pivotal Acquisition
On June 4, 2018, the Company, through its wholly owned subsidiary American Water Enterprises, LLC, completed the acquisition of Pivotal for a total
purchase price of $365 million, net of cash received and including $9 million in working capital. Pivotal is complementary to the Company’s Homeowner Services
Group product  offerings  and  enhances  its  presence  in  the  home  warranty  solutions  markets  through  utility  partnerships.  The  results  of  Pivotal  have  been
consolidated into the Homeowner Services Group non-reportable operating segment.
92

Table of Contents
Divestitures
On December 12, 2019, as part of a strategic review undertaken by the Company, American Industrial Water LLC, a wholly owned subsidiary of the
Company (“AIW”), sold all of the outstanding membership interests in Water Solutions Holdings, LLC (“WSH”), which was a wholly owned subsidiary of AIW,
to a natural gas and oil industry investment group, for total cash consideration of $31 million, subject to adjustment based on post-closing working capital. WSH
was the parent company of Keystone Clearwater Solutions, LLC. Keystone provides water transportation services to shale natural gas exploration and production
customers in the Appalachian Basin. As a result of the sale, the Company recorded a pre-tax loss on sale of $44 million, or $35 million after-tax, during the fourth
quarter of 2019.
The pro forma impact of the Company’s acquisitions was not material to the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31,
2019, 2018 and 2017.
Note 5: Property, Plant and Equipment
Presented in the table below are the major classes of property, plant and equipment by category as of December 31:
2019
2018
Range of Remaining
Useful Lives
Weighted Average
Useful Life
Utility plant:
 
 
 
 
Land and other non-depreciable assets
$
166
$
155
 
 
Sources of supply
858
821
 2 to 127 Years
47 years
Treatment and pumping facilities
3,750
3,607
 3 to 101 Years
41 years
Transmission and distribution facilities
10,807
10,164
 9 to 149 Years
70 years
Services, meters and fire hydrants
4,304
4,008
 5 to 90 Years
31 years
General structures and equipment
1,748
1,625
1 to 109 Years
16 years
Waste collection
1,153
943
5 to 114 Years
59 years
Waste treatment, pumping and disposal
720
570
3 to 139 Years
45 years
Construction work in progress
801
593
 
 
Less: Utility plant included in assets held for sale (a)
(587)
—
Total utility plant
23,720
22,486
 
 
Nonutility property
226
718
3 to 50 Years
6 years
Less: Nonutility plant included in assets held for sale (a)
(5)
—
Total property, plant and equipment
$
23,941
$
23,204
 
 
(a)
This property, plant and equipment is related to the pending transactions contemplated by the Stock Purchase Agreement and is included in assets held for sale on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets. See Note 4—Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information.
Property, plant and equipment depreciation expense amounted to $508 million, $497 million and $460 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018
and 2017, respectively and was included in depreciation and amortization expense on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. The provision for depreciation
expressed  as  a  percentage  of  the  aggregate  average  depreciable  asset  balances  was 2.96%, 3.09% and 3.07% for  years December  31,  2019, 2018 and 2017,
respectively.
In 2019, the Company completed and submitted its project completion certification to the New Jersey Economic Development Authority (“NJEDA”) in
connection with its capital investment in its corporate headquarters in Camden, New Jersey. The NJEDA has determined that the Company is qualified to receive
$164 million in tax credits over a ten year period. The Company is required to meet various annual requirements in order to monetize one-tenth of the tax credits
annually, and is subject to a claw-back period if the Company does not meet certain NJEDA requirements of the tax credit program in years 11 through 15. As a
result, the Company recorded receivables of $16 million and $148 million in other current assets and other long-term assets, respectively, on the Consolidated
Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019.
93

Table of Contents
Note 6: Allowance for Uncollectible Accounts
Presented in the table below are the changes in the allowances for uncollectible accounts for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Balance as of January 1
$
(45)
$
(42)
$
(40)
Amounts charged to expense
(28)
(33)
(29)
Amounts written off
32
34
30
Recoveries of amounts written off
—
(4)
(3)
Balance as of December 31
$
(41)
$
(45)
$
(42)
Note 7: Regulatory Assets and Liabilities
Regulatory Assets
Regulatory assets represent costs that are probable of recovery from customers in future rates. The majority of the regulatory assets earn a return. Presented
in the table below is the composition of regulatory assets as of December 31:
 
2019
2018
Deferred pension expense
$
384
$
362
Removal costs recoverable through rates
305
292
Regulatory balancing accounts
96
110
Other
398
392
Less: Regulatory assets included in assets held for sale (a)
(55)
—
Total regulatory assets
$
1,128
$
1,156
(a)
These regulatory assets are related to the pending transactions contemplated by the Stock Purchase Agreement and are included in assets held for sale on the Consolidated Balance
Sheets. See Note 4—Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information.
The Company’s deferred pension expense includes a portion of the underfunded status that is probable of recovery through rates in future periods of $375
million and $352 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The remaining portion is the pension expense in excess of the amount contributed to the
pension plans which is deferred by certain subsidiaries and will be recovered in future service rates as contributions are made to the pension plan.
Removal costs recoverable through rates represent costs incurred for removal of property, plant and equipment or other retirement costs.
Regulatory balancing accounts accumulate differences between revenues recognized and authorized revenue requirements until they are collected from
customers or are refunded. Regulatory balancing accounts include low income programs and purchased power and water accounts.
Other regulatory assets include San Clemente Dam project costs, debt expense, purchase premium recoverable through rates, tank painting costs, certain
construction  costs  for  treatment  facilities,  property  tax  stabilization,  employee-related  costs,  deferred  other  postretirement  benefit  expense,  business  services
project expenses, coastal water project costs, rate case expenditures and environmental remediation costs among others. These costs are deferred because the
amounts are being recovered in rates or are probable of recovery through rates in future periods.
94

Table of Contents
Regulatory Liabilities
Regulatory liabilities generally represent amounts that are probable of being credited or refunded to customers through the rate making process. Also, if
costs expected to be incurred in the future are currently being recovered through rates, the Company records those expected future costs as regulatory liabilities.
Presented in the table below is the composition of regulatory liabilities as of December 31:
 
2019
2018
Income taxes recovered through rates
$
1,258
$
1,279
Removal costs recovered through rates
297
309
Postretirement benefit liability
186
209
Other
102
110
Less: Regulatory liabilities included in liabilities related to assets held for sale (a)
(37)
—
Total regulatory liabilities
$
1,806
$
1,907
(a)
These regulatory liabilities are related to the pending transactions contemplated by the Stock Purchase Agreement and are included in liabilities related to assets held for sale on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 4—Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information.
Income taxes recovered through rates relate to deferred taxes that will likely be refunded to the Company’s customers. On December 22, 2017, the TCJA
was  signed  into  law,  which,  among  other  things,  enacted  significant  and  complex  changes  to  the  Internal  Revenue  Code  of  1986  (the  “Code”),  including  a
reduction in the maximum U.S. federal corporate income tax rate from 35% to 21% as of January 1, 2018. The TCJA created significant excess deferred income
taxes that the Company and its regulatory jurisdictions believe should be refunded to customers. Since these are significant refundable amounts, the Company
believes it is probable these amounts will be refunded to customers through future rates, and as such the amounts have been recorded to a regulatory liability.
During 2018, the Company’s 14 regulatory jurisdictions began to seek to address the impacts of the TCJA. The Company has adjusted customer rates to
reflect the lower income tax rate in 11 states. In one of those 11 states, a portion of the tax savings is being used to reduce certain regulatory assets. In one
additional  state,  the  Company  is  using  the  tax  savings  to  offset  additional  capital  investment  and  to  reduce  a  regulatory  asset.  Proceedings  in  the  other two
jurisdictions remain pending. With respect to excess accumulated deferred income taxes (“EADIT”), six of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries are amortizing
EADIT and crediting customers, including one which is using the EADIT to offset future infrastructure investments. The Company expects the timing of the
amortization of EADIT credits by the eight remaining regulated subsidiaries to be addressed in pending or future rate cases or other proceedings.
Removal costs recovered through rates are estimated costs to retire assets at the end of their expected useful lives that are recovered through customer rates
over the lives of the associated assets.
On August 31, 2018, the Postretirement Medical Benefit Plan was remeasured to reflect an announced plan amendment which changed benefits for certain
union and non-union plan participants. As a result of the remeasurement, the Company recorded a $227 million reduction to the net accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation, with a corresponding regulatory liability.
Other  regulatory  liabilities  include  TCJA  reserve  on  revenue,  pension  and  other  postretirement  benefit  balancing  accounts,  legal  settlement  proceeds,
deferred gains and various regulatory balancing accounts.
95

Table of Contents
Note 8: Goodwill and Other Intangible Assets
Goodwill
Presented in the table below are the changes in the carrying value of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018:
 
Regulated Businesses
Market-Based Businesses
Consolidated
 
Cost
Accumulated
Impairment
Cost
Accumulated
Impairment
Cost
Accumulated
Impairment
Total Net
Balance as of January 1, 2018
$
3,492
$
(2,332)
$
327
$
(108)
$
3,819
$
(2,440)
$
1,379
Goodwill from acquisitions
2
—
247
—
249
—
249
Goodwill impairment charge
—
—
—
(53)
—
(53)
(53)
Balance as of December 31, 2018
$
3,494
$
(2,332)
$
574
$
(161)
$
4,068
$
(2,493)
$
1,575
Goodwill from acquisitions
3
—
—
—
3
—
3
Goodwill reduced through sale of
Keystone operations
—
—
(91)
53
(91)
53
(38)
Less: Goodwill included in assets held
for sale (a)
(39)
—
—
—
(39)
—
(39)
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
3,458
$
(2,332)
$
483
$
(108)
$
3,941
$
(2,440)
$
1,501
(a)
This goodwill is related to the pending transactions contemplated by the Stock Purchase Agreement and is included in assets held for sale on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note
4—Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information.
In 2019, the Company acquired goodwill of $3 million associated with three of its acquisitions in the Regulated Businesses segment. Additionally, as part of
the  sale  of  the  Company’s  Keystone  operations  on December  12,  2019,  the  Company  reduced  goodwill,  net,  by $38  million.  See Note  4—Acquisitions  and
Divestitures for additional information.
The Company completed its annual impairment testing of goodwill as of November 30, 2019, which included quantitative assessments of its Regulated
Businesses, Homeowner Services Group and Military Services Group reporting units. Based on these assessments, the Company determined that there were no
factors present that would indicate that the fair value of these reporting units was less than their respective carrying values as of November 30, 2019.
In 2018, the Company acquired goodwill of $247 million associated with its acquisition of Pivotal, which was allocated to the Homeowner Services Group
reporting unit, within the Market-Based Businesses. Additionally, the Company acquired goodwill of $2 million associated with one of its acquisitions in the
Regulated Businesses segment.
During the third quarter of 2018, as a result of the narrowing the scope of the Company’s former Keystone operations, the Company concluded there were
indicators that the Keystone reporting unit may have been impaired. Accordingly, impairment testing was performed as part of the preparation of the Company’s
Consolidated Financial Statements during the third quarter of 2018. The results of this impairment test showed the fair value of the former Keystone reporting unit
was lower than its carrying value, resulting in a non-cash, pre-tax goodwill impairment charge of $53 million. Additionally, the impairment test showed the fair
value of the former Keystone reporting unit’s customer relationship intangible asset was lower than its carrying value, resulting in a non-cash, pre-tax impairment
charge of $4 million. In the aggregate, a non-cash, pre-tax impairment charge of $57 million was recorded in impairment charge on the Consolidated Statement of
Operations for the year ended December 31, 2018, of which, $54 million was attributable to the Company, after adjustment for noncontrolling interest.
Intangible Assets
Presented in the tables below are the gross carrying value and accumulated amortization of the finite-lived intangible assets held by the Company as of
December 31:
2018
Disposals (a)
2019
Customer relationships
$
86
$
(8)
$
78
Other intangible assets
13
—
13
Total gross carrying value
$
99
$
(8)
$
91
(a)
The disposals relate to customer relationship intangible assets disposed of as part of the sale of the Company’s Keystone operations on December 12, 2019. See Note 4—Acquisitions
and Divestitures for additional information.

96

Table of Contents
2018
Amortization
Disposals (a)
2019
Customer relationships
$
(13)
$
(12)
$
5
$
(20)
Other intangible assets
(2)
(2)
—
(4)
Total accumulated amortization
$
(15)
$
(14)
$
5
$
(24)
Total intangible assets, net
$
84
$
67
(a)
The disposals relate to customer relationship intangible assets disposed of as part of the sale of the Company’s Keystone operations on December 12, 2019. See Note 4—Acquisitions
and Divestitures for additional information.
Intangible  asset  amortization  expense  amounted  to $14  million, $12  million and $4  million for  the  years  ended December  31,  2019, 2018 and 2017,
respectively. Estimated amortization expense for the next five years subsequent to December 31, 2019 is as follows:
Amount
2020
$
12
2021
10
2022
9
2023
6
2024
5
Note 9: Shareholders’ Equity
Common Stock
Under the dividend reinvestment and direct stock purchase plan (the “DRIP”), shareholders may reinvest cash dividends and purchase additional Company
common stock, up to certain limits, through the plan administrator without commission fees. Shares purchased by participants through the DRIP may be newly
issued shares, treasury shares, or at the Company’s election, shares purchased by the plan administrator in the open market or in privately negotiated transactions.
Purchases generally will be made and credited to DRIP accounts once each week. As of December 31, 2019, there were approximately 4.2 million shares available
for future issuance under the DRIP.
Anti-dilutive Stock Repurchase Program
In February 2015, the Company’s Board of Directors authorized an anti-dilutive stock repurchase program, which allows the Company to purchase up to 10
million shares of its outstanding common stock from time to time over an unrestricted period of time. The Company repurchased 0.4 million shares and 0.6 million
shares of common stock in the open market at an aggregate cost of $36 million and $45 million under this program for the years ended December 31, 2019 and
2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2019, there were 5.1 million shares of common stock available for purchase under the program.
97

Table of Contents
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss
Presented in the table below are the changes in accumulated other comprehensive loss by component, net of tax, for the years ended December 31, 2019 and
2018:
 
Defined Benefit Plans
Foreign Currency
Translation
Gain (Loss) on
Cash Flow
Hedge
Accumulated Other
Comprehensive Loss
 
Employee Benefit
Plan Funded
Status
Amortization of Prior
Service Cost
Amortization of
Actuarial Loss
Beginning balance as of January 1, 2018 $
(140)
$
1
$
49
$
1
$
10
$
(79)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
before reclassification
60
—
—
—
(2)
58
TCJA tax effects reclassified from
accumulated other comprehensive
loss
(22)
—
—
—
2
(20)
Amounts reclassified from
accumulated other comprehensive
loss
—
—
7
—
—
7
Net other comprehensive income
38
—
7
—
—
45
Ending balance as of December 31,
2018
$
(102)
$
1
$
56
$
1
$
10
$
(34)
Other comprehensive income (loss)
before reclassification
8
—
—
—
(13)
(5)
Amounts reclassified from
accumulated other comprehensive
loss
—
—
4
(1)
—
3
Net other comprehensive income (loss)
8
—
4
(1)
(13)
(2)
Ending balance as of December 31,
2019
$
(94)
$
1
$
60
$
—
$
(3)
$
(36)
The Company does not reclassify the amortization of defined benefit pension cost components from accumulated other comprehensive loss directly to net
income in its entirety, as a portion of these costs have been capitalized as a regulatory asset. These accumulated other comprehensive loss components are included
in the computation of net periodic pension cost. See Note 15—Employee Benefits for additional information.
During the second quarter of 2019, the Company substantially exited its foreign operations in Canada due to a contract expiration in its Contract Services
Group. As a result, the Company recognized a pre-tax gain of $1 million from cumulative foreign currency translation, and a corresponding change of accumulated
other comprehensive loss.
The amortization of the gain (loss) on cash flow hedges is reclassified to net income during the period incurred and is included in interest, net in the
accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Dividends
The Company’s Board of Directors authorizes the payment of dividends. The Company’s ability to pay dividends on its common stock is subject to having
access to sufficient sources of liquidity, net income and cash flows of the Company’s subsidiaries, the receipt of dividends and repayments of indebtedness from
the Company’s subsidiaries, compliance with Delaware corporate and other laws, compliance with the contractual provisions of debt and other agreements, and
other factors. The Company’s dividend rate on its common stock is determined by the Board of Directors on a quarterly basis and takes into consideration, among
other factors, current and possible future developments that may affect the Company’s income and cash flows. When dividends on common stock are declared,
they are typically paid in March, June, September and December. Historically, dividends have been paid quarterly to holders of record less than 30 days prior to the
distribution date. Since the dividends on the Company’s common stock are not cumulative, only declared dividends are paid.
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, the Company paid $353 million, $319 million and $289 million in cash dividends, respectively. Presented in the table below is
the per share cash dividends paid for the years ended December 31:
2019
2018
2017
December
$
0.50
$
0.455
$
0.415
September
$
0.50
$
0.455
$
0.415

June
$
0.50
$
0.455
$
0.415
March
$
0.455
$
0.415
$
0.375
98

Table of Contents
On December 6, 2019, the Company’s Board of Directors declared a quarterly cash dividend payment of $0.50 per share payable on March 4, 2020, to
shareholders of record as of February 7, 2020.
Regulatory Restrictions
The issuance of long-term debt or equity securities by the Company or long-term debt by American Water Capital Corp. (“AWCC”), the Company’s wholly
owned financing subsidiary, does not require authorization of any state PUC if no guarantee or pledge of the regulated subsidiaries is utilized. However, state PUC
authorization is required to issue long-term debt at most of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries. The Company’s regulated subsidiaries  normally obtain the
required approvals on a periodic basis to cover their anticipated financing needs for a period of time or in connection with a specific financing.
Under applicable law, the Company’s subsidiaries can pay dividends only from retained, undistributed or current earnings. A significant loss recorded at a
subsidiary may limit the dividends that the subsidiary can distribute to American Water. Furthermore, the ability of the Company’s subsidiaries to pay upstream
dividends  or  repay  indebtedness  to  American  Water  is  subject  to  compliance  with  applicable  regulatory  restrictions  and  financial  obligations,  including,  for
example, debt service and preferred and preference stock dividends, as well as applicable corporate, tax and other laws and regulations, and other agreements or
covenants made or entered into by the Company and its subsidiaries.
Note 10: Stock Based Compensation
The Company has granted stock options, stock units and dividend equivalents to non-employee directors, officers and other key employees of the Company
pursuant to the terms of its 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan (the “2007 Plan”). Stock units under the 2007 Plan generally vest based on (i) continued
employment with the Company (“RSUs”), or (ii) continued employment with the Company where distribution of the shares is subject to the satisfaction in whole
or in part of stated performance-based goals (“PSUs”). The 2007 Plan has been replaced by the 2017 Omnibus Plan, as defined below, and no additional awards
may be granted under the 2007 Plan. However, shares may still be issued under the 2007 Plan pursuant to the terms of awards previously issued under that plan
prior to May 12, 2017.
In May 2017, the Company’s shareholders approved the American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan (the “2017
Omnibus Plan”). The Company has granted stock units, including RSUs and PSUs, stock awards and dividend equivalents to non-employee directors, officers and
employees under the 2017 Omnibus Plan. A total of 7.2 million shares of common stock may be issued under the 2017 Omnibus Plan. As of December 31, 2019,
6.8 million shares were available for grant under the 2017 Omnibus Plan. The 2017 Omnibus Plan provides that grants of awards may be in any of the following
forms: incentive stock options, nonqualified stock options, stock appreciation rights, stock units, stock awards, other stock-based awards and dividend equivalents.
Dividend equivalents may be granted only on stock units or other stock-based awards. The 2017 Omnibus Plan expires in 2027.
The cost of services received from employees in exchange for the issuance of stock options and restricted stock awards is measured based on the grant date
fair value of the awards issued. The value of stock options and stock unit awards at the date of the grant is amortized through expense over the requisite service
period. All awards granted in 2019, 2018 and 2017 are classified as equity. The Company recognizes compensation expense for stock awards over the vesting
period of the award. The Company stratified its grant populations and used historic employee turnover rates to estimate employee forfeitures. The estimated rate is
compared to the actual forfeitures at the end of the reporting period and adjusted as necessary. Presented in the table below is the stock-based compensation
expense recorded in O&M expense in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Stock options
$
—
$
1
$
1
RSUs and PSUs
15
15
9
Nonqualified employee stock purchase plan
2
1
1
Stock-based compensation
17
17
11
Income tax benefit
(4)
(5)
(4)
Stock-based compensation expense, net of tax
$
13
$
12
$
7
There were no significant stock-based compensation costs capitalized during the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017.
99

Table of Contents
The Company receives a tax deduction based on the intrinsic value of the award at the exercise date for stock options and the distribution date for stock
units. For each award, throughout the requisite service period, the Company recognizes the tax benefits, which have been included in deferred income tax assets,
related to compensation costs. The tax deductions in excess of the benefits recorded throughout the requisite service period are recorded to the Consolidated
Statements of Operations and are presented in the financing section of the Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows.
Stock Options
There were no grants of stock options to employees in 2019, 2018 and 2017. The stock options that were previously issued vested ratably over the three-
year service period beginning on January 1 of the year of the grant and have no performance vesting conditions. Expense was recognized using the straight-line
method and was amortized over the requisite service period.
Presented in the table below is stock option activity for the year ended December 31, 2019:
 
Shares (in thousands)
Weighted Average
Exercise Price (per
share)
Weighted Average
Remaining Life (years)
Aggregate Intrinsic Value
Options outstanding as of December 31, 2018
517
$
54.92
2.96
$
19
Granted
—
—
 
 
Forfeited or expired
—
—
 
 
Exercised
(223)
52.45
 
 
Options outstanding as of December 31, 2019
294
$
56.80
2.04
$
19
Options exercisable as of December 31, 2019
294
$
56.80
2.04
$
19
As of December 31, 2019, no unrecognized compensation cost related to nonvested stock options is expected to be recognized as all of the outstanding
options are exercisable. The total fair value of stock options vested was $1 million, $1 million and $2 million for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and
2017, respectively.
Presented in the table below is additional information regarding stock options exercised during the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Intrinsic value
$
12
$
9
$
10
Exercise proceeds
14
7
11
Income tax benefit realized
3
2
3
Stock Units
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, the Company granted RSUs to certain employees under the 2007 Plan and 2017 Omnibus Plan, as applicable. RSUs generally
vest based on continued employment with the Company over periods ranging from one to three years.
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, the Company granted stock units to non-employee directors under the 2017 Omnibus Plan. The stock units were vested in full
on the date of grant; however, distribution of the shares will be made within 30 days of the earlier of (i) 15 months after the date of the last annual meeting of
shareholders, subject to any deferral election by the director, or (ii) the participant’s separation from service. Because these stock units vested on the grant date, the
total grant date fair value was recorded in operation and maintenance expense on the grant date.
The RSUs are valued at the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the date of the grant and the majority vest ratably over a three-year service
period. These RSUs are amortized through expense over the requisite service period using the straight-line method.
100

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below is RSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2019:
  
Shares (in thousands)
Weighted Average
Grant Date Fair Value
(per share)
Non-vested total as of December 31, 2018
133
$
77.44
Granted
67
101.25
Vested
(65)
85.27
Forfeited
(17)
86.38
Non-vested total as of December 31, 2019
118
$
85.41
As of December 31, 2019, $4 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to the nonvested RSUs is expected to be recognized over the weighted
average  remaining  life  of 1.72 years.  The  total  fair  value  of  stock  units  and  RSUs  vested  was $4  million, $4  million and $3  million for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
During 2019, 2018 and 2017, the Company granted PSUs to certain employees under the 2007 Plan and 2017 Omnibus Plan, as applicable. The majority of
PSUs vest ratably based on continued employment with the Company over the three-year performance period (the “Performance Period”). Distribution of the
performance  shares  is  contingent  upon  the  achievement  of  one  or  more  internal  performance  measures  and,  separately,  a  relative  total  shareholder  return
performance measure, over the Performance Period.
Presented in the table below is PSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2019:
  
Shares (in thousands)
Weighted Average
Grant Date Fair Value
(per share)
Non-vested total as of December 31, 2018
308
$
73.39
Granted
145
97.73
Vested
(112)
72.84
Forfeited
(25)
84.54
Non-vested total as of December 31, 2019
316
$
83.89
As of December 31, 2019, $4 million of total unrecognized compensation cost related to the nonvested PSUs is expected to be recognized over the weighted
average remaining life of 1.09 years. The total fair value of PSUs vested was $14 million, $12 million and $13 million for the years ended December 31, 2019,
2018 and 2017, respectively.
PSUs granted with one or more internal performance measures are valued at the market value of the closing price of the Company’s common stock on the
date of grant. PSUs granted with a relative total shareholder return condition are valued using a Monte Carlo model. Expected volatility is based on historical
volatilities of traded common stock of the Company and comparative companies using daily stock prices over the past three years. The expected term is three years
and the risk-free interest rate is based on the three-year U.S. Treasury rate in effect as of the measurement date. Presented in the table below is the weighted
average assumptions used in the Monte Carlo simulation and the weighted average grant date fair values of PSUs granted for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Expected volatility
16.80%
17.23%
17.40%
Risk-free interest rate
2.47%
2.36%
1.53%
Expected life (years)
3.0
3.0
3.0
Grant date fair value per share
$
110.37
$
73.62
$
72.81
The grant date fair value of PSUs that vest ratably and have market and/or performance conditions are amortized through expense over the requisite service
period using the graded-vesting method.
101

Table of Contents
If dividends are paid with respect to shares of the Company’s common stock before the shares underlying the RSUs and PSUs are distributed, the Company
credits a liability for the value of the dividends that would have been paid if the RSUs and PSUs were shares of Company common stock. When the shares
underlying the RSUs and PSUs are distributed, the Company pays the participant a lump sum cash payment equal to the value of the dividend equivalents accrued.
The Company accrued dividend equivalents totaling $1 million, $1 million and less than $1 million to accumulated deficit in the accompanying Consolidated
Statements of Changes in Shareholders’ Equity for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
Employee Stock Purchase Plan
The Company maintains a nonqualified employee stock purchase plan (the “ESPP”) that expires in 2027 through which employee participants (other than
the Company’s executive officers) may use payroll deductions to acquire Company common stock at a discount of 85% of the fair market value of the common
stock at the end of the purchase period. A total of 2.0 million shares may be issued under the ESPP, and as of December 31, 2019, there were 1.8 million shares of
common stock reserved for issuance under the ESPP. The ESPP is considered compensatory. During the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, the
Company issued 88 thousand, 95 thousand and 93 thousand shares, respectively, under the ESPP and its predecessor plan.
Note 11: Long-Term Debt
The  Company  obtains  long-term  debt  through  AWCC  primarily  to  fund  capital  expenditures  of  the Regulated  Businesses and  to  lend  funds  to  parent
company to refinance debt and for other purposes. Presented in the table below are the components of long-term debt as of December 31:
Rate
Weighted Average
Rate
Maturity
2019
2018
Long-term debt of AWCC: (a)
 
 
 
 
 
Senior notes—fixed rate
2.95%-8.27%
4.18%
2021-2049
$
7,191
$
6,116
Private activity bonds and government funded debt
—fixed rate
1.79%-5.38%
3.72%
2021-2040
191
192
Long-term debt of other American Water subsidiaries:
 
 
 
 
 
Private activity bonds and government funded debt
—fixed rate (b)
0.00%-5.60%
3.08%
2020-2048
724
727
Mortgage bonds—fixed rate
3.92%-9.71%
7.49%
2020-2039
578
606
Mandatorily redeemable preferred stock
8.47%-9.75%
8.59%
2024-2036
7
8
Finance lease obligations
12.25%
12.25%
2026
1
1
Term loan
—
6
Long-term debt
 
 
 
8,692
7,656
Unamortized debt premium, net (c)
1
7
Unamortized debt issuance costs
 
 
 
(21)
(16)
Less current portion of long-term debt
 
 
 
(28)
(71)
Total long-term debt
 
 
 
$
8,644
$
7,576
(a)
This indebtedness is considered “debt” for purposes of a support agreement between parent company and AWCC, which serves as a functional equivalent of a guarantee by parent
company of AWCC’s payment obligations under such indebtedness.
(b)
Includes $3 million and $3 million of variable rate debt as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, with variable-to-fixed interest rate swaps ranging between 3.93% and 4.65%.
This debt was assumed via an acquisition in 2013.
(c)
Primarily fair value adjustments previously recognized in acquisition purchase accounting.
All mortgage bonds, term loans and $723 million of the private activity bonds and government funded debt held by the Company’s subsidiaries were
collateralized as of December 31, 2019.
Long-term debt indentures contain a number of covenants that, among other things, limit, subject to certain exceptions, AWCC from issuing debt secured
by the Company’s consolidated assets. Certain long-term notes require the Company to maintain a ratio of consolidated total indebtedness to consolidated total
capitalization of not more than 0.70 to 1.00. The ratio as of December 31, 2019 was 0.61 to 1.00. In addition, the Company has $877 million of notes which
include the right to redeem the notes at par value, in whole or in part, from time to time, subject to certain restrictions.
102

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below are future sinking fund payments and debt maturities:
Amount
2020
$
28
2021
310
2022
14
2023
159
2024
473
Thereafter
7,708
Presented in the table below are the issuances of long-term debt in 2019:
Company
Type
Rate
Maturity
Amount
AWCC
Senior notes—fixed rate
3.45%-4.15%
2029-2049
$
1,100
AWCC (a)
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
2.45%
2039
100
Other American Water subsidiaries
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
0.00%-5.00%
2021-2048
330
Total issuances
 
 
 
$
1,530
(a)
This indebtedness has a mandatory redemption provision callable in 2029.
The Company incurred debt issuance costs of $15 million related to the above issuances.
Presented  in  the  table  below  are  the  retirements  and  redemptions  of  long-term  debt  in 2019 through  sinking  fund  provisions,  optional  redemption  or
payment at maturity:
Company
Type
Rate
Maturity
Amount
AWCC
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
1.79%-6.25%
2021-2031
$
101
AWCC
Senior notes—fixed rate
7.21%
2019
25
Other American Water subsidiaries
Private activity bonds and government funded
debt—fixed rate
0.00%-6.20%
2019-2048
333
Other American Water subsidiaries
Mortgage bonds—fixed rate
5.48%-9.13%
2019-2021
28
Other American Water subsidiaries
Mandatorily redeemable preferred stock
8.49%-9.18%
2031-2036
2
Other American Water subsidiaries
Term loan
5.76%-5.81%
2021
6
Total retirements and redemptions
 
 
 
$
495
On May 13, 2019, AWCC completed a $1.10 billion debt offering which included the sale of $550 million aggregate principal amount of its 3.45% Senior
Notes due 2029 and $550 million aggregate principal amount of its 4.15% Senior Notes due 2049. At the closing of the offering, AWCC received, after deduction
of underwriting discounts and before deduction of offering expenses, net proceeds of approximately $1.09 billion. AWCC used the net proceeds to: (i) lend funds
to parent company and its regulated subsidiaries; (ii) repay $25 million principal amount of AWCC’s 7.21% Series I Senior Notes at maturity on May 19, 2019;
(iii) repay $26 million aggregate principal amount of regulated subsidiary debt at maturity during the second quarter of 2019; and (iv) repay AWCC’s commercial
paper obligations, and for general corporate purposes.
Interest, net includes interest income of approximately $4 million, $11 million and $14 million in 2019, 2018 and 2017, respectively.
103

Table of Contents
One of the principal market risks to which the Company is exposed is changes in interest rates. In order to manage the exposure, the Company follows risk
management  policies  and  procedures,  including  the  use  of  derivative  contracts  such  as  swaps. The  Company  reduces  exposure  to  interest  rates  by managing
commercial paper and debt maturities. The Company also does not enter into derivative contracts for speculative purposes and does not use leveraged instruments.
The derivative contracts entered into are for periods consistent with the related underlying exposures. The Company is exposed to the risk that counterparties to
derivative contracts will fail to meet their contractual obligations and minimizes this risk by dealing only with leading, credit-worthy financial institutions having
long-term credit ratings of “A” or better.
On May 6, 2019, AWCC terminated five forward starting swap agreements with an aggregate notional amount of $510 million, realizing a net loss of $30
million, to be amortized through interest, net over 10 and 30 year periods, in accordance with the terms of the new debt issued on May 13, 2019. No ineffectiveness
was recognized on hedging instruments for the years ended December 31, 2019 and 2018.
The Company has employed interest rate swaps to fix the interest cost on a portion of its variable-rate debt with an aggregate notional amount of $3 million.
The  Company  has  designated  these  instruments  as  economic  hedges,  accounted  for  at  fair  value,  with  gains  or  losses  recognized  in  interest,  net.  The  gain
recognized by the Company was de minimis for the years ended 2019 and 2018.
Presented  in  the  table  below  are  the  gross  fair  values  of  the  Company’s  derivative  liabilities,  as  well  as  the  location  of  the  liability  balances  on  the
Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31:
Derivative Instrument
Derivative Designation
Balance Sheet Classification
2019
2018
Liability derivative:
 
 
 
 
Forward starting swaps
Cash flow hedge
Other current liabilities
$
—
$
14
Note 12: Short-Term Debt
Short-term debt consists of commercial paper and credit facility borrowings totaling $786 million and $964 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018,
respectively. The weighted average interest rate on AWCC short-term borrowings was approximately 2.54% and 2.28% for the year ended December 31, 2019 and
2018, respectively. As of December 31, 2019 there were no borrowings outstanding with maturities greater than three months.
Liquidity needs for capital investment, working capital and other financial commitments are funded through cash flows from operations, public and private
debt offerings, commercial paper markets and, if and to the extent necessary, borrowings under the AWCC revolving credit facility and, in the future, issuances of
equity. The revolving credit facility provides $2.25 billion in aggregate total commitments from a diversified group of financial institutions. On April 9, 2019, the
termination date of the credit agreement with respect to AWCC’s revolving credit facility was extended, pursuant to the terms of the credit agreement, from March
21, 2023 to March 21, 2024. The facility is used principally to support AWCC’s commercial paper program and to provide a sub-limit of up to $150 million for
letters of credit. Letters of credit are non-debt instruments maintained to provide credit support for certain transactions as requested by third parties. Subject to
satisfying certain conditions, the credit agreement also permits AWCC to increase the maximum commitment under the facility by up to an aggregate of $500
million,  and  to  request  up  to two extensions  of  its  expiration  date  each  for  up  to  a  one-year  period,  as  to  which  one  such  extension  request  remains.  As  of
December 31, 2019, AWCC had no outstanding borrowings and $76 million of outstanding letters of credit under the revolving credit facility, with $2.17 billion
available  to  fulfill  the  Company’s  short-term  liquidity  needs  and  to  issue  letters  of  credit.  The  Company  regularly  evaluates  the  capital  markets  and  closely
monitors the financial condition of the financial institutions with contractual commitments in its revolving credit facility. Interest rates on advances under the
facility are based on a credit spread to the LIBOR rate (or applicable market replacement rate) or base rate in accordance with Moody Investors Service’s and
Standard & Poor’s Financial Services’ then applicable credit rating on AWCC’s senior unsecured, non-credit enhanced debt.
Presented in the table below are the aggregate credit facility commitments, letter of credit sublimit under the revolving credit facility and the commercial
paper limit, as well as the available capacity for each, as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Credit Facility
Commitment
Available Credit
Facility Capacity
Letter of Credit
Sublimit
Available Letter of
Credit Capacity
Commercial Paper
Limit
Available Commercial
Paper Capacity
December 31, 2019
$
2,250
$
2,174
$
150
$
74
$
2,100
$
1,314
December 31, 2018
2,262
2,177
150
69
2,100
1,146
104

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below is the short-term borrowing activity for AWCC for the years ended December 31:
  
2019
2018
Average borrowings
$
726
$
1,029
Maximum borrowings outstanding
1,271
1,905
Weighted average interest rates, computed on daily basis
2.54%
2.28%
Weighted average interest rates, as of December 31
1.86%
2.84%
The credit facility requires the Company to maintain a ratio of consolidated debt to consolidated capitalization of not more than 0.70 to 1.00. The ratio as of
December 31, 2019 was 0.61 to 1.00.
None of the Company’s borrowings are subject to default or prepayment as a result of a downgrading of securities, although such a downgrading could
increase fees and interest charges under AWCC’s revolving credit facility.
As part of the normal course of business, the Company routinely enters contracts for the purchase and sale of water, energy, fuels and other services. These
contracts either contain express provisions or otherwise permit the Company and its counterparties to demand adequate assurance of future performance when
there are reasonable grounds for doing so. In accordance with the contracts and applicable contract law, if the Company is downgraded by a credit rating agency,
especially if such downgrade is to a level below investment grade, it is possible that a counterparty would attempt to rely on such a downgrade as a basis for
making a demand for adequate assurance of future performance. Depending on the Company’s net position with the counterparty, the demand could be for the
posting of collateral. In the absence of expressly agreed provisions that specify the collateral that must be provided, the obligation to supply the collateral requested
will be a function of the facts and circumstances of the Company’s situation at the time of the demand. If the Company can reasonably claim that it is willing and
financially able to perform its obligations, it may be possible that no collateral would need to be posted or that only an amount equal to two or three months of
future payments should be sufficient. The Company does not expect to post any collateral which will have a material adverse impact on the Company’s results of
operations, financial position or cash flows.
Note 13: General Taxes
Presented in the table below is the components of general tax expense for the years ended December 31:
  
2019
2018
2017
Gross receipts and franchise
$
110
$
112
$
110
Property and capital stock
124
120
105
Payroll
35
33
31
Other general
11
12
13
Total general taxes
$
280
$
277
$
259
Note 14: Income Taxes
Presented in the table below is the components of income tax expense for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Current income taxes:
 
 
 
State
$
4
$
26
$
25
Federal
—
1
(1)
Total current income taxes
$
4
$
27
$
24
Deferred income taxes:
 
 
 
State
$
54
$
33
$
50
Federal
155
163
413
Amortization of deferred investment tax credits
(1)
(1)
(1)
Total deferred income taxes
208
195
462
Provision for income taxes
$
212
$
222
$
486

105

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below is a reconciliation between the statutory federal income tax rate and the Company’s effective tax rate for the years ended
December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Income tax at statutory rate
21.0 %
21.0%
35.0 %
Increases (decreases) resulting from:
 
 
 
State taxes, net of federal taxes
5.4 %
5.5%
5.4 %
TCJA
— %
1.5%
13.7 %
Other, net
(1.0)%
0.2%
(0.8)%
Effective tax rate
25.4 %
28.2%
53.3 %
On December 22, 2017, the TCJA was signed into law. Substantially all of the provisions of the TCJA are effective for taxable years beginning after
December  31,  2017.  The  TCJA  includes  significant  changes  to  the  Code,  including  amendments  which  significantly  change  the  taxation  of  individuals  and
business entities, and includes specific provisions related to regulated public utilities. The more significant changes that impact the Company included in the TCJA
are reductions in the corporate federal income tax rate from 35% to 21%, and several technical provisions including, among others, limiting the utilization of net
operating losses (“NOLs”) arising after December 31, 2017 to 80% of taxable income with an indefinite carryforward. The specific provisions related to regulated
public utilities in the TCJA generally allow for the continued deductibility of interest expense, the elimination of full expensing for tax purposes of certain property
acquired after September 27, 2017 and the continuation of certain rate normalization requirements for accelerated depreciation benefits. Non-regulated segments of
the Company’s business may be able to take advantage of the full expensing provisions of the TCJA.
Changes in the Code from the TCJA had a material impact on the Company’s financial statements in 2017. Under GAAP, specifically Accounting Standards
Codification Topic 740, Income Taxes (“ASC 740”), the tax effects of changes in tax laws must be recognized in the period in which the law is enacted. ASC 740
also requires deferred income tax assets and liabilities to be measured at the enacted tax rate expected to apply when temporary differences are to be realized or
settled. Thus, at the date of enactment, the Company’s deferred income taxes were re-measured based upon the new tax rate. For the Company’s regulated entities,
substantially  all of the change in deferred  income taxes are recorded as an offset to either a regulatory  asset or liability  because  changes are expected  to be
recovered by or refunded to customers. For the Company’s unregulated operations, the change in deferred income taxes is recorded as a non-cash re-measurement
adjustment to earnings.
The staff of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission recognized the complexity of reflecting the impacts of the TCJA, and on December 22, 2017
issued guidance in Staff Accounting Bulletin 118 (“SAB 118”) which clarifies accounting for income taxes under ASC 740 if information is not yet available or
complete and provides for up to a one year period in which to complete the required analyses and accounting. The Company made a reasonable estimate for the
measurement and accounting of certain effects of the TCJA which were reflected in the financial statements as of December 31, 2017. The re-measurement of
deferred income taxes at the new federal tax rate increased the 2017 deferred income tax provision by $125 million for the year ending December 31, 2017.
Additionally, the accumulated deferred income tax liability decreased by $1.39 billion and regulatory liabilities increased by $1.51 billion, respectively, as of
December 31, 2017.
As of December 31, 2018, the Company recorded all its reasonable estimates resulting from the TCJA under SAB 118. These estimates, however, are still
subject to changes due to the future impacts of various items, including further changes in income tax laws, forecasted financial conditions and the actual tax return
filings with the tax authorities. As of December 31, 2019, the Company has not identified any changes that would require its prior estimates to be modified.
ASC 740 requires the re-measurement of deferred income tax assets and liabilities as a result of a change in tax laws or rates to be presented in net income.
Adjusting  temporary  differences  originally  recorded  to  AOCI  through  the  income  statement  result  in  disproportionate  tax  effects  remaining  in  AOCI.  As  of
December 31, 2018, the Company adopted Accounting Standards Update 2018-02, Reclassification of Certain Tax Effects from Accumulated Other Comprehensive
Income, which allows  companies  to  reclassify  the  income  tax  effects  of  TCJA on items  within AOCI to retained  earnings.  As a result  of the  TCJA tax  rate
reduction, there were income tax effects related to the Company’s hedge and pension positions of $2 million and $22 million, respectively, remaining in the
Company’s  accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss  balance.  The  Company  reclassified  these  tax  effects  from  accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss  to
accumulated deficit as of December 31, 2018. No further adjustments were recorded during 2019 as a result of this re-measurement.
106

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below are the components of the net deferred tax liability as of December 31:
 
2019
2018
Deferred tax assets:
 
 
Advances and contributions
$
410
$
402
Tax losses and credits
136
131
Regulatory income tax assets
335
339
Pension and other postretirement benefits
94
91
Other
151
44
Total deferred tax assets
1,126
1,007
Valuation allowance
(21)
(14)
Total deferred tax assets, net of allowance
$
1,105
$
993
Deferred tax liabilities:
 
 
Property, plant and equipment
$
2,760
$
2,537
Deferred pension and other postretirement benefits
77
77
Other
207
97
Total deferred tax liabilities
3,044
2,711
Less: Deferred tax liabilities included in liabilities related to assets held for sale (a)
67
—
Total deferred tax liabilities, net of deferred tax assets
$
(1,872)
$
(1,718)
(a)
These deferred tax liabilities are related to the pending transactions contemplated by the Stock Purchase Agreement and are included in liabilities related to assets held for sale on the
Consolidated Balance Sheets. See Note 4—Acquisitions and Divestitures for additional information.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company recognized federal NOL carryforwards of $673 million and $813 million, respectively. The Company
believes the federal NOL carryforwards are more likely than not to be recovered and require no valuation allowance. The Company expects to fully utilize its
federal NOL carryforwards before they begin to expire in 2028.
As of December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company had state NOLs of $453 million and $387 million, respectively, a portion of which are offset by a
valuation allowance because the Company does not believe these NOLs are more likely than not to be realized. The state NOL carryforwards began to expire in
2019 through 2038.
The capital loss carryforward for federal income tax purposes have increased from the previous year due to the capital loss produced by the sale of the
Company’s Keystone operations. As of December 31, 2019, the capital loss carryforward for federal income tax purposes was approximately $66 million. As of
December 31, 2019 and 2018, the Company had an insignificant amount of Canadian NOL carryforward.
The  Company  files  income  tax  returns  in  the  United  States  federal  jurisdiction  and  various  state  and  foreign  jurisdictions.  With  few  exceptions,  the
Company is no longer subject to U.S. federal, state or local or non-U.S. income tax examinations by tax authorities for years on or before 2012. The Company has
state income tax examinations in progress and does not expect material adjustments to result.
Presented in the table below are the changes in gross liability, excluding interest and penalties, for unrecognized tax benefits:
Amount
Balance as of January 1, 2018
$
106
Increases in current period tax positions
13
Decreases in prior period measurement of tax positions
(22)
Balance as of December 31, 2018
$
97
Increases in current period tax positions
17
Decreases in prior period measurement of tax positions
(4)
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
110
107


Table of Contents
The  Company’s  tax  positions  relate  primarily  to  the  deductions  claimed  for  repair  and  maintenance  costs  on  its  utility  plant.  The  Company  does  not
anticipate material changes to its unrecognized tax benefits within the next year. As discussed above, the Company expects to utilize its remaining federal NOLs in
2020, after the pending sale of the New York subsidiary is completed, and therefore this federal tax attribute will not be available to reduce the federal liabilities
for uncertain tax positions or interest accrued as presented on the Company’s Consolidated Financial Statements.
If the Company sustains all of its positions as of December 31, 2019, an unrecognized tax benefit of $12 million, excluding interest and penalties, would
impact the Company’s effective tax rate. The Company had an insignificant amount of interest and penalties related to its tax positions as of December 31, 2019
and 2018.
Presented in the table below are the changes in the valuation allowance:
Amount
Balance as of January 1, 2017
$
6
Increases in current period tax positions
7
Balance as of December 31, 2017
$
13
Increases in current period tax positions
1
Balance as of December 31, 2018
$
14
Increases in current period tax positions
7
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
21
Note 15: Employee Benefits
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefits
The Company maintains noncontributory defined benefit pension plans covering eligible employees of its regulated utility and shared services operations.
Benefits under the plans are based on the employee’s years of service and compensation. The pension plans have been closed for all new employees. The pension
plans were closed for most employees hired on or after January 1, 2006. Union employees hired on or after January 1, 2001, except for specific eligible groups
specified in the plan, had their accrued benefit frozen and will be able to receive this benefit as a lump sum upon termination or retirement. Union employees hired
on or after January 1, 2001 and non-union employees hired on or after January 1, 2006 are provided with a 5.25% of base pay defined contribution plan. The
Company does not participate in a multi-employer plan. The Company also has unfunded noncontributory supplemental nonqualified pension plans that provide
additional retirement benefits to certain employees.
The Company’s pension funding practice is to contribute at least the greater of the minimum amount required by the Employee Retirement Income Security
Act of 1974 or the normal cost. Further, the Company will consider additional cash contributions and/or available prefunding balances if needed to avoid “at risk”
status and benefit restrictions under the Pension Protection Act of 2006 (“PPA”). The Company may also consider increased contributions, based on other financial
requirements and the plans’ funded position. Pension expense in excess of the amount contributed to the pension plans is deferred by certain regulated subsidiaries
pending future recovery in rates charged for utility services as contributions are made to the plans. See Note 7—Regulatory Assets and Liabilities for additional
information. Pension plan assets are invested in a number of actively managed, commingled funds, and limited partnerships including equities, fixed income
securities, guaranteed annuity contracts with insurance companies, real estate funds and real estate investment trusts (“REITs”).
The Company maintains other postretirement benefit plans providing varying levels of medical and life insurance to eligible retirees. The retiree welfare
plans are closed for union employees hired on or after January 1, 2006. The plans had previously closed for non-union employees hired on or after January 1, 2002.
The Company’s policy is to fund other postretirement benefit costs up to the amount recoverable through rates. Assets of the plans are invested in a number of
actively managed and commingled funds including equities and fixed income securities.
The investment policy guideline of the pension plan is focused on diversification, improving returns and reducing the volatility of the funded status over a
long-term horizon. The investment policy guidelines of the postretirement plans focus on the appropriate strategy given the funded status of the plans. None of the
Company’s securities are included in pension or other postretirement benefit plan assets.
The  Company  uses  fair  value  for  all  classes  of  assets  in  the  calculation  of  market-related  value  of  plan  assets.  As  of  2018,  the  fair  values  and  asset
allocations of the pension plan assets include the American Water Pension Plan, the New York Water Service Corporation Pension Plan, and the Shorelands Water
Company, Inc. Pension Plan.
108

Table of Contents
Presented in the tables below are the fair values and asset allocations of the pension plan assets as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively, by asset
category:
Asset Category
2020 Target
Allocation
Total
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets (Level
1)
Significant
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 3)
Percentage of Plan
Assets as of
December 31, 2019
Cash
$
39
$
39
$
—
$
—
2%
Equity securities:
50%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
358
358
—
—
20%
U.S. small cap
84
78
6
—
5%
International
320
6
137
177
18%
Real estate fund
127
—
—
127
7%
REITs
7
—
7
—
—%
Fixed income securities:
50%
 
 
 
 
U.S. Treasury securities and
government bonds
169
158
11
—
10%
Corporate bonds
542
—
542
—
31%
Mortgage-backed securities
14
—
14
—
1%
Municipal bonds
26
—
26
—
1%
Treasury futures
8
8
—
—
1%
Long duration bond fund
8
8
—
—
1%
Guarantee annuity contracts
45
—
—
45
3%
Total
100%
$
1,747
$
655
$
743
$
349
100%
Asset Category
2019 Target
Allocation
Total
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets (Level
1)
Significant
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 3)
Percentage of Plan
Assets as of
December 31, 2018
Cash
$
24
$
24
$
—
$
—
2%
Equity securities:
50%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
297
297
—
—
20%
U.S. small cap
76
70
6
—
5%
International
256
2
132
122
17%
Real estate fund
65
—
—
65
4%
REITs
20
—
20
—
1%
Fixed income securities:
50%
 
 
 
 
U.S. Treasury securities and
government bonds
181
167
14
—
12%
Corporate bonds
491
—
491
—
33%
Mortgage-backed securities
11
—
11
—
1%
Municipal bonds
28
—
28
—
2%
Long duration bond fund
7
7
—
—
—%
Guarantee annuity contracts
43
—
—
43
3%
Total
100%
$
1,499
$
567
$
702
$
230
100%
109

Table of Contents
Presented in the tables below are a reconciliation of the beginning and ending balances of the fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs
(Level 3) for 2019 and 2018, respectively:
 
Level 3
Balance as of January 1, 2019
$
230
Actual return on assets
25
Purchases, issuances and settlements, net
94
Balance as of December 31, 2019
$
349
 
Level 3
Balance as of January 1, 2018
$
278
Actual return on assets
(23)
Purchases, issuances and settlements, net
(25)
Balance as of December 31, 2018
$
230
The Company’s postretirement benefit plans have different levels of funded status and the assets are held under various trusts. The investments and risk
mitigation strategies for the plans are tailored specifically for each trust. In setting new strategic asset mixes, consideration is given to the likelihood that the
selected asset allocation will effectively fund the projected plan liabilities and meet the risk tolerance criteria of the Company. The Company periodically updates
the  long-term,  strategic  asset  allocations  for  these  plans  through  asset  liability  studies  and  uses  various  analytics  to  determine  the  optimal  asset  allocation.
Considerations include plan liability characteristics, liquidity needs, funding requirements, expected rates of return and the distribution of returns.
In 2018, the Company announced plan design changes to the medical bargaining benefit plan, which resulted in a cap on future benefits and an over funded
postretirement medical benefits bargaining plan. Given the change in funded status, the Retirement and Benefit Plans Investment Committee (the “Investment
Committee”), which is responsible for overseeing the investment of the Company’s pension and other postretirement benefit plans’ assets, commissioned a new
asset-liability study for the postretirement medical bargaining plan. This study concluded that it was prudent to decrease the investment risk in the plan due to the
current funded status. The study also recommended reducing its exposure to changes in interest rates by matching the assets of the plan to the projected cash flows
for future benefit payments of the liability. The Investment Committee approved the recommendations.
The Company engages third-party investment managers for all invested assets. Managers are not permitted to invest outside of the asset class (e.g. fixed
income,  equity,  alternatives)  or  strategy  for  which  they  have  been  appointed.  Investment  management  agreements  and  recurring  performance  and  attribution
analysis are used as tools to ensure investment managers invest solely within the investment strategy they have been provided. Futures and options may be used to
adjust portfolio duration to align with a plan’s targeted investment policy.
In order to minimize asset volatility relative to the liabilities, a portion of plan assets is allocated to long duration fixed income investments that are exposed
to interest rate risk. Increases in interest rates generally will result in a decline in the value of fixed income assets while reducing the present value of the liabilities.
Conversely,  rate  decreases  will  increase  fixed  income  assets,  partially  offsetting  the  related  increase  in  the  liabilities.  Within  equities,  risk  is  mitigated  by
constructing a portfolio that is broadly diversified by geography, market capitalization, manager mandate size, investment style and process. For the postretirement
medical bargaining plan, its asset structure is designed to meet the cash flows of the liabilities. This design reduces the plan’s exposure to changes in interest rates.
Actual allocations to each asset class vary from target allocations due to periodic investment strategy updates, market value fluctuations, the length of time
it takes to fully implement investment allocations, and the timing of benefit payments and contributions. The asset allocation is rebalanced on a quarterly basis, if
necessary. Voluntary Employees’ Beneficiary Association (“VEBA”) Trust assets include the American Water Postretirement Medical Benefits Bargaining Plan,
the New York Water Service Corporation Postretirement Medical Benefits Bargaining Plan, the American Water Postretirement Medical Benefits Non-Bargaining
Plan, and the American Water Life Insurance Trust.
110

Table of Contents
Presented  in  the  tables  below  are  the  fair  values  and  asset  allocations  of  the  postretirement  benefit  plan  assets  as  of December  31,  2019 and 2018,
respectively, by asset category:
Asset Category
2020 Target
Allocation
Total
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets (Level
1)
Significant
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 3)
Percentage of Plan
Assets as of
December 31, 2019
Bargain VEBA:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash
$
6
$
6
$
—
$
—
2%
Equity securities:
4%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
13
13
—
—
3%
Fixed income securities:
96%
 
 
 
 
U.S. Treasury securities and
government bonds
373
298
75
—
94%
Long duration bond fund
4
4
—
—
1%
Total bargain VEBA
100%
$
396
$
321
$
75
$
—
100%
Non-bargain VEBA:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash
$
4
$
4
$
—
$
—
—
Equity securities:
60%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
48
48
—
—
36%
International
30
30
—
—
23%
Fixed income securities:
40%
 
 
 
 
Core fixed income bond fund (a)
50
—
50
—
41%
Total non-bargain VEBA
100%
$
132
$
82
$
50
$
—
100%
Life VEBA:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity securities:
70%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
$
2
$
2
$
—
$
—
50%
Fixed income securities:
30%
 
 
 
 
Core fixed income bond fund (a)
2
2
—
—
50%
Total life VEBA
100%
$
4
$
4
$
—
$
—
100%
Total
100%
$
532
$
407
$
125
$
—
100%
 
(a)
Includes cash for margin requirements.
111

Table of Contents
Asset Category
2019 Target
Allocation
Total
Quoted Prices in
Active Markets for
Identical Assets (Level
1)
Significant
Observable Inputs
(Level 2)
Significant
Unobservable Inputs
(Level 3)
Percentage of Plan
Assets as of 12/31/2018
Bargain VEBA:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash
$
31
$
31
$
—
$
—
—
Equity securities:
2%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
1
1
—
—
—%
International
17
—
—
17
4%
Fixed income securities:
98%
 
 
 
 
U.S. Treasury securities and
government bonds
179
178
1
—
47%
Corporate bonds
141
—
141
—
37%
Municipal bonds
9
—
9
—
3%
Long duration bond fund
4
4
—
—
1%
Future and option contracts (a)
—
—
—
—
8%
Total bargain VEBA
100%
$
382
$
214
$
151
$
17
100%
Non-bargain VEBA:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cash
$
3
$
3
$
—
$
—
—
Equity securities:
60%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
43
43
—
—
35%
International
24
24
—
—
20%
Fixed income securities:
40%
 
 
 
 
Core fixed income bond fund (a)
52
—
52
—
45%
Total non-bargain VEBA
100%
$
122
$
70
$
52
$
—
100%
Life VEBA:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Equity securities:
70%
 
 
 
 
 
U.S. large cap
$
2
$
2
$
—
$
—
67%
Fixed income securities:
30%
 
 
 
 
Core fixed income bond fund (a)
1
1
—
—
33%
Total life VEBA
100%
$
3
$
3
$
—
$
—
100%
Total
100%
$
507
$
287
$
203
$
17
100%
(a)
Includes cash for margin requirements.
Valuation Techniques Used to Determine Fair Value
Cash—Cash and investments with maturities of three months or less when purchased, including certain short-term fixed-income securities, are considered
cash and are included in the recurring fair value measurements hierarchy as Level 1.
Equity  securities—For  equity  securities,  the  trustees  obtain  prices  from  pricing  services,  whose  prices  are  obtained  from  direct  feeds  from  market
exchanges, that the Company is able to independently corroborate. Certain equity securities are valued based on quoted prices in active markets and categorized as
Level 1. Other equities, such as international securities held in the pension plan, are invested in commingled funds and/or limited partnerships. These funds are
valued to reflect the plan fund’s interest in the fund based on the reported year-end net asset value. Since net asset value is not directly observable or not available
on a nationally recognized securities exchange for the commingled funds, they are categorized as Level 2. For limited partnerships, the assets as a whole are
categorized as Level 3 due to the fact that the partnership provides the pricing and the pricing inputs are less readily observable. In addition, the limited partnership
vehicle cannot be readily traded.
112

Table of Contents
Fixed-income securities—The majority of U.S. Treasury securities and government bonds have been categorized as Level 1 because they trade in highly-
liquid and transparent markets and their prices can be corroborated. The fair values of corporate bonds, mortgage backed securities, and certain government bonds
are based on prices that reflect observable market information, such as actual trade information of similar securities. They are categorized as Level 2 because the
valuations are calculated using models which utilize actively traded market data that the Company can corroborate. Exchange-traded options and futures, for which
market quotations are readily available, are valued at the last reported sale price or official closing price on the primary market or exchange on which they are
traded and are classified as Level 1.
Real estate fund—Real estate fund is categorized as Level 3 as the fund uses significant unobservable inputs for fair value measurement and the vehicle is in
the form of a limited partnership.
REITs—REITs are invested in commingled funds. Commingled funds are valued to reflect the plan fund’s interest in the fund based on the reported year-
end net asset value. Since the net asset value is not directly observable for the commingled funds, they are categorized as Level 2.
Guaranteed annuity contracts—Guaranteed annuity contracts are categorized as Level 3 because the investments are not publicly quoted. Since these market
values are determined by the provider, they are not highly observable and have been categorized as Level 3. Exchange-traded future and option positions are
reported in accordance with changes in variation margins that are settled daily.
Presented in the table below is a rollforward of the changes in the benefit obligation and plan assets for the two most recent years, for all plans combined:
 
Pension Benefits
Other Benefits
 
2019
2018
2019
2018
Change in benefit obligation:
 
 
 
 
Benefit obligation as of January 1,
$
1,892
$
2,034
$
353
$
614
Service cost
28
34
4
8
Interest cost
82
76
15
20
Plan participants' contributions
—
—
2
2
Plan amendments
—
(23)
(1)
(174)
Actuarial loss (gain)
264
(153)
25
(89)
Gross benefits paid
(105)
(76)
(25)
(29)
Federal subsidy
—
—
1
1
Benefit obligation as of December 31,
$
2,161
$
1,892
$
374
$
353
Change in plan assets:
 
 
 
 
Fair value of plan assets as of January 1,
$
1,499
$
1,649
$
507
$
576
Actual return on plan assets
319
(97)
51
(40)
Employer contributions
33
24
(2)
(2)
Plan participants' contributions
—
—
2
2
Benefits paid
(104)
(77)
(26)
(29)
Fair value of plan assets as of December 31,
$
1,747
$
1,499
$
532
$
507
Funded value as of December 31,
$
(414)
$
(393)
$
158
$
154
Amounts recognized on the balance sheet:
 
 
 
 
Noncurrent asset
$
—
$
—
$
159
$
155
Current liability
(3)
(3)
—
—
Noncurrent liability
(411)
(390)
(1)
(1)
Net amount recognized
$
(414)
$
(393)
$
158
$
154
On August 31, 2018, the Postretirement Medical Benefit Plan was remeasured to reflect a plan change. The plan change resulted in a $175 million reduction
in  future  benefits  payable  to  plan  participants,  and,  in  combination  with  other  experience  reflected  as  of  the  remeasurement  date,  resulted  in  a $227
million reduction to the net accumulated postretirement benefit obligation.
113

Table of Contents
Presented  in  the  table  below  are  the  components  of  accumulated  other  comprehensive  income  and  regulatory  assets  that  have  not  been  recognized  as
components of periodic benefit costs as of December 31:
 
Pension Benefits
Other Benefits
 
2019
2018
2019
2018
Net actuarial loss
$
435
$
431
$
72
$
83
Prior service credit
(19)
(22)
(257)
(291)
Net amount recognized
$
416
$
409
$
(185)
$
(208)
Regulatory assets (liabilities)
$
375
$
352
$
(185)
$
(208)
Accumulated other comprehensive income
41
57
—
—
Total
$
416
$
409
$
(185)
$
(208)
Presented in the tables below are the projected benefit obligation, accumulated benefit obligation and fair value of plan assets for pension plans with a
projected obligation in excess of plan assets as of December 31, 2019 and 2018:
Projected Benefit Obligation Exceeds the Fair Value
of Plans' Assets
 
2019
2018
Projected benefit obligation
$
2,161
$
1,892
Fair value of plan assets
1,748
1,499
 
Accumulated Benefit Obligation Exceeds the Fair
Value of Plans' Assets
 
2019
2018
Accumulated benefit obligation
$
2,018
$
1,768
Fair value of plan assets
1,748
1,499
The accumulated postretirement plan assets exceed benefit obligations for all of the Company’s other postretirement benefit plans, except for the Northern
Illinois Retiree Welfare Plan.
In 2006, the PPA replaced the funding requirements for defined benefit pension plans by requiring that defined benefit plans contribute to 100% of the
current liability funding target over seven years. Defined benefit plans with a funding status of less than 80% of the current liability are defined as being “at risk”
and additional funding requirements and benefit restrictions may apply. The PPA was effective for the 2008 plan year with short-term phase-in provisions for both
the  funding  target  and  at-risk  determination.  The  Company’s  qualified  defined  benefit  plan  is  currently  funded  above  the  at-risk  threshold,  and  therefore  the
Company expects that the plans will not be subject to the “at risk” funding requirements of the PPA. The Company is proactively monitoring the plan’s funded
status and projected contributions under the law to appropriately manage the potential impact on cash requirements.
Minimum  funding  requirements  for  the  qualified  defined  benefit  pension  plan  are  determined  by  government  regulations  and  not  by  accounting
pronouncements. The Company plans to contribute amounts at least equal to or greater than the minimum required contributions or the normal cost in 2020 to the
qualified pension plans. Contributions may be in the form of cash contributions as well as available prefunding balances.
Presented in the table below is information about the expected cash flows for the pension and postretirement benefit plans:
Pension Benefits
Other Benefits
2020 expected employer contributions:
 
 
To plan trusts
$
38
$
—
To plan participants
2
—
114

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below are the net benefits expected to be paid from the plan assets or the Company’s assets:
 
Pension Benefits
Other Benefits
 
Expected Benefit
Payments
Expected Benefit
Payments
Expected Federal Subsidy
Payments
2020
$
113
$
27
$
1
2021
115
27
1
2022
118
27
1
2023
123
27
1
2024
126
27
1
2025-2029
657
131
6
Because the above amounts are net benefits, plan participants’ contributions have been excluded from the expected benefits.
Accounting for pensions and other postretirement benefits requires an extensive use of assumptions about the discount rate, expected return on plan assets,
the rate of future compensation increases received by the Company’s employees, mortality, turnover and medical costs. Each assumption is reviewed annually. The
assumptions are selected to represent the average expected experience over time and may differ in any one year from actual experience due to changes in capital
markets and the overall economy. These differences will impact the amount of pension and other postretirement benefit expense that the Company recognizes.
Presented in the table below are the significant assumptions related to the pension and other postretirement benefit plans:
 
Pension Benefits
Other Benefits
 
2019
2018
2017
2019
2018
2017
Weighted average assumptions used to determine
December 31 benefit obligations:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discount rate
3.44%
4.38%
3.75%
3.36%
4.32%
3.73%
Rate of compensation increase
2.97%
3.00%
3.02%
N/A
N/A
N/A
Medical trend
N/A
N/A
N/A
graded from
graded from
graded from
 
 
 
 
6.50% in 2020
6.75% in 2019
7.00% in 2018
 
 
 
 
to 5.00% in 2026+
to 5.00% in 2026+
to 4.50% in 2026+
Weighted average assumptions used to determine net
periodic cost:
 
 
 
 
 
 
Discount rate
4.38%
3.75%
4.28%
4.32%
4.23%
4.26%
Expected return on plan assets
6.20%
5.95%
6.49%
3.56%
4.77%
5.09%
Rate of compensation increase
3.00%
3.02%
3.07%
N/A
N/A
N/A
Medical trend
N/A
N/A
N/A
graded from
graded from
graded from
 
 
 
 
6.75% in 2019
7.00% in 2018
7.00% in 2017
 
 
 
 
to 5.00% in 2026+
to 4.50% in 2026+
to 5.00% in 2021+
NOTE “N/A” in the table above means assumption is not applicable.
The  discount  rate  assumption  was  determined  for  the  pension  and  postretirement  benefit  plans  independently.  The  Company  uses  an  approach  that
approximates the process of settlement of obligations tailored to the plans’ expected cash flows by matching the plans’ cash flows to the coupons and expected
maturity values of individually selected bonds. Historically, for each plan, the discount rate was developed at the level equivalent rate that would produce the same
present value as that using spot rates aligned with the projected benefit payments.
115

Table of Contents
The expected long-term rate of return on plan assets is based on historical and projected rates of return, prior to administrative and investment management
fees, for current and planned asset classes in the plans’ investment portfolios. Assumed projected rates of return for each of the plans’ projected asset classes were
selected after analyzing historical experience and future expectations of the returns and volatility of the various asset classes. Based on the target asset allocation
for  each  asset  class,  the  overall  expected  rate  of  return  for  the  portfolio  was  developed,  adjusted  for  historical  and  expected  experience  of  active  portfolio
management results compared to the benchmark returns. The Company’s pension expense increases as the expected return on assets decreases. The Company used
an expected return on plan assets of 6.20% to estimate its 2019 pension benefit costs, and an expected blended return based on weighted assets of 3.56% to
estimate its 2019 other postretirement benefit costs.
The Company adopted a table based on the Society of Actuaries RP 2014 mortality table including a generational BB-2D projection scale. In 2018, the
Company adopted the new MP-2018 mortality improvement scale to gradually adjust future mortality rates downward. In 2019, the Company maintained the MP-
2018 mortality improvement scale until it can conduct a new experience study.
Presented in the table below are the components of net periodic benefit costs for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Components of net periodic pension benefit cost:
 
 
 
Service cost
$
28
$
34
$
33
Interest cost
82
76
80
Expected return on plan assets
(91)
(97)
(93)
Amortization of prior service (credit) cost
(3)
1
1
Amortization of actuarial loss
32
27
34
Net periodic pension benefit cost
$
48
$
41
$
55
Other changes in plan assets and benefit obligations recognized in other comprehensive
income:
 
 
 
Current year actuarial (gain) loss
$
(8)
$
(60)
$
(7)
Amortization of actuarial loss
(4)
(7)
(7)
Total recognized in other comprehensive income
(12)
(67)
(14)
Total recognized in net periodic benefit cost and other comprehensive income
$
36
$
(26)
$
41
Components of net periodic other postretirement benefit (credit) cost:
 
 
 
Service cost
$
4
$
8
$
10
Interest cost
15
20
26
Expected return on plan assets
(18)
(26)
(26)
Amortization of prior service credit
(35)
(23)
(18)
Amortization of actuarial loss
3
3
10
Net periodic other postretirement benefit (credit) cost
$
(31)
$
(18)
$
2
The Company’s policy is to recognize curtailments when the total expected future service of plan participants is reduced by greater than 10% due to an
event that results in terminations and/or retirements.
Cumulative gains and losses that are in excess of 10% of the greater of either the projected benefit obligation or the fair value of plan assets are amortized
over the expected average remaining future service of the current active membership for the plans.
Savings Plans for Employees
The Company maintains 401(k) savings plans that allow employees to save for retirement on a tax-deferred basis. Employees can make contributions that
are invested at their direction in one or more funds. The Company makes matching contributions based on a percentage of an employee’s contribution, subject to
certain limitations. Due to the Company’s discontinuing new entrants into the defined benefit pension plan, on January 1, 2006, the Company began providing an
additional 5.25% of base pay defined contribution benefit for union employees hired on or after January 1, 2001 and non-union employees hired on or after
January  1,  2006.  The  Company’s  401(k)  savings  plan  expenses  totaled $12  million, $12  million and $13  million for 2019, 2018 and 2017,  respectively.
Additionally, the Company’s 5.25% of base pay defined contribution benefit expenses totaled $13 million, $11 million and $9 million for 2019, 2018 and 2017,
respectively. All of the Company’s contributions are invested in one or more funds at the direction of the employees.
116

Table of Contents
Note 16: Commitments and Contingencies
Commitments  have  been  made  in  connection  with  certain  construction  programs.  The  estimated  capital  expenditures  required  under  legal  and  binding
contractual obligations amounted to $579 million as of December 31, 2019.
The  Company’s  regulated  subsidiaries  maintain  agreements  with  other  water  purveyors  for  the  purchase  of  water  to  supplement  their  water  supply.
Presented in the table below are the future annual commitments related to minimum quantities of purchased water having non-cancelable:
Amount
2020
$
65
2021
65
2022
65
2023
63
2024
49
Thereafter
605
The  Company  enters  into  agreements  for  the  provision  of  services  to  water  and  wastewater  facilities  for  the  U.S.  military,  municipalities  and  other
customers. See Note 3—Revenue Recognition for additional information regarding the Company’s performance obligations.
Contingencies
The Company is routinely involved in legal actions incident to the normal conduct of its business. As of December 31, 2019, the Company has accrued
approximately $17  million of  probable  loss  contingencies  and  has  estimated  that  the  maximum  amount  of  losses  associated  with  reasonably  possible  loss
contingencies that can be reasonably estimated is $25 million. For certain matters, claims and actions, the Company is unable to estimate possible losses. The
Company  believes  that  damages  or  settlements,  if  any,  recovered  by  plaintiffs  in  such  matters,  claims  or  actions,  other  than  as  described  in  this Note  16—
Commitments and Contingencies, will not have a material adverse effect on the Company.
West Virginia Elk River Freedom Industries Chemical Spill
On June 8, 2018, the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of West Virginia granted final approval of a settlement class and global class action
settlement (the “Settlement”) for all claims and potential claims by all class members (collectively, the “West Virginia Plaintiffs”) arising out of the January 2014
Freedom Industries, Inc. chemical spill in West Virginia. The effective date of the Settlement was July 16, 2018. Under the terms and conditions of the Settlement,
West Virginia-American Water Company (“WVAWC”) and certain other Company affiliated entities did not admit, and will not admit, any fault or liability for
any of the allegations made by the West Virginia Plaintiffs in any of the actions that were resolved.
The  aggregate  pre-tax  amount  contributed  by  WVAWC  of  the $126  million portion  of  the  Settlement  with  respect  to  the  Company,  net  of  insurance
recoveries, is $19 million. As of December 31, 2019, $5 million of that $126 million has been reflected in accrued liabilities, and $5 million in offsetting insurance
receivables have been reflected in other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The amount reflected in accrued liabilities as of December 31, 2019
reflects reductions in the liability and appropriate reductions to the offsetting insurance receivable reflected in other current assets, associated with the ongoing
processing of actual and potential Settlement claims. The Company funded WVAWC’s contributions to the Settlement through existing sources of liquidity.
Dunbar, West Virginia Water Main Break Class Action Litigation
On the evening of June 23, 2015, a 36-inch pre-stressed concrete transmission water main, installed in the early 1970s, failed. The water main is part of
WVAWC’s West Relay pumping station located in the City of Dunbar. The failure of the main caused water outages and low pressure for up to approximately
25,000 WVAWC customers. In the early morning hours of June 25, 2015, crews completed a repair, but that same day, the repair developed a leak. On June 26,
2015, a second repair was completed and service was restored that day to approximately 80% of the impacted customers, and to the remaining approximately 20%
by the next morning. The second repair showed signs of leaking, but the water main was usable until June 29, 2015 to allow tanks to refill. The system was
reconfigured to maintain service to all but approximately 3,000 customers while a final repair was completed safely on June 30, 2015. Water service was fully
restored by July 1, 2015 to all customers affected by this event.
117

Table of Contents
On June 2, 2017, a complaint captioned Jeffries, et al. v. West Virginia-American Water Company was filed in West Virginia Circuit Court in Kanawha
County on behalf of an alleged class of residents and business owners who lost water service or pressure as a result of the Dunbar main break. The complaint
alleges breach of contract by WVAWC for failure to supply water, violation of West Virginia law regarding the sufficiency of WVAWC’s facilities and negligence
by WVAWC in the design, maintenance and operation of the water system. The Jeffries plaintiffs seek unspecified alleged damages on behalf of the class for lost
profits, annoyance and inconvenience, and loss of use, as well as punitive damages for willful, reckless and wanton behavior in not addressing the risk of pipe
failure and a large outage.
In October 2017, WVAWC filed with the court a motion seeking to dismiss all of the Jeffries plaintiffs’ counts alleging statutory and common law tort
claims.  Furthermore,  WVAWC  asserted  that  the  Public  Service  Commission  of  West  Virginia,  and  not  the  court,  has  primary  jurisdiction  over  allegations
involving violations of the applicable tariff, the public utility code and related rules. In May 2018, the court, at a hearing, denied WVAWC’s motion to apply the
primary  jurisdiction  doctrine,  and  in  October  2018,  the  court  issued  a  written  order  to  that  effect.  On  February  21,  2019,  the  court  issued  an  order  denying
WVAWC’s motion to dismiss the Jeffries plaintiffs’ tort claims. On August 21, 2019, the court set a procedural schedule in this case, including a trial date of
September 21, 2020. Discovery in this case is ongoing. On February 4, 2020, the Jeffries plaintiffs filed a motion seeking class certification on the issues of breach
of contract and negligence, and to determine the applicability of punitive damages and a multiplier for those damages if imposed. A hearing on class certification is
currently scheduled for March 11, 2020.
The Company and WVAWC believe that WVAWC has meritorious defenses to the claims raised in this class action complaint. WVAWC is vigorously
defending itself against these allegations. The Company cannot currently determine the likelihood of a loss, if any, or estimate the amount of any loss or a range of
such losses related to this proceeding.
Chattanooga, Tennessee Water Main Break Class Action Litigation
On September 12, 2019, Tennessee-American Water Company, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (“TAWC”), experienced a break of a 36-inch
water transmission main, which caused service fluctuations or interruptions to TAWC customers and the issuance of a boil water notice. TAWC repaired the main
break by early morning on September 14, 2019, and restored full water service by the afternoon on September 15, 2019, with the boil water notice lifted for all
customers on September 16, 2019.
On September 17, 2019, a complaint captioned Bruce, et al. v. American Water Works Company, Inc., et al. was filed in the Circuit Court of Hamilton
County, Tennessee against TAWC, the Company and American Water Works Service Company, Inc., a wholly owned subsidiary of the Company (collectively, the
“Tennessee-American Water Defendants”), on behalf of an alleged class of individuals or entities who lost water service or suffered monetary losses as a result of
the  Chattanooga  main  break  (the  “Tennessee  Plaintiffs”).  The  complaint  alleges  breach  of  contract  and  negligence  against  the  Tennessee-American  Water
Defendants, as well as an equitable remedy of piercing the corporate veil. The Tennessee Plaintiffs seek an award of unspecified alleged damages for wage losses,
business and economic losses, out-of-pocket expenses, loss of use and enjoyment of property and annoyance and inconvenience, as well as punitive damages,
attorneys’ fees and pre- and post-judgment interest.
On November 22, 2019, the Tennessee-American Water Defendants filed a motion to dismiss the complaint for failure to state a claim upon which relief
may be granted, and, with respect to the Company, for lack of personal jurisdiction. A hearing on this motion is scheduled for February 18, 2020.
The Tennessee-American Water Defendants believe that they have meritorious defenses to the claims raised in this class action complaint, and they are
vigorously defending themselves against these allegations. The Company cannot currently determine the likelihood of a loss, if any, or estimate the amount of any
loss or a range of such losses related to this proceeding.
118

Table of Contents
Note 17: Earnings per Common Share
Presented in the table below is a reconciliation of the numerator and denominator for the basic and diluted earnings per share (“EPS”) calculations for the
years ended December 31:
 
2019
2018
2017
Numerator:
 
 
 
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
621
$
567
$
426
Denominator:
 
 
 
Weighted average common shares outstanding—Basic
181
180
178
Effect of dilutive common stock equivalents
—
—
1
Weighted average common shares outstanding—Diluted
181
180
179
The effect of dilutive common stock equivalents is related to outstanding stock options, RSUs and PSUs granted under the Company’s 2007 Plan and 2017
Omnibus Plan, as well as estimated shares to be purchased under the Company’s 2017 Nonqualified Employee Stock Purchase Plan. Less than one million share-
based awards were excluded from the computation of diluted EPS for the years ended December 31, 2019, 2018 and 2017, because their effect would have been
anti-dilutive under the treasury stock method.
Note 18: Fair Value of Financial Information
The following methods and assumptions were used by the Company in estimating its fair value disclosures for financial instruments:
Current assets and current liabilities—The carrying amounts reported on the Consolidated Balance Sheets for current assets and current liabilities, including
revolving credit debt, due to the short-term maturities and variable interest rates, approximate their fair values.
Preferred stock with mandatory redemption requirements and long-term debt—The fair values of preferred stock with mandatory redemption requirements
and long-term debt are categorized within the fair value hierarchy based on the inputs that are used to value each instrument. The fair value of long-term debt
classified as Level 1 is calculated using quoted prices in active markets. Level 2 instruments are valued using observable inputs and Level 3 instruments are valued
using observable and unobservable inputs. The fair values of instruments classified as Level 2 and Level 3 are determined by a valuation model that is based on a
conventional discounted cash flow methodology and utilizes assumptions of current market rates. The Company calculated a base yield curve using a risk-free rate
(a U.S. Treasury securities yield curve) plus a credit spread that is based on the following two factors: an average of the Company’s own publicly-traded debt
securities and the current market rates for U.S. Utility A debt securities. The Company used these yield curve assumptions to derive a base yield for the Level 2
and Level 3 securities. Additionally, the Company adjusted the base yield for specific features of the debt securities including call features, coupon tax treatment
and collateral for the Level 3 instruments.
Presented in the tables below are the carrying amounts, including fair value adjustments previously recognized in acquisition purchase accounting, and the
fair values of the Company’s financial instruments:
 
Carrying Amount
December 31, 2019
 
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Preferred stock with mandatory redemption
requirements
$
7
$
—
$
—
$
9
$
9
Long-term debt (excluding finance lease
obligations)
8,664
7,689
417
1,664
9,770
 
Carrying Amount
December 31, 2018
 
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Preferred stock with mandatory redemption
requirements
$
8
$
—
$
—
$
9
$
9
Long-term debt (excluding finance lease
obligations)
7,638
5,760
433
1,728
7,921

119

Table of Contents
Fair Value Measurements
To increase consistency and comparability in fair value measurements, GAAP establishes a fair value hierarchy that prioritizes the inputs to valuation
techniques used to measure fair value into three levels as follows:
Level 1—Quoted prices (unadjusted) in active markets for identical assets or liabilities that the Company has the ability to access as of the reporting date.
Financial assets and liabilities utilizing Level 1 inputs include active exchange-traded equity securities, exchange-based derivatives, mutual funds and money
market funds.
Level 2—Inputs other than quoted prices included within Level 1 that are directly observable for the asset or liability or indirectly observable through
corroboration  with  observable  market  data.  Financial  assets  and  liabilities  utilizing  Level  2  inputs  include  fixed  income  securities,  non-exchange-based
derivatives, commingled investment funds not subject to purchase and sale restrictions and fair-value hedges.
Level 3—Unobservable inputs, such as internally-developed pricing models for the asset or liability due to little or no market activity for the asset or
liability. Financial assets and liabilities utilizing Level 3 inputs include infrequently-traded non-exchange-based derivatives and commingled investment funds
subject to purchase and sale restrictions.
Recurring Fair Value Measurements
Presented in the tables below are assets and liabilities measured and recorded at fair value on a recurring basis and their level within the fair value hierarchy:
At Fair Value as of December 31, 2019
 
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets:
 
 
 
 
Restricted funds
$
31
$
—
$
—
$
31
Rabbi trust investments
17
—
—
17
Deposits
3
—
—
3
Other investments
8
—
—
8
Total assets
59
—
—
59
Liabilities:
 
 
 
 
Deferred compensation obligations
21
—
—
21
Total liabilities
21
—
—
21
Total assets
$
38
$
—
$
—
$
38
At Fair Value as of December 31, 2018
 
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Assets:
 
 
 
 
Restricted funds
$
29
$
—
$
—
$
29
Rabbi trust investments
15
—
—
15
Deposits
3
—
—
3
Other investments
3
—
—
3
Total assets
50
—
—
50
Liabilities:
 
 
 
 
Deferred compensation obligations
17
—
—
17
Mark-to-market derivative liabilities
—
14
—
14
Total liabilities
17
14
—
31
Total assets (liabilities)
$
33
$
(14)
$
—
$
19
120


Table of Contents
Restricted funds—The Company’s restricted funds primarily represent proceeds received from financings for the construction and capital improvement of
facilities and from customers for future services under operation, maintenance and repair projects. Long-term restricted funds of less than $1 million and $1 million
were included in other long-term assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets as of December 31, 2019 and December 31, 2018, respectively.
Rabbi trust investments—The Company’s rabbi trust investments consist of equity and index funds from which supplemental executive retirement plan
benefits and deferred compensation obligations can be paid. The Company includes these assets in other long-term assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Deposits—Deposits  include  escrow  funds  and  certain  other  deposits  held  in  trust.  The  Company  includes  cash  deposits  in  other  current  assets  on  the
Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Deferred  compensation  obligations—The  Company’s  deferred  compensation  plans  allow  participants  to  defer  certain  cash  compensation  into  notional
investment accounts. The Company includes such plans in other long-term liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets. The value of the Company’s deferred
compensation obligations is based on the market value of the participants’ notional investment accounts. The notional investments are comprised primarily of
mutual funds, which are based on observable market prices.
Mark-to-market derivative assets and liabilities—The Company utilizes fixed-to-floating interest rate swaps, typically designated as fair-value hedges, to
achieve a targeted level of variable-rate debt as a percentage of total debt. The Company also employs derivative financial instruments in the form of variable-to-
fixed interest rate swaps and forward starting interest rate swaps, classified as economic hedges and cash flow hedges, respectively, in order to fix the interest cost
on existing or forecasted debt. The Company uses a calculation of future cash inflows and estimated future outflows, which are discounted, to determine the
current fair value. Additional inputs to the present value calculation include the contract terms, counterparty credit risk, interest rates and market volatility.
Other  investments—Other  investments  primarily  represent  money  market  funds  used  for  active  employee  benefits.  The  Company  includes  other
investments in other current assets on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Note 19: Leases
On  January  1,  2019,  the  Company  adopted  Accounting  Standards  Update 2016-02, Leases  (Topic  842), and all  related  amendments  (collectively,  the
“Standard”). The Company implemented the guidance in the Standard using the modified retrospective approach and applied the optional transition method, which
allowed entities to apply the new Standard at the adoption date and recognize a cumulative-effect adjustment to the opening balance of retained earnings in the
period of adoption. Under this approach, prior periods have not been restated and continue to be reported under the accounting standards in effect for those periods.
The Standard includes practical expedients, which relate to the identification and classification of leases that commenced before the adoption date, initial direct
costs for leases that commenced before the adoption date, the ability to use hindsight in evaluating lessee options to extend or terminate a lease or to purchase the
underlying asset and the ability to carry forward accounting treatment for existing land easements.
Adoption of the Standard resulted in the recognition of operating lease right-of-use (“ROU”) assets and operating lease liabilities as of January 1, 2019 of
approximately $117 million and $115 million, respectively. The difference between the ROU assets and operating lease liabilities was recorded as an adjustment to
retained earnings. The Standard did not materially impact the Company’s consolidated results of operations and had no impact on cash flows.
Certain operating leases have renewal options ranging from one to 60 years. The exercise of lease renewal options is at the Company’s sole discretion.
Renewal options that the Company was reasonably certain to exercise are included in the Company’s ROU assets. Certain operating leases contain the option to
purchase the leased property.  The operating  leases for real property, vehicles  and equipment  will expire  over the next 40 years, seven years, and five years,
respectively.
The Company participates in a number of arrangements with various public entities (“Partners”) in West Virginia. Under these arrangements, the Company
transferred a portion of its utility plant to the Partners in exchange for an equal principal amount of Industrial Development Bonds (“IDBs”) issued by the Partners
under the Industrial Development and Commercial Development Bond Act. The Company leased back the utility plant under agreements for a period of 30 to 40
years. The Company has recorded these agreements as finance leases in property, plant and equipment, as ownership of the assets will revert back to the Company
at the end of the lease term. The carrying value of the finance lease assets was $147 million and $147 million as of December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The
Company  determined  that  the  finance  lease  obligations  and  the  investments  in  IDBs  meet  the  conditions  for  offsetting,  and  as  such,  are  reported  net  on  the
Consolidated Balance Sheets and excluded from the finance lease disclosure presented below.
121

Table of Contents
The Company also enters into O&M agreements with the Partners. The Company pays an annual fee for use of the Partners’ assets in performing under the
O&M  agreements.  The  O&M  agreements  are  recorded  as  operating  leases,  and  future  annual  use  fees  of $4  million in  2020  through  2024,  and $54  million
thereafter, are included in operating lease ROU assets and operating lease liabilities on the Consolidated Balance Sheets.
Rental expenses under operating and finance leases presented on the Consolidated Balance Sheets were $16 million for the year ended December 31, 2019.
Rental expenses under operating leases which included variable and short-term lease costs were $35 million and $29 million for the years ended December 31,
2018 and 2017, respectively.
Presented in the table below is supplemental cash flow information for the year ended December 31:
2019
Cash paid for amounts in lease liabilities (a)
$
16
Right-of-use assets obtained in exchange for new operating lease liabilities
121
(a)
Includes operating and financing cash flows from operating and finance leases.
Presented in the table below are the weighed-average remaining lease terms and the weighted-average discount rates for finance and operating leases:
As of December 31, 2019
Weighted-average remaining lease term:
Finance lease
6 years
Operating leases
19 years
Weighted-average discount rate:
Finance lease
12%
Operating leases
4%
Presented in the table below are the future maturities of lease liabilities at December 31, 2019:
Amount
2020
$
14
2021
13
2022
11
2023
7
2024
7
Thereafter
100
Total lease payments
152
Imputed interest
(53)
Total
$
99
122

Table of Contents
Presented in the table below are the future minimum rental commitments, as of December 31, 2018, under operating leases that have initial or remaining
non-cancelable lease terms over the next five years and thereafter:
Amount
2019
$
17
2020
15
2021
12
2022
11
2023
6
Thereafter
80
Total
$
141
Note 20: Segment Information
The  Company’s  operating  segments  are  comprised  of  the  revenue-generating  components  of  its  businesses  for  which  separate  financial  information  is
internally  produced  and  regularly  used  by  management  to  make  operating  decisions,  assess  performance  and  allocate  resources.  The  Company  operates  its
businesses primarily through one reportable segment, the Regulated Businesses segment. The Company also operates market-based businesses that, individually,
do not meet the criteria of a reportable segment in accordance with GAAP, and are collectively presented as the Market-Based Businesses.
The  Regulated  Businesses  segment  is  the  largest  component  of  the  Company’s  business  and  includes  subsidiaries  that  provide  water  and  wastewater
services to customers in 16 states.
The Company’s primary Market-Based Businesses include the Homeowner Services Group, which provides various warranty protection programs and other
home services to residential customers, and the Military Services Group, which enters into long-term contracts with the U.S. government to provide water and
wastewater services on various military installations.
The accounting policies of the segments are the same as those described in Note 2—Significant Accounting Policies. The Regulated Businesses segment
and Market-Based Businesses include intercompany costs that are allocated by American Water Works Service Company, Inc. and intercompany interest that is
charged by AWCC, both of which are eliminated to reconcile to the Consolidated Statements of Operations. Inter-segment revenues include the sale of water from
a  regulated  subsidiary  to  market-based  subsidiaries,  leased  office  space,  and  furniture  and  equipment  provided  by  the  market-based  subsidiaries  to  regulated
subsidiaries. “Other” includes corporate costs that are not allocated to the Company’s operating segments, eliminations of inter-segment transactions, fair value
adjustments, and associated income and deductions related to the acquisitions that have not been allocated to the operating segments for evaluation of performance
and allocation of resource purposes. The adjustments related to the acquisitions are reported in Other as they are excluded from segment performance measures
evaluated by management.
Presented in the tables below is summarized segment information as of and for the years ended December 31:
 
2019
 
Regulated 
Businesses
Market-Based 
Businesses
Other
Consolidated
Operating revenues
$
3,094
$
539
$
(23)
$
3,610
Depreciation and amortization
529
37
16
582
Total operating expenses, net
1,964
480
(4)
2,440
Interest, net
(295)
5
(92)
(382)
Income before income taxes
869
66
(102)
833
Provision for income taxes
215
20
(23)
212
Net income attributable to common shareholders
654
46
(79)
621
Total assets
20,318
1,008
1,356
22,682
Cash paid for capital expenditures
1,627
13
14
1,654
123

Table of Contents
 
2018
 
Regulated 
Businesses
Market-Based 
Businesses
Other
Consolidated
Operating revenues
$
2,984
$
476
$
(20)
$
3,440
Depreciation and amortization
500
29
16
545
Impairment charge
—
57
—
57
Total operating expenses, net
1,912
441
(15)
2,338
Interest, net
(280)
4
(74)
(350)
Income before income taxes
826
41
(80)
787
Provision for income taxes
224
11
(13)
222
Net income attributable to common shareholders
602
32
(67)
567
Total assets
18,680
999
1,544
21,223
Cash paid for capital expenditures
1,477
13
96
1,586
 
2017
 
Regulated 
Businesses
Market-Based 
Businesses
Other
Consolidated
Operating revenues
$
2,958
$
422
$
(23)
$
3,357
Depreciation and amortization
462
18
12
492
Total operating expenses, net
1,766
360
(22)
2,104
Interest, net
(268)
3
(77)
(342)
Income before income taxes
925
66
(79)
912
Provision for income taxes
366
28
92
486
Net income attributable to common shareholders
559
38
(171)
426
Total assets
17,602
599
1,281
19,482
Cash paid for capital expenditures
1,316
18
100
1,434
Note 21: Unaudited Quarterly Data
Presented  in  the  tables  below  are  supplemental,  unaudited,  consolidated,  quarterly  financial  data  for  each  of  the  four  quarters  in  the  years  ended
December 31, 2019 and 2018, respectively. The operating results for any quarter are not indicative of results that may be expected for a full year or any future
periods.
2019
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Operating revenues
$
813
$
882
$
1,013
$
902
Operating income
238
302
406
224
Net income attributable to common shareholders
113
170
240
98
Basic earnings per share: (a)
 
 
 
 
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
0.62
$
0.94
$
1.33
$
0.54
Diluted earnings per share:
 
 
 
 
Net income attributable to common shareholders
0.62
0.94
1.33
0.54
(a)
Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
124

Table of Contents
2018
 
First Quarter
Second Quarter
Third Quarter
Fourth Quarter
Operating revenues
$
761
$
853
$
976
$
850
Operating income
217
302
335
248
Net income attributable to common shareholders
106
162
187
112
Basic earnings per share:
 
 
 
 
Net income attributable to common shareholders
$
0.60
$
0.90
$
1.04
$
0.62
Diluted earnings per share: (a)
 
 
 
 
Net income attributable to common shareholders
0.59
0.91
1.04
0.62
(a)
Amounts may not sum due to rounding.
125

Table of Contents
ITEM 9.
CHANGES IN AND DISAGREEMENTS WITH ACCOUNTANTS ON ACCOUNTING AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE
None.
ITEM 9A.
CONTROLS AND PROCEDURES
Disclosure Controls and Procedures
The Company, under the supervision and with the participation of its management, including the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer,
conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of the design and operation of the Company’s disclosure controls and procedures as such term is defined in Rule 13a-
15(e) and Rule 15d-15(e) under the Exchange Act as of the end of the period covered by this report.
Based on that evaluation, the Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have concluded that, as of December 31, 2019, the Company’s disclosure
controls and procedures were effective at a reasonable level of assurance. The Company’s disclosure controls and procedures are designed to provide reasonable
assurance  that  the  information  required  to  be  disclosed  by  the  Company  in  the  reports  it  files  or  submits  under  the  Exchange  Act  is  recorded,  processed,
summarized  and  reported  within  the  time  periods  specified  in  the  SEC’s  rules  and  forms,  and  that  such  information  is  accumulated  and  communicated  to
management, including the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company’s management is responsible for establishing and maintaining adequate internal control over financial reporting, as such term is defined in
Rule 13a-15(f) of the Exchange Act. The Company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by or under the supervision of the Chief
Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability  of financial reporting and the preparation of financial
statements for external purposes in accordance with GAAP. The Company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that
(i) pertain to the maintenance of records that in reasonable detail accurately and fairly reflect its transactions and dispositions of its assets, (ii) provide reasonable
assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of the financial statements in accordance with GAAP, and that the Company’s receipts
and expenditures are being made only in accordance with authorizations of its management and its directors, and (iii) provide reasonable assurance regarding
prevention or timely detection of unauthorized acquisition, use or disposition of its assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of
effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with
the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
The Company’s management, including the Chief Executive Officer and the Chief Financial Officer, assessed the effectiveness of its internal control over
financial  reporting,  as  of December  31,  2019,  using  the  criteria  described  in Internal  Control—Integrated  Framework  (2013) issued  by  the  Committee  of
Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission (COSO).
Based on the Company’s evaluation under the framework in Internal Control—Integrated Framework (2013), its management concluded that its internal
control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2019.
The effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2019 has been audited by PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, an
independent registered public accounting firm, as stated in their report appearing in Item 8—Financial Statements and Supplementary Data of this Annual Report
on Form 10-K.
Changes in Internal Control over Financial Reporting
The Company concluded that there have been no changes in internal control over financial reporting that occurred during its last fiscal quarter that have
materially affected, or are reasonably likely to materially affect, the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
126

Table of Contents
ITEM 9B.
OTHER INFORMATION
Approval of CEO Compensation Arrangements with Walter J. Lynch
As previously disclosed, in response to the previously announced retirement of Susan N. Story, the Company’s President and Chief Executive Officer,
effective April 1, 2020, and in accordance with the existing succession plan of the Company’s Board of Directors (the “Board”) for the Company’s principal
executive officer position, on December 6, 2019, the Board elected Walter J. Lynch, the Company’s current Executive Vice President and Chief Operating Officer,
to serve as successor to Susan N. Story, effective April 1, 2020. To provide for Mr. Lynch’s compensation in his new role, the Company and Mr. Lynch have
executed an employment offer letter, dated February 12, 2020 and effective April 1, 2020, which was unanimously approved by the independent members of the
Board upon the unanimous recommendation of the Executive Development and Compensation Committee and its independent compensation consultant.
The employment offer letter provides for the following terms, effective April 1, 2020:
•
Mr. Lynch’s annual base salary is to be set at $925,000.
•
Mr. Lynch is to receive a 2020 target award under the Annual Performance Plan (the “APP”) as President and Chief Executive Officer. His target
award opportunity is to be set at 100% of his annual base salary, which will be prorated to reflect the portions of the year he serves as Executive Vice
President and Chief Operating Officer and will serve as President and Chief Executive Officer. His performance goals to be used to determine the
corporate performance factor with respect to his 2020 APP award will be the same as those in his 2019 APP award.
•
Mr. Lynch was granted LTPP awards under the Company’s 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan pursuant to the terms of the Company’s 2020
Long-Term Performance Plan (“LTPP”). In addition to standard LTPP awards granted to him on February 11, 2020 in his role as Executive Vice
President and Chief Operating Officer (which were based on his current target award opportunity percentage of 165% and annual base salary of
approximately $634,000), he was granted additional LTPP awards effective April 1, 2020 equal to the difference between the fair value of LTPP
grants he would be eligible to receive as President and Chief Executive Officer as of April 1, 2020 based on a target award opportunity of 275% and
his then annual base salary, and the fair value of the February 11, 2020 LTPP grants. The April 1, 2020 LTPP awards have standard terms and
vesting conditions substantially similar to those granted to Mr. Lynch in February 2020. All of Mr. Lynch’s 2020 LTPP awards will include the post-
retirement continued vesting provisions applicable to the Company’s executives serving in the CEO, CFO and COO roles.
•
Mr. Lynch will continue to participate in the Company’s Executive Severance Policy. Under this policy, in the event Mr. Lynch’s employment as
President and Chief Executive Officer is terminated by the Company without cause (as determined by the Board of Directors), he would be eligible to
receive salary continuation and COBRA benefits, and would continue to participate in any Company-sponsored life insurance plan, for a period of 18
months following the date of termination. In that circumstance, he also would receive a pro rata APP award for the year in which the termination of
employment occurs, to the extent such payment is provided for under the terms of the applicable APP award.
•
Mr. Lynch will continue to be eligible to receive benefits as provided under the Company’s qualified and nonqualified defined benefit pension plans,
as they may be in effect from time to time.
•
Mr. Lynch will continue to be eligible to participate in the Company’s employee nonqualified deferred compensation plan and its 401(k) savings
plan.
•
Mr. Lynch will continue to be subject to the Company’s executive stock ownership guidelines. Beginning April 1, 2020, he will be required to own
common stock with a value of at least six times his annual base salary.
Election of Mr. Lynch to the Board
On February 12, 2020, the Board unanimously approved the election of Mr. Lynch, effective April 1, 2020, to fill the vacancy to be created when Ms. Story
retires and steps down from the Board. Mr. Lynch will serve a term to commence April 1, 2020 and ending on the date of the Company’s 2020 Annual Meeting of
Shareholders (the “Annual Meeting”), and until his successor has been elected and qualified, or until his earlier death, resignation or removal. Mr. Lynch will not
serve on any committees of the Board. On that same day, the Board nominated Mr. Lynch, effective April 1, 2020, as a nominee for election as a director at the
Annual Meeting, to serve a term commencing on the date of the Annual Meeting and ending on the date of the Company’s 2021 Annual Meeting of Shareholders,
and until his successor has been elected and qualified, or until his earlier death, resignation or removal.
Other than as part of or in connection with the compensatory and other arrangements with Mr. Lynch described above, in connection with his election to the
Board, (i) there are no other arrangements or understandings between Mr. Lynch and any other person, pursuant to which Mr. Lynch was selected as a director, (ii)
no material plan, contract or arrangement has been entered into with Mr. Lynch, and no such plan, contract or arrangement with Mr. Lynch has been materially
amended, and (iii) no grant of any award to Mr. Lynch or modification of an existing award has been made. Also, Mr. Lynch does not have any direct or indirect
material interest in any transaction that would require reporting under Item 404(a) of Regulation S-K.
127

Table of Contents
PART III
ITEM 10.
DIRECTORS, EXECUTIVE OFFICERS AND CORPORATE GOVERNANCE
The information required by this item and not given below or in Item 1—Business—Executive Officers of this Form 10-K, is incorporated by reference
from the Company’s Proxy Statement for the 2020 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, to be filed with the SEC within 120 days following the end of the fiscal year
covered by this report, under the captions entitled “Board of Directors and Corporate Governance” and “Proposal 1—Election of Directors.”
The Company has adopted a Code of Ethics, which applies to directors, officers and employees. The full text of the Code of Ethics is publicly available on
the Company’s website at https://amwater.com. The Company intends to post on its website any amendments to the Code of Ethics and any waivers of such
provisions granted to certain principal officers.
ITEM 11.
EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference in the Company’s Proxy Statement for the 2020 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, under the
captions  entitled  “Proposal  1—Election  of  Directors—Director  Compensation  Table,”  “Compensation  Discussion  and  Analysis,”  “Executive  Compensation,”
“Compensation Committee Interlocks and Insider Participation” and “Compensation Committee Report.”
ITEM 12.
SECURITY  OWNERSHIP  OF  CERTAIN  BENEFICIAL  OWNERS  AND  MANAGEMENT  AND  RELATED  STOCKHOLDER
MATTERS
Information required by this item setting forth the security ownership of certain beneficial owners and management is incorporated by reference in the
Company’s  Proxy  Statement  for  the 2020 Annual  Meeting  of  Shareholders,  under  the  captions  entitled  “Certain  Beneficial  Ownership  Matters—Security
Ownership  of  Management,”  “Certain  Beneficial  Ownership  Matters—Security  Ownership  of  Certain  Beneficial  Owners”  and  “Equity  Compensation  Plan
Information.”
ITEM 13.
CERTAIN RELATIONSHIPS AND RELATED TRANSACTIONS, AND DIRECTOR INDEPENDENCE
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference in the Company’s Proxy Statement for the 2020 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, under the
caption  entitled  “Board  of  Directors  and  Corporate  Governance—Board  Review  of  Related  Person  Transactions”  and  “Proposal  1—Election  of  Directors—
Director Independence.”
ITEM 14.
PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTANT FEES AND SERVICES
Information required by this item is incorporated by reference in the Company’s Proxy Statement for the 2020 Annual Meeting of Shareholders, under the
caption  entitled  “Proposal  3—Ratification  of  Appointment  of  Independent  Registered  Public  Accounting  Firm—Fees  Paid  to  Independent  Registered  Public
Accounting Firm” and “Proposal 3—Ratification of Appointment of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm—Pre-Approval of Services Provided by
Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.”
128

Table of Contents
PART IV
ITEM 15.
EXHIBITS AND FINANCIAL STATEMENT SCHEDULES
(a)
The following documents have been filed as a part of this Form 10-K:
1.
The  financial  statements  listed  in  the  “Index  to  Consolidated  Financial  Statements”  contained  in Item  8—Financial  Statements  and
Supplementary Data of this Form 10-K are hereby incorporated by reference in response to this Item 15(a).
2.
Financial  statement  schedules  have  been  omitted  since  they  are  either  not  required  or  are  not  applicable  as  the  information  is  otherwise
included in the financial statements or notes thereto.
3.
Exhibits. The list of documents contained in “Exhibit Index” below is provided in response to this Item 15(a). The warranties, representations
and covenants contained in any of the agreements included or incorporated by reference herein or which appear as exhibits hereto should not
be relied upon by buyers, sellers or holders of the Company’s or its subsidiaries’ securities and are not intended as warranties, representations
or covenants to any individual or entity except as specifically set forth in such agreement.
The responses to Items 15(b) and (c) of Form 10-K are included above in response to Item 15(a).
EXHIBIT INDEX
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
2.1#
Stock Purchase Agreement, dated November 20, 2019, by and among American Water Works Company, Inc., New York American Water Company, Inc. and Liberty
Utilities Co. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 2.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed November 20,
2019).
3.1
Restated Certificate of Incorporation of American Water Works Company, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 3.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed November 6, 2008).
3.2
Amended  and  Restated  Bylaws  of  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  3.2  to  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 5, 2015).
4.1
Indenture, dated as of October 22, 2007, between American Water Capital Corp. and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.4
to American Water Capital Corp.’s Registration Statement on Form S-4, File No. 333-148284, and American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Registration Statement on
Form S-4, File No. 333-148284-01, filed December 21, 2007).
4.2
Indenture, dated as of December 4, 2009, between American Water Capital Corp. and Wells Fargo Bank, National Association (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1
to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed December 3, 2010).
4.3
Officers’ Certificate, dated December 15, 2010, establishing the 6.00% Senior Monthly Notes due 2040 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to American Water
Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed December 15, 2010).
4.4
Officers’ Certificate, dated December 17, 2012, establishing the 4.300% Senior Notes due 2042 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed December 17, 2012).
4.5
Officers’ Certificate, dated November 20, 2013, establishing the 3.850% Senior Notes due 2024 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed November 20, 2013).
4.6
Officers’ Certificate,  dated August 14,  2014, establishing  the 3.400% Senior Notes due 2025 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit  4.1 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 14, 2014).
4.7
Officers’ Certificate, dated August 14, 2014, providing for a further issuance of the 4.300% Senior Notes due 2042 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to American
Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 14, 2014).
4.8
Officers’ Certificate,  dated August 13,  2015, establishing  the 4.300% Senior Notes due 2045 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit  4.1 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 13, 2015).
4.9
Officers’ Certificate, dated August 13, 2015, providing for a further issuance of the 3.400% Senior Notes due 2025 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.3 to American
Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 13, 2015).
4.10
Officers’ Certificate, dated November 17, 2016, establishing the 3.000% Senior Notes due 2026 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.1 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed November 17, 2016).
4.11
Officers’ Certificate, dated November 17, 2016, establishing the 4.000% Senior Notes due 2046 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed November 17, 2016).
4.12
Officers’ Certificate,  dated August 10,  2017, establishing  the 2.950% Senior Notes due 2027 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit  4.1 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 10, 2017).
4.13
Officers’ Certificate,  dated August 10,  2017, establishing  the 3.750% Senior Notes due 2047 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit  4.2 to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 10, 2017).
4.14
Officer’s  Certificate,  dated  August  9,  2018,  establishing  the  3.750%  Senior  Notes  due  2028  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  4.1  to  American  Water  Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 9, 2018).
4.15
Officer’s  Certificate,  dated  August  9,  2018,  establishing  the  4.200%  Senior  Notes  due  2048  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  4.2  to  American  Water  Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed August 9, 2018).
4.16
Officers’  Certificate,  dated  May  13,  2019,  establishing  the  3.450%  Senior  Notes  due  2029  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  4.1  to  American  Water  Works
Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed on May 13, 2019).
4.17
Officers’ Certificate, dated May 13, 2019, establishing 4.150% Senior Notes due 2049 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 4.2 to American Water Works Company,
Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed on May 13, 2019).
129

Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
4.20
Description of American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Equity Securities (filed herewith).
10.1.1
Second Amended and Restated Credit Agreement, dated as of March 21, 2018, by and among American Water Works Company, Inc., American Water Capital Corp.,
each of the Lenders party thereto, Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as syndication agent, and Mizuho
Bank, Ltd., PNC Bank, National Association, and U.S. Bank National Association, as co-documentation agents (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to American
Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed on March 21, 2018).
10.1.2
Extension Agreement, dated as of April 9, 2019, among American Water Works Company, Inc., American Water Capital Corp., each of the Lenders party thereto, and
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association, as administrative agent (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.17.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly
Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.2
Support  Agreement,  dated  June  22,  2000,  together  with  First  Amendment  to  Support  Agreement,  dated  July  26,  2000,  by  and  between  American  Water  Works
Company, Inc. and American Water Capital Corp. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to American Water Capital Corp.’s Registration Statement on Form S-1,
File No. 333-145757-01, and American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Registration Statement on Form S-1, File No. 333-145757, filed October 11, 2007).
10.3.1*
Amended and Restated Letter Agreement between Loyd Warnock and American Water Works Company, Inc., dated May 7, 2014 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.4 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No. 001-34028, filed February 25, 2016).
10.3.2*
Amendment, dated April 25, 2018, to Amended and Restated Letter Agreement between Loyd Warnock and American Water Works Company, Inc. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.2.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.3.3*
Amendment, dated July 25, 2019, to Amended and Restated Letter Agreement between Loyd Warnock and American Water Works Company, Inc. (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1.3 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed October 30, 2019).
10.4.1*
Letter  Agreement,  dated  February  17,  2015,  between  Michael  A.  Sgro  and  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  10.4  to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 5, 2015).
10.4.2*
Amendment, dated December 6, 2018, to Letter Agreement between Michael A. Sgro and American Water Works Company, Inc. (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.6.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No. 001-34028, filed February 19, 2019).
10.5*
Executive Employment Agreement, dated November 1, 2018, between Radhakrishnan Swaminathan and American Water Works Service Company, Inc. (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.7 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No. 001-34028, filed February 19, 2019).
10.6*
Offer Letter for Employment, dated May 1, 2019, between American Water Works Company, Inc. and M. Susan Hardwick (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed July 31, 2019).
10.7*
Amended and Restated American Water Works Company, Inc. Deferred Compensation Plan, dated as of January 1, 2001 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9 to
American Water Capital Corp.’s Registration Statement on Form S-1, File No. 333-145757-01, and American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Registration Statement on
Form S-1, File No. 333-145757, filed October 11, 2007).
10.8*
Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan for Non-Employee Directors of American Water Works Company, Inc., as amended and restated, effective as of January 1,
2009 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.38 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Registration Statement on Form S-1, File No. 333-155245, filed November
18, 2008).
10.9.1*
Nonqualified Savings and Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of American Water Works Company, Inc. and Its Designated Subsidiaries, as amended and
restated, effective as of January 1, 2009 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.37 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Registration Statement on Form S-1,
File No. 333-155245, filed November 18, 2008).
10.9.2*
Nonqualified Savings and Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of American Water Works Company, Inc. and Its Designated Subsidiaries, as amended and
restated, effective as of January 1, 2017 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No.
001-34028, filed February 19, 2019).
10.9.3*
Nonqualified Savings and Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of American Water Works Company, Inc. and Its Designated Subsidiaries, as amended and
restated, effective as of June 1, 2018 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.9.3 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No.
001-34028, filed February 19, 2019).
10.9.4*
Amendment No. 2019-1 to the Nonqualified Savings and Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of American Water Works Company, Inc. and its Designated
Subsidiaries,  as  amended  and  restated,  effective  as  of  November  1,  2019  (incorporated  by  reference  to  Exhibit  4.1.2  to  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.’s
Registration Statement on Form S-8, File No. 333-235598, filed December 19. 2019).
10.10*
Amended and Restated American Water Works Company, Inc. Executive Retirement Plan, dated as of March 1, 2007 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.8 to
American Water Capital Corp.’s Registration Statement on Form S-1, File No. 333-145757-01, and American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Registration Statement on
Form S-1, File No. 333-145757, filed October 11, 2007).
10.11.1*
American Water Works Company, Inc. Annual Incentive Plan (incorporated by reference to Appendix C to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Definitive Proxy
Statement, File No. 001-34028, filed March 27, 2015).
10.11.2*
Amendment  2016-1  to  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  Annual  Incentive  Plan  (now  known  as  the  Annual  Performance  Plan),  effective  January  1,  2016
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.14.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No. 001-34028, filed February 25, 2016).
10.12*
Second Amended and Restated American Water Works Company, Inc. and its Designated Subsidiaries 2017 Nonqualified Employee Stock Purchase Plan, adopted on
July 27, 2018, effective as of February 5, 2019 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q,
File No. 001-34028, filed October 31, 2018).
10.13.1*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan, as amended (incorporated by reference to Appendix B to American Water Works
Company, Inc.’s Definitive Proxy Statement, File No. 001-34028, filed March 27, 2015).
10.13.2*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2014 Nonqualified Stock Option Grant Form for ML2 – L5 (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.6 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 7, 2014).
10.13.3*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan May 2014 Nonqualified Stock Option Grant Form for Susan N. Story (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 6, 2014).
10.13.5*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2015 Nonqualified Stock Option Grant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.13.10
to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No. 001-34028, filed February 25, 2016).
10.13.6*
Amendment to American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2015 Nonqualified Stock Option Grant (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.13.11 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No. 001-34028, filed February 25, 2016).
130

Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
10.13.7*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2015 Nonqualified Stock Option Grant (for certain executives) (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.13.12 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Annual Report on Form 10-K, File No. 001-34028, filed February 25, 2016).
10.13.8*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Nonqualified Stock Option Grant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1.1 to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.9*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Nonqualified Stock Option Grant (for certain executives) (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.1.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.10*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.2.1 to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.11*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for certain executives) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.2.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.12*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1.1 to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 3, 2017).
10.13.13*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for certain executives) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 3, 2017).
10.13.14*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.3.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.15*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.3.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.16*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.3.3 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.17*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.3.4 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 4, 2016).
10.13.18*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.2.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 3, 2017).
10.13.19*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.2.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 3, 2017).
10.13.20*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.2.3 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 3, 2017).
10.13.21*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.2.4 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 3, 2017).
10.13.22*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2011 Stock Unit Grant Form for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 3, 2011).
10.13.23*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2012 Stock Unit Grant Form for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 2, 2012).
10.13.24*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2013 Stock Unit Grant Form for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 7, 2013).
10.13.25*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2014 Stock Unit Grant Form for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.5 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 6, 2014).
10.13.26*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2015 Stock Unit Grant Form for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 5, 2015).
10.13.27*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2007 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2016 Stock Unit Grant Form for Non-Employee Directors (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 3, 2016).
10.14.1*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s
Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 2, 2017).
10.14.2*
American Water  Works Company,  Inc.  2017  Omnibus  Equity  Compensation  Plan  2017  Restricted  Stock  Unit  Grant (incorporated by  reference to  Exhibit  10.3 to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed May 12, 2017).
10.14.3*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for certain executives) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.4 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed May 12, 2017).
10.14.4*
American Water  Works Company,  Inc.  2017  Omnibus  Equity  Compensation  Plan  2018  Restricted  Stock  Unit  Grant (incorporated by  reference to  Exhibit  10.3 to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.5*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for certain executives) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.4 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.6*
American Water  Works Company,  Inc. 2017 Omnibus  Equity Compensation  Plan  2018  Restricted  Stock Unit  Grant (for Chief  Executive Officer, Chief  Financial
Officer and Chief Operating Officer) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.5 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No.
001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.7*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for Loyd A. Warnock) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.6 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
131

Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
10.14.8*
American Water  Works Company,  Inc.  2017  Omnibus  Equity  Compensation  Plan  2019  Restricted  Stock  Unit  Grant (incorporated by  reference to  Exhibit  10.1 to
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.9*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for certain executives) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.10*
American Water  Works Company,  Inc. 2017 Omnibus  Equity Compensation  Plan  2019  Restricted  Stock Unit  Grant (for Chief  Executive Officer, Chief  Financial
Officer and Chief Operating Officer) (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No.
001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.11*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for Loyd A. Warnock) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.4 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.12*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for Radhakrishnan Swaminathan), (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.5 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.13*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for M. Susan Hardwick) (incorporated by reference
to Exhibit 10.2 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed July 31, 2019).
10.14.14*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Restricted Stock Unit Grant (for Brian Chin) (incorporated by reference to
Exhibit 10.5 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed July 31, 2019).
10.14.15*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.5 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed May 12, 2017).
10.14.16*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.6 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed May 12, 2017).
10.14.17*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.7 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed May 12, 2017).
10.14.18*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.8 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed May 12, 2017).
10.14.19*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.7 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.20*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.8 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.21*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-3 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.9 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.22*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A (for Loyd A. Warnock) (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.10 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.23*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.11 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.24*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.12 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.25*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-3 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.13 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.26*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B (for Loyd A. Warnock) (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.14 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 2, 2018).
10.14.27*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-1 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.6 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.28*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-2 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.7 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.29*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A-3 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.8 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.30*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A (for Loyd A. Warnock), (incorporated by
reference to Exhibit 10.9 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.31*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A (for Radhakrishnan Swaminathan),
(incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.10 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed May 1, 2019).
10.14.32*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form A (for M. Susan Hardwick) (incorporated
by reference to Exhibit 10.3 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed July 31, 2019).
10.14.33*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-1 (corrected) (filed herewith).
10.14.34*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B-3 (corrected) (filed herewith).
10.14.35*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B (corrected) (for Loyd A. Warnock) (filed
herewith).
10.14.36*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Performance Stock Unit Grant Form B (corrected) (for M. Susan Hardwick)
(filed herewith).
132

Table of Contents
Exhibit
Number
Exhibit Description
10.14.37*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2017 Non-Employee Director Stock Unit Grant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.9 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Current Report on Form 8-K, File No. 001-34028, filed May 12, 2017).
10.14.38*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2018 Non-Employee Director Stock Unit Grant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.1 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed August 1, 2018).
10.14.39*
American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation Plan 2019 Non-Employee Director Stock Unit Grant (incorporated by reference to Exhibit
10.6 to American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed July 31, 2019).
10.15*
American Water Works Company, Inc. Executive Severance Policy, dated as of December 16, 2008 (incorporated by reference to Exhibit 10.1 to American Water
Works Company, Inc.’s Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q, File No. 001-34028, filed November 3, 2010).
10.16.1*
American Water Works Company, Inc. Pension Plan for Employees, amended and restated effective January 1, 2016 (filed herewith)
10.16.2*
American Water Works Company, Inc. Amendment Two to the Pension Plan for Employees, amended and restated effective January 1, 2016 (filed herewith)
21.1
Subsidiaries of American Water Works Company, Inc. (filed herewith).
23.1
Consent of PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP (filed herewith).
31.1
Certification of Susan N. Story, President and Chief Executive Officer, pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (filed herewith).
31.2
Certification of M. Susan Hardwick, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to Section 302 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (filed herewith).
32.1
Certification of Susan N. Story, President and Chief Executive Officer, pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (furnished herewith).
32.2
Certification of M. Susan Hardwick, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, pursuant to Section 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (furnished herewith).
101.INS
XBRL Instance Document - the instance document does not appear in the Interactive Data File because its XBRL tags are embedded within the Inline XBRL document.
101.SCH
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.DEF
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
101.LAB
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
101.PRE
Inline XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File (formatted as Inline XBRL with applicable taxonomy extension information contained in Exhibits 101)
#
Certain schedules and exhibits to this agreement have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. The Company will furnish the omitted
schedules and exhibits to the SEC upon request.
*
Denotes a management contract or compensatory plan or arrangement.
 Instruments defining the rights of holders of certain issues of long-term debt of the Company and certain of its consolidated subsidiaries have not been filed
as exhibits to this report because the authorized principal amount of any one of such issues does not exceed 10% of the Company’s consolidated total assets. The
Company agrees to furnish a copy of each such instrument to the SEC upon request.
The Stock Purchase Agreement filed as Exhibit 2.1 herewith has been included to provide investors and security holders with information regarding its
terms. It is not intended to provide any other factual information about the parties thereto, or any of their respective subsidiaries or affiliates. The representations,
warranties and covenants contained in the Stock Purchase Agreement (i) were made by the parties thereto only for purposes of that agreement and as of specific
dates; (ii) were made solely for the benefit of the parties to the Stock Purchase Agreement; (iii) may be subject to limitations agreed upon by the contracting
parties, including being qualified by confidential disclosures exchanged between the parties in connection with the execution of the Stock Purchase Agreement
(such disclosures include information that has been included in public disclosures, as well as additional non-public information); (iv) may have been made for the
purposes of allocating contractual risk between the parties to the Stock Purchase Agreement instead of establishing these matters as facts; and (v) may be subject to
standards of materiality applicable to the contracting parties that differ from those applicable to investors.
Investors should not rely on the representations, warranties and covenants or any descriptions thereof as characterizations of the actual state of facts or
condition of the parties thereto, or any of their respective subsidiaries or affiliates. Additionally, the representations, warranties, covenants, conditions and other
terms  of  the  Stock  Purchase  Agreement  may  be  subject  to  subsequent  waiver  or  modification.  Moreover,  information  concerning  the  subject  matter  of  the
representations, warranties and covenants may change after the date of the Stock Purchase Agreement, which subsequent information may or may not be fully
reflected in the Company’s public disclosures. The Stock Purchase Agreement should not be read alone, but should instead be read in conjunction with the other
information regarding the Company and its New York subsidiary that is or will be contained in, or incorporated by reference into, the reports and other documents
that are filed by the Company with the SEC.
133

Table of Contents
SIGNATURES
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on the 18th day of February, 2020.
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
BY:
 
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
 
Susan N. Story
 
President and Chief Executive Officer
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this Annual Report on Form 10-K has been signed on the 18th day of February, 2020,
by the following persons in the capacities indicated.
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
/s/ JEFFREY N. EDWARDS
Susan N. Story
President and Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer and Director)
Jeffrey N. Edwards
(Director)
 
/s/ M. SUSAN HARDWICK
/s/ MARTHA CLARK GOSS
M. Susan Hardwick
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
(Principal Financial Officer)
Martha Clark Goss
(Director)
 
/s/ MELISSA K. WIKLE 
/s/ VERONICA M. HAGEN
Melissa K. Wikle
Vice President and Controller
(Principal Accounting Officer)
Veronica M. Hagen
(Director)
/s/ KIMBERLY J. HARRIS
 
/s/ JULIA L. JOHNSON
Kimberly J. Harris 
(Director)
Julia L. Johnson
(Director)
/s/ PATRICIA L. KAMPLING
 
/s/ KARL F. KURZ
Patricia L. Kampling 
(Director)
Karl F. Kurz
(Director)
 
/s/ GEORGE MacKENZIE 
/s/ JAMES G. STAVRIDIS
George MacKenzie
(Director)
James G. Stavridis
(Director)
134

Exhibit 4.20
DESCRIPTION OF AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.’S EQUITY SECURITIES
The following description of the Company’s common stock, par value $0.01 per share (the “Common Stock”), is not intended to be complete. For more
information  regarding  the  Common  Stock,  please  refer  to  the  Company’s  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  (the  “Certificate  of  Incorporation”),  and  the
Company’s Amended and Restated Bylaws (the “Bylaws”), which have been filed as Exhibits 3.1 and 3.2, respectively, to the Company’s Annual Report on Form
10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019. The following descriptions are based on the Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws in effect as of February 18, 2020.
The terms and provisions of the Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws are hereby incorporated by reference herein. The terms of these securities also may be
affected by the General Corporation Law of the State of Delaware (the “DGCL”).
General
The Company’s authorized capital stock consists of 500,000,000 shares of Common Stock and 50,000,000 shares of preferred stock. As of February 13,
2020, there were 180,974,719 shares of Common Stock outstanding and no shares of preferred stock outstanding.
Common Stock
Voting Rights
Other than with respect to director elections, except as otherwise required by law, all matters  to be voted on by the Company’s shareholders  must be
approved by a majority of the shares present in person or proxy at such meeting and entitled to vote on the subject matter. With respect to uncontested director
elections, the Bylaws require that in order to be elected, a director nominee must receive a majority of the votes cast (for this purpose, a majority of the votes cast
means that the number of shares voted “for” a director nominee must exceed the number of votes cast “against” that nominee). For contested director elections
where the number of nominees exceeds the number of directors to be elected, the Bylaws require that the directors shall be elected by the vote of a plurality of the
shares represented in person or by proxy at any such meeting and entitled to vote on the election of directors.
Dividends
Holders of Common Stock will share equally in any dividend declared by the Company’s board of directors (the “Board”), subject to the rights of the
holders of any outstanding preferred stock.
Liquidation Rights
In the event of any voluntary or involuntary liquidation, dissolution or winding up of the Company’s affairs, holders of Common Stock would be entitled,
after payment of the liquidation preference to all holders of any outstanding preferred stock, to share ratably in the Company’s assets that are legally available for
distribution to shareholders after payment of liabilities. The Company must pay the applicable distribution to any holders of its preferred stock before it may pay
distributions to the holders of Common Stock.
Other Rights
The Company’s shareholders have no preemptive or other rights to subscribe for additional shares.
Preferred Stock
The Board may authorize the issuance of preferred stock from time to time in one or more series, without shareholder approval. Subject to the limits
imposed  by  the  DGCL,  the  Board  is  authorized  to  fix  for  any  series  of  preferred  stock  the  number  of  shares  of  such  series  and  the  voting  powers  (if  any),
designation, preferences and relative, participating, optional or other special rights, and qualifications, limitations or restrictions of such series. The Board is also
authorized to increase or decrease the number of shares of any series, but not below the number of shares of that series then outstanding, without any further vote
or action by the Company’s shareholders.
The Board may authorize the issuance of preferred stock with voting or conversion rights that affect adversely the voting power or other rights of holders of
Common Stock. The issuance of preferred stock, while providing flexibility in connection with possible acquisitions and other corporate purposes, could have the
effect of delaying, deferring or preventing a change in control, causing the market price of a share of Common Stock to decline, or impairing the voting and other
rights of the holders of Common Stock.

Certain Anti-Takeover Provisions of the Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws, and the DGCL
The following provisions of the Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws could deter, delay or prevent a third party from acquiring the Company, even if
doing so would benefit the Company’s shareholders.
Undesignated Preferred Stock
The ability to authorize undesignated preferred stock makes it possible for the Board to authorize the issuance of preferred stock with super voting, special
approval, dividend or other rights or preferences on a discriminatory basis that could impede the success of any attempt to acquire the Company. These and other
provisions may have the effect of deferring, delaying or discouraging hostile takeovers, or changes in control or management of the Company.
Requirements for Advance Notification of Shareholder Meetings, Nominations and Proposals
The Bylaws provide that special meetings of shareholders may be called only upon the request of the majority of the members of the Board, upon request of
the Chairman of the Board, or by the Secretary of the Company upon request of shareholders holding at least 15% of the outstanding Common Stock. The Bylaws
prohibit the conduct of any business at a special meeting other than as specified in the notice for such meeting.
The Bylaws establish advance notice procedures with respect to shareholder proposals for annual meetings and the nomination of candidates for election as
directors, other than nominations made by or at the direction of the Board or a committee thereof. A shareholder who wishes to bring a matter before a meeting
must comply with the Company’s advance notice requirements and provide the Company with certain information. Additionally, vacancies and newly created
directorships may be filled only by a vote of a majority of the members of the Board then in office, even though less than a quorum, or by shareholders. These
provisions may defer, delay or discourage a potential acquiror from conducting a solicitation of proxies to elect the acquiror’s own slate of directors or otherwise
attempting to obtain control of the Company.
Shareholder Action by Written Consent
As permitted by Section 228 of the DGCL, the Certificate of Incorporation states that any action required or permitted to be taken by the Company’s
shareholders must be effected at a duly called annual or special meeting and may not be effected by consent in writing by such shareholders.
Certain Anti-Takeover Matters
A significant number of the Company’s regulated subsidiaries are subject to economic regulation by state public utility commissions. Some of these states
have enacted laws that require regulatory approval for the acquisition of “control” of any regulated utility. In those states, obtaining “control” of the parent or any
other company that controls a regulated utility also requires prior regulatory approval. The threshold for a change in control is a fact-specific inquiry that varies by
state. For example, in some states, a presumption of control will arise when an acquiring party acquires more than 9.9% of the voting securities of the regulated
utility or the controlling entity. In addition to ownership, other states may analyze the degree of influence or control an acquiror may exert over the company. Any
person acquiring Common Stock in an offering or in any other purchase of Common Stock in an amount sufficient to trigger a change in control under state law
would need the prior approval of the applicable state public utility commission.
Certain Other Provisions of the Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws and the DGCL
Board of Directors
The Certificate of Incorporation provides that the number of directors is fixed in the manner provided in the Bylaws. The Bylaws provide that the number of
directors will be fixed from time to time by the Board.
Business Combinations under Delaware Law
The Company is subject to Section 203 of the DGCL, which prohibits a publicly held Delaware corporation from engaging in a “business combination” with
an “interested stockholder” for a period of three years after the time the shareholder became an “interested stockholder,” subject to certain exceptions, including if,
prior  to  such  time,  the  board  of  directors  approved  the  business  combination  or  the  transaction  which  resulted  in  the  shareholder  becoming  an  “interested
stockholder.” “Business combinations” include mergers, asset sales and other transactions resulting in a financial benefit to the “interested stockholder.” Subject to
various exceptions, an “interested stockholder” is a person who, together with his or her affiliates and associates, owns, or within the prior three years did own,
15% or more of

the corporation’s outstanding voting stock. These restrictions generally prohibit or delay the accomplishment of mergers or other takeover or change-in-control
attempts that are not approved by a company’s board of directors.
Limitations of Liability and Indemnification of Directors and Officers
The DGCL authorizes corporations to limit or eliminate the personal liability of directors to corporations and their shareholders for monetary damages for
breaches of directors’ fiduciary duties. The Certificate of Incorporation includes a provision that eliminates the personal liability of directors for monetary damages
for actions taken as a director to the fullest extent authorized by the DGCL. The DGCL does not permit exculpation for liability:
•
for breach of the duty of loyalty;
•
for acts or omissions not in good faith or involving intentional misconduct or knowing violation of law;
•
under Section 174 of the DGCL (relating to unlawful dividends or stock repurchases); or
•
for transactions from which the director derived an improper personal benefit.
The Certificate of Incorporation and Bylaws provide that the Company will indemnify its directors and officers to the fullest extent permitted by law. The
Bylaws also expressly authorize the Company to carry directors’ and officers’ insurance providing indemnification for its directors, officers and certain employees
and agents for certain liabilities.
The  limitation  of  liability  and  indemnification  provisions  in  the  Certificate  of  Incorporation  and  Bylaws may  discourage  shareholders  from  bringing  a
lawsuit against the Company’s directors for breach of their fiduciary duty. These provisions may also have the effect of reducing the likelihood of derivative
litigation against the Company’s directors and officers, even though such an action, if successful, might otherwise benefit the Company and its shareholders. In
addition, an investment in the Common Stock may be adversely affected to the extent the Company pays the costs of settlement and damage awards against
directors and officers in accordance with these indemnification provisions.
Transfer Agent and Registrar
American Stock Transfer & Trust Company, LLC serves as the registrar and transfer agent for the Common Stock.
New York Stock Exchange Listing
The Common Stock is listed on the New York Stock Exchange under the trading symbol “AWK.”

Exhibit 10.14.33
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
2017 OMNIBUS EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN
PERFORMANCE STOCK UNIT GRANT
This  PERFORMANCE  STOCK  UNIT  GRANT,  dated  as  of  February  14,  2019  (the  “Date  of  Grant”),  is  delivered  by
American Water Works Company, Inc. (the “Company”) to _________ ________________ (the “Participant”).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the Committee (as defined in the American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation
Plan (the “Plan”)) has adopted a 2019 Long Term Performance Plan (“2019 LTPP”) pursuant to which designated employees will be
granted equity awards (collectively, the “Equity Award”) for shares of Common Stock of the Company, par value $0.01 per share
(the “Company Stock”);
WHEREAS, the Equity Award is comprised of three separate grants: a restricted stock unit and two performance stock unit
grants;
WHEREAS, the Committee has determined that the Participant is eligible to participate in the 2019 LTPP and to grant the
Participant an Equity Award under the 2019 LTPP; and
WHEREAS,  the  Committee  has  determined  that  the  performance  stock  unit  portion  of  the  Equity  Award  granted  to  the
Participant pursuant to the 2019 LTPP shall be issued under the Plan, and the terms and conditions of the performance stock unit
grant that may be earned based on Performance Goals (defined below) relating to compounded earnings per share, as set forth in
Exhibit A attached hereto, shall be memorialized in this grant (the “Grant”).
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties to this Grant, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree as follows:
1.
Grant of Performance Stock Units. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Grant and the Plan, the Company
hereby grants to the Participant ______ performance stock units (the “Performance Units”). The Performance Units are contingently
awarded and will be earned and distributable if and only to the extent that the Performance Goals and other conditions set forth in
this Grant are met. Each Performance Unit shall be a phantom right and shall be equivalent to one share of Company Stock on the
applicable payment date, as described in Paragraph 5 below. The number of Performance Units set forth above is equal to the target
number of shares of Company Stock that the Participant will earn for 100% achievement of the Performance Goals described in this
Grant (the “Target Award”).
2.    Performance Unit Account. The Company shall establish and maintain a Performance Unit account as a bookkeeping account on
its records (the “Performance Unit Account”) for the Participant and shall record in such Performance Unit Account the number of
Performance Units
1

granted to the Participant. The Participant shall not have any interest in any fund or specific assets of the Company by reason of this
grant or the Performance Unit Account established for the Participant.
3.    Performance Goals.
(a)    Unless a Change of Control (as defined below) occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period (as defined below), the
distribution  of  the  shares  of  Company  Stock  attributable  to  the  Performance  Units  is  contingent  upon  achievement  of  the
performance goals set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto (the “Performance Goals”) and the Participant satisfying the continuation of
employment and service with the Employer (as defined in the Plan) requirement described in Paragraph 4 below.
(b)    As soon as administratively practicable following the end of the Performance Period (as defined in Paragraph 3(d)
below),  the  Committee  will  determine  whether  and  to  what  extent  the  Performance  Goals  have  been  met  and  the  number  of
Performance Units the Participant has earned, if any. Except as described in Paragraph 4 below, the Participant must be employed
by, or providing service to, the Employer on the last day of the Performance Period in order to earn the Performance Units.
(c)    If a Change of Control occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period, the Company is not the surviving corporation
(or survives only as a subsidiary of another corporation or entity (the “surviving corporation”)) and the Performance Units are not
converted to similar grants of the surviving corporation (or a parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation), then the Performance
Period will end on the date of the Change of Control and the Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as
of the date of the Change of Control (the “Change of Control Date”). In the event the Participant’s Performance Units are assumed
by the surviving corporation but the Participant ceases to be employed by, or providing service to, the surviving corporation (or a
parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation) within twelve (12) months after the date of the Change of Control on account of (i)
a termination of such Participant’s employment by the surviving corporation (or a parent of subsidiary of the surviving corporation)
for any reason other than on account of Cause (as defined in paragraph 4(c) hereof), or on account of death or Disability (each as
defined in the Plan), or (ii) a termination of employment or service by the Participant for Good Reason (as defined in the Plan), then
the  Performance  Period  will  end  on  the  date  of  such  termination  of  employment  or  service  (the  “Termination  Date”)  and  the
Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as of the Termination Date. For purposes of this Grant, “Change
of Control” shall mean as such term is defined in the Plan, except that a Change of Control shall not be deemed to have occurred for
purposes of this Grant unless the event constituting the Change of Control constitutes a change in ownership or effective control of
the Company, or in the ownership of a substantial portion of the assets of the Company, within the meaning of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and its corresponding regulations.
(d)    For purposes of this Grant, the term “Performance Period” shall mean the three (3)-year period beginning on January 1,
2019 and ending December 31, 2021.
2

4.    Termination of Employment or Service.
(a)    Except as set forth in Paragraph 3(c), if, at least one year after the beginning of the Performance Period, but prior to the
end of the Performance Period, the Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on account of any
reason other than a termination for Cause (as defined below), the Participant will earn a pro-rata portion of the Performance Units, if
the Performance Goals and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the Performance Period. The pro-rata portion
earned will be equal to the number of Performance Units that would have been earned if the Participant had remained employed
through the last day of the Performance Period, multiplied by a fraction, which fraction shall be equal to (i) 1/3, if the Participant’s
employment or service with the Employer terminates on or after January 31, 2020, but prior to January 31, 2021; (ii) 2/3, if the
Participant’s employment or service with the Employer terminates on or after January 31, 2021, but prior to January 31, 2022; and
(iii) 3/3, if the Participant’s employment or service terminates with the Employer on or after January 31, 2022. If the Participant
ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer for any reason other than on account of Cause, the prorated number of
Performance Units earned by the Participant pursuant to this Paragraph 4(a) will be distributed in accordance with Paragraph 5.
(b)    If at any time prior to the earlier of January 31, 2020 or a Change of Control, the Participant’s employment or service
with the Employer is terminated by the Employer on account of any reason or no reason or by the Participant for any reason or no
reason, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall be immediately forfeited as of the date of the Participant’s termination
of employment or service with the Employer and the Participant shall not have any rights with respect to the distribution of any
portion of the Performance Units.
(c)    If at any time prior to the date the Performance Units are distributed in accordance with Paragraph 5 the Participant’s
employment or service with the Employer is terminated on account of Cause, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall
be  immediately  forfeited  and  the  Participant  will  not  have  any  rights  with  respect  to  the  distribution  of  any  portion  of  the
Performance Units, irrespective of the level of achievement of the Performance Goals. For purposes of this Grant, “Cause” shall
mean a finding by the Committee that the Participant (i) has breached his or her employment or service contract with the Employer,
if any; (ii) has engaged in disloyalty to the Employer, including, without limitation, fraud, embezzlement, theft, commission of a
felony or proven dishonesty; (iii) has disclosed trade secrets or confidential information of the Employer to persons not entitled to
receive such information; (iv) has breached any written noncompetition or non-solicitation agreement between the Participant and
the Employer; or (v) has engaged in such other behavior detrimental to the interests of the Employer as the Committee determines.
5.    Time and Form of Payment with Respect to Performance Units. Unless an election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 below, the
Participant will receive a distribution with respect to the Performance Units earned as described in Paragraphs 3 and 4 above within
seventy (70) days following the earliest of (a) January 31, 2022 (the “Distribution Date”), (b) the Change of Control Date, or (c) the
Termination  Date.  The  Performance  Units  will  be  distributed  in  shares  of  Company  Stock,  with  each  Performance  Unit  earned
equivalent to one share of Company Stock. Any
3

Performance  Units not earned because of the failure to attain the Performance  Goals and service condition  will be immediately
forfeited.
6.    Deferrals. The Participant may make an irrevocable election to defer the Distribution Date (or further defer the Deferred Date (as
defined below), if applicable) of all of the Performance Units that are earned, plus dividend equivalents earned on such Performance
Units as described in Paragraph 7 below, to a later date, provided that (a) the election shall not take effect until at least twelve
(12) months after the date on which the election is made, (b) the deferred Distribution Date cannot be earlier than five (5) years from
the original Distribution Date under Paragraph 5 above (or five (5) years from the applicable Deferred Date, if a subsequent deferral
of a Deferred Date is being made), and (c) the election must be made no less than twelve (12) months prior to the date of the
Distribution Date (twelve (12) months prior to the previously applicable Deferred Date, if a subsequent deferral of a Deferred Date is
being  made).  To  defer  the  Distribution  Date,  the  Participant  must  elect  to  defer  100%  of  the  Performance  Units,  including
corresponding dividend equivalents, earned by the Participant under this Grant, as well as 100% of the other performance stock
units, including corresponding dividend equivalents, earned by the Participant under the 2019 LTPP, complete the deferral election
form  provided  to  the  Participant  by  the  Committee,  and  return  such  form  to  the  Company  in  the  manner  and  by  the  deadline
provided therein. If the Participant desires to make a further deferral, the Participant must make such election on a separate form
provided by the Committee for such purpose. Any such election shall be made in accordance with section 409A of the Code and any
corresponding guidance and regulations issued under section 409A of the Code. Notwithstanding a Participant’s election pursuant to
this Paragraph, if the Change of Control Date or the Termination Date occurs prior to the Deferred Date, the distribution of the
Participant’s  earned  Performance  Units,  plus  corresponding  dividend,  equivalents  will  be  the  Change  of  Control  Date  or  the
Termination  Date,  as  applicable.  If  a  Distribution  Date  is  delayed  one  or  more  times  pursuant  to  this  Paragraph  6,  the  new
Distribution Date shall be referred to as the “Deferred Date.”
7.    Dividend Equivalents. Until the earlier of the Distribution Date (or the Deferred Date, if elected), the Change of Control Date or
the Termination Date, if any dividends are paid with respect to the shares of Company Stock, the Company shall credit to a dividend
equivalent  account  (the  “Dividend  Equivalent  Account”)  the  value  of  the  dividends  that  would  have  been  distributed  if  the
Performance Units credited to the Participant’s Performance Unit Account as of the date of payment of any such dividend were
shares of Company Stock. At the same time that the Performance Units are converted to shares of Company Stock and distributed to
the Participant, the Company shall pay to the Participant in a lump sum cash equal to the value of the dividends credited to the
Participant’s Dividend Equivalent Account; provided, however, that any dividends that were credited to the Participant’s Dividend
Equivalent Account that are attributable to Performance Units that have been forfeited as provided in Paragraph 3 and 4 above shall
be forfeited and not payable to the Participant. No interest shall accrue on any dividend equivalents credited to the Participant’s
Dividend Equivalent Account.
8.    Change of Control. Except as set forth above, the provisions set forth in the Plan applicable to a Change of Control (as defined in
the Plan) shall apply to the Performance Units, and, in the event of a Change of Control, the Committee may take such actions as it
deems appropriate pursuant to the Plan and is consistent with the requirements of section 409A of the Code.
4

9.    Acknowledgment  by  Participant.  By  accepting  this  Grant,  the  Participant  acknowledges  that,  with  respect  to  any  right  to
distribution pursuant to the Plan or this Grant, the Participant is and shall be an unsecured general creditor of the Company without
any preference as against other unsecured general creditors of the Company, and the Participant hereby covenants for himself or
herself, and anyone at any time claiming through or under the Participant, not to claim any such preference, and hereby disclaims
and waives any such preference which may at any time be at issue, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law.
10.    Restrictions on Issuance or Transfer of Shares of Company Stock.
(a)    To the extent permitted by Code section 409A, the obligation of the Company to deliver shares of Company Stock upon
the Participant earning the Performance Units shall be subject to the condition that shares of Company Stock be qualified for listing
on the New York Stock Exchange or another securities exchange and be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended,
and that any consent or approval of any governmental regulatory body that is necessary to issue shares of Company Stock has been
so obtained, and that shares of Company Stock may not be issued in whole or in part unless such listing, registration, qualification,
consent or approval shall have been effected or obtained free of any conditions not acceptable to the Committee.
(b)    The issuance of shares of Company Stock and the payment of cash to the Participant pursuant to this Grant is subject to
any applicable taxes and other laws or regulations of the United States or of any state having jurisdiction thereof.
(c)    As  a  condition  to  receive  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  upon  conversion  of  the  earned  Performance  Units,  the
Participant agrees:
(i)
to be bound by, and to comply with, the Company’s policies and practices (as they may be in effect
from time to time) regarding the restrictions or limitations on the transfer of such shares, and understands that the
Participant may be restricted or prohibited at any time and/or from time to time from selling, transferring, pledging,
donating, assigning, margining, mortgaging, hypothecating or otherwise encumbering the shares in accordance with
such policies and practices, including without limitation the Company’s Insider Trading and Prohibited Transactions
Policy and the Personal Securities Trading and Preclearance Practice; and
(ii)    that  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  received  by  the  Participant  upon  the  distribution  of  the  earned
Performance Units pursuant to this Grant shall be subject to the guidelines and restrictions set forth in the Company’s
Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines and Executive Stock Retention Requirements, effective as of March 4, 2015
(and as they may be amended, restated, supplemented and interpreted), and any applicable clawback or recoupment
policies  and  other  policies  that  may  be  implemented  by  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  or  a  duly  authorized
committee thereof, from time to time.
5

11.    Participant Undertaking. The Participant agrees to take whatever additional actions and execute whatever additional documents
the Company may deem necessary or advisable in order to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions imposed
on the Participant pursuant to the provisions of this Grant.
12.    Grant Subject to Plan Provisions. This Grant is made pursuant to the Plan, the terms of which are incorporated herein by
reference,  and  in  all  respects  shall  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  Plan.  In  the  event  of  any  contradiction,  distinction  or
difference between this Grant and the terms of the Plan, the terms of the Plan will control. Except as otherwise defined in this Grant,
capitalized  terms  used  in  this  Grant  shall  have  the  meanings  set  forth  in  the  Plan.  This  Grant  is  subject  to  the  interpretations,
regulations  and  determinations  concerning  the  Plan  established  from  time  to  time  by  the  Committee  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of the Plan, including, but not limited to, provisions pertaining to (a) rights and obligations with respect to withholding
taxes, (b) the registration, qualification or listing of the shares of Company Stock, (c) changes in capitalization of the Company, and
(d) other requirements of applicable law. The Committee shall have the authority to interpret and construe this Grant pursuant to the
terms of the Plan, its decisions shall be conclusive as to any questions arising hereunder. By accepting this Grant, the Participant
agrees (i) to be bound by the terms of the Plan and this Grant, (ii) to be bound by the determinations and decisions of the Committee
with respect to this Grant,  the Plan and the Participant’s  rights to benefits  under this Grant and the Plan, and (iii) that all such
determinations and decisions of the Committee shall be binding on the Participant, his or her beneficiaries and any other person
having or claiming an interest under this Grant and the Plan on behalf of the Participant.
13.    No Rights as Stockholder. The Participant shall not have any rights as a stockholder of the Company, including the right to any
cash dividends (except with respect to the dividend equivalent rights provided in Paragraph 7), or the right to vote, with respect to
any Performance Units.
14.    No Rights to Continued Employment or Service. This Grant shall not confer upon the Participant any right to be retained in the
employment  or  service  of  the  Employer  and  shall  not  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  right  of  the  Employer  to  terminate  the
Participant’s employment or service at any time. The right of the Employer to terminate at will the Participant’s employment or
service at any time for any reason is specifically reserved.
15.    Assignment and Transfers. No Performance Units or dividend equivalents awarded to the Participant under this Grant may be
transferred,  assigned,  pledged,  or  encumbered  by  the  Participant  and  the  Performance  Units  and  dividend  equivalents  shall  be
distributed during the lifetime of the Participant only for the benefit of the Participant. Any attempt to transfer, assign, pledge, or
encumber the Performance Units or dividend equivalents under this Grant by the Participant shall be null, void and without effect.
The rights and protections of the Company hereunder shall extend to any successors or assigns of the Company. This Grant may be
assigned by the Company without the Participant’s consent.
16.    Withholding. The Participant shall be required to pay to the Employer, or make other arrangements satisfactory to the Employer
to provide for the payment of, any federal, state, local or other taxes that the Employer is required to withhold with respect to the
grant, vesting and distribution of the Performance Units and dividend equivalents. Any tax withholding obligation of
6

the Employer with respect to the distribution of shares of Company Stock pursuant to the Performance Units that are earned by the
Participant under this Grant may, at the Committee’s discretion, be satisfied by having shares of Company Stock withheld up to an
amount that does not exceed the minimum applicable withholding tax rate for federal (including FICA), state, local and other tax
liabilities.
17.    Effect on Other Benefits. The value of shares of Company Stock and dividend equivalents distributed with respect to the
Performance  Units shall not be considered  eligible earnings for purposes of any other plans maintained  by the Company or the
Employer. Neither shall such value be considered part of the Participant’s compensation for purposes of determining or calculating
other benefits that are based on compensation, such as life insurance.
18.    Applicable Law.  The  validity,  construction,  interpretation  and  effect  of  this  Grant  shall  be  governed  by  and  construed  in
accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware, without giving effect to the conflict of laws provisions thereof.
19.    Notice. Any notice to the Company provided for in this instrument shall be addressed to the Company in care of the General
Counsel at the Company’s corporate headquarters, and any notice to the Participant shall be addressed to such Participant at the
current address shown on the payroll records of the Employer,  or to such other address as the Participant  may designate to the
Employer in writing. Any notice shall be (i) delivered by hand, (ii) delivered by a national overnight courier or delivery service, (iii)
enclosed in a properly sealed envelope addressed as stated above, registered and deposited, postage prepaid, in a post office regularly
maintained by the United States Postal Service, or (iv) in the case of notices by the Company to the Participant, delivered by e-mail
or other electronic means (with confirmation of receipt to be made by any oral, electronic or written means).
20.    Taxation; Code Section 409A. As applicable, this Grant is intended to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the
Code  and  shall  be  interpreted  and  administered  in  accordance  with  Code  section  409A.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  to  the
contrary herein, if the Performance Units constitute “deferred compensation” under section 409A of the Code, distributions made
with respect to this Grant may only be made in a manner and upon an event permitted by Code section 409A. To the extent that any
provision of the Grant would cause a conflict with the requirements of Code section 409A, or would cause the administration of the
Grant  to  fail  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Code  section  409A,  such  provision  shall,  to  the  extent  practicable  if  permitted  by
applicable  law,  be  deemed  null  and  void.  In the  event  that  it is  determined  not  feasible  to  void  a  provision  of  this  Grant,  such
provision  shall  be  construed  in  a  manner  as to  comply  with  the  Code  section  409A  requirements.  This  Grant  may  be  amended
without the consent of the Participant in any respect deemed by the Committee or its delegate to be necessary in order to comply
with Code section 409A. Unless a valid election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 above, in no event may the Participant, directly or
indirectly,  designate  the  calendar  year  of  distribution.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  or  the  Grant  to  the  contrary,  the
Participant  shall  be  solely  responsible  for  the  tax  consequences  of  this  Grant,  and  in  no  event  shall  the  Company  have  any
responsibility or liability if this Grant does not meet any applicable requirements of Code section 409A.
7

21.    Severability. In the event one or more of the provisions of this Grant should, for any reason, be held to be invalid, illegal or
unenforceable in any respect, such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability will not affect any other provisions of this Grant, and this
Grant will be construed as if such invalid, illegal or unenforceable provision had never been contained herein.
[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]
8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused its duly authorized officer to execute this Grant, effective as of the Date
of Grant.
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
By: Susan N. Story
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
Its: President and CEO
9

“PSU GRANT B – EPS”
EXHIBIT A
PERFORMANCE GOALS
The number of Performance Units that may be earned shall be determined based on the achievement of Compounded Earnings Per
Share Growth (as described below) over the Performance Period.
Compounded Earnings Per Share (“EPS”) Growth – will be calculated based on fully diluted EPS calculated in accordance with
US GAAP as reported in the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature. The starting point for the calculation will be adjusted EPS of $3.30 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The ending point for the calculation will be EPS for the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature.
The award scale for Compounded EPS Growth is as follows:
 
Compounded EPS Growth
Actual 
Compounded EPS 
Growth
Target Award
11.0% or more
200%
9.8%
175%
8.5%
100%
7.3%
25%
< 6.0%
0%
If actual achievement of the Performance Goal does not meet threshold performance (i.e., less than 6.0% for Compounded EPS
Growth, then that Performance Goal will be reflected in the final result for determining the number of earned Performance Units at
its assigned weighting with a 0%. The maximum award that may be earned for each Performance Goal is capped at 200%, and the
maximum award that may be earned by the Participant is capped at 200% of the Target Award.
10

Example:
The following is an example calculation for a Participant with a Target Award of 1,000 Performance Units:
Earnings Per Share
 
12/31/2018
12/31/2021
Adjusted
Illustration
Adjusted diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations
$
3.30
$
4.27
Compounded EPS growth
8.97%
Earned Performance Units
Achievement
Award
Compounded EPS Growth
8.97%
127.5%
In this example, the individual who was awarded a Target Grant of 1,000 Performance Units would earn 1,275 Performance Units
(1,000 x 1.275), which is convertible into an equivalent number of shares of Company Stock assuming all other terms and conditions
of the Grant have been satisfied.
11

CEO, COO, CFO FORExhibit 10.14.34
M – 2019 PSU GRANT
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
2017 OMNIBUS EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN
PERFORMANCE STOCK UNIT GRANT
This  PERFORMANCE  STOCK  UNIT  GRANT,  dated  as  of  February  14,  2019  (the  “Date  of  Grant”),  is  delivered  by
American Water Works Company, Inc. (the “Company”) to _________________ (the “Participant”).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the Committee (as defined in the American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation
Plan (the “Plan”)) has adopted a 2019 Long Term Performance Plan (“2019 LTPP”) pursuant to which designated employees will be
granted equity awards (collectively, the “Equity Award”) for shares of Common Stock of the Company, par value $0.01 per share
(the “Company Stock”);
WHEREAS, the Equity Award is comprised of three separate grants: a restricted stock unit and two performance stock unit
grants;
WHEREAS, the Committee has determined that the Participant is eligible to participate in the 2019 LTPP and to grant the
Participant an Equity Award under the 2019 LTPP; and
WHEREAS,  the  Committee  has  determined  that  the  performance  stock  unit  portion  of  the  Equity  Award  granted  to  the
Participant pursuant to the 2019 LTPP shall be issued under the Plan, and the terms and conditions of the performance stock unit
grant that may be earned based on Performance Goals (defined below) relating to compounded earnings per share, as set forth in
Exhibit A attached hereto, shall be memorialized in this grant (the “Grant”).
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties to this Grant, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree as follows:
1.
Grant of Performance Stock Units. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Grant and the Plan, the Company
hereby grants to the Participant ______ performance stock units (the “Performance Units”). The Performance Units are contingently
awarded and will be earned and distributable if and only to the extent that the Performance Goals and other conditions set forth in
this Grant are met. Each Performance Unit shall be a phantom right and shall be equivalent to one share of Company Stock on the
applicable payment date, as described in Paragraph 5 below. The number of Performance Units set forth above is equal to the target
number of shares of Company Stock that the Participant will earn for 100% achievement of the Performance Goals described in this
Grant (the “Target Award”).
2.    Performance Unit Account. The Company shall establish and maintain a Performance Unit account as a bookkeeping account on
its records (the “Performance Unit Account”) for the Participant and shall record in such Performance Unit Account the number of
Performance Units

granted to the Participant. The Participant shall not have any interest in any fund or specific assets of the Company by reason of this
grant or the Performance Unit Account established for the Participant.
3.    Performance Goals.
(a)    Unless a Change of Control (as defined below) occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period (as defined below), the
distribution  of  the  shares  of  Company  Stock  attributable  to  the  Performance  Units  is  contingent  upon  achievement  of  the
performance goals set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto (the “Performance Goals”) and the Participant satisfying the continuation of
employment and service with the Employer (as defined in the Plan) requirement described in Paragraph 4 below.
(b)    As soon as administratively practicable following the end of the Performance Period (as defined in Paragraph 3(d)
below),  the  Committee  will  determine  whether  and  to  what  extent  the  Performance  Goals  have  been  met  and  the  number  of
Performance Units the Participant has earned, if any. Except as described in Paragraph 4 below, the Participant must be employed
by, or providing service to, the Employer on the last day of the Performance Period in order to earn the Performance Units.
(c)    If a Change of Control occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period, the Company is not the surviving corporation
(or survives only as a subsidiary of another corporation or entity (the “surviving corporation”)) and the Performance Units are not
converted to similar grants of the surviving corporation (or a parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation), then the Performance
Period will end on the date of the Change of Control and the Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as
of the date of the Change of Control (the “Change of Control Date”). In the event the Participant’s Performance Units are assumed
by the surviving corporation but the Participant ceases to be employed by, or providing service to, the surviving corporation (or a
parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation) within twelve (12) months after the date of the Change of Control on account of (i)
a termination of such Participant’s employment by the surviving corporation (or a parent of subsidiary of the surviving corporation)
for any reason other than on account of Cause (as defined in Paragraph 4(e) hereof), or on account of death or Disability (each as
defined in the Plan), or (ii) a termination of employment or service by the Participant for Good Reason (as defined in the Plan), then
the  Performance  Period  will  end  on  the  date  of  such  termination  of  employment  or  service  (the  “Termination  Date”)  and  the
Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as of the Termination Date. For purposes of this Grant, “Change
of Control” shall mean as such term is defined in the Plan, except that a Change of Control shall not be deemed to have occurred for
purposes of this Grant unless the event constituting the Change of Control constitutes a change in ownership or effective control of
the Company, or in the ownership of a substantial portion of the assets of the Company, within the meaning of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and its corresponding regulations.
(d)    For purposes of this Grant, the term “Performance Period” shall mean the three (3)-year period beginning on January 1,
2019 and ending December 31, 2021.
2

4.    Termination of Employment or Service.
(a)    Except as set forth in Paragraphs 3(c), 4(b) or 4(c), if, at least one year after the beginning of the Performance Period,
but prior to the end of the Performance Period, the Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on
account of any reason other than a termination  for Cause (as defined below), the Participant  will earn a pro-rata portion of the
Performance Units, if the Performance Goals and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the Performance Period.
The pro-rata portion earned will be equal to the number of Performance Units that would have been earned if the Participant had
remained employed through the last day of the Performance Period, multiplied by a fraction, which fraction shall be equal to (i) 1/3,
if the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer terminates on or after January 31, 2020, but prior to January 31, 2021;
(ii) 2/3, if the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer terminates on or after January 31, 2021, but prior to January
31, 2022; and (iii) 3/3, if the Participant’s employment or service terminates with the Employer on or after January 31, 2022. If the
Participant  ceases  to  be  employed  by,  or  provide  service  to,  the  Employer  for  any  reason  other  than  on  account  of  Cause,  the
prorated number of Performance Units earned by the Participant pursuant to this Paragraph 4(a) will be distributed in accordance
with Paragraph 5.
(b)    Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the contrary, if prior to the end of the Performance Period, the
Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on account of Normal Retirement, then the Participant will
earn the number of Performance Units that would have been earned if the Participant has remained employed through the last day of
the Performance Period, if the Performance Goals and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the Performance
Period. If the Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on account of Normal Retirement pursuant
to this subparagraph (b), the number of Performance Units that are earned based on the Performance Goals and other requirements of
this  Grant  will  be  distributed  in  accordance  with  Paragraph  5.  For  purposes  of  this  Grant,  “Normal  Retirement”  shall  mean
termination of employment or service with the Employer (other than for Cause) after the Participant has attained age sixty (60) and
has five (5) total years of employment or service with the Employer which includes at least three (3) consecutive full calendar years
of service in the position of Chief Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer or Chief Financial Officer, or any combination thereof.
(c)    Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the contrary, if prior to the end of the Performance Period, the
Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on account of Early Retirement, then the Participant will
earn 75% of the number of Performance Units that would have been earned if the Participant had remained employed through the
last day of the Performance Period, if the Performance Goals and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the
Performance Period, and unearned Performance Units shall be immediately forfeited. If the Participant ceases to be employed by, or
provide service to, the Employer on account of Early Retirement pursuant to this subparagraph (c), then the number of Performance
Units that are earned based on the Performance Goals and other requirements of this Grant will be distributed in accordance with
Paragraph 5. For purposes of this Grant, “Early Retirement” shall mean termination of employment or service with the Employer
(other than for Cause) after the Participant has attained age fifty-five (55) and has five (5) total years of employment
3

or service with the Employer which includes at least three (3) consecutive full calendar years of service in the position of Chief
Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer or Chief Financial Officer, or any combination thereof.
(d)    Except as set forth in Paragraphs 4(b) or 4(c), if at any time prior to the earlier of January 31, 2020 or a Change of
Control, the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer is terminated by the Employer on account of any reason or no
reason or by the Participant for any reason or no reason, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall be immediately
forfeited as of the date of the Participant’s termination of employment or service with the Employer and the Participant shall not
have any rights with respect to the distribution of any portion of the Performance Units.
(e)    If at any time prior to the date the Performance Units are distributed in accordance with Paragraph 5 the Participant’s
employment or service with the Employer is terminated on account of Cause, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall
be  immediately  forfeited  and  the  Participant  will  not  have  any  rights  with  respect  to  the  distribution  of  any  portion  of  the
Performance Units, irrespective of the level of achievement of the Performance Goals. For purposes of this Grant, “Cause” shall
mean a finding by the Committee that the Participant (i) has breached his or her employment or service contract with the Employer,
if any; (ii) has engaged in disloyalty to the Employer, including, without limitation, fraud, embezzlement, theft, commission of a
felony or proven dishonesty; (iii) has disclosed trade secrets or confidential information of the Employer to persons not entitled to
receive such information; (iv) has breached any written noncompetition or non-solicitation agreement between the Participant and
the Employer; or (v) has engaged in such other behavior detrimental to the interests of the Employer as the Committee determines.
5.    Time and Form of Payment with Respect to Performance Units. Unless an election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 below, the
Participant will receive a distribution with respect to the Performance Units earned as described in Paragraphs 3 and 4 above within
seventy (70) days following the earliest of (a) January 31, 2022 (the “Distribution Date”), (b) the Change of Control Date, or (c) the
Termination  Date.  The  Performance  Units  will  be  distributed  in  shares  of  Company  Stock,  with  each  Performance  Unit  earned
equivalent to one share of Company Stock. Any Performance Units not earned because of the failure to attain the Performance Goals
and service condition will be immediately forfeited.
6.    Deferrals. The Participant may make an irrevocable election to defer the Distribution Date (or further defer the Deferred Date (as
defined below), if applicable) of all of the Performance Units that are earned, plus dividend equivalents earned on such Performance
Units as described in Paragraph 7 below, to a later date, provided that (a) the election shall not take effect until at least twelve
(12) months after the date on which the election is made, (b) the deferred Distribution Date cannot be earlier than five (5) years from
the original Distribution Date under Paragraph 5 above (or five (5) years from the applicable Deferred Date, if a subsequent deferral
of a Deferred Date is being made), and (c) the election must be made no less than twelve (12) months prior to the date of the
Distribution Date (twelve (12) months prior to the previously applicable Deferred Date, if a subsequent deferral of a Deferred Date is
being  made).  To  defer  the  Distribution  Date,  the  Participant  must  elect  to  defer  100%  of  the  Performance  Units,  including
corresponding dividend equivalents,
4

earned by the Participant under this Grant, as well as 100% of the other performance stock units, including corresponding dividend
equivalents, earned by the Participant under the 2019 LTPP, complete the deferral election form provided to the Participant by the
Committee, and return such form to the Company in the manner and by the deadline provided therein. If the Participant desires to
make a further deferral, the Participant must make such election on a separate form provided by the Committee for such purpose.
Any such election shall be made in accordance with section 409A of the Code and any corresponding guidance and regulations
issued under section 409A of the Code. Notwithstanding a Participant’s election pursuant to this Paragraph, if the Change of Control
Date or the Termination Date occurs prior to the Deferred Date, the distribution of the Participant’s earned Performance Units, plus
corresponding dividend equivalents, will be the Change of Control Date or the Termination Date, as applicable. If a Distribution
Date is delayed one or more times pursuant to this Paragraph 6, the new Distribution Date shall be referred to as the “Deferred
Date.”
7.    Dividend Equivalents. Until the earlier of the Distribution Date (or the Deferred Date, if elected), the Change of Control Date or
the Termination Date, if any dividends are paid with respect to the shares of Company Stock, the Company shall credit to a dividend
equivalent  account  (the  “Dividend  Equivalent  Account”)  the  value  of  the  dividends  that  would  have  been  distributed  if  the
Performance Units credited to the Participant’s Performance Unit Account as of the date of payment of any such dividend were
shares of Company Stock. At the same time that the Performance Units are converted to shares of Company Stock and distributed to
the Participant, the Company shall pay to the Participant in a lump sum cash equal to the value of the dividends credited to the
Participant’s Dividend Equivalent Account; provided, however, that any dividends that were credited to the Participant’s Dividend
Equivalent Account that are attributable to Performance Units that have been forfeited as provided in Paragraph 3 and 4 above shall
be forfeited and not payable to the Participant. No interest shall accrue on any dividend equivalents credited to the Participant’s
Dividend Equivalent Account.
8.    Change of Control. Except as set forth above, the provisions set forth in the Plan applicable to a Change of Control (as defined in
the Plan) shall apply to the Performance Units, and, in the event of a Change of Control, the Committee may take such actions as it
deems appropriate pursuant to the Plan and is consistent with the requirements of section 409A of the Code.
9.    Acknowledgment  by  Participant.  By  accepting  this  Grant,  the  Participant  acknowledges  that,  with  respect  to  any  right  to
distribution pursuant to the Plan or this Grant, the Participant is and shall be an unsecured general creditor of the Company without
any preference as against other unsecured general creditors of the Company, and the Participant hereby covenants for himself or
herself, and anyone at any time claiming through or under the Participant, not to claim any such preference, and hereby disclaims
and waives any such preference which may at any time be at issue, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law.
10.    Restrictions on Issuance or Transfer of Shares of Company Stock.
(a)    To the extent permitted by Code section 409A, the obligation of the Company to deliver shares of Company Stock upon
the Participant earning the Performance Units shall be subject to the condition that shares of Company Stock be qualified for listing
on the New York Stock Exchange or another securities exchange and be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as
5

amended, and that any consent or approval of any governmental regulatory body that is necessary to issue shares of Company Stock
has been so obtained, and that shares of Company Stock may not be issued in whole or in part unless such listing, registration,
qualification, consent or approval shall have been effected or obtained free of any conditions not acceptable to the Committee.
(b)    The issuance of shares of Company Stock and the payment of cash to the Participant pursuant to this Grant is subject to
any applicable taxes and other laws or regulations of the United States or of any state having jurisdiction thereof.
(c)    As  a  condition  to  receive  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  upon  conversion  of  the  earned  Performance  Units,  the
Participant agrees:
(i)
to be bound by, and to comply with, the Company’s policies and practices (as they may be in effect
from time to time) regarding the restrictions or limitations on the transfer of such shares, and understands that the
Participant may be restricted or prohibited at any time and/or from time to time from selling, transferring, pledging,
donating, assigning, margining, mortgaging, hypothecating or otherwise encumbering the shares in accordance with
such policies and practices, including without limitation the Company’s Insider Trading and Prohibited Transactions
Policy and the Personal Securities Trading and Preclearance Practice; and
(ii)    that  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  received  by  the  Participant  upon  the  distribution  of  the  earned
Performance Units pursuant to this Grant shall be subject to the guidelines and restrictions set forth in the Company’s
Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines and Executive Stock Retention Requirements, effective as of March 4, 2015
(and as they may be amended, restated, supplemented and interpreted), and any applicable clawback or recoupment
policies  and  other  policies  that  may  be  implemented  by  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  or  a  duly  authorized
committee thereof, from time to time.
11.    Participant Undertaking. The Participant agrees to take whatever additional actions and execute whatever additional documents
the Company may deem necessary or advisable in order to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions imposed
on the Participant pursuant to the provisions of this Grant.
12.    Grant Subject to Plan Provisions. This Grant is made pursuant to the Plan, the terms of which are incorporated herein by
reference,  and  in  all  respects  shall  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  Plan.  In  the  event  of  any  contradiction,  distinction  or
difference between this Grant and the terms of the Plan, the terms of the Plan will control. Except as otherwise defined in this Grant,
capitalized  terms  used  in  this  Grant  shall  have  the  meanings  set  forth  in  the  Plan.  This  Grant  is  subject  to  the  interpretations,
regulations  and  determinations  concerning  the  Plan  established  from  time  to  time  by  the  Committee  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of the Plan, including, but not limited to, provisions pertaining to (a) rights and obligations with respect to withholding
taxes, (b) the registration, qualification or listing of the shares of Company Stock, (c) changes in capitalization of the Company, and
(d) other requirements of applicable law. The Committee shall have the
6

authority to interpret and construe this Grant pursuant to the terms of the Plan, its decisions shall be conclusive as to any questions
arising hereunder. By accepting this Grant, the Participant agrees (i) to be bound by the terms of the Plan and this Grant, (ii) to be
bound by the determinations and decisions of the Committee with respect to this Grant, the Plan and the Participant’s rights to
benefits under this Grant and the Plan, and (iii) that all such determinations and decisions of the Committee shall be binding on the
Participant, his or her beneficiaries and any other person having or claiming an interest under this Grant and the Plan on behalf of the
Participant.
13.    No Rights as Stockholder. The Participant shall not have any rights as a stockholder of the Company, including the right to any
cash dividends (except with respect to the dividend equivalent rights provided in Paragraph 7), or the right to vote, with respect to
any Performance Units.
14.    No Rights to Continued Employment or Service. This Grant shall not confer upon the Participant any right to be retained in the
employment  or  service  of  the  Employer  and  shall  not  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  right  of  the  Employer  to  terminate  the
Participant’s employment or service at any time. The right of the Employer to terminate at will the Participant’s employment or
service at any time for any reason is specifically reserved.
15.    Assignment and Transfers. No Performance Units or dividend equivalents awarded to the Participant under this Grant may be
transferred,  assigned,  pledged,  or  encumbered  by  the  Participant  and  the  Performance  Units  and  dividend  equivalents  shall  be
distributed during the lifetime of the Participant only for the benefit of the Participant. Any attempt to transfer, assign, pledge, or
encumber the Performance Units or dividend equivalents under this Grant by the Participant shall be null, void and without effect.
The rights and protections of the Company hereunder shall extend to any successors or assigns of the Company. This Grant may be
assigned by the Company without the Participant’s consent.
16.    Withholding. The Participant shall be required to pay to the Employer, or make other arrangements satisfactory to the Employer
to provide for the payment of, any federal, state, local or other taxes that the Employer is required to withhold with respect to the
grant, vesting and distribution of the Performance Units and dividend equivalents. Any tax withholding obligation of the Employer
with respect to the distribution of shares of Company Stock pursuant to the Performance Units that are earned by the Participant
under this Grant may, at the Committee’s discretion, be satisfied by having shares of Company Stock withheld up to an amount that
does not exceed the minimum applicable withholding tax rate for federal (including FICA), state, local and other tax liabilities.
17.    Effect on Other Benefits. The value of shares of Company Stock and dividend equivalents distributed with respect to the
Performance  Units shall not be considered  eligible earnings for purposes of any other plans maintained  by the Company or the
Employer. Neither shall such value be considered part of the Participant’s compensation for purposes of determining or calculating
other benefits that are based on compensation, such as life insurance.
18.    Applicable Law.  The  validity,  construction,  interpretation  and  effect  of  this  Grant  shall  be  governed  by  and  construed  in
accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware, without giving effect to the conflict of law provisions thereof.
7

19.    Notice. Any notice to the Company provided for in this instrument shall be addressed to the Company in care of the General
Counsel at the Company’s corporate headquarters, and any notice to the Participant shall be addressed to such Participant at the
current address shown on the payroll records of the Employer,  or to such other address as the Participant  may designate to the
Employer in writing. Any notice shall be (i) delivered by hand, (ii) delivered by a national overnight courier or delivery service, (iii)
enclosed in a properly sealed envelope addressed as stated above, registered and deposited, postage prepaid, in a post office regularly
maintained by the United States Postal Service, or (iv) in the case of notices by the Company to the Participant, delivered by e-mail
or other electronic means (with confirmation of receipt to be made by any oral, electronic or written means).
20.    Taxation; Code Section 409A. As applicable, this Grant is intended to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the
Code  and  shall  be  interpreted  and  administered  in  accordance  with  Code  section  409A.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  to  the
contrary herein, if the Performance Units constitute “deferred compensation” under section 409A of the Code, distributions made
with respect to this Grant may only be made in a manner and upon an event permitted by Code section 409A. To the extent that any
provision of the Grant would cause a conflict with the requirements of Code section 409A, or would cause the administration of the
Grant  to  fail  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Code  section  409A,  such  provision  shall,  to  the  extent  practicable  if  permitted  by
applicable  law,  be  deemed  null  and  void.  In the  event  that  it is  determined  not  feasible  to  void  a  provision  of  this  Grant,  such
provision  shall  be  construed  in  a  manner  as to  comply  with  the  Code  section  409A  requirements.  This  Grant  may  be  amended
without the consent of the Participant in any respect deemed by the Committee or its delegate to be necessary in order to comply
with Code section 409A. Unless a valid election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 above, in no event may the Participant, directly or
indirectly,  designate  the  calendar  year  of  distribution.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  or  the  Grant  to  the  contrary,  the
Participant  shall  be  solely  responsible  for  the  tax  consequences  of  this  Grant,  and  in  no  event  shall  the  Company  have  any
responsibility or liability if this Grant does not meet any applicable requirements of Code section 409A.
21.    Severability. In the event one or more of the provisions of this Grant should, for any reason, be held to be invalid, illegal or
unenforceable in any respect, such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability will not affect any other provisions of this Grant, and this
Grant will be construed as if such invalid, illegal or unenforceable provision had never been contained herein.
[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]
8

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused its duly authorized officer to execute this Grant, effective as of the Date
of Grant.
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
By: Susan N. Story
Its: President and CEO
9

“PSU GRANT B – EPS”
EXHIBIT A
PERFORMANCE GOALS
The number of Performance Units that may be earned shall be determined based on the achievement of Compounded Earnings Per
Share Growth (as described below) over the Performance Period.
Compounded Earnings Per Share (“EPS”) Growth – will be calculated based on fully diluted EPS calculated in accordance with
US GAAP as reported in the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature. The starting point for the calculation will be adjusted EPS of $3.30 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The ending point for the calculation will be EPS for the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature.
The award scale for Compounded EPS Growth is as follows:
 
Compounded EPS Growth
Actual 
Compounded EPS 
Growth
Target Award
11.0% or more
200%
9.8%
175%
8.5%
100%
7.3%
25%
< 6.0%
0%
If actual achievement of the Performance Goal does not meet threshold performance (i.e., less than 6.0% for Compounded EPS
Growth, then that Performance Goal will be reflected in the final result for determining the number of earned Performance Units at
its assigned weighting with a 0%. The maximum award that may be earned for each Performance Goal is capped at 200%, and the
maximum award that may be earned by the Participant is capped at 200% of the Target Award.  
10

Example:
The following is an example calculation for a Participant with a Target Award of 1,000 Performance Units:
Earnings Per Share
 
12/31/2018
12/31/2021
Adjusted
Illustration
Adjusted diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations
$
3.30
$
4.27
Compounded EPS growth
8.97%
Earned Performance Units
Achievement
Award
Compounded EPS Growth
8.97%
127.5%
In this example, the individual who was awarded a Target Grant of 1,000 Performance Units would earn 1,275 Performance Units
(1,000 x 1.275), which is convertible into an equivalent number of shares of Company Stock assuming all other terms and conditions
of the Grant have been satisfied.
11

Exhibit 10.14.35
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
2017 OMNIBUS EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN
PERFORMANCE STOCK UNIT GRANT
This  PERFORMANCE  STOCK  UNIT  GRANT,  dated  as  of  February  14,  2019  (the  “Date  of  Grant”),  is  delivered  by
American Water Works Company, Inc. (the “Company”) to Loyd A. Warnock (the “Participant”).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the Committee (as defined in the American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation
Plan (the “Plan”)) has adopted a 2019 Long Term Performance Plan (“2019 LTPP”) pursuant to which designated employees will be
granted equity awards (collectively, the “Equity Award”) for shares of Common Stock of the Company, par value $0.01 per share
(the “Company Stock”);
WHEREAS, the Equity Award is comprised of three separate grants: a restricted stock unit and two performance stock unit
grants;
WHEREAS, the Committee has determined that the Participant is eligible to participate in the 2019 LTPP and to grant the
Participant an Equity Award under the 2019 LTPP; and
WHEREAS,  the  Committee  has  determined  that  the  performance  stock  unit  portion  of  the  Equity  Award  granted  to  the
Participant pursuant to the 2019 LTPP shall be issued under the Plan, and the terms and conditions of the performance stock unit
grant that may be earned based on Performance Goals (defined below) relating to compounded earnings per share, as set forth in
Exhibit A attached hereto, shall be memorialized in this grant (the “Grant”).
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties to this Grant, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree as follows:
1.
Grant of Performance Stock Units. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Grant and the Plan, the Company
hereby grants to the Participant 1,602 performance stock units (the “Performance Units”). The Performance Units are contingently
awarded and will be earned and distributable if and only to the extent that the Performance Goals and other conditions set forth in
this Grant are met. Each Performance Unit shall be a phantom right and shall be equivalent to one share of Company Stock on the
applicable payment date, as described in Paragraph 5 below. The number of Performance Units set forth above is equal to the target
number of shares of Company Stock that the Participant will earn for 100% achievement of the Performance Goals described in this
Grant (the “Target Award”).
2.    Performance Unit Account. The Company shall establish and maintain a Performance Unit account as a bookkeeping account on
its records (the “Performance Unit Account”) for the Participant and shall record in such Performance Unit Account the number of
Performance Units
1

granted to the Participant. The Participant shall not have any interest in any fund or specific assets of the Company by reason of this
grant or the Performance Unit Account established for the Participant.
3.    Performance Goals.
(a)    Unless a Change of Control (as defined below) occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period (as defined below), the
distribution  of  the  shares  of  Company  Stock  attributable  to  the  Performance  Units  is  contingent  upon  achievement  of  the
performance goals set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto (the “Performance Goals”) and the Participant satisfying the continuation of
employment and service with the Employer (as defined in the Plan) requirement described in Paragraph 4 below.
(b)    As soon as administratively practicable following the end of the Performance Period (as defined in Paragraph 3(d)
below),  the  Committee  will  determine  whether  and  to  what  extent  the  Performance  Goals  have  been  met  and  the  number  of
Performance Units the Participant has earned, if any. Except as described in Paragraph 4 below, the Participant must be employed
by, or providing service to, the Employer on the last day of the Performance Period in order to earn the Performance Units.
(c)    If a Change of Control occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period, the Company is not the surviving corporation
(or survives only as a subsidiary of another corporation or entity (the “surviving corporation”)) and the Performance Units are not
converted to similar grants of the surviving corporation (or a parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation), then the Performance
Period will end on the date of the Change of Control and the Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as
of the date of the Change of Control (the “Change of Control Date”). In the event the Participant’s Performance Units are assumed
by the surviving corporation but the Participant ceases to be employed by, or providing service to, the surviving corporation (or a
parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation) within twelve (12) months after the date of the Change of Control on account of (i)
a termination of such Participant’s employment by the surviving corporation (or a parent of subsidiary of the surviving corporation)
for any reason other than on account of Cause (as defined in paragraph 4(c) hereof), or on account of death or Disability (each as
defined in the Plan), or (ii) a termination of employment or service by the Participant for Good Reason (as defined in the Plan), then
the  Performance  Period  will  end  on  the  date  of  such  termination  of  employment  or  service  (the  “Termination  Date”)  and  the
Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as of the Termination Date. For purposes of this Grant, “Change
of Control” shall mean as such term is defined in the Plan, except that a Change of Control shall not be deemed to have occurred for
purposes of this Grant unless the event constituting the Change of Control constitutes a change in ownership or effective control of
the Company, or in the ownership of a substantial portion of the assets of the Company, within the meaning of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and its corresponding regulations.
(d)    For purposes of this Grant, the term “Performance Period” shall mean the three (3)-year period beginning on January 1,
2019 and ending December 31, 2021.
2

4.    Termination of Employment or Service.
(a)    Except as set forth in Paragraph 3(c), unless the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer terminates
before January 1, 2021, the Participant will vest in the Performance Units, if the Performance Goals and the requirements of this
Grant are met as of the last day of the Performance Period. The number of Performance Units earned by the Participant pursuant to
this Paragraph 4(a) will be distributed in accordance with Paragraph 5.
(b)    If at any time prior to the earlier of January 1, 2021 or a Change of Control, the Participant’s employment or service
with the Employer is terminated by the Employer on account of any reason or no reason or by the Participant for any reason or no
reason, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall be immediately forfeited as of the date of the Participant’s termination
of employment or service with the Employer and the Participant shall not have any rights with respect to the distribution of any
portion of the Performance Units.
(c)    If at any time prior to the date the Performance Units are distributed in accordance with Paragraph 5 the Participant’s
employment or service with the Employer is terminated on account of Cause, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall
be  immediately  forfeited  and  the  Participant  will  not  have  any  rights  with  respect  to  the  distribution  of  any  portion  of  the
Performance Units, irrespective of the level of achievement of the Performance Goals. For purposes of this Grant, “Cause” shall
mean a finding by the Committee that the Participant (i) has breached his or her employment or service contract with the Employer,
if any; (ii) has engaged in disloyalty to the Employer, including, without limitation, fraud, embezzlement, theft, commission of a
felony or proven dishonesty; (iii) has disclosed trade secrets or confidential information of the Employer to persons not entitled to
receive such information; (iv) has breached any written noncompetition or non-solicitation agreement between the Participant and
the Employer; or (v) has engaged in such other behavior detrimental to the interests of the Employer as the Committee determines.
5.    Time and Form of Payment with Respect to Performance Units. Unless an election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 below, the
Participant will receive a distribution with respect to the Performance Units earned as described in Paragraphs 3 and 4 above within
seventy (70) days following the earliest of (a) January 1, 2021 (the “Distribution Date”), (b) the Change of Control Date, or (c) the
Termination  Date.  The  Performance  Units  will  be  distributed  in  shares  of  Company  Stock,  with  each  Performance  Unit  earned
equivalent to one share of Company Stock. Any Performance Units not earned because of the failure to attain the Performance Goals
and service condition will be immediately forfeited.
6.    Deferrals. The Participant may make an irrevocable election to defer the Distribution Date (or further defer the Deferred Date (as
defined below), if applicable) of all of the Performance Units that are earned, plus dividend equivalents earned on such Performance
Units as described in Paragraph 7 below, to a later date, provided that (a) the election shall not take effect until at least twelve
(12) months after the date on which the election is made, (b) the deferred Distribution Date cannot be earlier than five (5) years from
the original Distribution Date under Paragraph 5 above (or five (5) years from the applicable Deferred Date, if a subsequent deferral
of a Deferred Date is being made), and (c) the election must be made no less than twelve (12) months prior to the date of the
Distribution Date (twelve (12) months prior to the previously applicable Deferred Date, if a
3

subsequent deferral of a Deferred Date is being made). To defer the Distribution Date, the Participant must elect to defer 100% of
the Performance Units, including corresponding dividend equivalents, earned by the Participant under this Grant, as well as 100% of
the other performance stock units, including corresponding dividend equivalents, earned by the Participant under the 2019 LTPP,
complete  the deferral  election form provided  to the Participant  by the Committee,  and return such form to the Company in the
manner and by the deadline provided therein. If the Participant desires to make a further deferral, the Participant must make such
election on a separate form provided by the Committee for such purpose. Any such election shall be made in accordance with section
409A  of  the  Code  and  any  corresponding  guidance  and  regulations  issued  under  section  409A  of  the  Code.  Notwithstanding  a
Participant’s election pursuant to this Paragraph, if the Change of Control Date or the Termination Date occurs prior to the Deferred
Date, the distribution of the Participant’s earned Performance Units, plus corresponding dividend, equivalents will be the Change of
Control Date or the Termination Date, as applicable. If a Distribution Date is delayed one or more times pursuant to this Paragraph
6, the new Distribution Date shall be referred to as the “Deferred Date.”
7.    Dividend Equivalents. Until the earlier of the Distribution Date (or the Deferred Date, if elected), the Change of Control Date or
the Termination Date, if any dividends are paid with respect to the shares of Company Stock, the Company shall credit to a dividend
equivalent  account  (the  “Dividend  Equivalent  Account”)  the  value  of  the  dividends  that  would  have  been  distributed  if  the
Performance Units credited to the Participant’s Performance Unit Account as of the date of payment of any such dividend were
shares of Company Stock. At the same time that the Performance Units are converted to shares of Company Stock and distributed to
the Participant, the Company shall pay to the Participant in a lump sum cash equal to the value of the dividends credited to the
Participant’s Dividend Equivalent Account; provided, however, that any dividends that were credited to the Participant’s Dividend
Equivalent Account that are attributable to Performance Units that have been forfeited as provided in Paragraph 3 and 4 above shall
be forfeited and not payable to the Participant. No interest shall accrue on any dividend equivalents credited to the Participant’s
Dividend Equivalent Account.
8.    Change of Control. Except as set forth above, the provisions set forth in the Plan applicable to a Change of Control (as defined in
the Plan) shall apply to the Performance Units, and, in the event of a Change of Control, the Committee may take such actions as it
deems appropriate pursuant to the Plan and is consistent with the requirements of section 409A of the Code.
9.    Acknowledgment  by  Participant.  By  accepting  this  Grant,  the  Participant  acknowledges  that,  with  respect  to  any  right  to
distribution pursuant to the Plan or this Grant, the Participant is and shall be an unsecured general creditor of the Company without
any preference as against other unsecured general creditors of the Company, and the Participant hereby covenants for himself or
herself, and anyone at any time claiming through or under the Participant, not to claim any such preference, and hereby disclaims
and waives any such preference which may at any time be at issue, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law.
10.    Restrictions on Issuance or Transfer of Shares of Company Stock.
(a)    To the extent permitted by Code section 409A, the obligation of the Company to deliver shares of Company Stock upon
the Participant earning the Performance Units shall be subject
4

to  the  condition  that  shares  of  Company  Stock  be  qualified  for  listing  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  or  another  securities
exchange and be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended, and that any consent or approval of any governmental
regulatory body that is necessary to issue shares of Company Stock has been so obtained, and that shares of Company Stock may not
be issued in whole or in part unless such listing, registration, qualification, consent or approval shall have been effected or obtained
free of any conditions not acceptable to the Committee.
(b)    The issuance of shares of Company Stock and the payment of cash to the Participant pursuant to this Grant is subject to
any applicable taxes and other laws or regulations of the United States or of any state having jurisdiction thereof.
(c)    As  a  condition  to  receive  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  upon  conversion  of  the  earned  Performance  Units,  the
Participant agrees:
(i)
to be bound by, and to comply with, the Company’s policies and practices (as they may be in effect
from time to time) regarding the restrictions or limitations on the transfer of such shares, and understands that the
Participant may be restricted or prohibited at any time and/or from time to time from selling, transferring, pledging,
donating, assigning, margining, mortgaging, hypothecating or otherwise encumbering the shares in accordance with
such policies and practices, including without limitation the Company’s Insider Trading and Prohibited Transactions
Policy and the Personal Securities Trading and Preclearance Practice; and
(ii)    that  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  received  by  the  Participant  upon  the  distribution  of  the  earned
Performance Units pursuant to this Grant shall be subject to the guidelines and restrictions set forth in the Company’s
Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines and Executive Stock Retention Requirements, effective as of March 4, 2015
(and as they may be amended, restated, supplemented and interpreted), and any applicable clawback or recoupment
policies  and  other  policies  that  may  be  implemented  by  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  or  a  duly  authorized
committee thereof, from time to time.
11.    Participant Undertaking. The Participant agrees to take whatever additional actions and execute whatever additional documents
the Company may deem necessary or advisable in order to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions imposed
on the Participant pursuant to the provisions of this Grant.
12.    Grant Subject to Plan Provisions. This Grant is made pursuant to the Plan, the terms of which are incorporated herein by
reference,  and  in  all  respects  shall  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  Plan.  In  the  event  of  any  contradiction,  distinction  or
difference between this Grant and the terms of the Plan, the terms of the Plan will control. Except as otherwise defined in this Grant,
capitalized  terms  used  in  this  Grant  shall  have  the  meanings  set  forth  in  the  Plan.  This  Grant  is  subject  to  the  interpretations,
regulations  and  determinations  concerning  the  Plan  established  from  time  to  time  by  the  Committee  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of the Plan, including, but not limited to, provisions pertaining to (a) rights and obligations with respect to withholding
taxes, (b) the
5

registration, qualification or listing of the shares of Company Stock, (c) changes in capitalization of the Company, and (d) other
requirements of applicable law. The Committee shall have the authority to interpret and construe this Grant pursuant to the terms of
the Plan, its decisions shall be conclusive as to any questions arising hereunder. By accepting this Grant, the Participant agrees (i) to
be bound by the terms of the Plan and this Grant, (ii) to be bound by the determinations and decisions of the Committee with respect
to this Grant, the Plan and the Participant’s rights to benefits under this Grant and the Plan, and (iii) that all such determinations and
decisions of the Committee shall be binding on the Participant, his or her beneficiaries and any other person having or claiming an
interest under this Grant and the Plan on behalf of the Participant.
13.    No Rights as Stockholder. The Participant shall not have any rights as a stockholder of the Company, including the right to any
cash dividends (except with respect to the dividend equivalent rights provided in Paragraph 7), or the right to vote, with respect to
any Performance Units.
14.    No Rights to Continued Employment or Service. This Grant shall not confer upon the Participant any right to be retained in the
employment  or  service  of  the  Employer  and  shall  not  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  right  of  the  Employer  to  terminate  the
Participant’s employment or service at any time. The right of the Employer to terminate at will the Participant’s employment or
service at any time for any reason is specifically reserved.
15.    Assignment and Transfers. No Performance Units or dividend equivalents awarded to the Participant under this Grant may be
transferred,  assigned,  pledged,  or  encumbered  by  the  Participant  and  the  Performance  Units  and  dividend  equivalents  shall  be
distributed during the lifetime of the Participant only for the benefit of the Participant. Any attempt to transfer, assign, pledge, or
encumber the Performance Units or dividend equivalents under this Grant by the Participant shall be null, void and without effect.
The rights and protections of the Company hereunder shall extend to any successors or assigns of the Company. This Grant may be
assigned by the Company without the Participant’s consent.
16.    Withholding. The Participant shall be required to pay to the Employer, or make other arrangements satisfactory to the Employer
to provide for the payment of, any federal, state, local or other taxes that the Employer is required to withhold with respect to the
grant, vesting and distribution of the Performance Units and dividend equivalents. Any tax withholding obligation of the Employer
with respect to the distribution of shares of Company Stock pursuant to the Performance Units that are earned by the Participant
under this Grant may, at the Committee’s discretion, be satisfied by having shares of Company Stock withheld up to an amount that
does not exceed the minimum applicable withholding tax rate for federal (including FICA), state, local and other tax liabilities.
17.    Effect on Other Benefits. The value of shares of Company Stock and dividend equivalents distributed with respect to the
Performance  Units shall not be considered  eligible earnings for purposes of any other plans maintained  by the Company or the
Employer. Neither shall such value be considered part of the Participant’s compensation for purposes of determining or calculating
other benefits that are based on compensation, such as life insurance.
6

18.    Applicable Law.  The  validity,  construction,  interpretation  and  effect  of  this  Grant  shall  be  governed  by  and  construed  in
accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware, without giving effect to the conflict of laws provisions thereof.
19.    Notice. Any notice to the Company provided for in this instrument shall be addressed to the Company in care of the General
Counsel at the Company’s corporate headquarters, and any notice to the Participant shall be addressed to such Participant at the
current address shown on the payroll records of the Employer,  or to such other address as the Participant  may designate to the
Employer in writing. Any notice shall be (i) delivered by hand, (ii) delivered by a national overnight courier or delivery service, (iii)
enclosed in a properly sealed envelope addressed as stated above, registered and deposited, postage prepaid, in a post office regularly
maintained by the United States Postal Service, or (iv) in the case of notices by the Company to the Participant, delivered by e-mail
or other electronic means (with confirmation of receipt to be made by any oral, electronic or written means).
20.    Taxation; Code Section 409A. As applicable, this Grant is intended to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the
Code  and  shall  be  interpreted  and  administered  in  accordance  with  Code  section  409A.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  to  the
contrary herein, if the Performance Units constitute “deferred compensation” under section 409A of the Code, distributions made
with respect to this Grant may only be made in a manner and upon an event permitted by Code section 409A. To the extent that any
provision of the Grant would cause a conflict with the requirements of Code section 409A, or would cause the administration of the
Grant  to  fail  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Code  section  409A,  such  provision  shall,  to  the  extent  practicable  if  permitted  by
applicable  law,  be  deemed  null  and  void.  In the  event  that  it is  determined  not  feasible  to  void  a  provision  of  this  Grant,  such
provision  shall  be  construed  in  a  manner  as to  comply  with  the  Code  section  409A  requirements.  This  Grant  may  be  amended
without the consent of the Participant in any respect deemed by the Committee or its delegate to be necessary in order to comply
with Code section 409A. Unless a valid election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 above, in no event may the Participant, directly or
indirectly,  designate  the  calendar  year  of  distribution.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  or  the  Grant  to  the  contrary,  the
Participant  shall  be  solely  responsible  for  the  tax  consequences  of  this  Grant,  and  in  no  event  shall  the  Company  have  any
responsibility or liability if this Grant does not meet any applicable requirements of Code section 409A.
21.    Severability. In the event one or more of the provisions of this Grant should, for any reason, be held to be invalid, illegal or
unenforceable in any respect, such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability will not affect any other provisions of this Grant, and this
Grant will be construed as if such invalid, illegal or unenforceable provision had never been contained herein.
[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]
7

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused its duly authorized officer to execute this Grant, effective as of the Date
of Grant.
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
By: Susan N. Story
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
Its: President and CEO
8

“PSU GRANT B – EPS”
EXHIBIT A
PERFORMANCE GOALS
The number of Performance Units that may be earned shall be determined based on the achievement of Compounded Earnings Per
Share Growth (as described below) over the Performance Period.
Compounded Earnings Per Share (“EPS”) Growth – will be calculated based on fully diluted EPS calculated in accordance with
US GAAP as reported in the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature. The starting point for the calculation will be adjusted EPS of $3.30 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The ending point for the calculation will be EPS for the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature.
The award scale for Compounded EPS Growth is as follows:
 
Compounded EPS Growth
Actual 
Compounded EPS 
Growth
Target Award
11.0% or more
200%
9.8%
175%
8.5%
100%
7.3%
25%
< 6.0%
0%
If actual achievement of the Performance Goal does not meet threshold performance (i.e., less than 6.0% for Compounded EPS
Growth, then that Performance Goal will be reflected in the final result for determining the number of earned Performance Units at
its assigned weighting with a 0%. The maximum award that may be earned for each Performance Goal is capped at 200%, and the
maximum award that may be earned by the Participant is capped at 200% of the Target Award.
9

Example:
The following is an example calculation for a Participant with a Target Award of 1,000 Performance Units:
Earnings Per Share
 
12/31/2018
12/31/2021
Adjusted
Illustration
Adjusted diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations
$
3.30
$
4.27
Compounded EPS growth
8.97%
Earned Performance Units
Achievement
Award
Compounded EPS Growth
8.97%
127.5%
In this example, the individual who was awarded a Target Grant of 1,000 Performance Units would earn 1,275 Performance Units
(1,000 x 1.275), which is convertible into an equivalent number of shares of Company Stock assuming all other terms and conditions
of the Grant have been satisfied.
10

CEO, COO, CFO FORM – 2019 PSU Exhibit 10.14.36
 
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
2017 OMNIBUS EQUITY COMPENSATION PLAN
PERFORMANCE STOCK UNIT GRANT
This PERFORMANCE STOCK UNIT GRANT, dated as of June 3, 2019 (the “Date of Grant”), is delivered by American
Water Works Company, Inc. (the “Company”) to M. Susan Hardwick (the “Participant”).
RECITALS
WHEREAS, the Committee (as defined in the American Water Works Company, Inc. 2017 Omnibus Equity Compensation
Plan (the “Plan”)) has adopted a 2019 Long Term Performance Plan (“2019 LTPP”) pursuant to which designated employees will be
granted equity awards (collectively, the “Equity Award”) for shares of Common Stock of the Company, par value $0.01 per share
(the “Company Stock”);
WHEREAS, the Equity Award is comprised of three separate grants: a restricted stock unit and two performance stock unit
grants;
WHEREAS, the Committee has determined that the Participant is eligible to participate in the 2019 LTPP and to grant the
Participant an Equity Award under the 2019 LTPP; and
WHEREAS, the Committee has determined that the performance stock unit portion
of  the  Equity  Award  granted  to  the  Participant  pursuant  to  the  2019  LTPP  shall  be  issued  under  the  Plan,  and  the  terms  and
conditions  of  the  performance  stock  unit  grant  that  may  be  earned  based  on  Performance  Goals  (defined  below)  relating  to
compounded earnings per share, as set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto, shall be memorialized in this grant (the “Grant”).
NOW, THEREFORE, the parties to this Grant, intending to be legally bound hereby, agree as follows:
1.
Grant of Performance Stock Units. Subject to the terms and conditions set forth in this Grant and the Plan, the Company
hereby grants to the Participant 1470 performance stock units (the “Performance Units”). The Performance Units are contingently
awarded and will be earned and distributable if and only to the extent that the Performance Goals and other conditions set forth in
this Grant are met. Each Performance Unit shall be a phantom right and shall be equivalent to one share of Company Stock on the
applicable payment date, as described in Paragraph 5 below. The number of Performance Units set forth above is equal to the target
number of shares of Company Stock that the Participant will earn for 100% achievement of the Performance Goals described in this
Grant (the “Target Award”).
2.    Performance Unit Account. The Company shall establish and maintain a Performance Unit account as a bookkeeping account on
its records (the “Performance Unit Account”) for the Participant and shall record in such Performance Unit Account the number of
Performance Units granted to the Participant. The Participant shall not have any interest in any fund or specific assets

of the Company by reason of this grant or the Performance Unit Account established for the Participant.
3.    Performance Goals.
(a)    Unless a Change of Control (as defined below) occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period (as defined below), the
distribution  of  the  shares  of  Company  Stock  attributable  to  the  Performance  Units  is  contingent  upon  achievement  of  the
performance goals set forth in Exhibit A attached hereto (the “Performance Goals”) and the Participant satisfying the continuation of
employment and service with the Employer (as defined in the Plan) requirement described in Paragraph 4 below.
(b)    As soon as administratively practicable following the end of the Performance Period (as defined in Paragraph 3(d)
below),  the  Committee  will  determine  whether  and  to  what  extent  the  Performance  Goals  have  been  met  and  the  number  of
Performance Units the Participant has earned, if any. Except as described in Paragraph 4 below, the Participant must be employed
by, or providing service to, the Employer on the last day of the Performance Period in order to earn the Performance Units.
(c)    If a Change of Control occurs prior to the end of the Performance Period, the Company is not the surviving corporation
(or survives only as a subsidiary of another corporation or entity (the “surviving corporation”)) and the Performance Units are not
converted to similar grants of the surviving corporation (or a parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation), then the Performance
Period will end on the date of the Change of Control and the Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as
of the date of the Change of Control (the “Change of Control Date”). In the event the Participant’s Performance Units are assumed
by the surviving corporation but the Participant ceases to be employed by, or providing service to, the surviving corporation (or a
parent or subsidiary of the surviving corporation) within twelve (12) months after the date of the Change of Control on account of (i)
a termination of such Participant’s employment by the surviving corporation (or a parent of subsidiary of the surviving corporation)
for any reason other than on account of Cause (as defined in Paragraph 4(e) hereof), or on account of death or Disability (each as
defined in the Plan), or (ii) a termination of employment or service by the Participant for Good Reason (as defined in the Plan), then
the  Performance  Period  will  end  on  the  date  of  such  termination  of  employment  or  service  (the  “Termination  Date”)  and  the
Performance Units will be deemed earned at the Target Award level as of the Termination Date. For purposes of this Grant, “Change
of Control” shall mean as such term is defined in the Plan, except that a Change of Control shall not be deemed to have occurred for
purposes of this Grant unless the event constituting the Change of Control constitutes a change in ownership or effective control of
the Company, or in the ownership of a substantial portion of the assets of the Company, within the meaning of section 409A of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended (the “Code”) and its corresponding regulations.
(d)    For purposes of this Grant, the term “Performance Period” shall mean the three (3)-year period beginning on January 1,
2019 and ending December 31, 2021.
2

4.    Termination of Employment or Service.
(a)    Except as set forth in Paragraphs 3(c) 4(b), 4(c) or 4(d), if, at least one year after the beginning of the Performance
Period, but prior to the end of the Performance Period, the Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer
on account of any reason other than a termination for Cause (as defined below), the Participant will earn a pro-rata portion of the
Performance Units, if the Performance Goals and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the Performance Period.
The pro-rata portion earned will be equal to the number of Performance Units that would have been earned if the Participant had
remained employed through the last day of the Performance Period, multiplied by a fraction, which fraction shall be equal to (i) 1/3,
if the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer terminates on or after January 31, 2020, but prior to January 31, 2021;
(ii) 2/3, if the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer terminates on or after January 31, 2021, but prior to January
31, 2022; and (iii) 3/3, if the Participant’s employment or service terminates with the Employer on or after January 31, 2022. If the
Participant  ceases  to  be  employed  by,  or  provide  service  to,  the  Employer  for  any  reason  other  than  on  account  of  Cause,  the
prorated number of Performance Units earned by the Participant pursuant to this Paragraph 4(a) will be distributed in accordance
with Paragraph 5.
(b)    Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the contrary, if prior to the end of the Performance Period, the
Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on account of Normal Retirement, then the Participant will
earn the number of Performance Units that would have been earned if the Participant has remained employed through the last day of
the Performance Period, if the Performance Goals and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the Performance
Period. If the Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on account of Normal Retirement pursuant
to this subparagraph (b), the number of Performance Units that are earned based on the Performance Goals and other requirements of
this  Grant  will  be  distributed  in  accordance  with  Paragraph  5.  For  purposes  of  this  Grant,  “Normal  Retirement”  shall  mean
termination of employment or service with the Employer (other than for Cause) after the Participant has attained age sixty (60) and
has five (5) total years of employment or service with the Employer which includes at least three (3) consecutive full calendar years
of service in the position of Chief Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer or Chief Financial Officer, or any combination thereof.
(c)    Notwithstanding any provision of this Agreement to the contrary, if prior to the end of the Performance Period, the
Participant ceases to be employed by, or provide service to, the Employer on account of Early Retirement, then the Participant will
earn 75% of the number of Performance Units that would have been earned if the Participant had remained employed through the
last day of the Performance Period, if the Performance Goals and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the
Performance Period, and unearned Performance Units shall be immediately forfeited. If the Participant ceases to be employed by, or
provide service to, the Employer on account of Early Retirement pursuant to this subparagraph (c), then the number of Performance
Units that are earned based on the Performance Goals and other requirements of this Grant will be distributed in accordance with
Paragraph 5. For purposes of this Grant, “Early Retirement” shall mean termination of employment or service with the Employer
(other than for Cause) after the Participant has attained age fifty-five (55) and has five (5) total years of employment
3

or service with the Employer which includes at least three (3) consecutive full calendar years of service in the position of Chief
Executive Officer, Chief Operating Officer or Chief Financial Officer, or any combination thereof.
(d)    If at any time prior to January 31, 2022, the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer terminates on
account of Normal Retirement or Early Retirement before achieving five (5) total years of employment or service with the
Employer, but the Participant has completed a minimum of three (3) years of service in the position of Chief Financial Officer and
has achieved the required Normal Retirement or Early Retirement age, then the Participant will earn the number of Performance
Units that would have been earned if the Participant had remained employed through the last day of the Performance Period, if the
Performance Goal and the requirements of this Grant are met as of the last day of the Performance Period following the Participant’s
termination of employment or service on account of Normal Retirement or Early Retirement, so long as the Participant has used
good faith efforts (as determined by the Chief Executive Officer) to identify and develop a Chief Financial Officer successor who is
approved by the Chief Executive Officer and the Board of Directors.
(e)    Except as set forth in Paragraphs 4(b), 4(c) or 4(d), if at any time prior to the earlier of January 31, 2020 or a Change of
Control, the Participant’s employment or service with the Employer is terminated by the Employer on account of any reason or no
reason or by the Participant for any reason or no reason, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall be immediately
forfeited as of the date of the Participant’s termination of employment or service with the Employer and the Participant shall not
have any rights with respect to the distribution of any portion of the Performance Units.
(f)    If at any time prior to the date the Performance Units are distributed in accordance with Paragraph 5 the Participant’s
employment or service with the Employer is terminated on account of Cause, all of the Performance Units subject to this Grant shall
be  immediately  forfeited  and  the  Participant  will  not  have  any  rights  with  respect  to  the  distribution  of  any  portion  of  the
Performance Units, irrespective of the level of achievement of the Performance Goals. For purposes of this Grant, “Cause” shall
mean a finding by the Committee that the Participant (i) has breached his or her employment or service contract with the Employer,
if any; (ii) has engaged in disloyalty to the Employer, including, without limitation, fraud, embezzlement, theft, commission of a
felony or proven dishonesty; (iii) has disclosed trade secrets or confidential information of the Employer to persons not entitled to
receive such information; (iv) has breached any written noncompetition or non-solicitation agreement between the Participant and
the Employer; or (v) has engaged in such other behavior detrimental to the interests of the Employer as the Committee determines.
5.    Time and Form of Payment with Respect to Performance Units. Unless an election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 below, the
Participant will receive a distribution with respect to the Performance Units earned as described in Paragraphs 3 and 4 above within
seventy (70) days following the earliest of (a) January 31, 2022 (the “Distribution Date”), (b) the Change of Control Date, or (c) the
Termination  Date.  The  Performance  Units  will  be  distributed  in  shares  of  Company  Stock,  with  each  Performance  Unit  earned
equivalent to one share of Company Stock. Any
4

Performance  Units not earned because of the failure to attain the Performance  Goals and service condition  will be immediately
forfeited.
6.    Deferrals. The Participant may make an irrevocable election to defer the Distribution Date (or further defer the Deferred Date (as
defined below), if applicable) of all of the Performance Units that are earned, plus dividend equivalents earned on such Performance
Units as described in Paragraph 7 below, to a later date, provided that (a) the election shall not take effect until at least twelve
(12) months after the date on which the election is made, (b) the deferred Distribution Date cannot be earlier than five (5) years from
the original Distribution Date under Paragraph 5 above (or five (5) years from the applicable Deferred Date, if a subsequent deferral
of a Deferred Date is being made), and (c) the election must be made no less than twelve (12) months prior to the date of the
Distribution Date (twelve (12) months prior to the previously applicable Deferred Date, if a subsequent deferral of a Deferred Date is
being  made).  To  defer  the  Distribution  Date,  the  Participant  must  elect  to  defer  100%  of  the  Performance  Units,  including
corresponding dividend equivalents, earned by the Participant under this Grant, as well as 100% of the other performance stock
units, including corresponding dividend equivalents, earned by the Participant under the 2019 LTPP, complete the deferral election
form  provided  to  the  Participant  by  the  Committee,  and  return  such  form  to  the  Company  in  the  manner  and  by  the  deadline
provided therein. If the Participant desires to make a further deferral, the Participant must make such election on a separate form
provided by the Committee for such purpose. Any such election shall be made in accordance with section 409A of the Code and any
corresponding guidance and regulations issued under section 409A of the Code. Notwithstanding a Participant’s election pursuant to
this Paragraph, if the Change of Control Date or the Termination Date occurs prior to the Deferred Date, the distribution of the
Participant’s  earned  Performance  Units,  plus  corresponding  dividend  equivalents,  will  be  the  Change  of  Control  Date  or  the
Termination  Date,  as  applicable.  If  a  Distribution  Date  is  delayed  one  or  more  times  pursuant  to  this  Paragraph  6,  the  new
Distribution Date shall be referred to as the “Deferred Date.”
7.    Dividend Equivalents. Until the earlier of the Distribution Date (or the Deferred Date, if elected), the Change of Control Date or
the Termination Date, if any dividends are paid with respect to the shares of Company Stock, the Company shall credit to a dividend
equivalent  account  (the  “Dividend  Equivalent  Account”)  the  value  of  the  dividends  that  would  have  been  distributed  if  the
Performance Units credited to the Participant’s Performance Unit Account as of the date of payment of any such dividend were
shares of Company Stock. At the same time that the Performance Units are converted to shares of Company Stock and distributed to
the Participant, the Company shall pay to the Participant in a lump sum cash equal to the value of the dividends credited to the
Participant’s Dividend Equivalent Account; provided, however, that any dividends that were credited to the Participant’s Dividend
Equivalent Account that are attributable to Performance Units that have been forfeited as provided in Paragraph 3 and 4 above shall
be forfeited and not payable to the Participant. No interest shall accrue on any dividend equivalents credited to the Participant’s
Dividend Equivalent Account.
8.    Change of Control. Except as set forth above, the provisions set forth in the Plan applicable to a Change of Control (as defined in
the Plan) shall apply to the Performance Units, and, in the event of a Change of Control, the Committee may take such actions as it
deems appropriate pursuant to the Plan and is consistent with the requirements of section 409A of the Code.
5

9.    Acknowledgment  by  Participant.  By  accepting  this  Grant,  the  Participant  acknowledges  that,  with  respect  to  any  right  to
distribution pursuant to the Plan or this Grant, the Participant is and shall be an unsecured general creditor of the Company without
any preference as against other unsecured general creditors of the Company, and the Participant hereby covenants for himself or
herself, and anyone at any time claiming through or under the Participant, not to claim any such preference, and hereby disclaims
and waives any such preference which may at any time be at issue, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law.
10.    Restrictions on Issuance or Transfer of Shares of Company Stock.
(a)    To the extent permitted by Code section 409A, the obligation of the Company to deliver shares of Company Stock upon
the Participant earning the Performance Units shall be subject to the condition that shares of Company Stock be qualified for listing
on the New York Stock Exchange or another securities exchange and be registered under the Securities Act of 1933, as amended,
and that any consent or approval of any governmental regulatory body that is necessary to issue shares of Company Stock has been
so obtained, and that shares of Company Stock may not be issued in whole or in part unless such listing, registration, qualification,
consent or approval shall have been effected or obtained free of any conditions not acceptable to the Committee.
(b)    The issuance of shares of Company Stock and the payment of cash to the Participant pursuant to this Grant is subject to
any applicable taxes and other laws or regulations of the United States or of any state having jurisdiction thereof.
(c)    As  a  condition  to  receive  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  upon  conversion  of  the  earned  Performance  Units,  the
Participant agrees:
(i)
to be bound by, and to comply with, the Company’s policies and practices (as they may be in effect
from time to time) regarding the restrictions or limitations on the transfer of such shares, and understands that the
Participant may be restricted or prohibited at any time and/or from time to time from selling, transferring, pledging,
donating, assigning, margining, mortgaging, hypothecating or otherwise encumbering the shares in accordance with
such policies and practices, including without limitation the Company’s Insider Trading and Prohibited Transactions
Policy and the Personal Securities Trading and Preclearance Practice; and
(ii)    that  any  shares  of  Company  Stock  received  by  the  Participant  upon  the  distribution  of  the  earned
Performance Units pursuant to this Grant shall be subject to the guidelines and restrictions set forth in the Company’s
Executive Stock Ownership Guidelines and Executive Stock Retention Requirements, effective as of March 4, 2015
(and as they may be amended, restated, supplemented and interpreted), and any applicable clawback or recoupment
policies  and  other  policies  that  may  be  implemented  by  the  Company’s  Board  of  Directors  or  a  duly  authorized
committee thereof, from time to time.
6

11.    Participant Undertaking. The Participant agrees to take whatever additional actions and execute whatever additional documents
the Company may deem necessary or advisable in order to carry out or effect one or more of the obligations or restrictions imposed
on the Participant pursuant to the provisions of this Grant.
12.    Grant Subject to Plan Provisions. This Grant is made pursuant to the Plan, the terms of which are incorporated herein by
reference,  and  in  all  respects  shall  be  interpreted  in  accordance  with  the  Plan.  In  the  event  of  any  contradiction,  distinction  or
difference between this Grant and the terms of the Plan, the terms of the Plan will control. Except as otherwise defined in this Grant,
capitalized  terms  used  in  this  Grant  shall  have  the  meanings  set  forth  in  the  Plan.  This  Grant  is  subject  to  the  interpretations,
regulations  and  determinations  concerning  the  Plan  established  from  time  to  time  by  the  Committee  in  accordance  with  the
provisions of the Plan, including, but not limited to, provisions pertaining to (a) rights and obligations with respect to withholding
taxes, (b) the registration, qualification or listing of the shares of Company Stock, (c) changes in capitalization of the Company, and
(d) other requirements of applicable law. The Committee shall have the authority to interpret and construe this Grant pursuant to the
terms of the Plan, its decisions shall be conclusive as to any questions arising hereunder. By accepting this Grant, the Participant
agrees (i) to be bound by the terms of the Plan and this Grant, (ii) to be bound by the determinations and decisions of the Committee
with respect to this Grant,  the Plan and the Participant’s  rights to benefits  under this Grant and the Plan, and (iii) that all such
determinations and decisions of the Committee shall be binding on the Participant, his or her beneficiaries and any other person
having or claiming an interest under this Grant and the Plan on behalf of the Participant.
13.    No Rights as Stockholder. The Participant shall not have any rights as a stockholder of the Company, including the right to any
cash dividends (except with respect to the dividend equivalent rights provided in Paragraph 7), or the right to vote, with respect to
any Performance Units.
14.    No Rights to Continued Employment or Service. This Grant shall not confer upon the Participant any right to be retained in the
employment  or  service  of  the  Employer  and  shall  not  interfere  in  any  way  with  the  right  of  the  Employer  to  terminate  the
Participant’s employment or service at any time. The right of the Employer to terminate at will the Participant’s employment or
service at any time for any reason is specifically reserved.
15.    Assignment and Transfers. No Performance Units or dividend equivalents awarded to the Participant under this Grant may be
transferred,  assigned,  pledged,  or  encumbered  by  the  Participant  and  the  Performance  Units  and  dividend  equivalents  shall  be
distributed during the lifetime of the Participant only for the benefit of the Participant. Any attempt to transfer, assign, pledge, or
encumber the Performance Units or dividend equivalents under this Grant by the Participant shall be null, void and without effect.
The rights and protections of the Company hereunder shall extend to any successors or assigns of the Company. This Grant may be
assigned by the Company without the Participant’s consent.
16.    Withholding. The Participant shall be required to pay to the Employer, or make other arrangements satisfactory to the Employer
to provide for the payment of, any federal, state, local or other taxes that the Employer is required to withhold with respect to the
grant, vesting and distribution of the Performance Units and dividend equivalents. Any tax withholding obligation of
7

the Employer with respect to the distribution of shares of Company Stock pursuant to the Performance Units that are earned by the
Participant under this Grant may, at the Committee’s discretion, be satisfied by having shares of Company Stock withheld up to an
amount that does not exceed the minimum applicable withholding tax rate for federal (including FICA), state, local and other tax
liabilities.
17.    Effect on Other Benefits. The value of shares of Company Stock and dividend equivalents distributed with respect to the
Performance  Units shall not be considered  eligible earnings for purposes of any other plans maintained  by the Company or the
Employer. Neither shall such value be considered part of the Participant’s compensation for purposes of determining or calculating
other benefits that are based on compensation, such as life insurance.
18.    Applicable Law.  The  validity,  construction,  interpretation  and  effect  of  this  Grant  shall  be  governed  by  and  construed  in
accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware, without giving effect to the conflict of laws provisions thereof.
19.    Notice. Any notice to the Company provided for in this instrument shall be addressed to the Company in care of the General
Counsel at the Company’s corporate headquarters, and any notice to the Participant shall be addressed to such Participant at the
current address shown on the payroll records of the Employer,  or to such other address as the Participant  may designate to the
Employer in writing. Any notice shall be (i) delivered by hand, (ii) delivered by a national overnight courier or delivery service, (iii)
enclosed in a properly sealed envelope addressed as stated above, registered and deposited, postage prepaid, in a post office regularly
maintained by the United States Postal Service, or (iv) in the case of notices by the Company to the Participant, delivered by e-mail
or other electronic means (with confirmation of receipt to be made by any oral, electronic or written means).
20.    Taxation; Code Section 409A. As applicable, this Grant is intended to comply with the requirements of section 409A of the
Code  and  shall  be  interpreted  and  administered  in  accordance  with  Code  section  409A.  Notwithstanding  any  provision  to  the
contrary herein, if the Performance Units constitute “deferred compensation” under section 409A of the Code, distributions made
with respect to this Grant may only be made in a manner and upon an event permitted by Code section 409A. To the extent that any
provision of the Grant would cause a conflict with the requirements of Code section 409A, or would cause the administration of the
Grant  to  fail  to  satisfy  the  requirements  of  Code  section  409A,  such  provision  shall,  to  the  extent  practicable  if  permitted  by
applicable  law,  be  deemed  null  and  void.  In the  event  that  it is  determined  not  feasible  to  void  a  provision  of  this  Grant,  such
provision  shall  be  construed  in  a  manner  as to  comply  with  the  Code  section  409A  requirements.  This  Grant  may  be  amended
without the consent of the Participant in any respect deemed by the Committee or its delegate to be necessary in order to comply
with Code section 409A. Unless a valid election is made pursuant to Paragraph 6 above, in no event may the Participant, directly or
indirectly,  designate  the  calendar  year  of  distribution.  Notwithstanding  anything  in  the  Plan  or  the  Grant  to  the  contrary,  the
Participant  shall  be  solely  responsible  for  the  tax  consequences  of  this  Grant,  and  in  no  event  shall  the  Company  have  any
responsibility or liability if this Grant does not meet any applicable requirements of Code section 409A.
8

21.    Severability. In the event one or more of the provisions of this Grant should, for any reason, be held to be invalid, illegal or
unenforceable in any respect, such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability will not affect any other provisions of this Grant, and this
Grant will be construed as if such invalid, illegal or unenforceable provision had never been contained herein.
[SIGNATURE PAGE FOLLOWS]
9

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Company has caused its duly authorized officer to execute this Grant, effective as of the Date
of Grant.
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
By: Susan N. Story
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
Its: President and CEO
10

“PSU GRANT B – EPS”
EXHIBIT A
PERFORMANCE GOALS
The number of Performance Units that may be earned shall be determined based on the achievement of Compounded Earnings Per
Share Growth (as described below) over the Performance Period.
Compounded Earnings Per Share (“EPS”) Growth – will be calculated based on fully diluted EPS calculated in accordance with
US GAAP as reported in the Company’s audited consolidated financial statements adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature. The starting point for the calculation will be adjusted EPS of $3.30 for the year ended December 31, 2018.
The ending point for the calculation will be EPS for the year ended December 31, 2021, adjusted to exclude all items of gain, loss or
expense for the fiscal year determined to be extraordinary or unusual in nature or infrequent in occurrence or related to the disposal
of a segment of a business or related to a change in accounting principle or, as determined by the Committee, any other change or
event similar in nature.
The award scale for Compounded EPS Growth is as follows:
 
Compounded EPS Growth
Actual 
Compounded EPS 
Growth
Target Award
11.0% or more
200%
9.8%
175%
8.5%
100%
7.3%
25%
< 6.0%
0%
If actual achievement of the Performance Goal does not meet threshold performance (i.e., less than 6.0% for Compounded EPS
Growth, then that Performance Goal will be reflected in the final result for determining the number of earned Performance Units at
its assigned weighting with a 0%. The maximum award that may be earned for each Performance Goal is capped at 200%, and the
maximum award that may be earned by the Participant is capped at 200% of the Target Award.
11

 
Example:
The following is an example calculation for a Participant with a Target Award of 1,000 Performance Units:
Earnings Per Share
 
12/31/2018
12/31/2021
Adjusted
Illustration
Adjusted diluted earnings per share from
continuing operations
$
3.30
$
4.27
Compounded EPS growth
8.97%
Earned Performance Units
Achievement
Award
Compounded EPS Growth
8.97%
127.5%
In this example, the individual who was awarded a Target Grant of 1,000 Performance Units would earn 1,275 Performance Units
(1,000 x 1.275), which is convertible into an equivalent number of shares of Company Stock assuming all other terms and conditions
of the Grant have been satisfied.
12

Exhibit 10.16.1
PENSION PLAN
FOR EMPLOYEES OF
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
AND
ITS DESIGNATED SUBSIDIARIES
(As Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2016)

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I.
PURPOSE    1
ARTICLE II.
DEFINITIONS    2
Section 2.1
Definitions    2
Section 2.2
Administration    10
Section 2.3
Construction    10
Section 2.4
Governing Law    10
ARTICLE III.
PARTICIPATION    10
Section 3.1
New Participants    10
Section 3.2
Participants as of January 1, 2006    11
Section 3.3
Collective Bargaining    12
Section 3.4
Suspension of Benefits    12
ARTICLE IV.
RETIREMENT    13
Section 4.1
Normal Retirement and Late Retirement    13
Section 4.2
Early Retirement    13
Section 4.3
Disability Retirement    14
ARTICLE V.
RETIREMENT INCOME LIFE BENEFITS    15
Section 5.1
For Participants Who Retired Prior to July 1, 2001    15
Section 5.2
Normal or Late Retirement Income    15
Section 5.3
1994 Fresh Start Provisions    17
Section 5.4
Early Retirement Income    17
Section 5.5
Disability Retirement Income    17
Section 5.6
Other Plan Benefits    18
Section 5.7
Benefits Attributable to Merged Plans    18
Section 5.8
Normal Form of Retirement Income    18
ARTICLE VI.
BENEFIT ELECTIONS, SURVIVOR BENEFITS AND RELATED REDUCTIONS IN BENEFITS    18
Section 6.1
Automatic Surviving Spouse Benefit    18
Section 6.2
Notice and Election Procedures    20
Section 6.3
Monthly Income for Life Election    22
Section 6.4
Survivor Benefits Available by Election    22
Section 6.5
Death Benefits for Unmarried Participants    23
Section 6.6
Required Distributions - Code Section 401(a)(9)    24
Section 6.7
Distributions Pursuant to a Qualified Domestic Relations Order (“QDRO”)    28
ARTICLE VII.
BENEFIT PAYMENTS    29
Section 7.1
Purchase of Annuities    29
Section 7.2
Direct Rollovers    29
Section 7.3
Limitations for Underfunded Plans    30
i

TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
Page
ARTICLE VIII. VESTED BENEFITS IN THE EVENT OF TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT    35
Section 8.1
Vesting    36
Section 8.2
Payment of Vested Termination Benefit    36
Section 8.3
Failure to Vest    36
ARTICLE IX.
RE-EMPLOYMENT AND BREAKS-IN-SERVICE    37
Section 9.1
Re-employment before July 1, 1976    37
Section 9.2
Re-employment after June 30, 1976 and before July 1, 1985    37
Section 9.3
Re-employment after June 30, 1985    37
Section 9.4
General    38
ARTICLE X.
VETERANS’ RE-EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS    38
Section 10.1
Qualified Military Service    38
Section 10.2
Death While In Qualified Military Service    38
ARTICLE XI.
PLAN ADMINISTRATION    39
Section 11.1
Fiduciary Responsibility    39
Section 11.2
Appointment and Removal of Committee    39
Section 11.3
Compensation and Expenses of Committee    39
Section 11.4
Committee Procedures    39
Section 11.5
Delegation and Allocation of Responsibility    40
Section 11.6
Indemnification    40
Section 11.7
Claims Procedure    41
Section 11.8
Plan Expenses    42
ARTICLE XII.
CONTRIBUTIONS    42
Section 12.1
Contributions    42
Section 12.2
Management of Funds    43
ARTICLE XIII. MISCELLANEOUS    44
Section 13.1
Liability of the Company    44
Section 13.2
Non-Alienation of Benefits    44
Section 13.3
Facility of Payment    44
Section 13.4
Limitation on Benefits    44
Section 13.5
Right to Terminate Employment    45
ARTICLE XIV. TERMINATION OF THE PLAN - DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS    45
Section 14.1
Order of Priorities    45
Section 14.2
Method of Allocation    46
Section 14.3
Restricted Benefits    47
Section 14.4
Severance of a Subsidiary    47
ARTICLE XV.
GOVERNMENTAL APPROVAL    48
ii

TABLE OF CONTENTS
(continued)
Page
ARTICLE XVI. AMENDMENTS    48
Section 16.1
Amendment    48
Section 16.2
Merger, Consolidation or Transfer of Assets or Liabilities    48
Certain appendices to this agreement have been omitted pursuant to Item 601(a)(5) of Regulation S-K. The Company will furnish the
omitted appendices to the SEC upon request.
iii

PENSION PLAN FOR EMPLOYEES OF 
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC. 
AND ITS DESIGNATED SUBSIDIARIES
(As Amended And Restated Effective January 1, 2016)
ARTICLE I.
PURPOSE
The purpose of this Plan is to provide retirement income for participating Employees. The pensions provided by the Plan will
be in addition to any Social Security benefits payable under Federal or State law. The provisions of this Plan shall govern with
respect to retirement income over any bargaining unit agreement, but shall not supersede, modify, change or substitute any terms and
provisions  not  relating  to  retirement  income  of  participating  Employees  that  appear  in  such  agreements.  The  rules  set  out  in
Appendix 2 shall apply should the Plan become a Top-Heavy Plan, as defined therein.
Effective as of July 1, 2011, in connection with that certain Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of January 23, 2011, by and
among the Company, Arizona-American Water Company, New Mexico-American Water Company, Inc. and EPCOR Water (USA),
Inc., pursuant to which the Company agreed to sell all of the issued and outstanding stock of Arizona-American Water Company and
New Mexico-American Water Company, Inc. to EPCOR Water (USA), Inc., (the “Sale”) the Company is transferring the assets and
liabilities attributable to those Participants who are, or were previously, employed by Arizona-American Water Company and New
Mexico-American  Water  Company,  Inc.  to  the  Pension  Plan  for  Employees  of  Arizona-American  Water  Company  and  New
Mexico-American  Water  Company,  Inc.  (the  “Arizona-New  Mexico  Pension  Plan”),  a  new  pension  plan  established  for  such
Participants.  Such  assets  and  liabilities  include  those  attributable  to  active  Participants  as  of  June  30,  2011,  terminated  vested
Participants, and retired Participants (or their Beneficiaries) who are receiving benefit payments from the Plan, all of whom are, or
were previously, employed by Arizona-American Water Company or New Mexico-American Water Company, Inc. (collectively, the
“Arizona-New Mexico Employees”). Any benefit to which an Arizona-New Mexico Employee may have been entitled under the
Plan immediately prior to July 1, 2011 shall not be provided under the Plan, but instead shall be provided under the Arizona-New
Mexico Pension Plan. In addition, with respect to any Participant who is transferred to the employment of Arizona-American Water
Company  and  New  Mexico-American  Water  Company,  Inc.  from  the  Employer  on  or  after  July  1,  2011  and  prior  to  the
consummation date of the Sale, assets and liabilities with respect to such Participant’s Accrued Benefit under the Plan, if any, shall
be  transferred  to  the  Arizona-New  Mexico  Pension  Plan.  Furthermore,  with  respect  to  any  participant  under  the  Arizona-New
Mexico Pension Plan who transfers employment from Arizona-American

Water Company and New Mexico-American Water Company, Inc. to the Employer prior to the consummation date of the Sale,
assets  and  liabilities  with  respect  to  such  participant’s  Accrued  Benefit  under  the  Arizona-New  Mexico  Pension  Plan  shall  be
transferred back to this Plan and be payable from this Plan to such transferred participant. The Arizona-New Mexico Employees
described in this paragraph are identified in Appendix 6 attached hereto.
Effective as of May 1, 2012, in connection with that certain Stock Purchase Agreement, dated as of July 8, 2011, by and
among the Company, Ohio-American Water Company, and Aqua Ohio, Inc. ("Aqua Ohio"), pursuant to which the Company agreed
to  sell  all  of  the  issued  and  outstanding  stock  of  Ohio-American  Water  Company  to  Aqua  Ohio  (the  "Sale"),  the  Company  is
transferring the assets and liabilities attributable to those Participants who are, or were previously, employed by Ohio-American
Water Company to the Retirement Income Plan for Aqua America, Inc. and Subsidiaries ("Aqua Plan"). Such assets and liabilities
include those attributable to active Participants as of April 30, 2012, terminated vested Participants, and retired Participants (or their
Beneficiaries) who are receiving benefit payments from the Plan, all of whom are, or were previously, employed by Ohio-American
Water Company ("Ohio Employees"). Any benefit to which an Ohio Employee may have been entitled under the Plan immediately
prior to May 1, 2012 shall not be provided under the Plan, but instead shall be provided under the Aqua Plan.
The amendment and restatement of the Plan is effective January 1, 2016, except as otherwise specifically provided herein.
The benefits payable under this Plan with respect to any Participant whose service terminated before January 1, 2016 shall be
determined under the provisions of the Plan as in effect when such Participant’s service with the Employer terminated, except that
the  factors  under  Tables  2  through  4(a)  shall  be  derived  from  the  Tables  in  effect  when  the  benefit  in  question  is  to  begin.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the benefits payable under this Plan with respect to any individual who participated in a merged plan
but terminated employment before the date that plan was merged into this Plan shall be determined under the provisions of the
merged plan as in effect at the time the individual terminated employment.
Except as otherwise provided in an applicable Appendix, the terms of the Plan are as follows:
ARTICLE II.
DEFINITIONS
Section  2.1    Definitions.  Unless  the  context  clearly  indicates  otherwise,  the  following  terms  shall  have  the  following
meanings:
2

(a)    “Accrued  Benefit”  means  the  accrued  benefit  of  a  Participant  expressed  in  terms  of  a  monthly  single  life  annuity
beginning  at  or  after  his  Normal  Retirement  Date  determined  under  Sections  5.1  and  5.2,  as  applicable,  on  the  basis  of  the
Participant’s Years of Service for benefit accrual to the date as of which the computation is made.
(b)    “Actuarial Equivalent” means a benefit of equivalent value (A) computed on the basis set out in Tables 2 through 4(a),
appended hereto, (B) derived based on interest rates and mortality tables set forth in Table 5 or (C) in any instance in which neither
(A) nor (B) applies, based on an assumed interest rate of 8% and using the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table (set back 1 year for
Participants and set back 5 years for Contingent Annuitants). For the purpose of determining lump sum present values pursuant to
Sections 6.6 and 6.7, the calculation shall be made using the “applicable mortality table” under section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code and
shall be based on the “applicable interest rate” under section 417(e)(3)(C) of the Code for the third calendar month preceding the
calendar month during which the Annuity Starting Date occurs.
(c)    “Annuity Starting Date” means the first day of the first month for which an amount is payable as an annuity or in any
other form.
(d)    “Board of Directors” means the Board of Directors of American Water Works Company, Inc.
(e)    “Break-in-Service” means a 12 consecutive month period, measured from the date an Employee is first credited with an
Hour of Service or any anniversary thereof (or his re-employment commencement date or any anniversary thereof), within which he
is not credited with more than 500 Hours of Service.
(f)    “Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended, and, unless otherwise provided, applicable provisions of
successor laws.
(g)    “Committee” means the Retirement/Benefits Committee charged with the administration of the Plan as provided in
Section 2.2. The Committee shall be deemed to be the Plan’s “administrator” and “named fiduciary” as defined in sections 3(16)(A)
and  402(a)(2),  respectively,  of  ERISA,  or  any  corresponding  provisions  of  successor  laws.  In  addition,  any  reference  to  the
Committee herein shall be construed to mean the Committee or its designee.
(h)    “Company” means American Water Works Company, Inc., a Delaware corporation.
(i)    “Contingent Annuitant” means:
(i)    the Participant’s spouse; or
3

(ii)    the person designated by the Participant, with the consent of the Participant’s spouse if the Participant is married,
as Contingent Annuitant in a manner prescribed by the Committee, or,
(iii)    if the Participant has no spouse and benefits are payable in the form of a life and certain annuity under Section
6.4(b)(ii), the Participant’s estate.
A married Participant may designate a person or persons other than his spouse as Contingent Annuitant, provided that such
spouse consents in writing in a manner prescribed by the Committee which satisfies the requirements of Section 6.2. Such consent
shall not be required if it is established to the satisfaction of the Committee that the consent cannot be obtained because there is no
spouse, because the spouse cannot be located or because of such other circumstances as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe
by regulations. A subsequent spouse of the Participant shall not be bound by any such consent.
(j)    “Continuous  Service”  means  that  uninterrupted  period  of  employment,  prior  to  the  Normal,  Early  or  Disability
Retirement  Date  of  an  Employee  with  the  Company,  a  Designated  Subsidiary  or  former  Designated  Subsidiary,  or  Predecessor
thereof. Transfers of employment between any corporations which are or were the Company, a Designated Subsidiary, a former
Designated Subsidiary, or any Predecessor thereof, any absence due to temporary layoff not exceeding 12 months, Qualified Military
Service or approved leave of absence for sickness, accident or other cause shall not be considered an interruption or termination of
employment.  Employees  similarly  situated  shall  be  accorded  uniform  and  nondiscriminatory  treatment  by  the  Committee  in
approving leaves of absence. A completed year of Continuous Service means a 12 month period ending on the day prior to the
anniversary  date  of  employment  during  which  the  Employee’s  customary  employment  was  for  more  than  1,100  hours.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, each Employee who became a Participant on July 1, 1952 shall, if his Service has been Continuous
since July 1, 1952, receive Continuous Service credit for all periods of employment prior to July 1, 1952 with the Company, any
Predecessor  thereof,  or  any  Subsidiary  or  former  Subsidiary  from  the  date  when  he  was  first  employed  by  such  Company,
Predecessor or Subsidiary, including any period of Qualified Military Service, but excluding any other period when not actively
employed.
(k)    “Designated  Subsidiary”  means  any  Subsidiary  named  by  the  Board  of  Directors  as  such  under  this  Plan,  or  any
Subsidiary  to  which,  prior  to  July  1,  1975,  the  board  of  directors  of  its  immediate  parent  company  designated  this  Plan  to  be
applicable, which naming may be changed by the Board of Directors from time to time.
(l)    “Disability Retirement Date” means the date a Participant retires before his Normal Retirement Date in accordance with
the provisions of Section 4.3.
4

(m)    “Early Retirement Date” means the first day of the calendar month coinciding with or immediately following the date a
Participant reaches age 55, provided that the sum of his age and Years of Service is at least 70.
(n)    “Earnings:”
(i)    General Rule. Earnings shall mean, for any Participant, his total compensation for services as an Employee paid
as an annual or other periodic salary or as an hourly wage (including overtime pay and shift differentials), by the Company,
by any Designated Subsidiary, any former Designated Subsidiary or any Predecessor thereof, plus (a) amounts paid under the
Company’s  Annual  Incentive  Plan  that  have  not  been  deferred  by  the  Employee,  (b)  amounts  that  would  be  paid  to  the
Employee during the year but for the Employee’s election under a cash or deferred arrangement described in section 401(k)
of the Code or a cafeteria plan described in section 125 of the Code or a qualified transportation fringe benefit program
described in section 132(0(4) of the Code, and (c) amounts paid under the Company’s Business Development Incentive Plan.
(ii)    Maximum Annual Dollar Limit. The annual Earnings of each Participant (who performs at least one Hour of
Service  on  or  after  July  1,  2002)  taken  into  account  in  determining  benefit  accruals  in  any  Plan  Year  beginning  after
December 31, 2001, shall not exceed the dollar limitation specified in section 401(a)(17) of the Code as in effect for the Plan
Year ($270,000 for 2017), adjusted for cost-of-living increases in accordance with section 401(a)(17)(B) of the Code. The
cost-of-living adjustment in effect for a calendar year applies to annual compensation for the determination period that begins
with or within such calendar year. In determining benefit accruals in Plan Years beginning after December 31, 2001, the
annual  Earnings  limit  for  any  prior  determination  period  shall  be  limited  to  $200,000.  Effective  for  Limitation  Years
beginning after July 1, 2007, this Section 2.1(n)(ii) shall also apply to Article C.3 of Appendix 2.
(o)    “Effective Date” of the Plan means July 1, 1952. The effective date of this amendment and restatement of the Plan is
January 1, 2016, except as otherwise specifically stated herein.
(p)    “Employee” means:
(i)    an individual who is employed by the Employer;
(ii)    an individual who is not employed by the Employer but is a Leased Employee within the meaning of section
414(n)(2) of the Code, provided that if the total number of Leased Employees constitutes 20% or less of the Employer’s
nonhighly compensated work force, within the meaning of section 414(n)(5)(C)(ii) of the Code. The term “Employee” shall
not include those Leased Employees covered by a “safe harbor” plan described in section 414(n)(5)(B) of the Code; and
5

(iii)    when required under Section 2.1(u), for purposes of crediting Hours of Service, a former Employee.
(q)    “Employer” means the Company, its Designated Subsidiaries, and for purposes of computing an Employee’s Years of
Service for purposes of vesting and eligibility, but not benefit accrual:
(i)    any other employer included with the Company in a controlled group of corporations or trades or businesses
within the meaning of section 414(b) or (c) of the Code, or an affiliated service group within the meaning of section 414(m)
of the Code; and
(ii)    any other entity required to be aggregated with the Company pursuant to regulations under section 414(o) of the
Code;
provided, that any such employer shall be included with the term “Employer” only while member of such a group including
the Company.
(r)    “ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended.
(s)    “Final Average Earnings” means, for any Employee, the average of the Employee’s Earnings for those 60 consecutive
full months of the final 120 months of employment as an eligible Employee which yield the highest average. If within the 60 month
period (or lesser period of employment) applicable in the determination of Final Average Earnings a Participant is absent due to
layoff, sickness or accident, Qualified Military Service, leave of absence or other cause to the extent specified in Section 2.1(nn)(ii),
his Earnings during such period of absence shall be considered to be his Scheduled Monthly Earnings. If within such 60 month
period the Participant is absent due to a cause not specified in Section 2.1(nn)(ii), including but not limited to a strike or other work
stoppage, his Final Average Earnings shall be computed on the basis of the last 60 months (or lesser period of employment) during
which he actually received Earnings, or is absent under such circumstances that he is credited with Hours of Service under Section
2.1(nn)(ii). If a Participant does not have Earnings for 60 consecutive months, that Participant’s Final Average Earnings shall be the
amount determined by dividing that Participant’s Earnings as an eligible Employee by the number of months in which Earnings were
actually received. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in determining Final Average Earnings, overtime in the last month worked prior to
the pension effective date will be the average monthly overtime earned during the twelve months prior to the month in which the
Employee submits his application for retirement.
(t)    “Fund” means the aggregate of the funds held by any Insurance Company under an Insurance Contract, other than those
irrevocably committed to the purchase of annuity contracts, or by the Trustee or any other Investment Manager, for the purpose of
providing retirement income benefits under the Plan for Participants, surviving spouses and Contingent Annuitants.
6

(u)    “Hour of Service” means:
(i)    each hour for which an Employee is paid, or entitled to payment, for the performance of duties for the Employer;
(ii)    each hour for which an Employee is paid, or entitled to payment, by the Employer with respect to a period of
time  during  which  no  duties  are  performed  (irrespective  of  whether  the  employment  relationship  has  terminated)  due  to
vacation, holiday, illness, incapacity (including disability), layoff or jury duty; provided that, subject to Section 2.1(nn)(ii),
an Employee shall be credited with no more than 501 Hours of Service on account of any single continuous period during
which he performs no duties;
(iii)    each hour for which back pay, irrespective of mitigation of damages, is either awarded or agreed to by the
Employer employing an Employee;
(iv)    solely for purposes of determining whether a Break-in-Service has occurred, each hour which would normally
have  been  credited  to  the  individual,  or  if  that  number  of  hours  cannot  be  determined,  8  hours  per  working  day,  to  a
maximum  of  501  hours,  during  any  period  throughout  which  the  individual  is  absent  from  employment  because  of  the
individual’s pregnancy, the birth of the individual’s child, placement of a child with the individual in connection with the
adoption of that child by the individual, or the individual’s need to provide care for such a child for the period immediately
following that child’s birth or adoption; and,
(v)    each other hour credited under Section 2.1(nn)(ii).
Hours of service shall be credited to the Employee for the applicable 12 month period or periods in which the duties are performed,
for which the payment is made, or to which the award, agreement or leave pertains, except that in the case of hours credited under
Section 2.1(u)(iv), relating to maternity and paternity leave, such hours shall be credited in the year in which the absence from work
begins if necessary to avoid a Break-in-Service in that year, or in any other case, in the following year. Hours of Service under this
Section 2.1(u) shall be credited consistent with the provisions of 29 CFR 2530.200b-2, issued by the United States Department of
Labor, which provisions are incorporated herein by reference.
(v)    “Insurance Company” means any insurance company or companies, from which retirement income benefits payable
under the Plan may be purchased for Participants, their surviving spouses and Contingent Annuitants.
(w)    “Insurance Contract” means any group deposit administration contract, immediate participation guaranteed contract or
other policy of similar type or purpose entered into by the
7

Company, under which retirement income benefits payable under the Plan may be paid to Participants, their surviving spouses and
Contingent Annuitants.
(x)    “Investment Manager” means any “investment manager,” as that term is defined by section 3(38) of ERISA or any
applicable  provision  of  any  successor  law,  which  has  investment  control  of  any  Plan  assets  pursuant  to  an  agreement  with  the
Company or the Trustee.
(y)    “Late Retirement Date” means the actual date of retirement of a Participant who remains employed by the Employer
after his Normal Retirement Date.
(z)    “Leased Employee” means any person who is not an Employee and who provides services to the Employer if:
(i)    such services are provided pursuant to an agreement between the Employer and any other person;
(ii)    such  Person  has  performed  services  for  the  Employer  or  for  the  Employer  and  related  employees  on  a
substantially full-time basis for a period of at least one year; and
(iii)    such services are performed under the primary direction or control of the Employer.
(aa)    “Limitation Year” means the calendar year.
(bb)    “Qualified Military Service” means any service in the “uniformed services” (as defined in Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the
United States Code) by any Employee if such Employee is entitled to re-employment rights under such Chapter with respect to such
service.
(cc)    “Normal Retirement Date” means the first day of the calendar month coinciding with or immediately following the date
a Participant reaches age 65.
(dd)    “Participant” means an Employee who has met the eligibility requirements of Sections 3.1, 3.2, and 3.3, as applicable.
An individual who qualifies as a Participant shall continue to be a Participant until all benefits due him under the Plan have been
paid. An individual who is not a U.S. citizen but who is seconded to employment with any U.S. Employer shall not be eligible to
participate during any period while such individual is also covered by a pension plan maintained or contributed to by his non-U.S.
Employer.
(ee)    “Plan”  means  the  Pension  Plan  for  Employees  of  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  and  its  Designated
Subsidiaries, as set forth in this document and the related Trust Agreement pursuant to which the Trust is maintained.
(ff)    “Plan Year” means the 12 month period ending June 30.
8

(gg)    “Predecessor”  means  any  corporation  which  was  a  constituent  in  a  merger,  consolidation,  liquidation  or  similar
combination of corporations.
(hh)    “Scheduled Monthly Earnings” on any date means, in the case of any salaried Employee, his basic rate of monthly
earnings at such date (exclusive of overtime payments and bonuses), and, in the case of any hourly-paid Employee, the amount
determined by multiplying his average weekly earnings (exclusive of overtime payments and bonuses) at said date by 4 & 1/3. As
used in the preceding sentence, “average weekly earnings” on any date means the amount determined by multiplying the hourly-paid
Employee’s basic straight time hourly rate at said date by the number of hours in his normal work week; provided, however, that the
basic straight time hourly rate and the number of hours in a normal work week of any such Employee on a shift schedule shall be
averaged over the period covered by the shift cycle.
(ii)    “Social Security Average Wage Base” means the average of the amounts considered “wages” under section 3121(a)(1)
of the Code, or any applicable provision of any successor laws, for the calendar year including the date as of which a benefit is to be
calculated under Section 4.3(c) and the preceding nine calendar years.
(jj)    “Social Security Retirement Age” means the age used under section 216(1) of the Social Security Act, except that such
section shall be applied without regard to the age increase factor, as if the early retirement age under section 216(1)(2) of such Act
were 62.
(kk)    “Subsidiary” means any corporation, association or business trust, 50% or more of whose voting stock (not including
shares having voting power only upon the happening of an event of default) is or was owned, directly or indirectly, by American
Water Works Company, Inc., or by any corporation which was a constituent in a merger, consolidation, liquidation, transfer of
substantially all of its assets in exchange for stock, or similar combination of corporations with or into the Company.
(ll)    “Trust” means the legal entity created by the Agreement (“Trust Agreement”) between the Company and the Trustee,
fixing the rights and liabilities with respect to the control and management of those assets of the Fund held in the Trust.
(mm)    “Trustee” means the trustee or trustees, and any successor or successors thereto, designated by the Board of Directors
and named in the Trust Agreement or any amendment thereto.
(nn)    “Year of Service” means:
(i)    Service Prior to 1975 Anniversary. For periods prior to the first anniversary after July 1, 1975 of the date on
which  a  Participant  became  an  Employee,  each  year  of  Continuous  Service  included  in  a  period  of  Continuous  Service
ending on that date.
9

(ii)    Years of Service for Eligibility and Vesting. Except as otherwise provided under Section 2.1(nn)(iv) below, for
purposes of eligibility to participate in the Plan, vesting and for meeting the eligibility requirements for survivor benefits or
for a Normal, Late, Early or Disability Retirement Date, Years of Service shall be determined under this Section 2.1(nn)(ii).
For  periods  beginning  on  or  after  the  first  anniversary  after  July  1,  1975  of  the  date  on  which  a  Participant  became  an
Employee, or in the case of a Participant who first became an Employee on or after July 1, 1975, for periods beginning on or
after  the  date  the  Participant  became  an  Employee,  each  12  month  period  commencing  on  his  employment  date  or  any
anniversary thereof during which he completes at least 1,000 Hours of Service and which is not excluded by the provisions of
Sections 9.1 and 9.2. For this purpose, an Employee for whom records of hours actually worked are not maintained, shall be
credited with 8 Hours of Service for each day for which he is compensated for his services or for which he otherwise would
have been compensated for his services during which he is absent due to (A) layoff not exceeding 12 months, (B) sickness or
accident in accordance with the customary personnel practices of the respective Company or Designated Subsidiary, but not
exceeding the first 24 months thereof, (C) Qualified Military Service, or (D) leave of absence, or other cause, approved by
the Committee pursuant to uniform and nondiscriminatory rules applicable to Employees similarly situated, provided that in
each case the Employee returns to employment with the Company or a Designated Subsidiary or, if eligible to do so, retires,
on or before the last day of the period for which service credit is granted under (A), (B), or (D), or, in the case of absence
under (C), the last day on which the Employee’s re-employment rights are protected by law.
Years of Service earned by Employees who are not included in an “Eligible Union Group,” as described in Section
3.1(b), and have ceased for any reason to be eligible to accrue additional benefits under the Plan will be credited for purposes
of vesting and for meeting the eligibility requirements for survivor benefits and Normal, Late, Early or Disability Retirement,
but will not be credited for purposes of determining benefit accrual and computing a Participant’s retirement income benefit
under the Plan under Section 2.1(nn)(iii) below.
(iii)    Years  of  Service  for  Benefit  Accrual.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  under  Section  2.1(nn)(iv)  below,  for
purposes of determining benefit accrual and computing a Participant’s retirement income benefit under the Plan, a Year of
Service shall be credited for each full 12 month period during which a Participant is credited with at least 1,000 Hours of
Service. In addition, a Participant shall receive a partial Year of Service for a period of less than 12 months provided the
Participant is credited with at least 1,000 Hours of Service during such period. Notwithstanding any other provision of this
Plan, no period during which an individual was ineligible to be a Participant by reason of Section 3.1, 3.2 or 3.3 shall be
10

a Year of Service for the purpose of computing the retirement income benefit, if any, to which such individual is entitled
under this Plan.
A Participant shall receive credit for a partial Year of Service for an employment period of fewer than 12 months.
That credit shall be determined as a fraction, the denominator of which shall be 365 and the numerator of which shall be the
number of days in the period beginning on the last anniversary date of his employment prior to the termination of his service
or his Normal, Late, Early or Disability Retirement Date, and ending on the date of the termination of his service or his
Normal, Late, Early or Disability Retirement Date, if his Hours of Service for such period equaled, or when annualized,
would equal 1,000 or more.
(iv)    Special Rules. For special service rules to be applied in computing Years of Service for purposes of benefit
accrual, vesting and for meeting the eligibility requirements for survivor benefits or for a Normal, Late, Early or Disability
Retirement  Date,  for  Employees  of  certain  acquired  Subsidiaries  which  have  become  Designated  Subsidiaries,  see
Appendices 3 and 4.
Union Participants described in Section 5.2(d) shall cease to be credited with Years of Service after December 31,
2005  for  purposes  of  benefit  accrual.  Years  of  Service  earned  by  union  Participants  described  in  Section  5.2(d)  after
December 31, 2005 will be credited for purposes of vesting and for meeting the eligibility requirements for survivor benefits
and Normal, Late, Early or Disability Retirement.
Notwithstanding any provisions in the Plan to the contrary, any non-union Participant transferred from American
Water  Works  Service  Company,  Inc.  to  American  Water  Enterprises,  Inc.  effective  December  26,  2011  who  is  listed  in
Appendix 7, shall continue to be credited with Years of Service on and after December 26, 2011 for purposes of benefit
accrual, as well as for vesting and for meeting the eligibility requirements for survivor benefits or for Normal, Late, Early or
Disability  Retirement  Date,  until  such  Participant  subsequently  terminates  employment  or  is  transferred  from  his  or  her
December 26, 2011 classification to an ineligible employment classification.
Notwithstanding any provisions in the Plan to the contrary, any non-union Participant who, immediately prior to a
transfer of employment to American Water Enterprises, Inc., is eligible to accrue additional benefits under the Plan under
Section 3.2(b), shall continue to be credited with Years of Service on and after such transfer to American Water Enterprises,
Inc. for purposes of benefit accrual, as well as for vesting and for meeting the eligibility requirements for survivor benefits or
for  Normal,  Late,  Early  or  Disability  Retirement  Date,  until  such  Participant  subsequently  terminates  employment  or  is
transferred to an ineligible employment classification.
11

Section 2.2    Administration. The Plan shall be administered by the Committee as more fully provided for in Sections 11.1
through 11.3.
Section 2.3    Construction.
(a)    The headings and subheadings in the Plan are inserted for convenience of reference only and are not to be considered in
the construction of any provision of the Plan.
(b)    The masculine pronoun as used in this Plan refers to both sexes.
Section 2.4    Governing Law. Except to the extent such laws are superseded by ERISA or the Code, the laws of the State of
New Jersey shall govern.
    
ARTICLE III.
PARTICIPATION
Section 3.1    New Participants.
(a)    Except as specifically provided in Section 3.1(b) below, any Employee who was not a Participant in the Plan on January
1, 2006 shall forever remain ineligible for the Plan.
(b)    Subject to the terms of the applicable collective bargaining agreement, a union Employee employed within an Eligible
Union Group shall become a Participant on the first day of the calendar month next following his completion of one Year of Service.
“Eligible Union Groups” include:
(i)    Union  Employees  employed  in  the  Company’s  call  center  at  either  the  Alton,  Illinois  or  Pensacola,  Florida
facility;
(ii)    Union Employees hired or rehired prior to February 1, 2009 at the Company’s Sterling, Illinois facility;
(iii)    Union Employees employed on January 15, 2002 in the Company’s water business acquired from Citizens
Utility Company; or
(iv)    Local 423 union Employees hired before April 1, 2006 or Local 68 union Employees hired before May 1, 2006,
who were participating in the Employees’ Retirement Plan of Elizabethtown Water Company as of December 31, 2006.
An Employee who is hired or transferred into an Eligible Union Group shall become a Participant on or after January 1, 2006
only if the collective bargaining agreement applicable to that Eligible Union Group specifically provides for participation in the Plan
by all members of that Eligible Union Group.
12

Section 3.2    Participants as of January 1, 2006.
(a)    Except as provided in this Section 3.2, an Employee who was a Participant in this Plan as of January 1, 2006, shall
remain eligible to participate in the Plan.
(b)    Any Participant who, as of January 1, 2006, was not eligible to accrue benefits under the Plan shall forever remain
ineligible  to  accrue  benefits  under  the  Plan  without  regard  to  a  subsequent  transfer  to  an  eligible  classification  of  employment,
rehire, recall, or other resumption of employment unless that Participant is subsequently employed within one of the Eligible Union
Groups and the collective bargaining agreement applicable to that Eligible Union Group specifically provides for participation in the
Plan by all members of that Eligible Union Group.
(c)    Any Participant who, on or after January 1, 2006, ceases for any reason to be eligible to accrue benefits under the Plan
shall  forever  remain  ineligible  to  accrue  future  benefits  under  the  Plan  without  regard  to  a  subsequent  transfer  to  an  eligible
classification of employment, rehire, recall, or other resumption of employment unless that Participant is subsequently employed
within  one  of  the  Eligible  Union  Groups  and  the  collective  bargaining  agreement  applicable  to  that  Eligible  Union  Group
specifically provides for participation in the Plan by all members of that Eligible Union Group.
(d)    Non-union Participants rehired on or after January 1, 2006, shall not be eligible to accrue additional benefits under the
Plan.
(e)    No union Participants hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2001 shall be eligible to accrue additional benefits, under
the  Plan  on  or  after  January  1,  2006  unless  employed  within  one  of  the  Eligible  Union  Groups  and  the  collective  bargaining
agreement applicable to that Eligible Union Group specifically provides for participation in the Plan by all members of that Eligible
Union Group.
(f)    Union Employees hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2001 who, on or after January 1, 2006, cease to be covered
under a collective bargaining agreement between a union and the Company for any reason, including by transfer to non-union status
(union Employees hired before January 1, 2001 and transferred to non-union status will, at the time of transfer, be treated as a non-
union Employee hired before January 1, 2006) shall not be eligible to accrue additional benefits under the Plan on or after January 1,
2006; provided, however, union Employees hired before January 1, 2001 who are laid off and recalled to employment on or before
December 31, 2005 shall be treated as having been hired before January 1, 2001 but subject on and after January 1, 2006 to the
provisions in this Section 3.2.
(g)    No Employee on whose behalf the Company or a Designated Subsidiary makes contributions to any employee pension
benefit plan with respect to a period of current service shall be eligible to accrue benefits in this Plan for the same period of service.
13

(h)    Any Participant who, immediately prior to a transfer of employment to American Water Enterprises, Inc., is eligible to
accrue additional benefits under the Plan under this Section 3.2(b) shall continue to accrue benefits under the Plan while employed
by American Water Enterprises, Inc. until such Participant subsequently terminates employment or is transferred to an ineligible
employment classification.
Section 3.3    Collective Bargaining.
(a)    Any other provision of this Plan to the contrary notwithstanding, if any labor organization, which shall be recognized by
the Company or a Designated Subsidiary as the representative for purposes of collective bargaining of any unit of Employees, does
not enter into an agreement with the Company or a Designated Subsidiary providing for the participation of such Employees in this
Plan, or having entered into such an agreement fails or refuses to continue the same in effect, the Employees so represented shall not,
except to the extent of such Employees’ vested interest under Section 8.1, be Participants in, or eligible to participate in, this Plan, its
benefits, or in the funds held by the Insurance Company, the Trustee or any Investment Manager, provided that if the absence of an
agreement occurs only during a period of negotiations which culminate in a new agreement providing for the participation of such
Employees in this Plan, such Employees shall not lose any of the rights which they would otherwise have had hereunder.
(b)    If any Employee becomes a Participant following a period during which he was ineligible to participate by reason of this
Section 3.3, his Years of Service under this Plan shall not, for the purpose of computing the retirement income benefit, if any, to
which he is entitled under this Plan, include any period during which he was so ineligible.
Section 3.4    Suspension of Benefits. A Participant who continues in employment beyond age 65 shall not be entitled to
payment of benefits while so employed, provided that the Plan notifies the Participant by personal delivery or first class mail during
the first calendar month following the Participant’s Normal Retirement Date that his benefits will not be payable until his actual
termination of employment. Such notification shall state that benefit payments are not being paid, in accordance with this Section
3.4, because the Participant is remaining in active employment, and shall include a copy of this Section 3.4 and a statement to the
effect that applicable Department of Labor regulations may be found at 29 CFR § 2530.203-3.
14

ARTICLE IV.
RETIREMENT
Section 4.1    Normal Retirement and Late Retirement.
(a)    Upon retirement at his Normal Retirement Date a Participant shall be entitled to receive a monthly retirement income
commencing on his Normal Retirement Date in an amount determined under Sections 5.2, 5.6, 5.7 and, if applicable, Section 6.1(a).
(b)    A Participant who continues to be employed after his Normal Retirement Date shall be entitled to receive a monthly
retirement income commencing on his Late Retirement Date in an amount determined under Sections 5.2, 5.6, 5.7 and, if applicable,
Section 6.1(a). Notwithstanding the foregoing, an executive shall have a Late Retirement Date only if he continues in employment
with the Employer after his Normal Retirement Date by consent of the Company.
(c)    For purposes of this Section 4.1, an “executive” means a Participant:
(i)    who is an executive as defined in 29 CFR.541.1 and EEOC Reg. section 1625.12;
(ii)    who is (A) in charge of a significant and substantial local or regional operation of the Employer, (B) in charge of
a department or division of the Employer, or (C) in a high policy making position with the Employer;
(iii)    who has attained age 65;
(iv)    who has been in a position described in Sections 4.1(a) and 4.1(b) for the two year period immediately prior to
his retirement; and
(v)    who is entitled to an immediate nonforfeitable annual retirement income, payable in the form of a single life
annuity  commencing  at  age  65  (or  retirement,  if  later),  from  all  employee  pension,  profit  sharing,  savings  and  deferred
compensation plans sponsored by the Employer, which equals, in the aggregate, at least $44,000 (or such other amount as
may be described pursuant to 29 C.F.R. 541.1). There shall be excluded from the calculation of the retirement income all of
the Participant’s contributions to all plans, including amounts rolled over from the plans of previous employers.
Section 4.2    Early Retirement.
(a)    A Participant may retire on the first day of any month occurring on or after both attaining his Early Retirement Date and
making application in writing therefor to his Employer at
15

least  two  full  calendar  months  in  advance.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  in  the  event  a  Subsidiary  is  named  as  a  Designated
Subsidiary effective after December 31, 1971, a Participant who is an Employee of such Designated Subsidiary may not retire under
this Section 4.2(a) before being credited with five Years of Service under this Plan.
(b)    In the event of retirement under the provisions of Section 4.2(a), the date of a Participant’s actual retirement shall be his
Early  Retirement  Date  and  upon  retirement  at  his  Early  Retirement  Date  a  Participant  shall  be  entitled  to  receive  a  monthly
retirement  income  commencing  on  his  Early  Retirement  Date  in  an  amount  determined  under  Sections  5.4,  5.6,  5.7  and,  if
applicable, Section 6.1(a).
(c)    In the event a Participant who has applied for Social Security disability benefits applies for an Early Retirement benefit
under this Section 4.2, commences payment of his Early Retirement benefit as of his elected Annuity Starting Date, and such elected
Annuity Starting Date occurs prior to the date that an award of total and permanent disability benefits is made by the United States
Social Security Administration (the “Award”), such Participant shall not be permitted to change his Early Retirement benefit to a
Disability Retirement benefit payable under Section 4.3 following the date of the Award. The foregoing shall apply regardless of the
date of disability that is referenced in the Award. For purposes of clarity, a Participant for whom payment of his Early Retirement
benefit  has  not  yet  commenced  as  of  his  elected  Annuity  Starting  Date  due  to  administrative  delay  shall  be  treated  as  having
commenced payment of his Early Retirement benefit as of his elected Annuity Starting Date.
Section 4.3    Disability Retirement.
(a)    A Participant who has completed 10 or more Years of Service, and who qualifies for disability retirement under this
Section 4.3(a) shall be retired as of the first day of the month following the first month in which the Committee has received both (i)
the  Participant’s  written  request  for  disability  retirement,  and  (ii)  evidence  reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Committee  that  the
Participant has been determined by the United States Social Security Administration to qualify for total and permanent disability
benefits under the Social Security Act. A Participant shall be eligible for disability retirement benefits if, as a result of mental or
physical illness or injury (other than self-inflicted) while actively employed, he qualifies for disability benefits under the Social
Security  Act.  Disability  benefit  payments  shall  commence  in  either  the  month  in  which  the  disabled  Participant  is  retired,  as
described above, or in the next following month, as may be administratively practicable. Such payments under the Plan shall be
made retroactively to the first day of the month following the date as of which the Participant is deemed to be disabled by the Social
Security Administration, or, if later, to the last day of the Participant’s eligibility for continuation of the Participant’s salary or hourly
wages as sick pay under an applicable Employer sick pay plan. The sum of any retroactive payments shall be paid in a lump sum,
without interest, as part of the first monthly payment of disability benefits. A Participant shall provide such reasonable evidence of
continued Social Security
16

disability as the Committee  may require from time to time. Disability  benefits shall be discontinued  if the Participant  ceases to
qualify for disability benefits under the Social Security Act. A Participant who becomes disabled, while actively employed, on or
after attaining age 65, shall be considered to have retired under Section 4.1 and will be entitled to a monthly retirement income, if
any, in an amount determined under Sections 5.2, 5.6, 5.7 and, if applicable, Section 6.1(a).
(b)    Notwithstanding the above, if a Participant’s disability is determined by the Social Security Administration to qualify
under the Social Security Act prior to July 1, 2001, and the Participant’s benefit was in pay status, the benefit shall be determined
under the provisions of the Plan in effect prior to July 1, 2001.
(c)    In the event of retirement under the provisions of Section 4.3, the date specified in Section 4.3 shall be the Participant’s
Disability Retirement Date, and the Participant shall be entitled to receive for life, or as long as his disability continues to qualify
under the Social Security Act, a monthly retirement income commencing on his Disability Retirement Date in an amount determined
under Sections 5.5, 5.6, 5.7 and, if applicable, Section 6.1(a); provided that if at his Disability Retirement Date, a Participant would
be eligible for Early Retirement but for the two months’ notice requirement, he may elect to retire early under the provisions of
Section 4.2(a).
(d)    A Participant shall not be eligible for a benefit payable under this Section 4.3 if the provisions of Section 4.2(c) apply.
    
ARTICLE V.
RETIREMENT INCOME LIFE BENEFITS
Section 5.1    For Participants Who Retired Prior to July 1, 2001. Except as otherwise specifically provided in Appendix 1,
the monthly retirement income payable to a Participant whose Retirement Date occurred on or before July 1, 2001 shall be continued
after June 30, 2001 in the same amount and subject to the same conditions as the monthly retirement income which such Participant
was receiving under the Plan beginning on or before July 1, 2001.
Section 5.2    Normal or Late Retirement Income. A Participant’s Normal or Late Retirement Income shall be determined as
follows:
(a)    For Active Non Union Participants Retirement on or after July 1, 2001. An active non union Participant retiring after
June 30, 2001, except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a), shall receive a monthly retirement income commencing on his
Normal or Late Retirement Date in an amount equal to the following:
(i)    For Years of Service prior to July 1, 2001, the sum of the following:
17

(A)    1.85%  of  his  Final  Average  Earnings  not  in  excess  of  the  Social  Security  Average  Wage  Base,
multiplied by his Years of Service up to a maximum of 25 years, plus
(B)    2.1 % of his Final Average Earnings in excess of the Social Security Average Wage Base, multiplied by
his Years of Service up to a maximum of 25 years, plus
(C)    0.7% of his Final Average Earnings, multiplied by his Years of Service in excess of 25 years.
plus
(ii)    For Years of Service on or after July 1, 2001, the sum of the following:
(A)    1.60%  of  his  Final  Average  Earnings  not  in  excess  of  the  Social  Security  Average  Wage  Base,
multiplied by his Years of Service up to a maximum of 25 years, plus
(B)    2.1 % of his Final Average Earnings in excess of the Social Security Average Wage Base, multiplied by
his Years of Service up to a maximum of 25 years, plus
(C)    1.60% of his Final Average Earnings, multiplied by his Years of Service in excess of 25 years.
(iii)    Years of Service credited before and after July 1, 2001 shall be aggregated in determining the 25 year maximum
period.
(b)    For Active Union Participants Retiring on or after July 1, 2001. An active union Participant retiring after June 30, 2001,
except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a), shall receive a monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or
Late Retirement Date in an amount equal to the following:
(i)    For Years of Service prior to July 1, 2001, the sum of the following:
(A)    1.85%  of  his  Final  Average  Earnings  not  in  excess  of  the  Social  Security  Average  Wage  Base,
multiplied by his Years of Service up to a maximum of 25 years, plus
(B)    2.1 % of his Final Average Earnings in excess of the Social Security Average Wage Base, multiplied by
his Years of Service up to a maximum of 25 years, plus
18

(C)    0.7% of his Final Average Earnings, multiplied by his Years of Service in excess of 25 years.
plus
(ii)    1.60% of his Final Average Earnings, multiplied by his Years of Service earned on or after July 1, 2001.
(c)    For Participants Hired on or after July 1, 2001. Effective for Participants hired on or after July 1, 2001, except as
modified  by  the  provisions  of  Section  6.1(a),  a  Participant’s  monthly  retirement  income  commencing  on  his  Normal  or  Late
Retirement Date shall be an amount equal to 1.60% of his Final Average Earnings multiplied by his Years of Service at Normal or
Late Retirement.
(d)    For Union Participants Hired On Or After January 1, 2001. Except as provided below in this Section 5.2(d), Section
3.1(b), or Section 3.2, the Accrued Benefit of a union Participant hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2001 shall be frozen as of
December  31,  2005  and  no  further  benefits  shall  accrue  for  such  Participant  under  the  Plan  after  December  31,  2005.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, union Employees who:
(i)    are employed at the Company's Sterling, Illinois facility and were hired or re-hired prior to February 1, 2009,
(ii)    are employed in the Employer's call center at either the Alton, Illinois or Pensacola, Florida facility,
(iii)    were union Employees on January 15, 2002 employed in the water business acquired from Citizens Utility
Company, or
(iv)    are Local 423 union Employees hired before April 1, 2006 or Local 68 union Employees hired before May 1,
2006, who were participating in the Employees' Retirement Plan of Elizabethtown Water Company as of December 31, 2006,
may continue to accrue benefits under the Plan for Years of Service on and after December 31, 2005.
Section 5.3    1994 Fresh Start Provisions. If the Accrued Benefit, computed as of June 30, 1994, of a Participant who is
actively employed on July 1, 1994 was based on Earnings in excess of $150,000, such Accrued Benefit shall be frozen as of June 30,
1994. The Accrued Benefit payable to such a Participant who retires at his Normal Retirement Date shall be the greater of:
(a)    the sum of his Accrued Benefit as of June 30, 1994, plus his Accrued Benefit for each Year of Service for benefit
accrual after June 30, 1994 computed in accordance with Section
19

5.2(a) above but based only on Earnings allowable under section 401(a)(17) of the Code as in effect for Plan Years beginning after
1993; or
(b)    the Participant’s Accrued Benefit computed under Section 5.2(a) using all of the Participant’s Years of Service for
benefit accrual, but limiting Earnings to the level in effect under section 401(a)(17) of the Code as of the Participant’s retirement or
other termination of service, as applicable.
Section 5.4    Early Retirement Income. The monthly retirement income commencing on a Participant’s Early Retirement
Date  shall  be  an  amount  equal  to  his  normal  retirement  income  under  Section  5.2  based  on  his  Years  of  Service  to  his  Early
Retirement Date, multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined by his attained age and Years of Service at his Early Retirement
Date, as set forth in the Schedule of Early Retirement Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
Section  5.5    Disability  Retirement  Income.  The  monthly  retirement  income  commencing  on  a  Participant’s  Disability
Retirement Date shall be an amount equal to the benefit which he would have received pursuant to Section 5.2(a) or (b) or (c) based
on  his  Years  of  Service  and  Final  Average  Earnings  as  of  his  Disability  Retirement  Date,  without  reduction  for  early
commencement.
Section 5.6    Other Plan Benefits. In the case of a Participant who becomes a Participant by reason of the naming after June
30,  1985  of  a  Subsidiary  as  a  Designated  Subsidiary,  his  normal,  late,  early,  or  disability  retirement  income  shall  be  adjusted
downward  to  reflect  benefits  to  which  he  is  entitled  under  any  other  retirement  plan  or  plans  established  by  such  Designated
Subsidiary and the Committee, acting under uniform rules of nondiscriminatory application with respect to the Employees of any
such Designated Subsidiary, shall have the exclusive and binding discretion to make such adjustment as it determines to be equitable
under  all  of  the  circumstances  to  the  end  that  there  be  no  duplication  of  benefits  under  this  Plan  and  any  other  plan  or  plans.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, no such adjustment shall be made for such amounts as are attributable to the Participant’s
contributions to such other plan or plans.
Section 5.7    Benefits Attributable to Merged Plans. In addition to any retirement income benefit payable to a Participant
under this Plan, any Participant who was a participant in the California-American Water Company Employee Retirement Plan, the
Seymour Water Company Retirement Plan, the West Virginia Water Company Pension Plan, the Brownsville Water Company Non-
Bargaining  Employees’  Retirement  Plan,  the  Brownsville  Water  Company  Bargaining  Employees’  Retirement  Plan  and  the
Retirement Plan for Employees of California Water Company, which were merged into this Plan, shall also receive the amount of
any benefit the Participant would have received from that merged plan, but for the merger. The benefit payable to any Participant
who was a participant in the Pekin Water Works Company Pension Trust and who is given credit under Appendix 3 of this Plan in
computing his Accrued Benefit under this Plan shall receive no additional benefit credit on account of such participation.
20

Section 5.8    Normal Form of Retirement Income. The normal form of retirement income shall be as follows:
(a)    Unmarried Participants. If a Participant is not married on his Annuity Starting Date, his retirement income will be paid
to him monthly for life, beginning with the first payment following his retirement and ending with the last payment payable prior to
his death.
(b)    Married Participants. If a Participant is married on his Annuity Starting Date, his retirement income will be paid to him
in the faun of a Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity as described in Section 6.1(a).
ARTICLE VI.
BENEFIT ELECTIONS, SURVIVOR BENEFITS 
AND RELATED REDUCTIONS IN BENEFITS
Section 6.1    Automatic Surviving Spouse Benefit.
(a)    Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity. A Participant who is married on his Annuity Starting Date, shall be paid a benefit
for his life equal to that percentage determined by his attained age and the attained age of his spouse, set forth in the Table of
Contingent Annuitant Percentages attached to the Plan as Table 2, of his normal retirement income under Section 5.2, his early
retirement income under Section 5.4 or his disability retirement income under Section 5.5; and his spouse, if such spouse survives
him, shall be paid a benefit equal to 50% of his reduced benefit. For any Participant retiring on a Late Retirement Date, Table 2 shall
be  applied  based  on  the  Participant’s  attained  age  and  the  attained  age  of  the  Participant’s  spouse  as  of  the  Participant’s  Late
Retirement Date.
If  a  Participant’s  spouse  dies  within  two  years  of  the  date  payments  to  the  Participant  begin  under  this  Section  6.1(a),
beginning with the first payment following the death of such spouse, monthly retirement income payments to the Participant will be
adjusted  to  be  equal  to  the  monthly  amount  that  would  have  been  paid  to  the  Participant  if  the  Participant’s  benefit  had  been
determined solely under Section 5.8(a).
(b)    Qualified Preretirement Survivor Annuity.
(i)    Death Prior to Early Retirement Eligibility and Prior to Completing Ten Years of Service. In the event of the
death  of  an  actively  employed  married  Participant  who  had  competed  at  least  five  Years  of  Service  but  before  he  had
completed at least ten Years of Service, such Participant’s spouse shall be entitled to a benefit, payable, if such spouse is then
surviving, on the first day of the month coincident with, or next following the later of (A) the date of the Participant’s death
or (B) the date the Participant would have attained
21

age 55 had he survived, elected the 50% contingent annuity form of benefit, as determined under Table 2 based on his and his
spouse’s then attained ages, and then died.
(ii)    Death  Prior  to  Early  Retirement  Eligibility  but  After  Ten  Years  of  Service.  In  the  event  of  a  married
Participant’s death while actively employed, after he has completed ten Years of Service but prior to becoming eligible for
Early Retirement, such Participant’s spouse shall be entitled to receive the same monthly benefit to which the Participant
would  have  been  entitled  had  the  Participant  retired  on  the  day  before  his  death  and  had  elected  to  receive  the  100%
contingent annuity form of benefit. The amount of such benefit shall be determined under Table 4, based on his attained age
and the attained age of his spouse, except that for purposes of applying Table 4, the Participant’s attained age, if less than age
55, shall be considered to be age 55 and his spouse’s age shall be adjusted so that it bears the same relationship to age 55 as
their actual attained ages bear to each other.
(iii)    Death  After  Becoming  Eligible  for  Early  Retirement.  In  the  event  of  a  married  Participant’s  death,  while
actively employed, while he is eligible for Early Retirement but for the applicable notice requirement under Section 4.2(a),
such Participant’s spouse shall be entitled to receive the same monthly benefit to which the Participant would have been
entitled had the Participant retired on the day before his death and had elected to receive the 100% contingent annuitant form
of benefit as determined under Table 4, based on his attained age and the attained age of his spouse.
(iv)    Death After Becoming Eligible for Normal Retirement. In the event of a married Participant’s death while
actively employed, after his Normal Retirement Date, such Participant’s spouse shall be entitled to receive the same monthly
benefit to which the Participant would have been entitled had the Participant retired on his Late Retirement Date and had
elected to receive the 100% contingent annuitant form of benefit as determined under Table 4, based on his attained age and
the attained age of his spouse.
(v)    Death of Vested Terminated Participant. In the event of a married Participant’s death after he had completed five
Years of Service, but before he had become eligible for Early Retirement, and who was not actively employed at the time of
his death, such Participant’s spouse shall be entitled to a benefit, payable, if such spouse is then surviving, on the first day of
the month coincident with, or next following the later of (A) the date of the Participant’s death or (B) the date the Participant
would have attained age 55 had he survived, elected the 50% contingent annuity form of benefit, as determined under Table 2
based  on  his  and  his  spouse’s  then  attained  ages,  and  then  died.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  in  the  event  a  married
Participant  who  is  no  longer  actively  employed  dies  after  he  has  become  eligible  to  elect  to  receive  retirement  income
benefits under Section 8.1 and before his Normal Retirement Date, such Participant shall be considered to be actively
22

employed on the date of his death, and his spouse, if surviving, will receive a benefit in accordance with Section 6.1(b)(iii)
above.
Any benefit payable under this Section 6.1 shall terminate on the surviving spouse’s death.
Section 6.2    Notice and Election Procedures.
(a)    Initial Notice and Election. Within  180 days (90 days for plan years beginning  prior to January 1, 2007) before a
Participant’s Annuity Starting Date, the Committee shall supply the Participant with a written explanation describing the terms and
conditions of the normal form of benefit payable to him under Section 5.8, the financial effect of the other forms of benefit available
to him under the Plan and the relative value of the other forms of benefit compared to the normal form of benefit. The explanation
shall  also  describe  the  Participant’s  right  to  waive  the  normal  form  of  benefit  and  the  effect  of  such  waiver,  the  rights  of  the
Participant’s spouse, the right to revoke a previous waiver of the normal form of benefit, the effect of such a revocation and, if the
Participant has not reached his or her Normal Retirement Date, the consequences of failing to defer payment until a later payment
date. Finally, the explanation shall advise the Participant that his benefit shall be paid in such normal form, unless within 180 days
(90  days  for  plan  years  beginning  prior  to  January  1,  2007)  before  his  Annuity  Starting  Date,  he  notifies  the  Committee  of  an
election to receive a different form of benefit, and, if he is married:
(i)    his spouse consents to his election in writing,
(ii)    such election designates a Contingent Annuitant or Annuitants other than his spouse (or form of benefit) that
may not be changed without spousal consent, or the spouse’s consent acknowledges the spouse’s right to limit consent to a
specific Contingent Annuitant or Annuitants (or form of benefit), and expressly and voluntarily permits designations by the
Participant without any requirement of further consent by the spouse; and
(iii)    the spouse’s consent acknowledges the effect of such election and is witnessed by a notary public.
(iv)    Spouse  shall  mean  effective  June  26,  2013,  the  individual  to  whom  a  Participant  is  married,  including  a
marriage of same-sex spouses that was validly entered into in a domestic or foreign jurisdiction whose laws authorize the
marriage of two individuals of the same sex even if the married couple resides in a domestic or foreign jurisdiction that does
not recognize the validity of same-sex marriages. Marriage does not include registered domestic partnerships, civil unions, or
other similar formal relationships recognized under state law that are not denominated as a marriage under that state’s law,
and the term “Spouse” does not include individuals who have entered into such a formal relationship. Spouse means the
spouse of a Participant on the date benefits under the Plan commence, however, if the Participant should die prior to the date
benefits under the Plan
23

would have commenced to him/her, then the spouse will be the spouse to whom the Participant was married on the date of
death.  To  the  extent  provided,  under  a  qualified  domestic  relations  order,  the  “Spouse”  means  a  former  Spouse  of  the
Participant.
(b)    Election Period; Extension of Election Period. A Participant’s election period under this Section 6.2 shall be the 180 day
period (90 day period for plan years beginning prior to January 1, 2007) ending on his Annuity Starting Date. If, by not later than the
day before his Annuity Starting Date, the Participant notifies the Committee of an election not to receive the normal form of benefit
payable to him under Section 5.8, and his spouse (if any) has consented to such election, his benefit shall be paid in the alternate
form selected by the Participant.
However, if by not later than the day before his Annuity Starting Date, the Participant requests the Committee to furnish him with
additional information relating to the effect of the normal form of benefit payable to him under the Plan, the election period under
this Section 6.2 shall be extended and his Annuity Starting Date shall be postponed to a date not later than 180 days (90 days for plan
years beginning prior to January 1, 2007) following the date the Committee furnishes him with the additional information.
(c)    Change of Election - Optional Form of Benefit. Any Participant electing an optional form of benefit under Section 6.3 or
Section 6.4 may revoke such election and file a new election with the Committee at any time prior to the Participant’s Annuity
Starting Date. Upon the Participant’s Annuity Starting Date, his election shall become irrevocable.
(d)    Notice and Election Procedures for Qualified Preretirement Survivor Annuity. Within the one year period beginning on
the date an Employee becomes a Participant, the Committee shall provide the Participant with a written explanation of the spouse’s
preretirement death benefit. The written explanation shall notify the Participant that if he is married and he dies before his Annuity
Starting Date, his spouse shall receive the spouse’s preretirement death benefit determined under Section 6.1(b).
Section 6.3    Monthly Income for Life Election. A Participant who is married on his Annuity Starting Date may, with his
spouse’s written and notarized consent, elect to have his normal or late retirement income under Section 5.2, his early retirement
income under Section 5.4, or his disability retirement income under Section 5.5, in each case as limited by Section 5.6 and 5.7, paid
in the form described in Section 5.8(a).
Section 6.4    Survivor Benefits Available by Election.
(a)    Participants whose benefits are not subject to an automatic surviving spouse benefit under Section 6.1 or who, with their
spouse’s written and notarized consent as described in Section 6.2, elect not to accept an automatic surviving spouse benefit may
elect to provide benefits for their Contingent Annuitants as described below.
24

(b)    Upon written notice executed by a Participant and filed with his Employer at least 60 days prior to his actual retirement
date, a Participant may, subject to the limitations of this Section 6.4, designate any individual as his Contingent Annuitant and at the
same time elect:
(i)    a reduced benefit for life with the continuation of (A) 50%, (B) 75% (effective for Annuity Starting Dates after
June 30, 2008), (C) 66-2/3%, or (D) 100% of such reduced benefit to his surviving Contingent Annuitant for the life of such
Contingent Annuitant; or
(ii)    a reduced benefit for life with the continuation of 100% of such reduced benefit to his Contingent Annuitant
only to the extent required for the total number of monthly payments to the Participant and his Contingent Annuitant to equal
either (A) 60, (B) 120, or (C) 180.
(c)    In the event of such a designation and election, the reduced retirement income payments will be paid to the Participant,
commencing on his Normal, Late, Early or Disability Retirement Date. The first payment, if any, to the Contingent Annuitant shall
be  made  on  the  first  day  of  the  calendar  month  coincident  with  or  following  the  death  of  the  Participant,  or  as  soon  as
administratively possible following the death of the Participant, provided payment is made retroactively to the first day of the month
following the Participant’s death. Payments to the Participant shall terminate with the last payment payable preceding his death.
(d)    Any such election shall become effective upon the Participant’s retirement unless otherwise provided by the Participant.
The amount of the Participant’s reduced retirement benefit shall be determined by multiplying his normal, late, early or disability
retirement income by a percentage set forth in Table 2, 3, 4, or 4(a), as appropriate, depending upon his age and the age of his
Contingent Annuitant as of the Participant’s actual retirement date.
(e)    If a Contingent Annuitant dies within two years of the date payments to the Participant begin under this Section 6.4,
other  than  payments  in  a  form  described  in  Section  6.4(b)(ii),  monthly  retirement  income  payments  to  the  Participant  will  be
adjusted beginning with the first payment following the death of such Contingent Annuitant, to be equal to the monthly amount that
would  have  been  paid  to  the  Participant  if  the  Participant’s  benefit  had  been  determined  solely  under  Section  5.8(a).  No  such
adjustment will be made to the benefit of a Participant whose benefit is being paid in a form described in Section 6.4(b)(ii).
(f)    If a Participant’s Contingent Annuitant is anyone other than his spouse, the present value of the payments to be made to
the Participant as of the date such payments are to commence, computed by using the same mortality and interest assumptions as are
used for purposes of Tables 2, 3, 4, and 4(a) must be more than 50% of the present value, as of such date and similarly computed, of
all payments to be made to the Participant and his Contingent Annuitant. Any election of a Contingent Annuitant made in violation
of this provision shall be void.
25

(g)    In the event of the death of the Participant’s Contingent Annuitant prior to the Participant’s actual retirement date, the
election of a Contingent Annuitant under Section 6.4 shall be inoperative.
Section 6.5    Death Benefits for Unmarried Participants. An unmarried Participant who is actively employed on or after
January 1, 2006 and who has completed at least five Years of Service may designate a Contingent Annuitant. The benefit to be
provided to that Contingent Annuitant shall be as specified in (a) through (c) below:
(a)    For Active and Terminated Vested Participants: Death Prior to Early Retirement Eligibility and Prior to Completing Ten
Years of Service. In the event of an unmarried Participant’s death after he had completed five Years of Service, but before he had
become  eligible  for  Early  Retirement,  whether  such  Participant  is  then  actively  employed  or  not,  such  Participant’s  Contingent
Annuitant  shall  be  entitled  to  a  benefit,  payable,  if  such  Contingent  Annuitant  is  then  surviving,  on  the  first  day  of  the  month
coincident with or next following the later of (i) the date of the Participant’s death or (ii) the date the Participant would have attained
age 55 had he survived. The amount of such benefit shall be the same amount that such surviving Contingent Annuitant would have
received had such Participant terminated his service, survived to age 55, elected the 50% contingent annuity form of benefit, as
determined under Table 2 based on his and his Contingent Annuitant’s then attained ages, and then died.
(b)    For Active Participants: Death Prior to Early Retirement Eligibility but After Ten Years of Service. In the event of an
unmarried Participant’s death while actively employed, after he has completed ten Years of Service but prior to becoming eligible
for Early Retirement, such Participant’s Contingent Annuitant shall be entitled to receive the same monthly benefit to which the
Participant  would  have  been  entitled  had  the  Participant  retired  on  the  day  before  his  death  and  elected  to  receive  the  100%
contingent annuity form of benefit. The amount of such benefit shall be determined under Table 4, based on his attained age and the
attained age of his Contingent Annuitant, except that for purposes of applying Table 4, the Participant’s attained age, if less than age
55, shall be considered to be age 55 and his Contingent Annuitant’s age shall be adjusted so that it bears the same relationship to age
55 as their actual attained ages bear to each other.
(c)    Death After Becoming Eligible for Early Retirement.
(i)    Actively Employed Participants. In the event of an unmarried Participant’s death, while actively employed and
after becoming eligible for Early Retirement including after the Participant’s Normal Retirement Date, such Participant’s
Contingent Annuitant shall be entitled to receive the same monthly benefit to which the Participant would have been entitled
had the Participant retired on the day before death and elected to receive the 100% contingent annuitant form of benefit as
determined under Table 4, based on his attained age and the attained age of his Contingent Annuitant.
26

(ii)    Terminated  Participants.  In  the  event  of  an  unmarried  Participant’s  death  after  his  employment  with  the
Employer  has  terminated  and  after  becoming  eligible  for  Early  Retirement  including  after  the  Participant’s  Normal
Retirement Date, such Participant’s Contingent Annuitant shall be entitled to receive the same monthly benefit to which the
Participant would have been entitled had the Participant retired on the day before death and elected to receive the 100%
contingent  annuitant  form  of benefit  as determined  under  Table  4, based  on his  attained  age and the attained  age of his
Contingent Annuitant.
(d)    Any benefit payable under this Section 6.5 shall terminate on the surviving Contingent Annuitant’s death.
Section  6.6    Required  Distributions  -  Code  Section  401(a)(9).  Distributions  under  this  Section  6.6  shall  be  made  in
accordance  with  section  401(a)(9)  of  the  Code  and  the  regulations  thereunder,  as  generally  described  in  this  Section  6.6.  The
provisions  of  this  Section  6.6  shall  supersede  any  distribution  option  otherwise  provided  in  the  Plan  to  the  extent  that  it  is
inconsistent with section 401(a)(9) of the Code, but shall not create or increase any benefit. Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to
the  contrary,  the  form  and  the  timing  of  all  distributions  under  the  Plan  shall  be  in  accordance  with  regulations  issued  by  the
Department  of  the  Treasury  under  section  401(a)(9)  of  the  Code,  including  the  incidental  death  benefit  requirements  of  section
401(a)(9)(G)  of  the  Code.  The  Plan  shall  apply  the  minimum  distribution  requirements  of  section  401(a)(9)  of  the  Code  in
accordance with the final regulations under section 401(a)(9) that were published on April 17, 2002 and June 15, 2004, as set forth in
Treas. Reg. § 1.401(a)(9)-2 through 1.401(a)(9)-9. The provisions of this Section 6.6 shall override any provisions of the Plan to the
contrary.
(a)    Time and Manner of Distribution.
(i)    Required Beginning Date. The Participant’s entire interest shall be distributed, or begin to be distributed, to the
Participant no later than the Participant’s Required Beginning Date.
(ii)    Death  of  Participant  Before  Distributions  Begin.  If  the  Participant  dies  before  distributions  begin  and  the
Participant’s Beneficiary is entitled to receive a death benefit, the Participant’s entire interest shall be distributed, or begin to
be distributed, no later than as follows:
(A)    If the Participant’s surviving spouse is the Participant’s sole Designated Beneficiary, then distributions
to the surviving spouse shall begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in
which the Participant died, or by December 31 of the calendar year in which the Participant would have reached age
70½, if later.
27

(B)    If  the  Participant’s  surviving  spouse  is  not  the  Participant’s  sole  Designated  Beneficiary,  then
distributions to the Designated Beneficiary shall begin by December 31 of the calendar year immediately following
the calendar year in which the Participant died.
(C)    If  there  is  no  Designated  Beneficiary  as  of  September  30  of  the  year  following  the  year  of  the
Participant’s  death  and  benefits  are  payable  in  the  form  of  a  life  and  certain  annuity  under  Section  6.4(b),  the
Participant’s entire interest shall be distributed to the Participant’s estate by the December 31 of the calendar year
containing the fifth anniversary of the Participant’s death.
(D)    If the Participant’s surviving spouse is the Participant’s sole Designated Beneficiary and the surviving
spouse dies after the Participant but before distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this Section 6.6(a)(ii), other
than Section 6.6(a)(ii)(A), shall apply as if the surviving spouse were the Participant.
For  purposes  of  this  Section  6.6(a)(ii)  and  Section  6.6(d),  distributions  are  considered  to  begin  on  the  Participant’s  Required
Beginning Date (or, if Section 6.6(a)(ii)(D) applies, the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under Section
6.6(a)(ii)(A)). If annuity payments irrevocably commence to the Participant before the Participant’s Required Beginning Date (or to
the Participant’s surviving spouse before the date distributions are required to begin to the surviving spouse under Section 6.6(a)(ii)
(B)), the date distributions are considered to begin is the date distributions actually commence.
(iii)    Form of Distribution. Unless the Participant’s interest is distributed in the form of an annuity purchased from an
insurance company or in a single sum on or before the Required Beginning Date, as of the first Distribution Calendar Year
distributions shall be made in accordance with Sections 6.6(b), (c) and (d). If the Participant’s interest is distributed in the
form of an annuity purchased from an insurance company, distributions thereunder shall be made in accordance with the
requirements of section 401(a)(9) of the Code and the regulations thereunder.
(b)    Determination of Amount to be Distributed Each Year.
(i)    General Annuity Requirements. If the Participant’s interest is paid in the form of annuity distributions under the
Plan, payments under the annuity shall satisfy the following requirements:
(A)    the annuity distributions shall be paid in periodic payments made at intervals not longer than one year;
28

(B)    the distribution period shall be over a life (or lives) or over a period certain not longer than the period
described in Sections 6.6(c) and (d);
(C)    once payments have begun over a period certain, the period certain shall not be changed even if the
period certain is shorter than the maximum permitted;
(D)    payments shall either be non-increasing or increase only as follows:
(1)    by an annual percentage increase that does not exceed the annual percentage increase in a cost-of-
living index that is based on prices of all items and issued by the United States Bureau of Labor Statistics;
(2)    to the extent of the reduction in the amount of the Participant’s payments to provide for a survivor
benefit upon death, but only if the Beneficiary whose life was being used to determine the distribution period
described in Section 6.6(c) dies or is no longer the Participant’s Beneficiary pursuant to a qualified domestic
relations order within the meaning of section 414(p) of the Code;
(3)    to provide cash refunds of employee contributions upon the Participant’s death; or
(4)    to pay increased benefits that result from a Plan amendment.
(ii)    Amount Required to be Distributed by Required Beginning Date. The amount that must be distributed on or
before the Participant’s Required Beginning Date (or, if the Participant dies before distributions begin, the date distributions
are required to begin under Section 6.6(b)(i)) is the payment that is required for one payment interval. The second payment
need not be made until the end of the next payment interval even if that payment interval ends in the next calendar year.
Payment intervals are the periods for which payments are received, e.g., bi-monthly, monthly, semi-annually, or annually. All
of  the  Participant’s  benefit  accruals  as  of  the  last  day  of  the  first  Distribution  Calendar  Year  shall  be  included  in  the
calculation  of  the  amount  of  the  annuity  payments  for  payment  intervals  ending  on  or  after  the  Participant’s  Required
Beginning Date.
(iii)    Additional Accruals After First Distribution Calendar Year. Any additional benefits accruing to the Participant
in a calendar year after the first Distribution Calendar Year shall be distributed beginning with the first payment interval
ending in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year in which such amount accrues.
(c)    Requirements for Annuity Distributions that Commence During Participant’s Lifetime.
29

(i)    Joint Life Annuities Where the Beneficiary is Not the Participant’s Spouse. If the Participant’s interest is being
distributed in the form of a joint and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the Participant and a non-spouse Beneficiary,
annuity payments to be made on or after the Participant’s Required Beginning Date to the Designated Beneficiary after the
Participant’s death must not at any time exceed the applicable percentage of the annuity payment for such period that would
have been payable to the Participant using the table set forth in Q&A-2 of Treas. Reg. § 1.401(a)(9)-6. If the Annuity Starting
Date precedes the year in which the Participant reaches age 70, the age difference to be used in determining the applicable
percentage referred to in the preceding sentence is reduced by the number of years that the Participant is younger than age 70
on his or her birthday in the calendar year that contains the Annuity Starting Date. If the form of distribution combines a joint
and survivor annuity for the joint lives of the Participant and a non-spouse Beneficiary and a period certain annuity, the
requirement in the preceding two sentences shall apply to annuity payments to be made to the Designated Beneficiary after
the expiration of the period certain.
(ii)    Period Certain Annuities. Unless the Participant’s spouse is the sole Designated Beneficiary and the form of
distribution  is a period certain and no life annuity, the period certain for an annuity distribution  commencing  during the
Participant’s lifetime may not exceed the applicable distribution period for the Participant under the Uniform Lifetime Table
set forth in Treas. Reg. § 1.401(a)(9)-9 for the calendar year that contains the Annuity Starting Date. If the Annuity Starting
Date precedes the year in which the Participant reaches age 70, the applicable distribution period for the Participant is the
distribution period for age 70 under the Uniform Lifetime Table set forth in Treas. Reg. § 1.401(a)(9)-9 plus the excess of 70
over the age of the Participant as of the Participant’s birthday in the year that contains the Annuity Starting Date. If the
Participant’s spouse is the Participant’s sole Designated Beneficiary and the form of distribution is a period certain and no
life annuity, the period certain may not exceed the longer of the Participant’s applicable distribution period, as determined
under this Section 6.6(c)(ii), or the joint life and last survivor expectancy of the Participant and the Participant’s spouse as
determined  under  the  Joint  and  Last  Survivor  Table  set  forth  in  Treas.  Reg.  §  1.401(a)(9)-9,  using  the  Participant’s  and
spouse’s attained ages as of the Participant’s and spouse’s birthdays in the calendar year that contains the Annuity Starting
Date.
(d)    Requirements For Minimum Distributions Where Participant Dies Before Date Distributions Begin.
(i)    Participant Survived by Designated Beneficiary. If the Participant dies before the date distribution of his or her
interest begins and there is a Designated Beneficiary entitled to a death benefit under the Plan, the Participant’s entire interest
will be distributed, beginning
30

no later than the time described in Section 6.6(a)(ii)(A) or (B) over the life of the Designated Beneficiary or over a period
certain not exceeding:
(A)    unless the Annuity Starting Date is before the first Distribution Calendar Year, the life expectancy of the
Designated  Beneficiary  determined  using  the  Designated  Beneficiary’s  age  as  of  the  Designated  Beneficiary’s
birthday in the calendar year immediately following the calendar year of the Participant’s death; or
(B)    if the Annuity Starting Date is before the first Distribution Calendar Year, the life expectancy of the
Designated  Beneficiary  determined  using  the  Designated  Beneficiary’s  age  as  of  the  Designated  Beneficiary’s
birthday in the calendar year that contains the Annuity Starting Date.
(ii)    No Designated Beneficiary. If the Participant dies before the date the distribution of his or her interest begins,
the  Participant’s  surviving  spouse  is  the  Participant’s  sole  Designated  Beneficiary,  and  the  surviving  spouse  dies  before
distributions to the surviving spouse begin, this Section 6.6(d) will apply as if the surviving spouse were the Participant,
except that the time by which distributions must begin will be determined without regard to Section 6.6(a)(ii)(A).
(e)    Definitions.
(i)    Designated Beneficiary. The individual who is designated as the Contingent Annuitant under Section 2.1(i) of the
Plan and is the designated beneficiary under section 401(a)(9) of the Code and section 1.401(a)(9)-1, Q&A-4 of the Treasury
regulations.
(ii)    Distribution Calendar Year. A calendar year for which a minimum distribution is required. The first Distribution
Calendar  Year  is  the  calendar  year  immediately  preceding  the  calendar  year  that  contains  the  Participant’s  Required
Beginning Date.
(iii)    Life Expectancy. Life expectancy as computed by use of the Single Life Table in Treas. Reg. § 1.401(a)(9)-9.
(iv)    Required Beginning Date. April 1 of the calendar year following the year in which a Participant reaches age
70½.
Section 6.7    Distributions Pursuant to a Qualified Domestic Relations Order (“QDRO”). Any benefit payable to an Alternate
Payee pursuant to a Qualified Domestic Relations Order (“QDRO”), as those terms are defined in section 414(p) of the Code, shall
be  paid  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  QDRO.  If  permitted  under  the  terms  of  the  QDRO,  an  Alternate  Payee  may  elect
payment of benefits pursuant to a QDRO in the form of an Actuarially Equivalent lump sum distribution; provided, however that the
Alternate Payee must exercise this election within the 90 day period following the notice to the Alternate Payee that the domestic
relations order issued is a
31

QDRO.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  an  Alternate  Payee  may  not  elect  a  lump  sum  form  of  distribution  if  payment  of  the
Participant’s benefit has commenced prior to the Alternate Payee’s benefit election.
Section 76.8    Limited Lump Sum Election.
(a)    Eligibility. A Participant who has terminated employment with a vested Accrued Benefit, who is entitled to benefits as
of June 30, 2014, may elect to receive his benefit in a single lump sum payment, if the Participant satisfies the following criteria:
(i)    the Participant has neither been reemployed by the Employer nor commenced benefits under the Plan prior to the
date of distribution is made under this Section;
(ii)    the Participant's benefit is not subject to payment pursuant to Section 6.6 as a required minimum distribution or
Section 6.7 according to a Qualified Domestic Relations Order; and
(iii)    the Participant effectively returns a properly completed application for distribution under this Section, in such
form and manner as required by the Committee, during the period that begins September 10, 2014 and ends October 24,
2014, or such other dates established by the Committee to provide an election period of no fewer than 30 days and applied in
a uniform and nondiscriminatory manner.
(b)    Distribution to Beneficiary. If a Participant described in subsection (a) is deceased, and if such Participant's surviving
spouse or Contingent Annuitant is entitled to a future benefit under the Plan that has not yet commenced under the Plan prior to the
date of distribution under this Section, such surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant may elect to receive a distribution in the form
of a single lump sum payment, if the surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant effectively returns a properly completed application
for distribution under this Section no later than October 24, 2014, in such form and manner as required by the Committee.
(c)    Amount. The amount of the single lump sum payment under this Section shall be an amount equal to the Actuarial
Equivalent present value of the Participant's vested Accrued Benefit which would otherwise be payable at the Participant's Normal
Retirement Date, as of November 1, 2014, including the value of any early retirement subsidy if the Participant is eligible for an
Early Retirement Date.
(d)    Early Commencement of Benefits and Additional Forms of Distribution for Certain Participants.
(i)    A Participant who satisfies the requirements of subsection (a) who is not yet eligible for a Normal Retirement
Date or an Early Retirement Date shall be eligible for a single lump sum payment under this Section.
32

(ii)    A Participant described in subsection (d)(i) shall also be eligible for the normal form of payment under Section
5.8, which for a married Participant shall be an annuity providing a reduced benefit for life with the continuation of either
50% or 75%, as elected, of such reduced benefit to his surviving spouse. The Actuarial Equivalent of such Accrued Benefit
shall be reduced in accordance with the factors set forth in Section 5.4 assuming the Participant would have otherwise begun
to receive his benefit upon attainment of age 55 or current age, if older, then further reduced using the "applicable mortality
table" under section 417(e)(3) of the Code and the "applicable interest rate" under section 417(e)(3) of the Code for the third
calendar month preceding the calendar year during which the Annuity Starting Date occurs to the extent his Annuity Starting
Date precedes his Early Retirement Date.
(e)    Spousal Consent. Notwithstanding anything in this Section to the contrary, any election under this Section by a married
Participant of any form of distribution, other than the normal form of benefit payable to him under Section 5.8, shall be subject to the
spousal consent and notification requirements described in Sections 6.2.
(f)    Time of Distribution. Any single lump sum distributions elected under this Section must commence on November 1,
2014 or as soon as administratively feasible thereafter to cause all single lump sum distributions under this Section to occur during
2014.
(g)    Closure of Limited Election Period. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, nothing under this Section shall provide
any Participant, spouse, surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant the right to distribution in the form of a single lump sum payment
that does not, for any reason whatsoever, satisfy all of the terms and conditions set forth in this Section.
ARTICLE VII.
BENEFIT PAYMENTS
Section 7.1    Purchase of Annuities. All retirement income will be provided either through (i) the purchase of annuities from,
or other contractual arrangements with, an Insurance Company; or (ii) by direct payment from the Trust, as determined from time to
time by the Committee.
(a)    In the event that a Participant, his surviving spouse, or his Contingent Annuitant is entitled to a retirement income of less
than $10 monthly, that retirement income may be paid quarterly, semi-annually, or annually, in amounts equal to 3, 6 or 12 times the
monthly payment otherwise payable, respectively.
(b)    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, if the Actuarial Equivalent lump sum present value of a Participant’s
vested retirement income is $5,000 or less on the date his distribution commences, such amount shall be paid to the Participant in a
single cash lump sum
33

without the Participant’s consent as soon as administratively feasible in accordance with the following:
(i)    If the Actuarial Equivalent present value of a Participant’s vested retirement income is $1,000 or less and the
Participant does not elect to have such distribution paid directly to an “eligible retirement plan” in accordance with Section
7.2 of the Plan, the Participant’s retirement income shall be paid directly to the Participant in a cash lump sum.
(ii)    If the Actuarial Equivalent present value of a Participant’s vested retirement income is more than $1,000 but
does not exceed $5,000 and the Participant does not affirmatively elect to have such distribution paid directly to him or to an
“eligible  retirement  plan”  in  accordance  with  Section  7.2  of  the  Plan,  the  Participant’s  retirement  income  shall  be  paid
directly  to  an  individual  retirement  account  or  annuity  (an  “IRA”)  established  for  the  Participant  pursuant  to  a  written
agreement between the Committee and the provider of the IRA that meets the requirements of section 401(a)(31) of the Code
and the regulations thereunder. The Committee shall establish and maintain procedures to inform each Participant to whom
this Section 7.1(b)(ii) applies of the nature and operation of the IRA and the Participant’s investments therein, the fees and
expenses associated with the operation of the IRA, and the terms of the written agreement establishing such IRA on behalf of
the Participant.
Section 7.2    Direct Rollovers.
(a)    Eligibility. If one or more distributions from the Plan constitutes an “eligible rollover distribution” within the meaning
of sections 402(c)(2) and (4) of the Code, a distributee may elect to have all or a portion (but not less than $500) of the distribution
paid directly  to an “eligible  retirement  plan.” As used herein, “eligible  retirement  plan” means an individual  retirement  account
described in section 408(a) of the Code, an individual retirement annuity described in section 408(b) of the Code, an annuity plan
described in Section 403(a) of the Code, an annuity contract described in section 403(b) of the Code, or a qualified trust described in
section 401(a) of the Code that accepts the distributee’s eligible rollover distribution. An eligible retirement plan also includes an
eligible  plan  under  section  457(b)  of  the  Code  that  is  maintained  by  a  state,  political  subdivision  of  a  state,  or  any  agency  or
instrumentality of a state or political subdivision of a state and that agrees to account separately for amounts transferred into such
plan from this Plan. For any portion of an eligible rollover distribution consisting of after-tax contributions that are not includable in
gross income, an eligible retirement plan must agree to separately account for such portion. With respect to a distributee who is a
non-spouse beneficiary, “eligible retirement plan” means an individual retirement account or annuity described in section 408(a) or
408(b) of the Code that is established on behalf of the designated beneficiary and that will be treated as an inherited individual
retirement annuity pursuant to the provisions of section 402(c)(11) of the Code. Effective for distributions
34

made on or after January 1, 2008, a “qualified rollover contribution” as described in section 408A(e) of the Code may be made from
the Plan to a Roth IRA in a direct rollover subject to the rules and provisions set forth in section 408A(e) of the Code and any
regulations issued thereunder. The recipient may not elect to have portions of an eligible rollover distribution paid directly to more
than one eligible retirement plan. In addition, the recipient will not be permitted to elect a direct rollover with respect to eligible
rollover distributions that are reasonably expected to total less than $200 during the year.
(b)    Procedures.  The  Committee  shall  make  such  payment  upon  receipt  from  the  recipient  of  the  name  of  the  eligible
retirement plan to which such payment is to be made, a representation that the receiving plan is an “eligible retirement plan” as
defined above, and such other information and/or documentation as the Committee may reasonably require to make such payment.
(c)    Failure to Elect. Except as otherwise provided under Section 7.1(b)(ii), if the recipient fails to elect whether or not a
distribution is to be paid in a direct rollover, the recipient will be deemed to have elected not to have any portion of the distribution
paid in a direct rollover.
(d)    Application. For purposes of this Section 7.2, “distributee” means a Participant or former Participant. In addition, the
Participant’s  or  former  Participant’s  surviving  spouse  or  former  spouse  who  is  the  alternate  payee  under  a  qualified  domestic
relations order, as defined in section 414(p) of the Code, are distributees with regard to the interest of the spouse or former spouse.
For distributions after June 30, 2008, the term distributee also shall include a beneficiary who is not the spouse or former spouse of
the Participant or former Participant.
ARTICLE VIII.
VESTED BENEFITS IN THE EVENT OF TERMINATION OF EMPLOYMENT
Section 8.1    Vesting. A Participant whose employment is terminated for any reason other than death or retirement, and who
has completed five or more Years of Service at the date of his termination of employment shall be entitled to receive a monthly
retirement income beginning on his Normal Retirement Date equal to his normal retirement income under the Plan as in effect as of
the date of his termination of employment, based on his full and partial Years of Service at such date of termination of employment.
However, if he makes written application to his Employer at least two months in advance, such a Participant shall be entitled to
receive his benefit, reduced as provided in Section 5.4, beginning with the first day of any calendar month following the month in
which the sum of the years of his attained age and his completed Years of Service is at least 70, provided he has then attained at least
age 55. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Participant shall automatically become 100% vested on the date he reaches age 65.
35

Section 8.2    Payment of Vested Termination Benefit.
(a)    Forms of Payment. A Participant entitled to benefits under Section 8.1, shall, for purposes of Section 6.1(a) and Section
6.3,  be treated  as though  the date  on which  his benefits  under  Section  8.1 are to begin  were  his actual  retirement  date.  Such a
Participant may elect any of the elective survivor benefits provided by Section 6.4.
(b)    Termination Benefit For Certain Union Employees. A union Participant hired on or after January 1, 2001 but before
January 1, 2006 who terminates employment with a vested Accrued Benefit on or after January 1, 2006, may elect to receive his
benefit at any time in one of the following payment forms:
(i)    a single lump sum payment in an amount equal to the Actuarial Equivalent present value of the Participant’s
vested  Accrued  Benefit  which  would  otherwise  be payable  at the  Participant’s  Normal  Retirement  Date,  however,  if  the
Participant is eligible for an Early Retirement Date at the time he terminates employment, the lump sum payment will reflect
the value of the early retirement subsidy; or
(ii)    a single life annuity which shall be the Actuarial Equivalent value of the single lump sum described in (i) above.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if payment to the Participant occurred later than the close of the second Plan Year following the Plan
Year in which such Termination of Employment occurred and such Participant is reemployed by the Employer, the Participant’s
Accrued Benefit shall be restored upon reemployment without the requirement that he make restoration contributions, provided,
however his subsequent Accrued Benefit, if any, payable upon his subsequent Termination of Employment shall be offset by the
Accrued Benefit attributable to the prior distribution.
Section 8.3    Failure to Vest. A Participant whose employment is terminated for any reason other than death or retirement
and who has not completed at least five Years of Service at the time of his termination of employment for any reason other than
death or retirement shall not be entitled to any benefits under the Plan. Amounts forfeited under this provision shall be applied to
reduce the obligation of the Company and its Designated Subsidiaries to contribute under the Plan.
ARTICLE IX.
RE-EMPLOYMENT AND BREAKS-IN-SERVICE
Section 9.1    Re-employment before July 1, 1976. If a Participant who terminated employment with the Employer is re-
employed before July 1, 1976, he shall be considered a new Employee for purposes of this Plan. In determining the amount of his
retirement income as a new Employee, however, if the Participant has vested retirement income benefits under Section 8.1 due
36

to  prior  service,  his  benefit  shall  be  computed  under  Section  5.2  as  if  his  service  was  continuous.  The  benefit  payable  to  such
Participant as a new Employee shall be the excess of the benefit so computed over the benefit payable on account of that prior
service, without regard to any actuarial reductions to which that prior service benefit may have been subject.
Section 9.2    Re-employment after June 30, 1976 and before July 1, 1985. If a Participant terminates employment with the
Employer and is re-employed after June 30, 1976 and before July 1, 1985, all of his Years of Service shall be recognized for all
purposes of the Plan unless, at the time of his return to employment, the period of his absence was at least a one year Break-in-
Service, in which event:
(a)    Years of Service occurring before the Break-in-Service shall not thereafter be recognized for any purpose of the Plan
unless, immediately following the Break-in-Service, he completed one Year of Service; and,
(b)    if, before the Break-in-Service, the Participant had no vested retirement income benefit under Section 8.1, Years of
Service before the Break-in-Service shall not thereafter be recognized for any purpose of the Plan unless the number of Years of
Service before the Break-in-Service exceeds the number of consecutive years of Break-in-Service.
Section 9.3    Re-employment after June 30, 1985. If a Participant  terminates  employment with the Employer  and is re-
employed after June 30, 1985, all of his Years of Service shall be recognized for all purposes of the Plan unless, at the time of his
return to employment, the period of his absence was at least five consecutive Breaks-in-Service, in which event:
(a)    Years of Service occurring before those Breaks-in-Service shall not thereafter be recognized for any purpose of the Plan
unless, immediately following those Breaks-in-Service, he has completed one Year of Service; and,
(b)    if, before those Breaks-in-Service, the Participant had no vested retirement income benefit under Section 8.1, Years of
Service before those Breaks-in-Service shall not thereafter be recognized for any purpose of the Plan unless the number of Years of
Service before those Breaks-in-Service exceeds the greater of five or the number of consecutive Breaks-in-Service.
Section  10.4    General.  Anything  herein  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  a  Break-in-Service  shall  not  reduce  any
Participant’s  vested  retirement  income  benefit,  determined  immediately  before  the  Break-in-Service,  nor  shall  Section  9.2  or
Sections 9.3 or 9.4 be interpreted to restore credit for Years of Service disregarded by reason of some earlier Breaks(s)-in-Service.
ARTICLE X.
VETERANS’ RE-EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS
37

Section 10.1    Qualified Military Service. Notwithstanding any provision of the Plan to the contrary, contributions, benefits
and service credit with respect to Qualified Military Service will be provided in accordance with section 414(u) of the Code as
summarized below:
(a)    Crediting Service.
(i)    An Employee re-employed by the Employer in accordance with Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code
shall  be  treated  as  not  having  incurred  a  Break-in-Service  with  the  Employer  by  reason  of  such  Employee’s  period  of
Qualified Military Service.
(ii)    Upon re-employment by the Employer in accordance with Chapter 43 of Title 38 of the United States Code, an
Employee’s period of Qualified Military Service shall be deemed service with the Employer for purposes of determining the
vested percentage of the Employee’s account.
(b)    Earnings. An Employee who is in Qualified Military Service shall be treated as receiving Earnings from the Employer
during such period of Qualified Military Service equal to:
(i)    the  Earnings  the  Employee  would  have  received  during  such  period  if  the  Employee  were  not  in  Qualified
Military Service, determined based on the rate of pay the Employee would have received from the Employer but for absence
during the period of Qualified Military Service; or
(ii)    if  the  Earnings  the  Employee  would  have  received  during  such  period  was  not  reasonably  certain,  the
Employee’s average Earnings from the Employer during the 12-month period immediately preceding the Qualified Military
Service (or, if shorter, the period of employment immediately preceding the Qualified Military Service).
Section 10.2    Death While In Qualified Military Service. Effective for deaths occurring on or after January 1, 2007, to the
extent required by section 401(a)(37) of the Code and regulations or other guidance issued thereunder, the survivors of a Participant
who dies while performing qualified military service (as defined in section 414(u) of the Code) shall be eligible for any additional
benefits (other than benefit accruals relating to the period of qualified military service) that would have been provided under the Plan
if the Participant had resumed employment and immediately thereafter terminated employment due to death.
ARTICLE XI.
PLAN ADMINISTRATION
38

Section 11.1    Fiduciary Responsibility. The Plan shall be administered by the Committee, which shall be the Plan’s “named
fiduciary” and “administrator,” as those terms are defined by ERISA, and its agent designated to receive service of process. All
matters relating to the administration of the Plan, including the duties imposed upon the Plan administrator by law, except those
duties relating to the control or management of Plan assets, shall be the responsibility of the Committee. All matters relating to the
control and management of Plan assets shall, except to the extent delegated in accordance with the trust agreement, be the sole and
exclusive responsibility of the Trustee. The Committee shall administer the Plan for the exclusive benefit of Participants and their
Beneficiaries.
Section 11.2    Appointment and Removal of Committee. The Committee shall consist of at least three persons who shall be
appointed and may be removed by the Board of Directors. Persons appointed to the Committee may be, but need not be, employees
of the Employer. Any Committee member may resign by giving written notice to the Board of Directors, which notice shall be
effective 30 days after delivery. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any Committee member who is an Employee of the Employer shall
be deemed to have resigned  from  the Committee  effective  upon  his termination  of employment.  A Committee  member  may be
removed by the Board of Directors by written notice to such Committee member, which notice shall be effective upon delivery. The
Board of Directors shall promptly select a successor following the resignation or removal of the Committee member, if necessary to
maintain a Committee of at least three members.
Section 11.3    Compensation  and  Expenses  of  Committee.  Members  of  the  Committee  who  are  Employees  shall  serve
without  compensation.  Members  of  the  Committee  who  are  not  Employees  may  be  paid  reasonable  compensation  for  services
rendered to the Plan. Such compensation, if any, and all ordinary and necessary expenses of the Committee shall be paid by the
Employer.
Section 11.4    Committee Procedures. The Committee may enact such rules and regulations for the conduct of its business
and for the administration of the Plan as it may deem desirable. The Committee may act either at meetings at which a majority of its
members are present or by a writing signed by a majority of its members without the holding of a meeting. Records shall be kept of
the actions of the Committee. No member of the Committee shall act on any matter in which he alone is personally interested under
the  Plan.  Except  as  may  otherwise  be  provided  by  the  Plan,  the  Committee  shall  have  all  powers  necessary  to  accomplish  the
purposes of the Plan including, but not by way of limitation, the following:
(a)    To interpret the provisions of the Plan and to decide any dispute that may arise regarding the rights of Participants
thereunder. Any such determinations shall apply uniformly to all persons similarly situated and shall be binding and conclusive upon
all interested persons.
39

(b)    To  determine  all  questions  affecting  the  eligibility  of  any  Employee  to  participate  in  the  Plan,  including,  without
limitation,  to  determine  whether  any  individual  performing  services  as  an  independent  contractor  is  an  Employee  eligible  to
participate in the Plan and, if so, for what period.
(c)    To compute the amount of benefits payable hereunder to any Participant.
(d)    To authorize the application of funds to provide the retirement income benefits of Participants, surviving spouses and
Contingent Annuitants.
(e)    To appoint an actuary who shall make all actuarial computations required in the administration of the Plan, including
those necessary to enable the Company and its Designated subsidiaries to comply with the provisions of Section 12.1.
(f)    To  employ  such  accountants,  attorneys,  consultants  and  other  advisors  as  may  be  necessary  or  appropriate  to  the
administration of the Plan and to delegate authority to such one or more members of the Committee or such other Employee of an
appropriate Employer as the Committee shall determine.
(g)    To prescribe from time to time, with the advice of an actuary, such actuarial assumptions as are necessary for the
operation  of  the  Plan.  The  factors  and  assumptions  embodied  in  Tables  1  through  5  may  be  changed  only  by  Plan  amendment
pursuant to Section 16.1(a).
(h)    To authorize an amendment to the Plan extending the Plan to a group or groups of acquired employees in accordance
with the terms and conditions set forth in any acquisition agreement previously approved by the Board of Directors, provided that no
service shall be credited for benefit accrual purposes prior to the date on which the Plan is extended by the Company to the group or
groups of acquired employees, except as specifically provided in the agreement approved by the Board.
Section 11.5    Delegation and Allocation of Responsibility. The Committee, by unanimous action in writing, may delegate
any Plan administrative responsibility to any employee of the Employer and may allocate any of its responsibilities to one or more
members  of  the  Committee.  In  the  event  of  any  such  delegation  or  allocation  the  Committee  shall  establish  procedures  for  the
thorough and frequent review of the performance of such duties. Persons to whom responsibilities have been delegated may not
delegate to others any discretionary authority or discretionary control with respect to the management or administration of the Plan.
Section  11.6    Indemnification.  The  Company  and  Designated  Subsidiaries  shall,  to  the  full  extent  permitted  by  law,
indemnify and hold harmless each member of the Committee and each other director, officer or employee of the Company or of a
Designated Subsidiary acting as a “fiduciary” of the Plan, as defined in section 3(21) of ERISA or any corresponding provisions of
40

successor  laws,  against  any  liability  or  loss,  including,  without  limitation,  attorneys’  fees  and  other  expenses,  excise  taxes,
judgments, fines and amounts paid in settlement, reasonably incurred by such “fiduciary” in connection with any claim (or actions or
proceedings in respect thereof) arising out of or based upon an alleged breach of fiduciary duty, provided that he acted in good faith
and in a manner he reasonably believed to be in, or not opposed to, the best interests of the Plan and, with respect to any criminal
proceeding, had no reasonable cause to believe his conduct was unlawful, and further provided that the “fiduciary” shall have taken
the steps required under any applicable insurance policy to preserve the coverage afforded by such insurance with respect to such
liability or loss. If any action is brought against a “fiduciary” in respect of which indemnity may be sought against the Company or a
Designated Subsidiary he shall promptly notify the Company in writing of the institution of such action, and the Company shall
assume the defense of such action, including the employment of counsel and payment of expenses, to the extent that the same is not
assumed by the insurance company. The “fiduciary” shall bear the fees and expenses of any additional counsel retained by him.
Section 11.7    Claims Procedure. The Committee shall administer a claims procedure as follows:
(a)    Initial Claim. A Participant, surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant (a “Claimant”), or the Claimant’s authorized
representative, who believes himself entitled to benefits under the Plan and who does not begin to receive those benefits within 120
days after the claimed benefit date may claim those benefits by submitting to his Employer within 90 days after the expiration of that
120 day period, a written notification of his claim of right to such benefits. A claim for benefits must be made in accordance with the
procedures established by the Committee. Except for benefits paid pursuant to the small benefit cash out provisions of Section 7.1,
no benefit shall be paid under the Plan until a proper claim for benefits has been submitted to the Committee. The Participant’s
Employer shall forward that claim to the Committee within five business days after it is filed.
(b)    Procedure for Review. The Committee shall establish administrative processes and safeguards designed to ensure and to
verify  that  benefit  claim  determinations  are  made  in  accordance  with  the  Plan  document  and  that,  where  appropriate,  the  Plan
provisions have been applied consistently with respect to similarly situated claimants.
(c)    Claim Denial Procedure. In the event that the initial claim is wholly or partially denied, the Committee shall, within 90
days (or in special cases, and upon prior written notice to the claimant, 180 days) of the receipt of the claim, provide written notice
informing the Claimant of: (i) the reason or reasons for the denial, (ii) the specific reference to the Plan provisions on which the
denial was based, (iii) any additional information which may be necessary to perfect the claim, with reasons therefor, and (iv) the
procedure for reviewing the denial of the claim, including a
41

description of the time limits applicable to the Plan’s review procedures and a statement of the Claimant’s right to bring a legal
action following an adverse benefit determination on review.
(d)    Appeal Procedure. In the case of an adverse benefit determination, the Claimant or his representative shall have the
opportunity to appeal to the Committee for review provided the Claimant submits a proper written application for appeal within 90
days of receipt of the notification of the adverse benefit determination. Failure to submit a proper application for appeal within such
90 day period will cause such claim to be permanently denied. The Claimant shall have a right to: (i) review all pertinent documents
and  submit  comments  in  writing,  and  (ii)  receive,  upon  request  and  free  of  charge,  reasonable  access  to,  and  copies  of,  all
documents, records and other information relevant to the claim for benefits. The Committee’s review shall take into account all
comments, documents, records and other information submitted by the Claimant relating to the claim, without regard to whether
such information was submitted or considered in the initial benefit determination.
(e)    Decision on Appeal. No later than 60 days after its receipt of the request for review, the Committee shall render a
decision  in  writing.  If  special  circumstances  require  extension,  and  upon  prior  written  notice  to  the  claimant,  the  Committee’s
decision may be given within 120 days after receipt of the request for review. In the case of an adverse benefit determination on
appeal, the written notice shall include: (i) the specific reason or reasons for the adverse determination, (ii) the specific reference to
the Plan provision(s) on which the denial is based, (iii) a statement that the Claimant is entitled to receive, upon request and free of
charge, reasonable access to and copies of all documents, records and other information relevant to the claim, and (iv) a statement of
the Claimant’s right to bring a legal action.
(f)    Litigation. In order to operate and administer the claims procedure in a timely and efficient manner, any Claimant whose
appeal with respect to a claim for benefits has been denied, and who desires to commence a legal action with respect to such claim,
must commence such action in a court of competent jurisdiction within 90 days of receipt of notification of such denial. Failure to
file such action by the prescribed time will forever bar the commencement of such actions.
Section 11.8    Plan Expenses. All fees of actuaries, accountants, attorneys, consultants or other advisors, and other expenses
of the Plan, shall, as determined by the Committee, be paid from the Fund or allocated among the Company and its Designated
Subsidiaries.
ARTICLE XII.
CONTRIBUTIONS
Section 12.1    Contributions.
(a)    Contributions to Meet Funding Standards. The Company and its Designated Subsidiaries, shall each contribute to the
Plan, by deposit with the Insurance Company or with the
42

Trustee or other fiduciary of any trust or other fund which may be established by the Company to hold, manage and invest amounts
contributed  under  the  Plan  by  the  Company  or its  Designated  Subsidiaries,  an  amount  which  shall  not  be  less  than  the  amount
necessary  to  prevent  an  accumulated  funding  deficiency,  as  defined  in  section  412  of  the  Code,  section  302  of  ERISA,  or
corresponding provisions of successor laws, with respect to those of its Employees who are Participants in the Plan.
(b)    Quarterly Installments. The Company and its Designated Subsidiaries shall endeavor to make four equal payments to the
Fund on October 15, January 15 and April 15 of the Plan Year for which such payment is due and on July 15 of the next Plan Year.
The amount of each payment shall equal the “applicable percentage” of the lesser of:
(i)    90 percent of the amount necessary to prevent an accumulated funding deficiency for the Plan Year, as defined in
section 412 of the Code, or
(ii)    100  percent  of  the  amount  necessary  to  prevent  an  accumulated  funding  deficiency  for  the  immediately
preceding Plan Year.
(iii)    The amount of each quarterly installment determined under this Section 12.1 shall be increased to the extent
required under section 412(m) of the Code, if the Plan has any liabilities for “unpredictable contingent event benefits,” within
the meaning of section 412(I)(7)(B)(ii), during the Plan Year.
(c)    Additional  Contributions.  Payment  of  any  difference  between  the  amount  of  the  Company’s  and  Designated
Subsidiary’s contribution to the Fund as determined under Section 12.1(a) and the amount paid into the Fund under Section 12.1(b)
shall be made within the time prescribed by the Code as the time within which contributions must be made in order to constitute (A)
a credit to the Plan’s minimum funding standard account (or alternative funding standard account) for the Plan Year to which the
contribution relates, and (B) an allowable Federal income tax deduction for the taxable year for which the contribution is made.
(d)    Special Rule; Return of Contributions. It is intended that the Plan and the Fund shall continue to qualify under section
401(a) of the Code and that contributions are conditioned upon their deductibility under section 404 of the Code. Therefore, Section
12.1 shall be subject to the following provisions:
(i)    The entire contribution attributable to any Plan Year as to which deductibility is disallowed shall be returned to
the  Employer,  to  the  extent  of  the  amount  of  the  disallowance,  within  one  year  after  the  disallowance.  Nondeductible
contributions that are treated as de minimis pursuant to Revenue Procedure 90-49 shall be returned to the Employer within
one year of the date of the Plan actuary’s certification of such non-deductibility.
43

(ii)    In the case of a contribution which is made in whole or in part by reason of a mistake of fact, so much of such
contribution as is attributable to the mistake of fact shall be returnable to the Employer upon demand by the Committee, upon
presentation  of  evidence  of  the  mistake  of  fact  to  the  Insurance  Company  and  of  calculations  as  to  the  impact  of  such
mistake. Demand and repayment must be effectuated within one year after the payment of the contribution to which the
mistake applies.
Income  and  gains  attributable  to  the  excess  contributions  may  not  be  recovered  by  the  Employer.  Losses  attributable  to  such
contribution shall reduce the amount the Employer may recover.
Section 12.2    Management of Funds. All funds to provide the benefits of the Plan shall be deposited with the Insurance
Company or the Trustee to be held, managed and disposed of in accordance with the terms of the Insurance Contract, the Trust
Agreement or any agreement with any Investment Manager. At no time and under no circumstances  may the funds or any part
thereof or income therefrom prior to the satisfaction of all liabilities for benefits under the Plan be used for or diverted to purposes
other than the exclusive benefit of Participants, surviving spouses or Contingent Annuitants under the Plan. No one shall have any
interest in or right to any part of the assets or the earnings of the funds, except as and to the extent expressly provided in the Plan.
ARTICLE XIII.
MISCELLANEOUS
Section 13.1    Liability  of  the  Company.  The  Company  and  its  Designated  Subsidiaries  shall  have  no  liability  for  the
payment of benefits under the Plan, except to make the contributions required under Section 12.1, nor shall the Company or any
Designated  Subsidiary  have  any  liability  for  the  administration  of  the  funds  or  assets  paid  over  to  the  Insurance  Company,  the
Trustee  or  any  Investment  Manager,  and  each  Participant,  surviving  spouse  and  Contingent  Annuitant  shall  look  solely  to  the
Insurance Company, or Trustee for any payments or benefits under the Plan.
Section 13.2    Non-Alienation of Benefits. No benefits payable under the Plan shall be subject in any manner to anticipation,
assignment or pledge and any attempt to anticipate, assign or pledge the same shall be void; and no such benefit shall be in any
manner  liable  for  or  subject  to  the  debts,  contracts,  liabilities,  engagements  or  torts  of  any  Participant,  surviving  spouse  or
Contingent Annuitant. This Section 13.2 shall not preclude the Insurance Company or the Trustee from complying with the terms of
a qualified domestic relations order as defined in section 414(p) of the Code, or applicable provisions of successor laws.
Section 13.3    Facility of Payment. If any Participant, surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant is, in the judgment of either
the Insurance Company or the Trustee, legally, physically or mentally incapable of personally receiving or receipting for any benefit
due hereunder, the
44

Insurance Company or the Trustee may make payment thereof to such other person, persons or institutions who, in the opinion of the
Insurance Company or Trustee, are then maintaining or have custody of such Participant, surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant
until claim is made by the duly appointed guardian or other legal representative of such Participant, surviving spouse or Contingent
Annuitant. Such payment shall constitute a full discharge of the liability of the Insurance Company or Trustee, to the extent thereof.
Upon notice to the Insurance Company or Trustee of the appointment of a guardian or other legal representative of such Participant,
surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant, the Insurance Company or Trustee shall thereafter pay only to said guardian or other legal
representative.
Section 13.4    Limitation on Benefits. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Plan, the annual benefit, derived from
Company, Designated Subsidiary or former Designated Subsidiary contributions, payable to any Participant under this Plan and any
other  defined  benefit  pension  plan  maintained  by  the  Company  or  any  Designated  Subsidiary  may  not  exceed  the  lesser  of  the
amount  determined  under  the  primary  limit  or,  effective  until  January  1,  2000,  the  combined  limit  provisions  of  Article  C  of
Appendix 2, provided that in applying the combined limit any necessary reduction shall first be made in computing the benefit to be
provided under this Plan.
Section 13.5    Right to Terminate Employment. The establishment or continuance of the Plan and of any Insurance Contract,
Trust, or any contract with any Investment Manager, shall not confer upon any Participant the right to be continued in the employ of
the Company or of any Designated Subsidiary and this Plan shall in no way restrict the right of the Company or of a Designated
Subsidiary to terminate the employment of any employee, whether or not a Participant.
ARTICLE XIV.
TERMINATION OF THE PLAN - DISTRIBUTION OF ASSETS
Section 14.1    Order of Priorities. The Plan as a whole may be terminated at any time by the Board of Directors. In the event
of such complete termination, or if for any reason the Plan is partially terminated the Accrued Benefits of all Participants affected by
such complete or partial termination shall, to the extent then funded, become 100% vested. In the event of a complete or partial
termination of the Plan, or upon a complete discontinuance of contributions required by Section 12.1, funds then held under the Plan
for the benefit of affected Participants, surviving spouse and Contingent Annuitants shall be allocated to or for the benefit of the
affected  Participants,  surviving  spouse  and  Contingent  Annuitants  in  the  order  set  forth  below  and  in  the  manner  and  amount
provided in Sections 14.2 through 14.3.
(a)    There shall first be credited to each Participant the amount, if any, necessary to provide that portion of his benefit
derived from his own contributions.
45

(b)    There shall then be credited to each Participant, surviving spouse and Contingent Annuitant whose benefit has been in
pay status for at least three years as of the Plan’s termination date, or whose benefit would have been in pay status during such
period if the Participant had retired, and his benefit had begun immediately prior thereto, the amount, if any, necessary to provide the
lowest level of benefit to which he was, or would have been, entitled under the provisions of the Plan in effect during the five year
period ending on the Plan’s termination date.
(c)    There shall then be credited to each Participant, surviving spouse and Contingent Annuitant whose vested Accrued
Benefit  has  not  been  fully  provided  under  (a)  or  (b)  above,  the  amount,  if  any,  necessary  to  provide  that  portion  of  his  vested
Accrued Benefit, determined immediately prior to the Plan’s termination, which does not exceed the lesser of:
(i)    a monthly annuity equal to the Participant’s average monthly gross income during the five consecutive calendar
years during which his gross income received from the Company was highest; or
(ii)    $750 multiplied by a percentage computed by dividing the Social Security Act contribution and benefit base at
the time the Plan terminates by that base as in effect during 1974.
The amount allocated under this Section 14.1(c) shall be determined without regard to whether the Participant would be considered a
“substantial owner” within the meaning of section 4022(b)(6) of ERISA, or any corresponding provisions of successor laws.
(d)    There shall then be credited to each Participant, surviving spouse and Contingent Annuitant whose benefit has not been
provided under (a) or (b) above, the amount, if any, necessary to provide the portion of his vested Accrued Benefit, determined
immediately prior to the Plan’s termination, not provided under (c) above. If the Plan has been amended during that five year period,
the allocation of assets to benefits described in (d) which are attributable to such amendments shall be made on the basis of such
amendments in the order in which they became effective.
(e)    Finally,  there shall be credited  to each Participant,  surviving  spouse and Contingent  Annuitant  the amount,  if any,
necessary to provide any benefit to which he is entitled under the Plan to the extent such benefit has not been provided above.
(f)    If the assets of the Plan are insufficient to provide in full the benefits described in (a), (b) or (c) above, the assets shall be
allocated pro rata among all Participants, surviving spouses and Contingent Annuitants in the affected group on the basis of the
present value, as of the Plan’s termination date, of their respective benefits. If the assets of the Plan are insufficient to provide all
benefits described in (d) (after all benefits described in (a) through (c) have been provided) those assets will first be allocated to any
nonforfeitable benefits described in (d) under the Plan as in effect five years prior to the termination date, and thereafter to other
benefits described in (d).
46

Section 14.2    Method of Allocation. The allocation of funds held under the Plan shall, with the advice of the actuary, be
calculated by the Committee on the foregoing basis as of the date on which the Plan is discontinued or contributions are completely
discontinued. When the calculations have been completed, and the Company shall have obtained such governmental approvals of the
allocation of Plan assets, including approval by the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation, as the Committee may determine to be
necessary,  such  funds  shall  be  allocated  to  or  for  the  benefit  of  the  respective  Participants,  surviving  spouses  and  Contingent
Annuitants of each class in the order, and to the extent, stated in Section 14.1 above, except that (a) no Participant, surviving spouse
or  Contingent  Annuitant  shall  be  entitled  to  a  share  of  any  such  funds  greater  than  the  actuarial  value,  at  the  date  of  such
discontinuance of the Plan or contributions, of the total retirement income to which such Participant, surviving spouse or Contingent
Annuitant would have been entitled under the Plan at the Participant’s Normal Retirement Date pursuant to Sections 5.2, 5.6, and 5.7
had the Plan or contributions not been discontinued and had such Participant continued in employment until his Normal Retirement
Date without change in Final Average Earnings, and (b) except to the extent required to comply with Title IV of ERISA, or any
corresponding provisions of any successor laws, no assets previously allocated to the benefit of any Participant, surviving spouse or
Contingent Annuitant shall be reallocated. The Committee shall have the right to determine whether the distribution shall be applied
to purchase retirement income under any Insurance Contract or paid in cash. Any assets remaining after the distributions described in
this Section 14.2 have been completed shall be allocated among, and returned to, the Company and its Designated Subsidiaries on
the basis determined by the Committee, with the advice of the actuary.
Section 14.3    Restricted Benefits.
(a)    In the event of termination of the Plan, the benefit due any Participant or former Participant who is one of the 25 highest
paid Participants shall be restricted in the manner set forth in this Section 14.3(a).
(i)    Benefit Restriction.  The  annual  payments  to  a  Participant  described  above  in  this  Section  14.3(a)  shall  be
restricted to an amount equal to the payments that would be made on behalf of such Participant under a single life annuity
that  is  the  Actuarial  Equivalent  of  the  sum  of  the  Participant’s  Accrued  Benefit  and  the  Participant’s  other  benefits,  as
described below.
(ii)    Definition of “Benefits”. For purposes of this Section 14.3(a), the term “benefits” shall include loans in excess of
the amounts set forth in section 72(p)(2)(A) of the Code, any periodic income, any withdrawal values payable to a living
Participant, and any death benefits not provided for by insurance on the Participant’s life.
(iii)    Restrictions Not Applicable. The restrictions described in this Section 14.3(a) shall not apply if:
47

(A)    after payment to a Participant described in Section 14.3(a) of all benefits described in Section 14.3(a)(ii),
the value of the Plan assets equals or exceeds 110% of the value of the current liabilities as defined in section 412(1)
(7) of the Code for Plan Years beginning prior to January 1, 2008, and for Plan Years beginning on or after January 1,
2008, the funding target (as defined under section 430 of the Code), or
(B)    the value of the benefits described in Section 14.3(a)(ii) for a Participant described in this Section 14.3(a)
is less than 1% of the value of current liabilities.
(b)    Any excess reserves arising by application of the provisions of Section 14.3(a), shall be used for the benefit of the other
Participants, surviving spouses and Contingent Annuitants in accordance with Section 14.1.
(c)    The provisions of Section 14.3(a) shall not restrict the purchase in full of retirement income benefits, including vested
deferred benefits, called for by the Plan for any retired Participant, surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant while the Plan is in full
effect and its full current costs have been met; nor shall it restrict the purchase of any retirement income benefits withheld for a prior
year (under the foregoing provisions) after all deficits for all prior years and full current costs have been met.
Section 14.4    Severance of a Subsidiary. If at any time any Designated Subsidiary ceases to be a Subsidiary or a Designated
Subsidiary prior to termination of the Plan, the Employees of that Subsidiary shall then cease to be Participants in the Plan, and shall
accrue no further benefits hereunder.
ARTICLE XV.
GOVERNMENTAL APPROVAL
Anything  in  this  Plan  to  the  contrary  notwithstanding,  the  adoption  of  the  Plan  and  any  amendment  thereto  shall  be
conditioned upon the receipt of (A) a determination from the Commissioner of Internal Revenue to the effect that the Plan qualifies
under the applicable provisions of the Code and (B) any required approval or authorization under any other applicable statute or
regulation. Effective February 1, 2017, the Internal Revenue Service has discontinued the determination letter application program
such that (A) shall no longer apply.
ARTICLE XVI.
AMENDMENTS
48

Section 16.1    Amendment.
(a)    The Company and its Designated Subsidiaries hope and expect to continue the Plan indefinitely, but reserve the right to
suspend or discontinue the Plan, or to reduce or discontinue contributions hereunder. The Plan may be amended at any time and
from time to time by the Board of Directors or its properly authorized delegate. In addition, the Committee shall have the right to
amend this Plan in whole or in part at any time and from time to time, provided that any such amendment is either required by law or
does not materially increase the cost of the Plan. No amendment shall divest any vested interest of any Participant or beneficiary,
and  no  amendment  shall  be  effective  unless  the  Plan  continues  to  be  for  the  exclusive  benefit  of  the  Participants  and  their
beneficiaries. In addition, no amendment shall decrease a Participant’s vested interest, eliminate or reduce any benefit subsidy or
early  retirement  benefit,  or  eliminate  any  optional  form  of  benefit  except  in  accordance  with  sections  411(d)(6)  and  412(d)(2)
(section 412(c)(8) for Plan Years beginning before July 1, 2008) of the Code.
(b)    Notwithstanding the foregoing Section 16.1(a), any modification or amendment of the Plan, the Insurance Contract, any
trust or other fund established under the Plan, or any provision thereof, may be made, retroactively if necessary, which the Company
by action of the Board of Directors or its designee shall deem necessary or appropriate in order to comply with any applicable statute
or regulations, including but not limited to the Code and the regulations thereunder.
Section 16.2    Merger, Consolidation or Transfer of Assets or Liabilities. The Company and its Designated Subsidiaries also
reserve the right to merge or consolidate this Plan with any other pension plan qualified under applicable provisions of the Code, or
to transfer any or all Plan assets or liabilities to any other pension plan qualified under applicable provisions of the Code, provided
that, notwithstanding this Section 16.2, no such merger, consolidation or transfer of Plan assets or liabilities shall occur unless the
benefit  to  which  each  affected  Participant,  surviving  spouse  or  Contingent  Annuitant  would  be  entitled  in  the  event  of  a  plan
termination immediately after such merger, consolidation or transfer will be at least equal to the benefit to which such Participant,
surviving  spouse  or  Contingent  Annuitant  would  be  entitled  under  this  Plan  if  it  terminated  immediately  prior  to  such  merger,
consolidation or transfer.
    
ARTICLE XVII.
LIMITATIONS APPLICABLE IF THE PLAN'S ADJUSTED FUNDING
TARGET ATTAINMENT PERCENTAGE IS LESS THAN 80%
OR IF THE PLAN SPONSOR IS IN BANKRUPTCY
Section 17.1    Limitations Applicable If the Plan's Adjusted Funding Target Attainment Percentage Is Less Than 80%, But
Not Less Than 60%. Notwithstanding any other provisions of
49

the Plan, if the Plan's adjusted funding target attainment percentage for a Plan Year is less than 80% (or would be less than 80% to
the extent described in Section 17.1(b) below) but is not less than 60%, then the limitations set forth in this Section 17.1 apply.
(a)    50% Limitation on Single Sum Payments, Other Accelerated Forms of Distribution, and Other Prohibited Payments. A
Participant or beneficiary is not permitted to elect, and the Plan shall not pay, a single sum payment or other optional form of benefit
that includes a prohibited payment with an annuity starting date on or after the applicable section 436 measurement date, and the
Plan  shall  not  make  any  payment  for  the  purchase  of  an  irrevocable  commitment  from  an  insurer  to  pay  benefits  or  any  other
payment  or  transfer  that  is  a  prohibited  payment,  unless  the  present  value  of  the  portion  of  the  benefit  that  is  being  paid  in  a
prohibited payment does not exceed the lesser of:
(i)    50% of the present  value of the benefit  payable  in the optional  form of benefit  that includes the prohibited
payment; or
(ii)    100%  of  the  PBGC  maximum  benefit  guarantee  amount  (as  defined  in  section  1.436-1(d)(3)(iii)(C)  of  the
Treasury Regulations).
The limitation set forth in this Section 17.1(a) does not apply to any payment of a benefit which under section 411(a)(11) of
the Code may be immediately distributed without the consent of the Participant. If an optional form of benefit that is otherwise
available under the terms of the Plan is not available to a Participant or beneficiary as of the annuity starting date because of the
application of the requirements of this Section 17.1(a), the Participant or beneficiary is permitted to elect to bifurcate the benefit into
unrestricted and restricted portions (as described in section 1.436-1(d)(3)(iii)(D) of the Treasury Regulations). The Participant or
beneficiary may also elect any other optional form of benefit otherwise available under the Plan at that annuity starting date that
would satisfy the 50%/PBGC maximum benefit guarantee amount limitation described in this Section 17.1(a), or may elect to defer
the benefit in accordance with any general right to defer commencement of benefits under the Plan.
During a period when Section 17.1(a) applies to the Plan, Participants and beneficiaries are permitted to elect payment in any
optional form of benefit otherwise available under the Plan that provides for the current payment of the unrestricted portion of the
benefit (as described in section 1.436-1(d)(3)(iii)(D) of the Treasury Regulations), with a delayed commencement for the restricted
portion of the benefit (subject to other applicable qualification requirements, such as sections 411(a)(11) and 401(a)(9) of the Code).
(b)    Plan  Amendments  Increasing  Liability  for  Benefits.  No  amendment  to  the  Plan  that  has  the  effect  of  increasing
liabilities  of  the  Plan  by  reason  of  increases  in  benefits,  establishment  of  new  benefits,  changing  the  rate  of  benefit  accrual,  or
changing the rate at which benefits become
50

nonforfeitable shall take effect in a Plan Year if the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year is:
(i)        Less than 80%; or
(ii)        80% or more, but would be less than 80% if the benefits attributable to the amendment were taken into
account in determining the adjusted funding target attainment percentage.
The limitation set forth in this Section 17.1(b) does not apply to any amendment to the Plan that provides a benefit increase
under a Plan formula that is not based on compensation, provided that the rate of such increase does not exceed the contemporaneous
rate of increase in the average wages of Participants covered by the amendment.
Section 17.2    Limitations  Applicable  If  the  Plan's  Adjusted  Funding  Target  Attainment  Percentage  Is  Less  Than  60%.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Plan, if the Plan's adjusted funding target attainment percentage for a Plan Year is less
than 60% (or would be less than 60% to the extent described in Section 17.2(b) below), then the limitations in this Section 17.2
apply.
(a)    Single Sums, Other Accelerated Forms of Distribution, and Other Prohibited Payments Not Permitted. A Participant or
beneficiary is not permitted to elect, and the Plan shall not pay, a single sum payment or other optional form of benefit that includes
a prohibited payment with an annuity starting date on or after the applicable section 436 measurement date, and the Plan shall not
make any payment for the purchase of an irrevocable commitment from an insurer to pay benefits or any other payment or transfer
that is a prohibited payment. The limitation set forth in this Section 17.2(a) does not apply to any payment of a benefit which under
Section 411(a)(11) of the Code may be immediately distributed without the consent of the Participant.
(b)    Shutdown Benefits and Other Unpredictable Contingent Event Benefits Not Permitted to Be Paid. An unpredictable
contingent event benefit with respect to an unpredictable contingent event occurring during a Plan Year shall not be paid if the
adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year is:
(i)    Less than 60%; or
(ii)    60%  or  more,  but  would  be  less  than  60%  if  the  adjusted  funding  target  attainment  percentage  were
redetermined applying an actuarial assumption that the likelihood of occurrence of the unpredictable contingent event during
the Plan Year is 100%.
(c)    Benefit Accruals Frozen. Benefit accruals under the Plan shall cease as of the applicable section 436 measurement date.
In addition, if the Plan is required to cease benefit accruals under this Section 17.2(c), then the Plan is not permitted to be amended
in a manner that would
51

increase the liabilities of the Plan by reason of an increase in benefits or establishment of new benefits.
Section 17.3    Limitations Applicable If the Plan Sponsor Is In Bankruptcy. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the
Plan, a Participant or beneficiary is not permitted to elect, and the Plan shall not pay, a single sum payment or other optional form of
benefit that includes a prohibited payment with an annuity starting date that occurs during any period in which the Plan sponsor is a
debtor in a case under title 11, United States Code, or similar Federal or State law, except for payments made within a Plan Year
with an annuity starting date that occurs on or after the date on which the Plan's enrolled actuary certifies that the Plan's adjusted
funding target attainment percentage for that Plan Year is not less than 100%. In addition, during such period in which the Plan
sponsor is a debtor, the Plan shall not make any payment for the purchase of an irrevocable commitment from an insurer to pay
benefits or any other payment or transfer that is a prohibited payment, except for payments that occur on a date within a Plan Year
that is on or after the date on which the Plan's enrolled actuary certifies that the Plan's adjusted funding target attainment percentage
for that Plan Year is not less than 100%. The limitation set forth in this Section 17.3 does not apply to any payment of a benefit
which under section 411(a)(11) of the Code may be immediately distributed without the consent of the Participant.
Section 17.4    Provisions Applicable After Limitations Cease to Apply.
(a)    Resumption of Prohibited Payments. If a limitation on prohibited payments under Section 17.1(a), Section 17.2(a), or
Section 17.3 applied to the Plan as of a section 436 measurement date, but that limit no longer applies to the Plan as of a later section
436 measurement date, then that limitation does not apply to benefits with annuity starting dates that are on or after that later section
436 measurement date.
In addition, after the section 436 measurement date on which the limitation on prohibited payments under Section 17.1(a) or
17.2(a) ceases to apply to the Plan, any Participant or beneficiary who had an annuity starting date within the period during which
that limitation applied to the Plan is permitted to make a new election (within 90 days after the section 436 measurement date on
which the limit ceases to apply or, if later, 30 days after receiving notice of the right to make such election) under which the form of
benefit previously elected is modified at a new annuity starting date to be changed to a single sum payment for the remaining value
of the Participant or beneficiary's benefit under the Plan, subject to the other rules in this Article XVII and applicable requirements
of section 401(a) the Code, including spousal consent.
(b)    Resumption of Benefit Accruals. If a limitation on benefit accruals under Section 17.2(c) applied to the Plan as of a
section 436 measurement date, but that limitation no longer applies to the Plan as of a later section 436 measurement date, then
benefit accruals shall resume prospectively and that limitation does not apply to benefit accruals that are based on service on or
52

after that later section 436 measurement date, except as otherwise provided under the Plan. The Plan shall comply with the rules
relating  to  partial  years  of  participation  and  the  prohibition  on  double  proration  under  Department  of  Labor  regulation  29  CFR
section 2530.204-2(c) and (d).
In addition, benefit accruals that were not permitted to accrue because of the application of Section 17.2(c) shall be restored
when that limitation ceases to apply if the continuous period of the limitation was 12 months or less and the Plan's enrolled actuary
certifies that the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year would not be less than 60% taking into account any
restored benefit accruals for the prior Plan Year.
(c)    Shutdown and Other Unpredictable Contingent Event Benefits. If an unpredictable contingent event benefit with respect
to an unpredictable contingent event that occurs during the Plan Year is not permitted to be paid after the occurrence of the event
because  of  the  limitation  of  Section  17.2(b),  but  is  permitted  to  be  paid  later  in  the  same  Plan  Year  (as  a  result  of  additional
contributions or pursuant to the enrolled actuary's certification of the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year
that meets the requirements of section 1.436-1(g)(5)(ii)(B) of the Treasury Regulations), then that unpredictable contingent event
benefit shall be paid, retroactive to the period that benefit would have been payable under the terms of the Plan (determined without
regard to Section 17.2(b)). If the unpredictable contingent event benefit does not become payable during the Plan Year in accordance
with the preceding sentence, then the Plan is treated as if it does not provide for that benefit.
(d)    Treatment of Plan Amendments That Do Not Take Effect. If a Plan amendment does not take effect as of the effective
date of the amendment because of the limitation of Section 17.1(b) or Section 17.2(c), but is permitted to take effect later in the same
Plan Year (as a result of additional contributions or pursuant to the enrolled actuary's certification of the adjusted funding target
attainment percentage for the Plan Year that meets the requirements of section 1.436-1(g)(5)(ii)(C) of the Treasury Regulations),
then the Plan amendment must automatically take effect as of the first day of the Plan Year (or, if later, the original effective date of
the amendment). If the Plan amendment cannot take effect during the same Plan Year, then it shall be treated as if it were never
adopted, unless the Plan amendment provides otherwise.
Section 17.5    Notice Requirement.  See  section  101(j)  of  ERISA  for  rules  requiring  the  plan  administrator  of  a  single
employer  defined  benefit  pension  plan  to  provide  a  written  notice  to  participants  and  beneficiaries  within  30  days  after  certain
specified dates if the plan has become subject to a limitation described in Section 17.1(a), Section 17.2, or Section 17.3.
Section 17.6    Methods to Avoid or Terminate Benefit Limitations. See section 436(b)(2), (c)(2), (e)(2), and (f) of the Code
and section 1.436-1(f) of the Treasury Regulations for rules relating to employer contributions and other - methods- to avoid or-
terminate- the -application of -the- -limitations -set -forth in- - Sections 17.1 through 17.3 for a Plan Year. In general, the methods a
53

plan sponsor may use to avoid or terminate one or more of the benefit limitations under Sections 17.1 through 17.3 for a Plan Year
include employer contributions and elections to increase the amount of plan assets which are taken into account in determining the
adjusted  funding  target  attainment  percentage,  making an employer  contribution  that is specifically  designated  as a current  year
contribution that is made to avoid or terminate application of certain of the benefit limitations, or providing security to the plan.
Section 17.7    Special Rules.
(a)    Rules  of  Operation  for  Periods  Prior  to  and  After  Certification  of  Plan's  Adjusted  Funding  Target  Attainment
Percentage.
(i)    In General. Section 436(h) of the Code and section 1.436-1(h) of the Treasury Regulations set forth a series of
presumptions  that  apply  (1)  before  the  Plan's  enrolled  actuary  issues  a  certification  of  the  Plan's  adjusted  funding  target
attainment percentage for the Plan Year and (2) if the Plan's enrolled actuary does not issue a certification of the Plan's
adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year before the first day of the tenth month of the Plan Year (or if
the Plan's enrolled actuary issues a range certification for the Plan Year pursuant to section 1.436-1(h)(4)(ii) of the Treasury
Regulations but does not issue a certification of the specific adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan by the
last  day  of  the  Plan  Year).  For  any  period  during  which  a  presumption  under  section  436(h)  of  the  Code  and  section
1.436¬1(h) of the Treasury Regulations applies to the Plan, the limitations under Sections 17.1 through 17.3 are applied to
the Plan as if the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year were the presumed adjusted funding target
attainment percentage determined under the rules of section 436(h) of the Code and section 1.436-1(h)(1), (2), or (3) of the
Treasury Regulations. These presumptions are set forth in Section 17.7(a)(ii) though (iv).
(ii)    Presumption of Continued Underfunding Beginning First Day of Plan Year. If a limitation under Section 17.1,
17.2, or 17.3 applied to the Plan on the last day of the preceding Plan Year, then, commencing on the first day of the current
Plan Year and continuing until the Plan's enrolled actuary issues a certification of the adjusted funding target attainment
percentage for the Plan for the current Plan Year, or, if earlier, the date Section 17.7(a)(iii) or Section 17.7(a)(iv) applies to
the Plan:
(A)    The adjusted funding target attainment percentage of the Plan for the current Plan Year is presumed to
be the adjusted funding target attainment percentage in effect on the last day of the preceding Plan Year; and
(B)    The first day of the current Plan Year is a section 436 measurement date.
54

(iii)    Presumption of Underfunding Beginning First Day of Fourth Month. If the Plan's enrolled actuary has not
issued a certification of the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year before the first day of the fourth
month of the Plan Year and the Plan's adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the preceding Plan Year was either at
least 60% but less than 70% or at least 80% but less than 90%, or is described in section 1.436-1(h)(2)(ii) of the Treasury
Regulations, then, commencing on the first day of the fourth month of the current Plan Year and continuing until the Plan's
enrolled actuary issues a certification of the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan for the current Plan
Year, or, if earlier, the date Section 17.7(a)(iv) applies to the Plan:
(A)    The adjusted funding target attainment percentage of the Plan for the current Plan Year is presumed to
be the Plan's adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the preceding Plan Year reduced by 10 percentage
points; and
(B)    The first day of the fourth month of the current Plan Year is a section 436 measurement date.
(iv)    Presumption of Underfunding On and After First Day of Tenth Month. If the Plan's enrolled actuary has not
issued a certification of the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan Year before the first day of the tenth
month of the Plan Year (or if the Plan's enrolled actuary has issued a range certification for the Plan Year pursuant to section
1.436-1(h)(4)(ii)  of  the  Treasury  Regulations  but  has  not  issued  a  certification  of  the  specific  adjusted  funding  target
attainment percentage for the Plan by the last day of the Plan Year), then, commencing on the first day of the tenth month of
the current Plan Year and continuing through the end of the Plan Year:
(A)    The adjusted funding target attainment percentage of the Plan for the current Plan Year is presumed to
be less than 60%; and
(B)    The first day of the tenth month of the current Plan Year is a section 436 measurement date.
(b)    New Plans, Plan Termination, Certain Frozen Plans, and Other Special Rules.
(i)    First 5 Plan Years. The limitations in Section 17.1(b), Section 17.2(b), and Section 17.2(c) do not apply to a new
plan for the first 5 plan years of the plan, determined under the rules of section 436(i) of the Code and section 1.436-1(a)(3)
(i) of the Treasury Regulations.
(ii)    Plan Termination. The limitations on prohibited payments in Section 17.1(a), Section 17.2(a), and Section 17.3
do not apply to prohibited payments that are made to carry
55

out the termination of the Plan in accordance with applicable law. Any other limitations under this Section of the Plan do not
cease to apply as a result of termination of the Plan.
(iii)    Exception to Limitations on Prohibited Payments Under Certain Frozen Plans. The limitations on prohibited
payments set forth in Sections 17.1(a), 17.2(a), and 17.3 do not apply for a Plan Year if the terms of the Plan, as in effect for
the period beginning on September 1, 2005, and continuing through the end of the Plan Year, provide for no benefit accruals
with respect to any Participants. This Section 17.7(b)(iii) shall cease to apply as of the date any benefits accrue under the
Plan or the date on which a Plan amendment that increases benefits takes effect.
(iv)    Special Rules Relating to Unpredictable Contingent Event Benefits and Plan Amendments Increasing Benefit
Liability.  During  any  period  in  which  none  of  the  presumptions  under  Section  17.7(a)  apply  to  the  Plan  and  the  Plan's
enrolled actuary has not yet issued a certification of the Plan's adjusted funding target attainment percentage for the Plan
year, the limitations under Section 17.1(b) and Section 17.2(b) shall be based on the inclusive presumed adjusted funding
target attainment percentage for the Plan, calculated in accordance with the rules of section 1.436-1(g)(2)(iii) of the Treasury
Regulations.
(c)    Special Rules Under PRA 2010.
(i)    Payments Under Social Security Leveling Options. For purposes of determining whether the limitations under
Section 17.1(a) or 17.2(a) apply to payments under a social security leveling option, within the meaning of section 436(j)(3)
(C)(i) of the Code, the adjusted funding target attainment percentage for a Plan Year shall be determined in accordance with
the "Special Rule for Certain Years" under section 436(j)(3) of the Code and any Treasury Regulations or other published
guidance thereunder issued by the Internal Revenue Service.
(ii)    Limitation  on  Benefit  Accruals.  For  purposes  of  determining  whether  the  accrual  limitation  under  Section
17.2(c)  applies  to  the  Plan  the  adjusted  funding  target  attainment  percentage  for  a  Plan  Year  shall  be  determined  in
accordance with the "Special Rule for Certain Years" under section 436(j)(3) of the Code (except as provided under section
203(b) of the Preservation of Access to Care for Medicare Beneficiaries and Pension Relief Act of 2010, if applicable).
(d)    Interpretation of Provisions. The limitations imposed by this Section of the Plan shall be interpreted and administered in
accordance with section 436 of the Code and section 1.436-1 of the Treasury Regulations.
Section 17.8    Definitions. The definitions in the following Treasury Regulations apply for purposes of Sections 17.1 through
17.7: section 1.436¬1(j)(1) defining adjusted funding target
56

attainment  percentage;  section  1.436¬1(j)(2)  defining  annuity  starting  date;  section  1A36-1(j)(6)  defining  prohibited  payment;
section 1.436-1(j)(8) defining section 436 measurement date; and section 1.436-1(j)(9) defining an unpredictable contingent event
and an unpredictable contingent event benefit.
Section 17.9    Effective Date. The rules in Sections 17.1 through 17.8 are effective for Plan Years beginning after December
31, 2007.
To record the adoption of the amendment and restatement of the Plan, American Water Works Company, Inc. has caused its
authorized officer to execute the Plan on its behalf and to affix its corporate name and seal this 24th day of January, 2017.
[CORPORATE SEAL]
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
By:
/s/ Brenda J. Holdnak
57

EXHIBIT A 
LIST OF DESIGNATED SUBSIDIARIES
•
American Water Works Company, Inc.
•
American Water Enterprises, Inc. (participating only with respect to certain grandfathered employees)
• AAET, L.P.
Ø EA2 Systems L.C.
Ø American Water Operations and Maintenance, Inc.
Ø American Water Services CDM, Inc.
•
American Water Resources, Inc. (participating only with respect to certain grandfathered employees)
•
American Water Works Service Company, Inc.
•
Arizona-American Water Company (prior to July 1, 2011)
•
California-American Water Company
•
Hawaii American Water Company
•
Illinois-American Water Company
•
Indiana-American Water Company, Inc.
•
Iowa-American Water Company
•
Kentucky-American Water Company
•
Maryland-American Water Company
•
Michigan American Water Company
•
Missouri-American Water Company
•
New Jersey-American Water Company, Inc.
•
New Mexico-American Water Company (prior to July 1, 2011)
•
New York American Water Company, Inc. (participating only with respect to the component of the, company formerly
known as Long Island Water Corporation)
•
Ohio-American Water Company (prior to May 1, 2012)
•
Pennsylvania-American Water Company
•
Tennessee-American Water Company
•
Virginia-American Water Company
•
West Virginia-American Water Company
Ø Bluefield Valley Water Works Company
58

APPENDIX 1 
INCREASE IN RETIREMENT INCOME FOR CERTAIN RETIRED PARTICIPANTS
Increase Effective October 1, 1980.
(1)    Effective October 1, 1980, the monthly benefits of Participants who retired prior to January 1, 1978, and of surviving
spouses  and  Contingent  Annuitants  of  any  such  Participants  who  were  receiving  benefits  under  the  Plan  shall  be  increased  in
accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 2 of this Appendix 1.
(2)    The amount of monthly benefit payable to a former or retired Participant or to his surviving spouse or Contingent
Annuitant under the Plan shall be increased by 4% for each full calendar year, or fraction thereof, between the effective date of the
Participant’s commencement of monthly benefits and December 31, 1977, up to a maximum of 32% of such monthly benefit.
(3)    Any potential benefit which may become payable to the surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant of a Participant
whose benefit is adjusted under Paragraph 2 of this Appendix 1 shall be adjusted by the same percentage as is applied in adjusting
the Participant’s benefit.
Increase Effective October 1, 1985.
(4)     Effective  October  1,  1985,  the  monthly  benefits  of  Participants  who  retired  prior  to  January  1,  1984  and  of  any
surviving spouses and Contingent Annuitants who were receiving benefits under the Plan shall be increased in accordance with the
provisions of Paragraph (5) of this Appendix 1. That increase shall be in addition to any increase provided under Paragraphs (1)
through (3) above, but shall not apply to any benefit attributable to any plan merged into this Plan.
(5)    The amount of monthly benefit payable to a former or retired Participant or to his surviving spouse or Contingent
Annuitant under the Plan shall be increased by 3% for each full calendar year, or fraction thereof, between the effective date of the
Participant’s commencement of monthly benefits and December 31, 1983, up to a maximum of 18% of such monthly benefit.
(6)    Any potential benefit which may become payable to the surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant of a Participant
whose benefit is adjusted under Paragraph (4) of this Appendix 1 shall be adjusted by the same percentage as is applied in adjusting
the Participant’s benefit.
APP-1-1

APPENDIX 2 
TOP-HEAVY PROVISIONS AND BENEFIT LIMITS
A.    Top-Heavy Plan Definitions.
The following words and phrases as used herein have the following meanings unless a different meaning is plainly required
by the context:
A.1    “Account Balance” means the sum of:
A.1.1    the present value, as of the Top-Heavy Valuation Date, of a Participant’s Accrued Benefit under the Plan,
determined in the same manner as Actuarial Equivalent forms of benefit are determined under the Plan;
A.1.2    the balance, as of the Top-Heavy Valuation Date, standing to the credit of a Participant (including a surviving
spouse or Contingent Annuitant of such Participant) in any Defined Contribution Plan maintained by the Employer, including
contributions that would be allocated as of the Top-Heavy Valuation Date, even though these amounts are not yet required to
be contributed, and any contribution attributable (A) to a plan-to-plan transfer or rollover contribution from another qualified
employee pension benefit plan or a rollover individual retirement account, accepted before January 1, 1984, or (B) a related
plan-to-plan transfer or rollover individual retirement account; and
A.1.3    the aggregate distributions made with respect to such Participant (including a surviving spouse or Contingent
Annuitant of such Participant) under the Plan during the five year period ending on the Determination Date. If a distribution
is  made  in  the  form  of  an  annuity  contract,  the  amount  of  such  distribution  shall  be  equal  to  the  actuarial  value  of  the
contract, determined on the date of the distribution. Benefits paid on account of death shall only be included to the extent of
the present value of the decedent’s Accrued Benefit immediately prior to death.
The term “Account Balance” shall not include any amount held or distributed on behalf of any Participant who is a Former
Key Employee, or who has performed no service for the Employer (other than benefits under qualified plans maintained by the
Employer)  at  any  time  during  the  five  year  period  ending  on  the  Determination  Date  or  any  amount  attributable  to  qualified
voluntary employee contributions (within the meaning of section 219(e)(2) of the Code).
A.2    “Aggregation Group” means:
A.2.1    a Required Aggregation Group, or
APP-2-1

A.2.2    a Permissive Aggregation Group.
A.3    “Compensation” shall include all amounts that are treated as wages for Federal income tax withholding under section
3401(a) of the Code (determined without regard to any rules that limit the remuneration included in wages based on the nature or
location  of  the  employment  or  the  services  performed)  and  actually  paid  to  the  Participant  during  the  Limitation  Year.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for Limitation Years beginning on and after July 1, 2007, Compensation includes regular pay as
described in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(c)-(2)(e)(3) if paid by the end of the Limitation Year that includes the Employee’s termination of
employment, or if later, 2½ months after the Employee’s termination of employment. Any payments not described in the foregoing
sentence shall not be considered Compensation if paid after separation from service, even if they are paid by the later of 2½ months
after the date of separation from service or the end of the Limitation Year that includes the date of severance from employment.
Effective for distributions made on and after January 1, 2009, Compensation shall include the amount of any military differential
wage payments made by the Employer to a Participant in accordance with section 3401(h) and section 414(u)(12) of the Code.
A.4    “Defined Benefit Plan” means any employee pension plan maintained by the Employer that is qualified under section
401(a) of the Code and is not a Defined Contribution Plan.
A.5    “Defined Contribution Plan” means an employee pension plan maintained by the Employer that is qualified under
section 401(a) of the Code and provides for an individual account for each Participant and for benefits based solely on the amount
contributed  to  the  Participant’s  account,  and  any  income,  expenses,  gains  and  losses,  and  any  forfeitures  of  accounts  of  other
Participants that may be allocated to such Participant’s account.
A.6    “Determination Date” means:
A.6.1    if the Plan is not included in an Aggregation Group, the last day of the preceding Plan Year; or
A.6.2    if the Plan is included in an Aggregation Group, the Determination Date as determined under Section A.6.1
that falls within the same calendar year of each other plan included in such Aggregation Group.
A.7    “Employee” means the Employer as defined in Section 2.1(q) of the Plan.
A.8    “Former Key Employee” means an Employee or former Employee who is a Non-Key Employee with respect to the
Plan for the Plan Year if such individual was a Key Employee with respect to the Plan for any prior Plan Year.
APP-2-2

A.9    “Key Employee” means any Employee or former Employee (including any deceased Employee) who at any time
during the Plan Year that includes the Determination Date was an officer of the Employer having annual Compensation greater than
the dollar amount specified in section 416(i)(1) of the Code as in effect for the Plan Year ($175,000 for 2017), adjusted for cost-of-
living, a five-percent owner of the Employer, or a one-percent owner of the Employer having annual Compensation of more than
$150,000. For this purpose, annual Compensation means Compensation within the meaning of section 415(c)(3) of the Code. The
determination  of  who  is  a  Key  Employee  will  be  made  in  accordance  with  section  416(i)(1)  of  the  Code  and  the  applicable
regulations and other guidance of general applicability issued thereunder.
A.10    “Non-Key Employee” means any Participant in the Plan (including a surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant of
such Participant) who is not a Key Employee with respect to the Plan for the Plan Year.
A.11    “Permissive Aggregation Group” means:
A.11.1    each plan of the Employer included in a Required Aggregation Group; and
A.11.2    each other plan of the Employer if the group of plans consisting of such plan or plans included in the
Required Aggregation Group, when considered as a single plan, meets the requirements of section 401(a)(4) and section 410
of the Code.
A.12    “Required Aggregation Group” means:
A.12.1    each plan of the Employer in which a Key Employee participated (regardless of whether such plan has been
terminated) during the Plan Year ending on the Determination Date; and
A.12.2     each  other  plan  of  the  Employer  which  enables  any  plan  described  in  Section  A.12.1  to  meet  the
requirements of section 401(a)(4) or section 410 of the Code, including any such plan terminated within the one-year period
ending on the Determination Date.
A.13    “Top-Heavy Group” means an Aggregation Group in which, as of the Determination Date, the sum of:
A.13.1    the aggregate of the Account Balances of Key Employees under all Defined Contribution Plans included in
such Aggregation Group, and
A.13.2    the aggregate of the present value of cumulative accrued benefits for Key Employees under all Defined
Benefit Plans included in such Aggregation Group,
APP-2-3

exceeds 60% of the sum of such aggregates determined for all Employees included in the Aggregation Group.
A.14    “Top-Heavy Plan” means the Plan, if as of the Determination Date:
A.14.1    the aggregate of the Account Balances of Key Employees exceeds 60% of the aggregate of the Account
Balances of all Employees; or
A.14.2    the Plan is part of a Required Aggregation Group which is a Top-Heavy Group.
Notwithstanding Section A.14.1 and Section A.14.2, the Plan shall not be considered a Top-Heavy Plan for any Plan Year in
which the Plan is a part of a Required Aggregation Group or a Permissive Aggregation Group which is not a Top-Heavy Group.
A.15    “Top-Heavy Valuation Date” means the Determination Date.
B.    Top-Heavy Plan Provisions.
Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to the contrary, if the Plan is a Top-Heavy Plan within the meaning of Section A.14 and
section 416(g) of the Code for any Plan Year beginning after December 31, 1983, then the Plan shall meet the requirements of
Section B.1, Section B.2 and Section B.3 for each such Plan Year.
B.1    Minimum Vesting Requirement. The vested interest of a Participant who is credited with an Hour of Service after the
Plan  becomes  a  Top-Heavy  Plan  will  be  determined  under  a  schedule  which  is  not  less  favorable  to  the  Participant  than  the
following:
Years of Service
As Defined in
Section 2.1(nn)(ii)
Vested Interest
Less than one
0%
One but less than two
20%
Two but less than three
40%
Three but less than four
60%
Four but less than five
80%
Five or more
100%
B.2    Minimum Benefit or Contribution Requirement.
APP-2-4

B.2.1.    This Plan shall provide a minimum annual retirement benefit for each such Plan Year for each Participant
who  is  a  Non-Key  Employee  in  an  amount  equal  to  2%  of  such  Participant’s  average  Compensation  for  the  period  of
consecutive  years  (not  exceeding  five)  during  which  the  Participant  had  the  greatest  aggregate  Compensation  from  the
Employer, multiplied by the Participant’s Years of Service, not to exceed 10.
B.2.2    The minimum benefit or contribution shall be made for each Non-Key Employee who is employed at the end
of the Plan Year in question, regardless of whether such Non-Key Employee has been credited with 1,000 Hours of Service
in such Plan Year and regardless of such Non-Key Employee’s level of Compensation.
B.3    Change in Top-Heavy Status. If the Plan becomes a Top-Heavy Plan and subsequently ceases to be a Top-Heavy Plan,
the vesting schedule in Section B.1 shall continue to apply in determining  the vested percentage  of the Accrued Benefit of any
Participant who had at least five Years of Service as of the last day of the last Plan Year in which the Plan was a Top-Heavy Plan.
For all other Participants, the vesting schedule in Section B.1 shall apply only to their Accrued Benefit as of such last day.
B.4    Determination of Present Values and Amounts. Effective for Plan Years beginning after December 31, 2001, this
Paragraph shall apply for purposes of determining the present values of Accrued Benefits and the amounts of Account Balances of
Employees as of the Determination Date.
B.4.1    The present values of Accrued Benefits and the amounts of Account Balances of an Employee as of the
Determination Date shall be increased by the distributions made with respect to the Employee under the Plan and any plan
aggregated with the Plan under section 416(g)(2) of the Code during the one-year period ending on the Determination Date.
The preceding sentence shall also apply to distributions under a terminated plan which, had it not been terminated, would
have been aggregated with the Plan under section 416(g)(2)(A)(i) of the Code. In the case of a distribution made for a reason
other than severance from employment, death, or disability, this provision shall be applied by substituting “five-year period”
for “one-year period.”
B.4.2     The  Accrued  Benefits  and  Account  Balances  of  any  individual  who  has  not  performed  services  for  the
Employer during the one-year period ending on the Determination Date shall not be taken into account.
B.5     Minimum Benefits.  Effective  for  Plan  Years  beginning  after  December  31,  2001,  for  purposes  of  satisfying  the
minimum benefit requirements of section 416(c)(1) of the Code and the Plan, in determining Years of Service with the Employer,
any service with the Employer shall be
APP-2-5

disregarded to the extent that such service occurs during a Plan Year when the Plan benefits (within the meaning of section 410(b) of
the Code) no Key Employee or former Key Employee.
C.    Limitations on Benefits - Code Section 415 Limit.
C.1    Effective for Limitation Years ending after December 31, 2001, in no case shall the annual benefit with respect to any
Participant payable under the Plan and all other Defined Benefit Plans, when expressed in the form of an annual single life annuity
(with no ancillary benefits), exceed the “maximum permissible benefit” which shall be the lesser of the amount determined under
Paragraph C.1.1 or C.1.2 (both adjusted where required, as provided in Paragraph C.1.3, and, if applicable, in Paragraph C.1.4 or
Paragraph C.1.5):
C.1.1     the  dollar  limitation  specified  in  section  415(b)(1)(A)  of  the  Code,  as  in  effect  for  the  Limitation  Year
($215,000 for 2017), as adjusted, effective January 1 of each year under section 415(d) of the Code in such manner as the
Secretary of the Treasury shall prescribe (the “Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation”)); or
C.1.2    the greater of $10,000 or 100% of the Participant’s average annual Compensation received during the three
consecutive years of Continuous Service (years of participation in the Plan for Limitation Years beginning before January 1,
2006)  with  the  Employer  and  all  50%  related  employers  during  which  he  receives  the  greatest  aggregate  annual
Compensation.  The  $10,000  restriction  shall  not  apply  if  the  Participant  participates  in  any  defined  contribution  plan
maintained by the Employer, a 50% related employer or a predecessor employer. For purposes of determining the $10,000
amount, the benefit payable to the Participant under the Plan for a Limitation Year reflects all amounts payable under the
Plan for the Limitation Year (except as otherwise provided in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(d)-1) and are not adjusted for faun of
benefit or commencement date.
C.1.3    If the Participant has fewer than 10 years of participation in the Plan, the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation
shall be multiplied by a fraction, (i) the numerator of which is the number of years (or part thereof) of participation in the
Plan and (ii) the denominator of which is 10. In the case of a Participant who has fewer than 10 Years of Service with the
Employer, the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation shall be multiplied by a fraction (i) the numerator of which is the number of
years (or part thereof) of service with the Employer and (ii) the denominator of which is 10.
C.1.4    If the benefit of a Participant begins prior to age 62, the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation applicable to the
Participant at such earlier age is an annual benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity beginning at the earlier age
that is the Actuarial Equivalent of the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation applicable to the Participant at age 62 (adjusted
under Paragraph C.1.3 above, if required). The Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation applicable
APP-2-6

at an age prior to age 62 is determined as the lesser of (i) the Actuarial Equivalent (at such age) of the Defined Benefit Dollar
Limitation computed using the interest rate provided under Section 2.1(b), or (ii) the Actuarial Equivalent (at such age) of the
Defined  Benefit  Dollar  Limitation  computed  using  a  5  percent  interest  rate.  Any  decrease  in  the  Defined  Benefit  Dollar
Limitation determined in accordance with this Paragraph C.1.4 shall not reflect a mortality decrement if benefits are not
forfeited upon the death of the Participant. If any benefits are forfeited upon death, the full mortality decrement is taken into
account.
Effective for Limitation Years beginning on and after July 1, 2007, the defined benefit dollar limitation applicable at an age
prior to age 62 is determined as the lesser of (1) the actuarial equivalent at such age of the defined benefit dollar limitation computed
using a 5% interest rate and the applicable mortality table under section 417(e)(3) of the Code, or (2) the amount determined by
multiplying the defined benefit dollar limitation by the ratio of the annual amount of the single life annuity beginning at such earlier
age (computed using the interest rate and mortality table as applicable under Section 2.1(b)) to the annual amount of the single life
annuity under the Plan commencing at age 62 (with both such amounts determined without application of the rules of section 415 of
the Code).
C.1.5     If  the  benefit  of  a  Participant  begins  after  the  Participant  attains  age  65,  the  Defined  Benefit  Dollar  Limitation
applicable to the Participant at the later age is the annual benefit payable in the form of a straight life annuity beginning at the later
age that is Actuarially Equivalent to the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation applicable to the Participant at age 65 (adjusted under
Paragraph C.1.3 above, if required). The Actuarial Equivalent of the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation applicable at an age after age
65 is determined as the lesser of (i) the Actuarial Equivalent (at such age) of the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation computed using
the interest rate provided under Section 2.1(b), or (ii) the Actuarial Equivalent (at such age) of the Defined Benefit Dollar Limitation
computed using a 5 percent interest rate. For these purposes, mortality between age 65 and the age at which benefits commence shall
be ignored.
Effective  for  Limitation  Years  beginning  on  and  after  July  1,  2007,  for  benefits  commencing  after  age  65,  the  dollar
limitation  shall  be  determined  as  the  lesser  of  (1)  the  actuarial  equivalent  at  such  age  of  the  defined  benefit  dollar  limitation
computed using an interest rate of 5% and the applicable mortality table described under section 417(e)(3) of the Code, or (2) the
amount  determined  by  multiplying  the  defined  benefit  dollar  limitation  by  the  ratio  of  (A)  the  annual  amount  of the  single  life
annuity beginning at such later age (computed using the interest rate and mortality assumptions for delayed retirement benefits under
the Plan, if applicable) to (B) the annual amount of the single life annuity under the Plan commencing at age 65 (computed without
using  the  interest  rate  and  mortality  assumptions  for  delayed  retirement  benefits  under  the  Plan,  if  applicable)  (with  both  such
amounts in (A) and (B) determined without application of the rules of section 415 of the Code). The amount of the annual benefit
commencing at such later age is the annual amount of the
APP-2-7

benefit (determined without regard to section 415 of the Code) computed by disregarding the Participant’s accruals after age 65, but
including actuarial adjustments even if such adjustments are applied to offset benefit accrual.
C.1.6    Benefit increases resulting from the increase in the limitations of section 415(b) of the Code shall be provided to all
Participants with benefits limited by section 415(b) of the Code who, (i) as of January 1, 2002 have commenced receipt of their
benefit under the Plan; or (ii) are credited with at least one Hour of Service on or after January 1, 2002.
C.1.7    If a Participant’s benefit is payable in any form other than a straight life annuity, the determination as to whether the
limitation of this Paragraph C.1 has been satisfied shall be made by adjusting such benefit to the form of a straight life annuity using
an  interest  rate  equal  to  the  greater  of  5%  or  the  interest  rate  provided  under  Section  2.1(b).  However,  for  purposes  of  such
adjustment, any ancillary benefit that is not directly related to retirement income benefits and that portion of any joint and survivor
annuity that constitutes a Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity shall not be taken into account. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for
purposes of adjusting any form of benefit subject to the requirements of section 417(e)(3) of the Code, the interest rate used shall not
be less than the greater of (i) the applicable interest rate under section 417(e)(3) of the Code for the October immediately preceding
the calendar year during which the Annuity Starting Date occurs, provided that the lump sum present value for distributions made on
or before October 1, 2007, shall not be less than the lump sum present value based on the applicable interest rate under section
417(e)(3) of the Code for the third calendar month preceding the calendar month in which the Annuity Starting Date occurs, or (ii)
the interest rate specified in Section 2.1(b).
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, for purposes of adjusting any form of benefit subject to section 417(e)(3) of
the Code for Plan Years beginning in 2004 or 2005, the interest rate used shall not be less than the greater of (i) 5.5%, or (ii) the
interest rate specified in Section 2.1(b).
Notwithstanding the foregoing, effective for Limitation Years beginning on and after July 1, 2007, for purposes of applying
the limitations under this Article C, if a Participant’s benefits are payable in a form of benefit other than a single life annuity or a
qualified joint and survivor annuity, the benefit shall be limited as follows. The benefit shall be converted to a single life annuity
using the interest rate and mortality assumptions specified in the Plan for the Actuarial Equivalent of the particular form of benefit
payable. The single life annuity, which has been so determined, shall be compared to the single life annuity computed using a 5%
interest rate assumption (or for any form of benefit subject to section 417(e)(3) of the Code, the applicable interest rate as defined in
section 417(e)(3) of the Code) and the IRS mortality table prescribed in section 415(b)(2)(E)(v) of the Code). The greater of these
two amounts shall be the applicable limit for the benefit payable in a form other than a single life annuity or a qualified joint and
survivor annuity.
APP-2-8

Effective as of January 1, 2006, if a Participant’s benefit is payable in a form subject to section 417(e)(3) of the Code, such
benefit shall be adjusted, for purposes of applying the limitations under this Article C, so that it is the greater of (1) a straight life
annuity  determined  using  the  interest  rate  and  mortality  table  as  applicable  under  Section  2.1(b),  (2)  a  straight  life  annuity
determined using an interest rate of 5.5% and the applicable mortality table described under section 417(e)(3) of the Code, or (3) a
straight life annuity determined using the interest rate that produces a benefit of not more than 105% of the benefit that would be
produced using the applicable interest rate and applicable mortality table described under section 417(e)(3) of the Code.
C.2     Applicable  Mortality  Table  for  Distributions  With  Annuity  Starting  Dates  on  or  after  December  31,  2002.
Notwithstanding any other Plan provisions to the contrary, the applicable mortality table used for purposes of adjusting any benefit
or limitation under section 415(b)(2)(B), (C), or (D) of the Code as set forth in this Article C (unless another mortality table is either
required under section 415(b) of the Code or otherwise referenced in this Article C) is the table prescribed in Rev. Rul. 2007-67 for
Plan Years beginning after December 31, 2007 (Rev. Rul. 2001-62 for Plan Years beginning before January 1, 2008), or such other
table as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe.
C.3    Definition of Compensation. For purposes of this Article C, Compensation shall include all amounts that are treated as
wages for Federal income tax withholding under section 3401(a) of the Code (determined without regard to any rules that limit the
remuneration included in wages based on the nature or location of the employment or the services performed) and actually paid to
the Participant during the Limitation Year, plus amounts that would be paid to the Employee during the year but for the Employee’s
election under a cash or deferred arrangement described in section 401(k) of the Code, a cafeteria plan described in section 125 of
the Code, a qualified transportation fringe benefit program described in section 132(f)(4) of the Code, a simplified employee pension
described in section 402(h) of the Code or an annuity program described in section 403(b) of the Code.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, for Limitation Years beginning on and after July 1, 2007, Compensation includes regular pay
as described in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(c)-(2)(e)(3) if paid by the end of the Limitation Year that includes the Employee’s termination of
employment, or if later, 2½ months after the Employee’s termination of employment Any payments not described in the foregoing
sentence shall not be considered Compensation if paid after separation from service, even if they are paid by the later of 2½ months
after the date of separation from service or the end of the Limitation Year that includes the date of severance from employment.
C.4    Application of the provisions of this Section C of this Appendix 2 in effect for Limitation Years beginning on and after
July 1, 2007, shall not cause the maximum permissible benefit for any Participant to be less than the Participant’s accrued benefit
under all the defined
APP-2-9

benefit plans of the Employer or a predecessor employer as of the end of the last Limitation Year beginning before July 1, 2007
under  provisions  of  the  plans  that  were  both  adopted  and  in  effect  before  April  5,  2007  determined  in  accordance  with  the
requirements of section 415 of the Code in effect on that date.
C.5    Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Plan hereby incorporates by reference section 415 of the Code and the regulations
promulgated thereunder.
APP-2-10

APPENDIX 3 
SPECIAL SERVICE CREDITING RULES
A.    General Rules.
A.1    Vesting and Benefit Accrual. The following special service crediting rules shall be applied in determining the earliest
commencement date for service credit, for benefit accrual and vesting for employees of the following named subsidiaries which
have,  either  by  designation  in  accordance  with  Section  2.1(k)  or  by  merger  into  a  Designated  Subsidiary  become  Designated
Subsidiaries.
A.2    Eligibility for Early Retirement. For purposes of computing eligibility for Early Retirement in accordance with Section
4.2,  Years  of  Service  with  a  Subsidiary  which  has,  after  December  31,  1971,  become  a  Designated  Subsidiary,  whether  by
designation in accordance with Section 2.1(k) or by merger into a Designated Subsidiary, shall be taken into account, but only after
the Participant  in question  has completed  5 Years of Service after the first date upon which he was employed  by a Designated
Subsidiary.
A.3    Early Retirement Reduction Factors. Unless otherwise specified below, Years of Service for determining the applicable
Early Retirement Reduction Factor under Table 1 shall be determined in the same manner as Years of Service for benefit accrual.
A.4    Break-in-Service Rules. These rules are subject to the Break-in-Service rules of Sections 9.1 through 9.4 and are not to
be  construed  to  require  the  crediting  of  Years  of  Service  for  any  purpose  if  those  Years  of  Service  are  disregarded  under  the
provisions of those Sections or under the applicable provisions in effect when the Participant in question sustained his first Break-in-
Service.
B.    Special Rules.
B.1    California-American Water Co. Service for all Employees who first became Employees by reason of the acquisition of
California-American Water Co. shall begin no earlier than December 28, 1970 for purposes of vesting and benefit accrual. However,
in determining eligibility for Early Retirement and in applying the Early Retirement Reduction Factors of Table 1, Years of Service
with California-American Water Company before December 28, 1970 shall be taken into account. See Table 5 for Special Option
Factors.
B.2     Hershey  Water  Company.  Service  for  all  purposes  for  Dale  Grinder  and  Ralph  Light,  who  are  entitled  to  a
nonforfeitable benefit under a pension plan maintained by HERCO, Inc. and its subsidiaries, shall begin April 19, 1977. For all other
Employees who became Employees by
APP-3-1

reason of the acquisition of Hershey Water Company, service for all purposes shall begin on their date of hire by HERCO, Inc.,
nearest April 19, 1977, the date of acquisition of Hershey Water Company.
B.3    Norristown Water Company. Service for all purposes shall begin on such Employee’s date of hire nearest January 11,
1962, the date Norristown Water Company was acquired.
B.4    Paradise Valley Water Co. Service for all purposes shall begin on such Employee’s date of hire nearest December 3,
1969, the date Paradise Valley Water Co. was acquired.
B.5    Village Water Company. Service for all purposes for Donald M. Ross shall begin on July 10, 1967. Service for all
purposes for all others shall begin December 28, 1970.
B.6    West Virginia Water Company. Service for all Employees who first became Employees by reason of the acquisition of
West Virginia Water Company shall begin, for purposes of vesting and benefit accrual, no earlier than December 1, 1970. However,
in determining eligibility for Early Retirement, and in applying the Early Retirement reduction factors of Table 1, Years of Service
with West Virginia Water Company shall be taken into account. See Table 5 for Special Option Factors.
B.7    Yardley Water Company. Service for all purposes for Employees who became Employees by reason of the acquisition
of Yardley Water Company shall begin on December 1, 1970.
B.8    Pekin Water Works Company. Service for all purposes for D. Brown, R.O. Ivey and H. J. Schiszio shall begin on
January 1, 1982. Service for all purposes for A. L. Calvin, Sr., J.W. Lockhart and K. L. Price will begin on their date of hire by
Pekin Water Works Company nearest the date Pekin Water Works Company was acquired. Their accrued benefits under the Pekin
Water  Works  Company  Pension  Trust  shall  be  frozen  as  of  May  1,  1982,  and  the  retirement  income  benefits  earned  by  those
Employees  under  this  Plan  reduced  by  the  amount  of  that  frozen  benefit.  Service  for  all  purposes  for  Employees  covered  by  a
collective bargaining agreement entered into by Pekin Water Works Company and in effect on January 1, 1982 will commence on
April 1, 1982.
B.9    Seymour Water Co. Service for benefit accrual for Employees who became Employees by reason of the acquisition of
Seymour Water Co. will commence on March 16, 1982. For vesting purposes, such Employees will be given credit for service with
Seymour Water Co. from their date of hire nearest March 16, 1982. See Table 5 for Special Option Factors.
B.10    New Mexico-American Water Company. Service for all Employees who first became Employees pursuant to the
terms  of  the  Asset  Acquisition  Agreement  between  Clovis  Water  Company  and  New  Mexico-American  Water  Company  shall
include Years of Service with
APP-3-2

Southwestern Public Service Company for purposes of determining eligibility to participate, vesting, benefit accrual, eligibility for
Early Retirement under Section 4.2, including, for purposes of satisfying the minimum service requirement thereof, eligibility for
Disability Retirement under Section 4.3 and eligibility for Surviving Spouse Benefits under Section 6.1(b), and in applying the Early
Retirement Reduction Factors of Table 1.
B.11    Indiana-American Water Company, Inc. Service for benefit accrual for employees previously covered by the Indiana-
American Water Company, Inc. - Plumbers and Steam-Fitters Local 157 Pension Plan (Terre Haute Bargaining Unit) (the “Terre
Haute  Pension  Plan”),  shall  begin  on  May  11,  1987.  For  purposes  of  vesting  under  Section  8.1  and  disability  retirement  under
Section 4.3, service for all such employees shall include service taken into account under the Terre Haute Pension Plan. Service for
all such employees for purposes of eligibility for early retirement shall include all service credited under the Terre Haute Pension
Plan for purposes of determining whether any such employee’s age and Years of Service total at least 70, provided that no such
employee shall be entitled to early retirement under the Plan before May 11, 1992.
B.12    Brownsville Water Company. Service for all purposes under the Plan other than for benefit accrual shall begin on
such Employee’s date of hire by Brownsville Water Company nearest the date that that company was acquired, which was July 1,
1990. Service for benefit accrual under the Plan for such Employee shall begin July 1, 1990.
B.13     California Water Company. Service for all purposes under the Plan other than for benefit accrual shall begin on such
Employee’s date of hire by California Water Company nearest the date that that company was acquired, which was July 1, 1990.
Service for benefit accrual under the Plan for such Employee shall begin July 1, 1990.
B.14    Certain Transferred Employees. For purposes of computing the monthly normal or late retirement income under
Section 5.2 of any Employee of California-American Water Company, West Virginia Water Company, Yardley Water Company,
New  Mexico-American  Water  Company  or  any  other  Subsidiary,  who  had  been  employed  by  the  Company  or  a  Designated
Subsidiary and who was transferred to a Subsidiary that, at the time of such transfer was not, but subsequently became, a Designated
Subsidiary,  that  Employee’s  service  with  such  Subsidiary  during  the  period  before  it  became  a  Designated  Subsidiary  shall  be
credited to the same extent as if it had been performed for the Company or a Designated Subsidiary. In addition, during that interval,
such  Employee  shall  be  considered  a  Participant  for  purposes  of  eligibility  for  Early  Retirement  under  Sections  4.2  and  5.4,
eligibility for Disability Retirement under Sections 4.3 and 5.5, and eligibility for Survivor Benefits under Sections 6.1 and 6.3.
B.15    Northern Michigan Water Company. Service for benefit accrual for Employees  who first became Employees  by
reason of the acquisition of Northern Michigan Water Company will
APP-3-3

commence on August 31, 1993, the Closing Date under the Stock Purchase Agreement dated as of January 30, 1993. For eligibility
to participate, vesting and eligibility for early retirement under the Plan, service with Northern Michigan Water Company shall be
counted.
B.16    Ohio Suburban Water Company. Service for benefit accrual for Employees who first became Employees by reason of
the acquisition of Ohio Suburban Water Company will commence on August 31, 1993, the Closing Date under the Stock Purchase
Agreement dated as of January 30, 1993. For eligibility to participate, vesting and eligibility for early retirement under the Plan,
service with Ohio Suburban Water Company shall be counted.
B.17    Missouri Cities Water Company. Service for benefit accrual for Employees who first became Employees by reason of
the acquisition of Missouri Cities Water Company will commence on August 31, 1993, the Closing Date under the Stock Purchase
Agreement dated as of January 30, 1993. For eligibility to participate, vesting and eligibility for early retirement under the Plan,
service with Missouri Cities Water Company shall be counted.
B.18    Indiana Cities Water Corporation. Service for benefit accrual for Employees who first became Employees by reason
of  the  acquisition  of  Indiana  Cities  Water  Corporation  will  commence  on  August  31,  1993,  the  Closing  Date  under  the  Stock
Purchase Agreement dated as of January 30, 1993. For eligibility to participate, vesting and eligibility for early retirement under the
Plan, service with Indiana Cities Water Corporation shall be counted.
B.19    Country Place Water Co., Inc. and Country Place Water Treatment Co., Inc. (Monroe County), PA. Service for all
purposes under the Plan for non-union Employees who first became Employees by reason of the acquisition of Country Place Water
Co., Inc. or Country Place Water Treatment Co., Inc. will commence on June 30, 1995.
B.20    Pennsylvania Gas and Water Company. Service for all purposes under the Plan other than for benefit accrual shall
begin on such Employee’s date of hire by Pennsylvania Gas and Water Company nearest February 16, 1996, the closing date under
the Asset Purchase  Agreement  by and among  Pennsylvania  Enterprises,  Inc.,  Pennsylvania  Gas and Water Company,  American
Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  and  Pennsylvania-American  Water  Company.  Service  for  benefit  accrual  under  the  Plan  for  such
Employee shall begin February 16, 1996.
B.21    Hawaii American Water. Service for benefit accrual for Employees who first became Employees by reason of the
acquisition of Hawaii American Water will commence on July 1, 1998. For eligibility to participate, vesting and eligibility for early
retirement under the Plan, service with Hawaii American Water shall be counted.
B.22    United Water Resources, Inc.
APP-3-4

(a)    Service for benefit accrual for employees previously covered under the United Water Resources, Inc. Retirement Plan
(the “United Plan”), shall begin on the following dates:
            Location
           Date
United Water of Indiana
February 1, 2000
United Water of West Lafayette
February 1, 2000
United Water of Virginia
February 29, 2000
United Water of Missouri
May 1, 2000
United Water of Illinois
May 31, 2000
For eligibility to participate and vesting under the Plan, service with United Water Resources, Inc. shall be counted.
(b)    Service for all purposes for Employees previously covered under the United Waterworks Inc. Employees’ Retirement
Plan (the “United Waterworks Plan”) whose terms and conditions of employment are covered by a union contract shall include all
service taken into account under the United Waterworks Plan. Accrued Benefits under the Plan shall be determined on the basis of
the United Waterworks Plan formula in effect on the date(s) specified in (a) above, as applicable.
B.23    City of Coatesville Authority. Service for benefit accrual purposes for Employees who first became Employees by
reason of the Asset Purchase Agreement by and between the City of Coatesville Authority and American Water Works Company,
Inc.  will  commence  on  March  23,  2001,  the  Closing  Date  under  the  Asset  Purchase  Agreement  dated  February  15,  2000  and
amended on October 5, 2000. For eligibility to participate, vesting and eligibility for early retirement under the Plan, service with the
City of Coatesville Authority shall be counted.
B.24    City of Florissant, MO. Service for benefit accrual for non-union Employees who first became Employees by reason
of  the  acquisition  of  City  of  Florissant,  MO  will  commence  on  November  1,  2001.  For  eligibility  to  participate,  vesting  and
eligibility for early retirement under the Plan, service with City of Florissant, MO shall be counted.
B.25    Texas American Water Company. Service for all purposes under the Plan for Employees who first became Employees
by reason of the acquisition of Texas American Water Company on November 1, 2001, will commence on July 1, 2002.
B.26    Citizens Utilities Companies. Service for benefit accrual purposes for Employees who first became Employees by
reason of the Asset Purchase Agreement by and among Citizens Utilities Company and Certain of Its Affiliates and American Water
Works Company, Inc. and Arizona-American Water Company will commence on January 15, 2002, the Closing Date under the
Asset Purchase Agreement dated October 15, 1999. For eligibility to participate, vesting and
APP-3-5

eligibility for early retirement under the Plan, service with Citizens Utilities Companies shall be counted.
B.27    City of Webster Groves, MO. Service for benefit accrual for Employees who first became Employees by reason of the
acquisition of City of Webster Groves, MO will commence on February 8, 2002. For eligibility to participate, vesting and eligibility
for early retirement under the Plan, service with City of Webster Groves, MO shall be counted.
B.28    LP Water & Sewer Company (Monroe and Pike Counties), PA. Service for benefit accrual for non-union Employees
who first became Employees by reason of the acquisition of LP Water & Sewer Company (Monroe and Pike Counties), PA will
commence on April 3, 2002. For eligibility to participate, vesting and eligibility for early retirement under the Plan, service with LP
Water & Sewer Company (Monroe and Pike Counties), PA shall be counted.
APP-3-6

APPENDIX 4 
SPECIAL SERVICE CREDITING RULES AND BENEFIT PROVISIONS 
RELATING TO NEI ACQUISITION
NON-UNION EMPLOYEES.
Effective  July  1,  2001,  eligible  non-union  employees  of  Northwest  Indiana  Water  Company,  Northern  Illinois  Water
Corporation, Long Island Water Corporation and St. Louis Water Company (collectively with their subsidiaries referred to as “NEI”)
began participation in the Plan. The following special rules apply only to the non-union employees of NEI who were hired prior to
July 1, 2001.
I.    NORTHWEST INDIANA WATER COMPANY
A.    “Service Crediting” means all service including service with Northwest Indiana Water Company for purposes of vesting
and for purposes of determining entitlement to Early Retirement.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective June 30, 2001, non-union employees shall cease to be credited with Years
of  Service  under  the  Employees’  Pension  Plan  of  Northwest  Indiana  Water  Company  (“Northwest  Indiana  Plan”)  and  will
commence  benefit  accrual  service  under  the  Pension  Plan  for  Employees  of  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  and  Its
Designated Subsidiaries.
B.    “Early Retirement Date” means the first of the month following a Participant’s 55th birthday and completion of 5 or
more Years of Service.
C.    “Early Retirement Income” means the monthly retirement income commencing on a Participant’s Early Retirement Date
in an amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement of
benefits by multiplying such benefit by the fraction from the following schedule:
APP-4-1

Lesser of:
Years Until Age 65, or
Years of Vesting Service less than 30
Applicable Fraction
10
15/30
9
16/30
8
17/30
7
18/30
6
19/30
5
20/30
4
22/30
3
24/30
2
26/30
1
28/30
0
30/30
plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
D.    “Normal Retirement Income”
Effective for any Participant retiring after June 30, 2001, except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, a
Participant’s monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be an amount equal to the sum of
the following:
(i)     1.667%  of  Final  Average  Earnings  at  retirement  multiplied  by  Years  of  Service  prior  to  July  1,  2001  as
determined under the provisions of the Northwest Indiana Plan, up to a maximum of 30 years, plus
(ii)    1.60% of Final Average Earnings at retirement multiplied by Years of Service after July 1, 2001 to Normal or
Late Retirement Date.
E.    “Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment”
APP-4-2

The benefit of any vested active Employee who terminates employment on or after July 1, 2001 and who is not yet eligible
for Early Retirement, shall be determined in accordance with Section 1.C above.
II.    LONG ISLAND WATER CORPORATION
A.    “Service Crediting” means all service including service with Long Island Water Corporation (which became part of
New York American Water Company, Inc. on October 4, 2012) for purposes of vesting and for purposes of determining entitlement
to Early Retirement.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective June 30, 2001, non-union employees shall cease to be credited with Years
of Service under the Long Island Water Corporation Employees Retirement Plan ("Long Island Plan") and will commence benefit
accrual service under the Pension Plan for Employees of American Water Works Company, Inc. and Its Designated Subsidiaries.
B.    “Early Retirement Income” means the monthly retirement income commencing on a Participant’s Early Retirement Date
in an amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(i) reduced 2% for each year (1/6% for each month)
subsequent to age 62, and reduced 4% for each year (1/3% for each month) prior to age 62, by which the Participant’s Early
Retirement Date precedes his Normal Retirement Date, in accordance with the following table:
Age at Early Retirement
Early Retirement Fraction
65
1.00
64
.98
63
.96
62
.94
61
.90
60
.86
59
.82
58
.78
57
.74
56
.70
55
.66
plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
APP-4-3

C.    “Supplemental Early Retirement Income”
In addition to the Early Retirement Income, a Supplemental Early Retirement Benefit, in the yearly amount of $1,200 ($100
per month) will be payable to the Participant, commencing on his Early Retirement Date and ceasing with the earlier of his death or
his attainment of age 65, provided that:
(i)    the Participant is an Employee on the date he elects an Early Retirement Date, and
(ii)    the sum of the Participant’s age and Years of Service equals 90 units.
The yearly amount of the Supplemental Early Retirement Benefit will be reduced by 5% for each unit by which the sum of
the Participant’s age and Years of Service is less than 90.
D.    “Normal Retirement Income”
Effective for any Participant retiring after June 30, 2001, except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, a
Participant’s monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be an amount equal to the sum of
the following:
(i)     1.75%  of  Final  Average  Earnings  at  retirement  multiplied  by  Years  of  Service  prior  to  July  1,  2001,  as
determined under the Long Island Plan, plus
(ii)    1.60% of Final Average Earnings at retirement multiplied by Years of Service after July 1, 2001 to Normal or
Late Retirement Date.
In no event shall a Participant’s Accrued Benefit be less than his Accrued Benefit earned under the terms of the Long Island Water
Corporation Pension Plan as of June 30, 2001.
E.    “Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment”
The benefit of any vested active Employee who terminates employment on or after July 1, 2001 and who is not yet eligible
for Early Retirement, shall be determined in accordance with Section II.B above.
III.    ST. LOUIS COUNTY WATER COMPANY
A.    “Service Crediting” means all service including service with St. Louis County Water Company for purposes of vesting
and for purposes of determining entitlement to Early Retirement.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective June 30, 2001, non-union employees shall cease to be credited with Years
of Service under The St. Louis County Water Company Pension
APP-4-4

Plan (“St Louis Plan”) and will commence benefit accrual service effective as of July 1, 2001 under the Pension Plan for Employees
of American Water Works Company, Inc. and Its Designated Subsidiaries.
B.    “Early Retirement Income” means the monthly retirement income commencing on a Participant’s Early Retirement Date
in an amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section C(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement of
benefits by multiplying such benefit by the applicable factor from Table 4(b); plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section C(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
C.    “Normal Retirement Income”
Effective for any Participant retiring after June 30, 2001, except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, a
Participant’s monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be an amount equal to the sum of
the following:
(i)     1.50%  of  Final  Average  Earnings  at  retirement  multiplied  by  Years  of  Service  prior  to  July  1,  2001,  as
determined under the St. Louis Plan, plus
(ii)    1.60% of Final Average Earnings at retirement multiplied by Years of Service after July 1, 2001 to Normal or
Late Retirement Date.
D.    “Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment”
The benefit of any vested active Employee who terminates employment on or after July 1, 2001 and who is not yet eligible
for Early Retirement, shall be determined in accordance with Section III.B above.
IV.    NORTHERN ILLINOIS WATER CORPORATION
A.    “Service Crediting” means all service including service with Northern Illinois Water Corporation for purposes of vesting
and for purposes of determining entitlement to Early Retirement.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective June 30, 2001, non-union employees shall cease to be credited with Years
of Service under the Northern Illinois Water Corporation Retirement Income Plan (“Northern Illinois Plan”) and will commence
benefit accrual service effective as of
APP-4-5

July 1, 2001 under the Pension Plan for Employees of American Water Works Company, Inc. and Its Designated Subsidiaries.
B.    “Early Retirement Date” means the first of the month following a Participant’s attainment of age 55.
C.    “Early Retirement Income” means the monthly retirement income commencing on a Participant’s Early Retirement Date
in an amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement of
benefits by multiplying such benefit by the factor from the following schedule:
Number of Years
Early Retirement Date
Precedes Normal
Retirement Date
Applicable Factor
1
.97
2
.94
3
.91
4
.88
5
.85
6
.82
7
.79
8
.76
9
.73
10
.70
plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
D.    “Normal Retirement Income”
Effective for any Participant retiring after June 30, 2001, except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, a
Participant’s monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be an amount equal to the sum of
the following:
APP-4-6

(i)     1.33%  of  Final  Average  Earnings  at  retirement  multiplied  by  Years  of  Service  prior  to  July  1,  2001,  as
determined under the Northern Illinois Plan, plus
(ii)    1.60% of Final Average Earnings at retirement multiplied by Years of Service after July 1, 2001 to Normal or
Late Retirement Date.
E.    “Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment”
The benefit of any vested active Employee who terminates employment on or after July 1, 2001 and who is not yet eligible
for Early Retirement, shall be determined in accordance with Section IV.C above.
UNION EMPLOYEES.
V.
INDIANA-AMERICAN  WATER  COMPANY,  INC.  (formerly  Northwest  Indiana  Water  Corporation)  -  UNION
EMPLOYEES AT THE NORTHWEST OPERATIONS FACILITY
Effective December 31, 2002, or as soon as administratively practicable thereafter, the Northwest Indiana Water Company
Retirement Plan (the “Indiana Plan”), consisting of two different groups of union employees, was merged with and into the Plan.
Effective January 1, 2003, all eligible union employees of Indiana-American Water Company, Inc. began participation in the Plan.
The  following  special  rules  apply  only  to  each  active  Employee  of  Indiana-American  Water  Company,  Inc.  who,  as  of
December 31, 2002, is both: (1) a member of the USWA, Local 13584 (including Local 13584-01) at the Company’s northwest
operations facility, and (2) a participant in the Indiana Plan (a “Local 13584 Participant”):
A.    Service Crediting. All service with the Company, including service with Northwest Indiana Water Corporation and
Indiana-American Water Company, Inc. shall be credited to a Local 13584 Participant for purposes of vesting and for purposes of
determining entitlement to Early Retirement.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective December 31, 2002, a Local 13584 Participant will cease to be credited
with years of service under the Indiana Plan. Thereafter, a Local 13584 Participant’s benefit accrual service shall consist of benefit
accrual  service  credited  under  the  terms  of  the  Indiana  Plan  through  December  31,  2002,  plus,  beginning  January  1,  2003,  any
additional benefit service credited under the terms of the Plan.
B.    Early Retirement Date. A Local 13584 Participant’s Early Retirement Date shall be the first of any month following the
date he attains at least age 55 (but before age 65) and is credited with 5 Years of Service for vesting purposes.
APP-4-7

C.    Early Retirement Income. The benefit payable to a Local 13584 Participant commencing on his Early Retirement Date
shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement of
benefits by multiplying such benefit by the factor from the following table:
Lesser of:
Years Until Age 65, or
Years of Service for Vesting
Purposes Less than 30
Applicable Fraction
10
15/30
9
16/30
8
17/30
7
18/30
6
19/30
5
20/30
4
22/30
3
24/30
2
26/30
1
28/30
0
30/30
plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
D.    Normal Retirement Income. Effective for any Local 13584 Participant retiring on and after January 1, 2003, except as
modified  by  the  provisions  of  Section  6.1(a)  of  the  Plan,  the  benefit  payable  to  a  Local  13584  Participant  commencing  on  his
Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    1.667% of Final Average Earnings at retirement multiplied by Years of Service prior to January 1, 2003, as
determined under the provisions of the Indiana Plan, up to a maximum of 30 years, plus;
APP-4-8

(ii)    1.60% multiplied by Years of Service credited to the Local 13584 Participant under the terms of the Plan on and
after January 1, 2003, multiplied by his Final Average Earnings as defined by the Plan.
In no event shall a Local 13584 Participant’s Accrued Benefit be less than his Accrued Benefit earned under the terms of the
Indiana Plan as of December 31, 2002.
E.    Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment. The benefit of any vested active Local 13584 Participant
who terminates employment on or after January 1, 2003, and who is not yet eligible for Early Retirement, shall be determined in
accordance with Section C above.
VI.
MISSOURI-AMERICAN WATER COMPANY (formerly St. Louis County Water Company) - UNION EMPLOYEES
Effective June 30, 2003, the St. Louis County Water Company Pension Plan (the “St. Louis Plan”), consisting entirely of
union Employees, was merged with and into the Plan. These union Employees continued to participate under the terms of the St.
Louis  Plan  until  January  1,  2004,  at  which  time  all  eligible  union  employees  of  Missouri-American  Water  Company  began
participation in the Plan.
The following special rules apply only to each active Employee of Missouri-American Water Company who, as of December
31,  2003,  is  both:  (1)  a  member  of  the  Utility  Workers  Union  of  America  Affiliated  with  the  AFL-CIO,  Local  335,  and  (2)  a
participant in the St. Louis Plan (a “Local 335 Participant”):
A.    Service Crediting.  All  service  with  the  Company,  including  service  with  St.  Louis  Water  Company  and  Missouri-
American Water Company, shall be credited to a Local 335 Participant for purposes of vesting and determining eligibility for early
retirement, preretirement death benefits and disability benefits.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective December 31, 2003, a Local 335 Participant will cease to be credited with
years of service under the St. Louis Plan. Thereafter, a Local 335 Participant’s benefit accrual service shall consist of benefit accrual
service credited under the terms of the St. Louis Plan through December 31, 2003, plus, beginning January 1, 2004, any additional
benefit service credited under the terms of the Plan.
B.    Early Retirement Income. The benefit payable to a Local 335 Participant commencing on his Early Retirement Date
shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
APP-4-9

(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section C(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement of
benefits by multiplying such benefit by the factor from the following table:
Age
Applicable Factor
64
.970
63
.941
62
.913
61
.885
60
.859
59
.833
58
.808
57
.784
56
.760
55
.737
plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section C(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
C.    Normal Retirement Income. Effective for any Local 335 Participant retiring on and after January 1, 2004, except as
modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, the benefit payable to a Local 335 Participant payable on his Normal or
Late Retirement Date shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    1.50% multiplied by years of service credited to the Local 335 Participant under the terms of the St. Louis Plan
through December 31, 2003, multiplied by his Final Average Earnings as defined by the Plan;
plus
(ii)    1.60% multiplied by Years of Service credited to the Local 335 Participant under the terms of the Plan on and
after January 1, 2004, multiplied by his Final Average Earnings as defined by the Plan.
In no event shall a Local 335 Participant’s Accrued Benefit be less than his Accrued Benefit earned under the terms of the St.
Louis Plan as of December 31, 2003.
APP-4-10

D.    Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment. The benefit of any vested active Local 335 Participant who
terminates  employment  on  or  after  January  1,  2004,  and  who  is  not  yet  eligible  for  Early  Retirement,  shall  be  determined  in
accordance with Section B above.
VII.
LONG ISLAND WATER CORPORATION - UNION EMPLOYEES
Effective June 30, 2004, the Long Island Water Corporation Employees Retirement Plan (the "Long Island Plan"), consisting
entirely of union Employees, was merged with and into the Plan. Effective July 1, 2004, all eligible union Employees of Long Island
Water Company began participation in the Plan. Effective October 4, 2012, Long Island Water Corporation merged with New York
Water Services Corporation, Aqua New York, Inc. and Aqua New York of Sea Cliff, Inc. to form New York American Water
Company, Inc.
APP-4-11

A.    Special Rules for Union Employees Hired Prior to July 1, 2004. The following special rules apply only to each
active Employee of New York American Water Company, Inc. (formerly Long Island Water Corporation) who, as of June
30, 2004 was both: (1) a member of the Utility Workers Union of America Local 365 at the Company's Long Island, New
York facility, and (2) participating in the Long Island Plan (a "Local 365 Participant"):
(i)    Service Crediting. All service with the Company, including service with Long Island Water Corporation
and  New  York  American  Water  Company,  Inc.,  shall  be  credited  to  a  Local  365  Participant  for  purposes  of  vesting,
determining eligibility for early retirement, preretirement death benefits and disability benefits.
For  purposes  of  benefit  accrual  service,  effective  June  30,  2004,  a  Local  365  Participant  will  cease  to  be
credited with years of service under the Long Island Plan. Thereafter, a Local 365 Participant's benefit accrual service shall
consist of benefit accrual service credited under the terms of the Long Island Plan through June 30, 2004, plus, beginning
July 1, 2004, any additional benefit service credited under the terms of the Plan.
(ii)    Early Retirement Income. The benefit payable to a Local 365 Participant on his Early Retirement Date
shall be his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section C multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined by his
attained age and Years of Service at his Early Retirement Date, as set forth in the Schedule of Early Retirement Factors
attached to this Plan as Table 1.
(iii)    Normal Retirement Income. Effective for any Local 365 Participant retiring on or after July 1, 2004,
except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, the benefit payable to a Local 365 Participant on his
Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of the following:
(a)    1.75% multiplied by years of service credited to the Local 365 Participant under the terms of the
Long Island Plan through June 30, 2004, multiplied by his Final Average Earnings, as defined by the Plan, as of the earlier of
July 31, 2010 or his actual termination of employment; plus
(b)    1.60% multiplied by Years of Service credited to the Local 365 Participant under the terms of the
Plan on and after July 1, 2004 but before January 1, 2008, multiplied by his Final Average Earnings, as defined by the Plan,
as of the earlier of July 31, 2010 or his actual termination of employment; plus
(c)    the greater of:
APP-4-12

(1)    1.60% multiplied by Years of Service credited to the Local 365 Participant under the terms of the
Plan on and after August 1, 2010 through his* date of retirement or other termination employment, multiplied by his Final
Average Earnings, as defined by the Plan, as of his actual termination of employment; or
(2)    1.60% multiplied by Earnings, as defined by the Plan, for each Year of Service credited under the
terms of the Plan on and after August 1, 2010 but before January 1, 2013.
In no event shall a Local 365 Participant's Accrued Benefit be less than his Accrued Benefit earned under the terms of
the Long Island Plan as of June 30, 2004.
(iv)    Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment. The benefit of any vested active Local 365
Participant who terminates employment on or after July 1, 2004 and who is not yet eligible for Early Retirement, shall be
determined in accordance with Section B above.
B.     Normal  Retirement  Income  -  Special  Rules  for  Union  Employees  Hired  On  and  After  July  1,  2004.  The
following  special  rules apply only to an Employee  of New York American  Water Company,  Inc. (formerly  Long Island
Water Corporation) who was hired on or after July 1, 2004, and is a member of the Utility Workers Union of America Local
365 at the Company's Long Island, New York facility ("New Local 365 Participant"). A New Local 365 Participant shall,
upon meeting the eligibility requirements of Section 3.1 of the Plan, commence participation under the terms of the Plan
except as otherwise provided in this Section E.
Effective for any New Local 365 Participant hired before January 1, 2006, except as modified by the provisions of Section
6.1(a) of the Plan, a New Local 365 Participant's monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or Late Retirement Date
shall be an amount equal to the sum of the following:
(i)    1.60% multiplied by Years of Service credited to the New Local 365 Participant on and after July 1, 2004
but before January 1, 2006, multiplied by his of Final Average Earnings as of the earlier of December 31, 2005 or his actual
termination of employment; plus
(ii)    the greater of:
(a)    1.60% multiplied by Years of Service credited to the New Local 365 Participant under the terms
of the Plan on and after January 1, 2006 through his date of
APP-4-13

retirement or other termination employment,  multiplied by his Final Average Earnings, as defined by the Plan, as of his
actual termination of employment; or
(b)    1.60% multiplied by Earnings for each Year of Service credited to the New Local 365 Participant
on and after January 1, 2006 but before January 1, 2013.
VIII.
ILLINOIS-AMERICAN WATER COMPANY (formerly Northern Illinois Water Corporation) - UNION EMPLOYEES AT
CHAMPAIGN, ILLINOIS
Effective  June 30, 2004, the Northern Illinois Water Corporation  Retirement  Income Plan (the “Northern Illinois Plan”),
consisting of two different groups of union employees, was merged with and into the Plan. Effective July 1, 2004, all eligible union
employees of Illinois-American Water Company began participation in the Plan.
Employees of Illinois-American Water Company who are members of the IBEW Local 51 at the Company’s Sterling, Illinois
facility continue to participate under the terms of the former Northern Illinois Plan, as described in Article IX of this Appendix 4.
The following special rules apply only to each active Employee of Illinois-American Water Company who, as of June 30,
2004, is both: (1) a member of the Utility Workers Union of America, Local 500 at the Company’s Champaign, Illinois facility, and
(2) a participant in the Northern Illinois Plan (a “Local 500 Participant”):
A.     Service Crediting.  All  service  with  the  Company,  including  service  with  Northern  Illinois  Water  Corporation  and
Illinois-American  Water  Company,  shall  be  credited  to  a  Local  500  Participant  for  purposes  of  vesting  and  for  purposes  of
determining entitlement to Early Retirement.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective June 30, 2004, a Local 500 Participant will cease to be credited with years
of  service  under  the  Northern  Illinois  Plan.  Thereafter,  a Local  500  Participant’s  benefit  accrual  service  shall  consist  of benefit
accrual  service credited  under the terms of the Northern Illinois  Plan through June 30, 2004, plus, beginning  July 1, 2004, any
additional benefit service credited under the terms of the Plan.
B.    Early Retirement Date. A Local 500 Participant’s Early Retirement Date shall be the first of any month following his
attainment of age 55 but before age 65.
C.    Early Retirement Income. The benefit payable to a Local 500 Participant commencing on his Early Retirement Date
shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement of
benefits by multiplying such benefit by the factor from the following table:
APP-4-14

Number of Years
Early Retirement Date
Precedes Normal
Retirement Date
Applicable Factor
1
.97
2
.94
3
.91
4
.88
5
.85
6
.82
7
.79
8
.76
9
.73
10
.70
plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
D.     Normal  Retirement  Income.  Effective  for  any  Local  500  Participant  retiring  on  and  after  July  1,  2004,  except  as
modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, the benefit payable to a Local 500 Participant commencing on his Normal
or Late Retirement Date shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    1.33% multiplied by years of service credited to the Local 500 Participant  under the terms of the Northern
Illinois Plan through June 30, 2004, multiplied by his Final Average Earnings as defined by the Plan; plus
(ii)    1.60% multiplied by Years of Service credited to the Local 500 Participant under the terms of the Plan on and
after July 1, 2004, multiplied by his Final Average Earnings as defined by the Plan.
In no event shall a Local 500 Participant’s Accrued Benefit be less than his Accrued Benefit earned under the terms of the
Northern Illinois Plan as of June 30, 2004.
E.    Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment. The benefit of any vested active Local 500 Participant who
terminates employment on or after July 1, 2004 and who is not yet eligible for Early Retirement, shall be determined in accordance
with Section C above.
APP-4-15

IX.
ILLINOIS-AMERICAN WATER COMPANY (formerly Northern Illinois Water Corporation) - UNION EMPLOYEES AT
STERLING, ILLINOIS
Effective June 30, 2004, the Northern Illinois Water Corporation Retirement Income Plan (the "Northern Illinois Plan"),
consisting of two different groups of union employees, was merged with and into the Plan. Employees of Illinois-American Water
Company who were members of the IBEW Local 51 at the Company's Sterling, Illinois facility continued to participate under the
terms of the former Northern Illinois Plan, as described in this Article IX prior to July 1, 2012. This Article IX is updated effective
July 1, 2012, in accordance with the most recent collective bargaining agreement.
The following special rules apply only to each active Employee of Illinois-American Water Company who was: (1) as of
June 30, 2004, both: (a) a member of the IBEW Local 51 at the Company's Sterling, Illinois facility, and (b) a participant in the
Northern Illinois Plan; or (2) hired on or after July 1, 2004, but prior to February 1, 2009, as a member of the IBEW Local 51 at the
Company's Sterling, Illinois facility (collectively "Local 51 Participants"). Except as otherwise provided under this Article IX, a
Local 51 Participant shall participate in and be subject to all provisions of the Plan.
A.    Definitions. All capitalized terms which are not defined below shall have the meaning given to them under Section 2.1
of the Plan.
(i)    "Actuarial Equivalent" means, effective July 1, 2012, a benefit of equivalent value determine in accordance with
Section 2.1(b) of the Plan; provided, however, notwithstanding any other Plan provision to the contrary, the value of an
optional form of benefit (other than for benefit determinations subject to the requirements of section 417(e)(3) of the Code)
elected by a Local 51 Participant with an Annuity Starting Date on or after July 1, 2012, will not be less than the value of that
optional form of benefit based on his accrued benefit as of June 30, 2012, an interest rate of 7.5 percent and the mortality
table as set forth in Revenue Ruling 95-6.
(ii)    "Compensation" means, for purposes other than the limitations under Appendix 2, the total earnings paid or
made available to an Employee by the Employer plus contributed by the Employer pursuant to a salary reduction agreement
and which are not includible in the gross income of the employee under sections 125, 132(f)(4), 402(e), 402(h), or 403(b) of
the Code. Compensation shall exclude overtime pay, shift or Sunday premiums and special compensation.
(iii)    "Average Compensation" means, on any April 1, the average of a Local 51 Participant's monthly Compensation
for those five consecutive Plan Years (all Plan Years
APP-4-16

if less than five) which give the highest average out of the final ten Plan Years (all Plan Years if less than ten) of employment
with the Employer.
(iv)    "Early Retirement Age" means age 55.
(v)    "Early Retirement Date" means the first day of any month on or after a Local 51 Participant reaches his Early
Retirement Age but before his Normal Retirement Date, and on which he commences his benefit. A Local 51 Participant who
has terminated employment with the Employer with a vested benefit before reaching his Early Retirement Age may elect an
early retirement benefit upon reaching his Early Retirement Age.
(vi)    "Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity" means a joint and survivor annuity that is the Actuarial Equivalent of
the normal form of benefit for an unmarried Local 51 Participant that provides a monthly annuity for the life of the Local 51
Participant's surviving spouse equal to 50% of the monthly annuity payable during the joint lives of the Local 51 Participant
and his spouse.
(vii)    "Required Beginning Date" means, solely for purposes of this Article IX, the April 1 of the calendar year
following the calendar year in which the Local 51 Participant attains age 70'/2.
(viii)     "Required  Contribution  Account"  means,  on  any  date,  the  total  of  a  Local  51  Participant's  Required
Contributions with interest. Contributions previously paid to the Local 51 Participant or applied for him, and any interest that
would have been credited on those contributions, shall be excluded. On and after April 1, 1988, interest shall be credited in
each Plan Year at the rate of 120% of the Federal mid-term rate (as in effect under section 1274 of the Code for the first
month of the Plan Year) per annum compounded annually. Before April 1, 1988, interest was credited at the rate specified in
the Plan as in effect on the day immediately before April 1, 1988. Interest shall be credited on each Required Contribution
from the end of the Plan Year for which it was made until the month prior to the date of determination.
(ix)    "Required Contributions" means nondeductible contributions required from a Local 51 Participant prior to.
January 1, 1967 (August 1, 1966 for any Employee of the Champion Division.)
(x)    "Required Contribution. Accrued Benefit" means the amount of monthly retirement benefit payable in the form
of a Single Life Annuity accrued by a Local 51 Participant which is derived from his Required Contributions.
APP-4-17

(xi)    "Single Life Annuity" means a monthly benefit payable for the life of the Local 51 Participant with a modified
cash refund of his Required Contribution Account, if any.
B.    Participation. An eligible Employee who is a member of the IBEW Local 51 at the Company's Sterling, Illinois facility
(other than an Employee hired or rehired on or after February 1, 2009) shall commence participation under this Article IX on the
first day of the month coincident with or next following the date on which he: (1) attains age 21; and (2) completes one Year of
Service for eligibility purposes.
C.    Early Retirement Income. The benefit payable to a Local 51 Participant commencing on his Early Retirement Date shall
be determined as follows:
(i)    Terminated or Retired Prior to July 1, 2012. If the Local 51 Participant terminates employment or retires prior to
July 1_ 2012, his benefit commencing on his Early Retirement Date shall be his normal retirement benefit as determined
under Section D reduced to reflect the early commencement of benefits by multiplying such benefit by the factor from the
following table:
Number of Years 
Early Retirement Date 
Precedes Normal  
Retirement Date
Applicable Factor
1
.97
2
.94
3
.91
4
.88
5
.85
6
.82
7
.79
8
.76
9
.73
10
.70
(ii)    Terminated or Retired on or after July 1, 2012. If the Local 51 Participant terminates employment or retires on
or after July 1, 2012, his benefit commencing on his Early Retirement Date shall be the sum of
APP-4-18


(a)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Sections D(ii)(a) and D(ii)(c) reduced to reflect the early
commencement of benefits by multiplying such benefit by the factor from the following table
Number of Years 
Early Retirement Date 
Precedes Normal  
Retirement Date
Applicable Factor
1
.97
2
.94
3
.91
4
.88
5
.85
6
.82
7
.79
8
.76
9
.73
10
.70
and
(b)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D(ii)(b) as of his Early Retirement Date multiplied by
the appropriate factor, determined by his attained age and Years of Service at his Early Retirement Date, as set forth in the
Schedule of Early Retirement Factors attached to the Plan as Table 1.
D.    Normal Retirement Income. Effective for any Local 51 Participant retiring on and after July 1, 2004, except as modified
by the provisions of Section 6.1(a) of the Plan, the benefit payable to a Local 51 Participant commencing on his Normal Retirement
Date shall be determined as follows:
(i)    Terminated or Retired Prior to July 1, 2012. If the Local 51 Participant terminates employment or retires prior to
July 1, 2012, his benefit shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
(a)    1.33% of his Average Compensation multiplied by his Years of Service; plus
b)    $1 for each $144 of his Required Contribution Account, if any.
APP-4-19


(ii)    Terminated or Retired on or after July 1, 2012. For any Local 51 Participant who continues to be actively
employed on or after July 1, 2012, his benefit shall be a monthly amount equal to the sum of:
(a)    1.33% times Years of Service prior to July 1, 2012 times Final Average Earnings; plus
(b)    1.60% times Years of Service on or after July 1, 2012 times Final Average Earnings; plus
(c)    $1 for each $144 of his Required Contribution Account, if any.
(iii)    A Local 51 Participant may commence receipt of his normal retirement benefit on his Normal Retirement Date
regardless of whether he is still employed by the Employer on such date.
E.    Late Retirement Income. The benefit payable to a Local 51 Participant commencing on his Late Retirement Date shall
be the greatest of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D on his Late Retirement Date; or
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit determined as of June 30, 2012 under Section D multiplied by the factor shown
below corresponding to the number of years his Late Retirement Date follows his Normal Retirement Date
Number of Years 
Late Retirement Date 
Follows Normal  
Retirement Date
Applicable Factor
1
1.0600
2
1.1200
3
1.1900
4
1.2600
5
1.3400
6
1.4200
7
1.5000
8
1.5900
9
1.6900
10
1.7900
APP-4-20


The above factors shall be prorated for a partial year (counting a partial month as a complete month). Factors for numbers of
years beyond 10 shall be determined using a consistently applied reasonable actuarially equivalent method; or
(iii)    with respect to a Local 51 Participant whose Late Retirement Date occurs after his Required Beginning Date,
his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section D (determined as of June 30, 2012) multiplied by the factor in
Section E(ii) for I year past Normal Retirement Date, prorated for a partial year based on the number of months in the period
(counting a partial month as a complete month).
The amount in this Section E(iii) shall be redetermined after each subsequent April 1 based on the retirement benefit that
would  have  been  paid  on  his  Required  Beginning  Date  (determined  as  if  his  Late  Retirement  Date  had  occurred  on  his
Required Beginning Date) multiplied by the factor in Section E(ii) for 1 year past Normal Retirement Date, prorated for a
partial year based on the number of months since such Yearly Date (counting a partial month as a complete month).
Such greatest amount so determined applies to an active Local 51 Participant, who (1) is not a five-percent owner, (2) has
attained age 70%2, and (3) makes an election to defer commencement of his retirement benefit until the calendar year following the
calendar year in which he retires.
F.    Minimum Benefit. An active Local 51 Participant's benefit payable as a Single Life Annuity shall not be less than the
greatest amount of benefit that would have been provided for him had he retired on any earlier retirement date. In any event, an
active Local 51 Participant's retirement benefit payable as a Single Life Annuity on his retirement date will not be less than the
greater of his Required Contribution Account Accrued Benefit on his retirement date, multiplied by the appropriate factor if his
retirement  date  is  an  Early  Retirement  Date,  or  the  monthly  benefit  payable  as  a  Single  Life  Annuity  which  is  the  Actuarial
Equivalent of his Required Contribution Account on such date.
G.    Vesting. A Local 51 Participant shall have no vested interest in his Accrued Benefit until he has been credited with five
Years of Service for vesting purposes, at which time he shall have a 100% vested interest in his Accrued Benefit determined under
this Article IX. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a Local 51 Participant who is actively employed by the Employer shall have a 100%
vested interest in his Accrued Benefit upon reaching his Early Retirement Age or Normal Retirement Age.
A Local 51 Participant's Required Contribution Account is fully 100% vested and nonforfeitable at all times.
APP-4-21

H.    Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment. The benefit of any vested active Local 51 Participant who
terminates employment on or after July 1, 2004 shall be:
(i)    in the case of a Local 51 Participant who elects to commence his deferred vested benefit on his Early Retirement
Date, an amount determined in accordance with Section H(ii) below multiplied by the applicable early retirement factor in
Section C above.
(ii)     in  the  case  of  a  Local  51  Participant  who  elects  to  commence  his  deferred  vested  benefit  on  his  Normal
Retirement Date, an amount equal to the sum of (a) and (b):
(a)    the Local 51 Participant's Required Contribution Accrued Benefit as of the date of determination (or the date the
Required Contribution Account is paid in a single sum, if earlier);
(b)    the excess of the Local 51 Participant's Accrued Benefit on the day before he terminated employment over the
amount determined under (a) above but not less than $0.
(iii)    in the case of a Local 51 Participant who elects to commence his deferred vested benefit on his Late Retirement
Date, an amount equal to:
(a)    if he terminated on or before his Normal Retirement Date, an amount equal to the amount under Section H(ii)
above multiplied by the late retirement factor in Section E(ii) which corresponds to the number of years his Late Retirement
Date follows his Normal Retirement Date; or
(b)    if he terminated after his Normal Retirement Date, an amount equal to the greater of:
(1)    his Accrued Benefit on the day before he terminated employment with the Employer; or
(2)    his Accrued Benefit on his Normal Retirement Date multiplied by the late retirement factor in Section
E(ii) which corresponds to the number of years his Late Retirement Date follows his Normal Retirement Date.
Provided, however, for a terminated Local 51 Participant whose Late Retirement Date occurs after his Required Beginning
Date, his deferred monthly retirement benefit determined in Section H(iii)(a) or (b) of this Article IX, whichever applies,
shall be adjusted as provided in Section E(iii) of this Article IX.
I.    Forms of Distribution.
APP-4-22

(i)    Normal Form for Unmarried Local 51 Participants. The normal form of distribution for an unmarried Local 51
Participant shall be a Single Life Annuity as defined in Section A(xii) of this Article IX.
(ii)    Normal Form for Married Participants. If a Participant is married on his Annuity Starting Date, his retirement
income will be paid to him in the form of a Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity.
(iii)    Required Contribution Account. A Local 51 Participant may elect, subject to the notice and election procedures
of Section 6.2 of the Plan, as applicable, to receive his Required Contribution Account in a single-sum payment at any time
after he ceases to be an Employee and before his retirement date, provided he is not reemployed by the Employer.
(iv)    Survivor Benefits Available by Election. A Local 51 Participant who is actively employed on or after July 1,
2012 may elect, subject to the notice and election provisions of Section 62 of the Plan, as applicable, to provide benefits for
his Contingent Annuitant as described in Section 6.4.
J.    Preretirement Survivor Annuity.
(i)    Eligibility for Preretirement Survivor Annuity. If  a  married  Local  51  Participant  or  an  unmarried  Local  51
Participant who has designated a Contingent Annuitant dies on or after July 1, 2012 but before his Annuity Starting Date, his
surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant, as applicable, shall receive a Preretirement Survivor Annuity as provided in this
Section  J.  If  a  Local  51  Participant  dies  prior  to  July  1,  2012,  the  benefit,  if  any,  payable  to  his  spouse  or  Contingent
Annuitant shall be determined under the provisions of the Plan in effect prior to July 1, 2012.
(ii)    Death Prior to Early Retirement Eligibility, After Completing Five, But Not Yet Ten Years of Service. In the
event of the death of a married Local 51 Participant or an unmarried Local 51 Participant who has designated a Contingent
Annuitant on or after the date he had competed at least five Years of Service but before he had completed at least ten Years
of Service or become eligible for Early Retirement, whether such Local 51 Participant is then actively employed or not, such
Local 51 Participant's spouse or Contingent Annuitant, as applicable, shall be entitled to a benefit, payable, if such spouse or
Contingent Annuitant is then surviving, on the first day of the month coincident with, or next following the later of (A) the
date of the Local 51 Participant's death or (B) the date the Local 51 Participant would have attained age 55 had he survived.
The  amount  of  such  benefit  shall  be  the  same  amount  that  such  surviving  spouse  or  Contingent  Annuitant  would  have
received had such Local 51 Participant terminated his service, survived to age 55, elected the 50% contingent
APP-4-23

annuity form of benefit, as determined under Table 2 based on his and his spouse's or Contingent Annuitant's then attained
ages, and then died.
(iii)    Death Prior to Early Retirement Eligibility but After Completing Ten Years of Service. In the event of the
death of a married Local 51 Participant or an unmarried Local 51 Participant who has designated a Contingent Annuitant on
or after the date he has completed at least ten Years of Service but prior to becoming eligible for Early Retirement, whether
such Local 51 Participant is then actively employed or not, such Local 51 Participant's spouse or Contingent Annuitant, as
applicable, shall be entitled to a benefit, payable, if such spouse or Contingent Annuitant is then surviving, on the first day of
the month coincident with, or next following the later of (A) the date of the Local 51 Participant's death or (B) the date the
Local 51 Participant would have attained age 55 had he survived. The amount of such benefit shall be the same amount that
such surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant would have received had such Local 51 Participant retired on the day before
his death, or at age 55 if the date of death is prior to the date the Local 51 Participant attains age 55, elected to receive the
100% contingent annuity form of benefit and then died. The amount of such benefit shall be determined under Table 4, based
on his attained age and the attained age of his spouse or Contingent Annuitant, except that for purposes of applying Table 4,
the Local 51 Participant's attained age, if less than age 55, shall be considered to be age 55 and his spouse's or Contingent
Annuitant's age shall be adjusted so that it bears the same relationship to age 55 as their actual attained ages bear to each
other.
(iv)    Death After Becoming Eligible for Early Retirement. In the event of the death of a married Local 51 Participant
or an unmarried Local 51 Participant who has designated a Contingent Annuitant while he is eligible for Early Retirement,
whether  such  Local  51  Participant  is  then  actively  employed  or  not,  such  Local  51  Participant's  spouse  or  Contingent
Annuitant, as applicable, shall be entitled to a benefit, payable, if such spouse or Contingent Annuitant is then surviving, on
the first day of the month coincident with, or next following the date of the Local 51 Participant's death. The amount of such
benefit shall be the same amount that such surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant would have received had such Local 51
Participant  retired  on  the  day  before  his  death,  elected  to  receive  the  100%  contingent  annuitant  form  of  benefit  as
determined under Table 4, based on his attained age and the attained age of his spouse or Contingent Annuitant, and then
died.
(v)     Death  After  Becoming  Eligible  for  Normal  Retirement. In  the  event  of  the  death  of  a  married  Local  51
Participant or an unmarried Local 51 Participant who has designated a Contingent Annuitant while actively employed after
his Normal Retirement Date, such Local 51 Participant's spouse or Contingent Annuitant, as applicable, shall be entitled to a
benefit, payable, if such spouse or Contingent Annuitant is then surviving, on the first day of the month coincident with, or
next following the date of the Local 51
APP-4-24

Participant's death. The amount of such benefit shall be the same amount that such surviving spouse or Contingent Annuitant
would  have  received  had  such  Local  51  Participant  retired  on  his  Late  Retirement  Date,  elected  to  receive  the  100%
contingent annuitant form of benefit as determined under Table 4, based on his attained age and the attained age of his spouse
or Contingent. Annuitant, and then died.
(vi)    Any benefit payable under this Section J shall terminate on the surviving spouse's or Contingent Annuitant's
death.
(vii)    Notwithstanding anything in this Section J to the contrary, if a single-sum death benefit would otherwise be
payable under Section K below, the monthly benefit payable to the spouse or Contingent Annuitant, as applicable, under this
Section J shall not be less than the monthly benefit which is the Actuarial Equivalent of the single-sum death benefit at the
date benefits start.
K.    Single-Sum Death Benefit. If the requirements of Section J above have not been met on the date a Local 51 Participant
dies, a single-sum death benefit equal to his Required Contribution Account on the date he died, if any, shall be payable to the Local
51 Participant's spouse, if any, or to the Local 51 Participant's estate. If the requirements of Section J above have been met on the
date such Local 51 Participant dies, but the Local 51 Participant's spouse or Contingent Annuitant dies before the preretirement
survivor annuity starts, this single-sum death benefit, determined as of the date of the spouse's or Contingent Annuitant's death, shall
be paid to the Local 51 Participant's estate.
L.    Disability Retirement Income.
(i)     A  Local  51  Participant  who  has  completed  10  or  more  Years  of  Service,  and  who  qualifies  for  disability
retirement  under  this  Section  L  shall  be  retired  as  of  the  first  day  of  the  month  following  the  first  month  in  which  the
Committee  has  received  both  (i)  the  Local  51  Participant's  written  request  for  disability  retirement,  and  (ii)  evidence
reasonably  satisfactory  to  the  Committee  that  the  Local  51  Participant  has  been  determined  by  the  United  States  Social
Security Administration to qualify for total and permanent disability benefits under the Social Security Act. A Local 51
Participant shall be eligible for disability retirement benefits if, as a result of mental or physical illness or injury (other than
self-inflicted) while actively employed, he qualifies for disability benefits under the Social Security Act. Disability benefit
payments shall commence in either the month in which the disabled Local 51 Participant is retired, as described above, or in
the next following month, as may be administratively practicable. Such payments under the Plan shall be made retroactively
to the first day of the month following the date as of which the Local 51 Participant is deemed to be disabled by the Social
Security Administration, or, if later, to
APP-4-25

the last day of the Local 51 Participant's eligibility for continuation of the Local 51 Participant's salary or hourly wages as
sick pay under an applicable Employer sick pay plan. The sum of any retroactive payments shall be paid in a lump sum,
without  interest,  as  part  of  the  first  monthly  payment  of  disability  benefits.  A  Local  51  Participant  shall  provide  such
reasonable  evidence  of  continued  Social  Security  disability  as  the  Committee  may  require  from  time  to  time.  Disability
benefits shall be discontinued if the Local 51 Participant ceases to qualify for disability benefits under the Social Security
Act.
(ii)     "Disability  Retirement  Date"  means  the  date  a  Participant  retires  before  his  Normal  Retirement  Date  in
accordance with the provisions of Section L(i).
(iii)    A Local 51 Participant who retires under the provisions of Section L(i) before his Normal Retirement Date
shall be entitled to receive for life, or as long as his disability continues to qualify under the Social Security Act, a monthly
retirement income commencing on his Disability Retirement Date in an amount equal to the benefit which he would have
received pursuant to Section D based on his Years of Service and Final Average Earnings as of his Disability Retirement
Date,  without  reduction  for  early  commencement.  Notwithstanding  the  above,  if  a  Local  51  Participant  is  not  actively
employed (meaning engaged in work duties for the Employer) on or after July 1, 2012, his benefit shall be determined under
the provisions of the Plan in effect prior to July 1, 2012.
(iv)    A Local 51 Participant who becomes disabled, while actively employed, on or after attaining age 65, shall be
considered to have retired under Section D or Section E, as applicable, and will be entitled to a monthly retirement income, if any, in
an amount determined under Section D or E and Section 6.1(a), as applicable.
APP-4-26

APPENDIX 5 
SPECIAL SERVICE CREDITING RULES AND BENEFIT PROVISIONS 
RELATING TO MERGER OF EMPLOYEES’ RETIREMENT PLAN OF 
ELIZABETHTOWN WATER COMPANY
Effective January 1, 2006, the Employees’ Retirement Plan of Elizabethtown Water Company (the “Elizabethtown Plan”)
was amended to provide that the benefit of all non-union participants would continue to be paid from the Elizabethtown Plan trust,
however all benefits would become payable in accordance with the terms of the Pension Plan for Employees of American Water
Works Company, Inc. And Its Designated Subsidiaries provided that certain protected benefits and features would continue to apply.
The Elizabethtown Plan was also amended to provide that all Local 423 union employees hired or rehired on or after April 1, 2006
and  all  Local  68  union  employees  hired  or  rehired  on  or  after  May  1,  2006  were  not  eligible  to  commence  or  recommence
participation in the Elizabethtown Plan.
Effective December 31, 2006, the Elizabethtown Plan was merged with and into the Plan, assets were transferred from the
Elizabethtown Plan trust to the Trust for the Plan, and eligible employees of Elizabethtown Water Company began participation in
the  Plan.  The  following  special  rules  apply  only  to  the  non-union  and  union  employees  who  had  accrued  a  benefit  under  the
Elizabethtown Plan as of December 31, 2006.
NON-UNION EMPLOYEES.
The following special rules apply only to non-union employees who had accrued a benefit under the Elizabethtown Plan as of
December 31, 2006 (the “Non-union Participants”).
A.    Definitions. All capitalized terms which are not defined below shall have the meaning given to them under Article 2 of
the Plan.
(i)    “Compensation” means regular earnings paid to an Employee, including contributions made by an Employee to a
Code section 125 or 401(k) plan, but excluding bonuses, overtime pay, special pay and all other Employer contributions to
benefit plans.
(ii)    “Early Retirement Date” means the first of the month following a Non-union Participant’s 55th birthday and
completion of 10 or more Years of Service.
(iii)    “Final Average Earnings” determined for periods beginning on and after January 1, 2006 and before January 1,
2011 shall be based on:
APP-5-1

(a)    the Non-union Participant’s “Compensation” (as defined in Section A(i) above) for the portion of the
applicable 60 consecutive months which occurred before January 1, 2006; and
(b)    the Non-union Participant’s “Earnings” (as defined in Section 2.1(n)) for the portion of the applicable 60
consecutive months which occurred on and after January 1, 2006.
(iv)     “Service Crediting”  or  “Years  of  Service”  means  all  service  including  service  with  Elizabethtown  Water
Company for purposes of vesting and for purposes of determining entitlement to Early Retirement.
For purposes of benefit accrual service, effective January 1, 2006, Non-union Participants shall cease to be credited with
Years of Service under the Elizabethtown Plan and will commence benefit accrual service under the Pension Plan for Employees of
American Water Works Company, Inc. and Its Designated Subsidiaries.
B.     Early  Retirement  Income means  the  monthly  retirement  income  commencing  on  a  Non-union  Participant’s  Early
Retirement Date in an amount equal to the sum of:
(i)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section C(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement of
benefits by multiplying such benefit by 5/12 of 1% for each month that the commencement of payments precedes his Normal
Retirement Date (or, if the Non-union Participant has completed at least 25 Years of Service, the reduction shall apply for
each month that the commencement of payments precedes his attainment of age 60); plus
(ii)    his normal retirement benefit as determined under Section C(ii) multiplied by the appropriate factor, determined
by his attained  age and Years of Service  at his Early  Retirement  Date,  as set forth  in the Schedule  of Early  Retirement
Factors attached to this Plan as Table 1.
C.    Normal Retirement Income.
Effective for any Non-union Participant retiring after January 1, 2006, except as modified by the provisions of Section 6.1(a)
of the Plan, a Participant’s monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be an amount equal
to the sum of the following:
APP-5-2

(i)     1.60%  of  Final  Average  Earnings  at  retirement  multiplied  by  Years  of  Service  prior  to  January  1,  2006  as
determined under the provisions of the Elizabethtown Plan, up to a maximum of 40 years, plus
(ii)    1.60% of Final Average Earnings at retirement multiplied by Years of Service after January 1, 2006 to Normal
or Late Retirement Date.
D.    Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment.
The benefit of any vested Non-union Participant who terminates employment on or after January 1, 2006 and who is not yet
eligible for Early Retirement, shall be determined in accordance with Section B above.
E.    Lump Sum Option.
In addition to the optional forms of payment provided under Section 6.3 of the Plan, if the Actuarially Equivalent present
value of a Non-union Participant’s vested Accrued Benefit is less than $15,000, he may elect to receive his benefit in the form of a
single lump sum payment.
UNION EMPLOYEES.
The following special rules apply only to Local 423 union employees hired before April 1, 2006 and all Local 68 union
employees hired before May 1, 2006 who had accrued a benefit under the Elizabethtown Plan as of December 31, 2006 (the “Union
Participants”).
A.    Definitions. All capitalized terms which are not defined below shall have the meaning given to them under Section 2.1
of the Plan.
(i)    “Actuarial Equivalent” means an amount of equal value when computed on the basis of the 1978 Group Annuity
Mortality Table (1971 Group Annuity Mortality Table Projected to 1978 with scale E) and an interest rate of 5% per annum.
An average of male and female rates shall be used. For purposes of determining lump sum present values for distributions
with an Annuity Starting Date on and after December 31, 2006, the calculation shall be made using the applicable interest
rate under section 417(e)(3) of the Code for the October immediately preceding the calendar year during which the Annuity
Starting Date occurs, provided that the lump sum present value for distributions made on or before December 31, 2007, shall
not be less than the lump sum present value based on the applicable interest rate under section 417(e)(3) of the Code for the
December preceding the calendar year in which the Annuity Starting Date occurs.
(ii)    “Average Monthly Compensation” means the average of the Union Participant’s “Compensation” (as defined in
Section A(iv) below) for any four consecutive
APP-5-3

calendar years during the period beginning with 1966 and ending on the date his employment terminates which produces the
highest average.
(iii)    “Beneficiary” means the person, persons or trust entitled to receive the payments, if any, made with respect to a
Union Participant after such Participant’s death.
(iv)    “Compensation” means regular earnings paid to a Union Participant, including contributions made by a Union
Participant to a Code section 125 or 401(k) plan, but excluding bonuses, overtime pay, special pay and all other Employer
contributions to benefit plans. Compensation shall also include amounts paid to a Union Participant by Elizabethtown Water
Company, or any of its participating affiliates, and credited as “Compensation” under the Elizabethtown Plan prior to the
merger on December 31, 2006.
(v)     “Early  Retirement  Date”  means  the  first  of  the  month  following  a  Union  Participant’s  55th  birthday  and
completion of 10 or more Years of Service.
 
(vi)    “Elizabethtown Plan” means the Employees’ Retirement Plan of Elizabethtown Water Company, as in effect on
December 31, 2006, the date it was merged with and into the Plan.
(vii)    “Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity” or “QJSA” means an annuity for the life of the Union Participant with
a survivor annuity for the life of such Participant’s surviving Spouse which is equal to 50% of the amount which is payable
during the joint lives of the Union Participant and his Spouse.
(viii)    “Service Crediting” or “Years of Service”. A Union Participant shall be credited with a Year of Service for
each Plan Year during which he completes at least 1,000 Hours of Service with the Designated Subsidiary. Years of Service
shall also include periods of service with Elizabethtown Water Company or its participating affiliates credited under the
Elizabethtown Plan as “Credited Service” prior to the merger on December 31, 2006. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
maximum number of Years of Service credited under the Plan shall be 40.
(ix)    “Spouse” means the husband or wife to whom the Union Participant had been married throughout the one-year
period preceding the earlier of his Annuity Starting Date or date of his death.
B.    Early Retirement Income. A Union Participant’s monthly retirement income commencing on a Union Participant’s Early
Retirement Date shall be an amount equal to his normal
APP-5-4

retirement  benefit as determined under Section C(i) reduced to reflect the early commencement  of benefits by multiplying  such
benefit by 5/12 of 1% for each month that the commencement of payments precedes his Normal Retirement Date (or, if the Union
Participant has completed at least 25 Years of Service, the reduction shall apply for each month that the commencement of payments
precedes his attainment of age 60).
C.    Normal or Late Retirement Income.
A Union Participant’s monthly retirement income commencing on his Normal or Late Retirement Date shall be an amount
equal to the greater of (i) or (ii) as follows:
(i)    1.60% of Average Monthly Compensation at retirement multiplied by Years of Service, up to a maximum of 40
years, or
(ii)    his Accrued Benefit as of December 31, 1995, calculated under the terms of the prior Elizabethtown Plan as
then effective.
D.    Disability. A Union Participant shall not be eligible for any disability retirement benefit under the Plan unless such
Union Participant (1) is a Local 423 union employee hired before April 1, 2006 who had a benefit under the Elizabethtown Plan as
of December 31, 2006, and (2) becomes eligible for a disability retirement benefit under Section 4.3 of the Plan on or after February
1,  2009  while  actively  employed  by  New  Jersey-American  Water  Company,  Inc.  (formerly  known  as  the  Elizabethtown  Water
Company). A Union Participant who is a Local 68 union employee shall not be eligible for any disability retirement benefit under
the Plan.
E.    Vested Benefits in the Event of Termination of Employment.
The benefit of any vested Union Participant who terminates employment on or after January 1, 2006 and who is not yet
eligible for Early Retirement, shall be determined in accordance with Section B above. Such Union Participant shall be entitled to
receive his benefit beginning with the month following his Normal Retirement Date and shall not be eligible to receive his benefit
upon termination as provided in Section 8.2(b).
F.    Forms of Benefit Payment.
(i)    Normal Forms of Payment.
(a)    The normal form of retirement benefit for an unmarried Union Participant shall be a monthly annuity for
the life of such Participant continuing until the last payment due before his death. An unmarried Union Participant
may elect an optional faun of payment in lieu of the normal form pursuant to the notice and election procedures under
the Plan.
APP-5-5

(b)    The normal form of retirement benefit for a Union Participant who has been married throughout the one
year period preceding his Annuity Starting Date shall be a Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity or QJSA. Such a
Participant may elect the normal form of benefit for an unmarried Participant or an optional fouls of benefit under this
Section F. The Union Participant’s election of an optional form of benefit will be valid only if his Spouse consents to
his election in writing, signed before a notary public, pursuant to the notice and election procedures set forth in the
Plan.
(ii)    Optional Forms of Payment. Subject to the spousal waiver provision described above (if applicable) and in lieu
of the normal form of benefit payment, a Union Elizabethtown Participant may elect one of the optional fauns of benefit
payment:
(a)     100%  Contingent  Annuitant  Option.  The  amount  of  retirement  income  to  be  paid  to  the  Union
Participant shall be reduced, but after his death 100% of such reduced retirement income shall be paid for life to his
Spouse. The amount of reduced retirement income payable to the Participant shall be 80% of the amount otherwise
payable. Such reduced retirement income shall be further reduced, or increased, by 1% for each year by which the
Union Participant’s Spouse is more than five years younger, or older, than the Participant. However, in no event shall
the retirement income payable under this option be greater than that payable in the absence of an option.
(b)    50% Contingent Annuitant Option. The amount of retirement income to be paid to the Union Participant
shall be reduced, but after his death 50% of such reduced retirement income shall be paid for life to his Spouse. The
amount of reduced retirement income payable to the Participant shall be 90% of the amount otherwise payable. Such
reduced  retirement  income  shall  be  further  reduced,  or  increased,  by  1/2%  for  each  year  by  which  the  Union
Participant’s Spouse is more than five years younger, or older, than the Participant. However, in no event shall the
retirement income payable under this option be greater than that payable in the absence of an option.
(c)    Five-Year Certain Option. The amount of retirement income to be paid to the Union Participant shall be
reduced, but in the event of his death prior to receiving 60 monthly payments, the same amount of retirement income
shall be continued to his Beneficiary until a combined total of 60 monthly payments have been made. The amount of
reduced retirement income payable to the Participant shall be 98% of the amount otherwise payable to him.
APP-5-6

(d)    Ten-Year Certain Option. The amount of retirement income to be paid to the Union Participant shall be
reduced, but in the event of his death prior to receiving 120 monthly payments, the same amount of retirement income
shall be continued to his Beneficiary until a combined total of 120 monthly payments have been made. The amount of
reduced retirement income payable to the Participant shall be 94% of the amount otherwise payable to him.
(e)    Fifteen-Year Certain Option. The amount of retirement income to be paid to the Union Participant shall
be reduced, but in the event of his death prior to receiving 180 monthly payments, the same amount of retirement
income shall be continued to his Beneficiary until a combined total of 180 monthly payments have been made. The
amount of reduced retirement income payable to the Participant shall be 88% of the amount otherwise payable to him.
(f)    Lump Sum Option. If the Actuarially Equivalent present value of a Union Participant’s vested Accrued
Benefit is less than $15,000, he may elect to receive his benefit in the form of a single lump sum payment.
G.     Death Benefits.  The  provisions  of  this  Section  shall  apply  to  any  vested  Union  Participant  whether  or  not  he  has
terminated employment with the Employer. Sections 6.3 and 6.4 shall not apply to any Union Participant. In addition, the Automatic
Surviving Spouse Benefit under Section 6.1 of the Plan shall not apply to any Union Participant, however Section 6.2 Notice and
Election Procedures for Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity, shall apply to all Union Participants.
(i)    Qualified Preretirement Survivor Annuity (QPSA).
(a)    Death After Earliest Retirement Age. If a vested active or terminated vested Union Participant dies after
the Earliest Retirement Age (as defined below), the Participant’s Spouse or Beneficiary will receive the same benefit
that would be payable if the Participant had retired with an immediate QJSA on the day before his date of death.
(b)    Death Before Earliest Retirement Age If a vested active or terminated vested Union Participant dies on
or  before  the  Earliest  Retirement  Age,  the  Participant’s  Spouse  or  Beneficiary  will  receive  the  same  benefit  that
would be payable if the Participant had:
(1)    separated from service on the date of death,
(2)    survived to the Earliest Retirement Age,
APP-5-7

(3)    elected to receive an immediate QJSA at the Earliest Retirement Age, and
(4)    died on the day after the Earliest Retirement Age.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Section, if the value of the QPSA is less than $5,000, the Committee
shall direct the immediate distribution of the Actuarial Equivalent thereof in a single lump sum in cash to the Union
Participant’s Spouse or Beneficiary.
(c)    Reduction in Benefit. The benefit payable to the Spouse or Beneficiary will be reduced by 1/6 of one percent for
each month that the date of birth of the Spouse or Beneficiary is more than five years after the date of birth of the deceased
Union Participant.
(d)    Death Benefit after Commencement of Benefits. The benefits, if any, payable as a result of death after the
commencement of benefits shall be governed by the payment option in effect in accordance with Section F.
(e)    Earliest Retirement Age, for the purpose of this Section, is the earliest date on which, under the Plan, the Union
Participant could elect to receive retirement benefits.
(f)    Qualified Joint and Survivor Annuity. For purposes of this Section, the definition of Qualified Joint and Survivor
Annuity set forth in Section A is changed by substituting the term “Beneficiary” in place of the term “Spouse” wherever it is
used therein.
(g)    Benefits Payable to Beneficiaries. The death benefit payable pursuant to the provisions of this Section G(i) shall
be payable to a Beneficiary only if the Union Participant has no Spouse, unless a valid spousal waiver has been obtained, in
accordance with Section G(ii)(d).
(ii)    Beneficiary Designation.
(a)    Each Union Participant shall have the right to designate one or more Beneficiaries and contingent Beneficiaries
to  receive  any  benefit  payable  under  Section  G(i)(d)  by  filing  a  written  designation  with  the  Committee  on  the  form
prescribed by the Committee.
(b)    If the Union Participant has elected an annuity with a contingent annuitant option, the election of the contingent
annuitant shall be irrevocable as of the Annuity Starting Date.
APP-5-8

(c)    If the Union Participant has elected an annuity with a guaranteed number of monthly payments or commuted
death  benefit,  such Union  Participant  may thereafter  designate  a different  Beneficiary  to receive  the guaranteed  monthly
payments or commuted death benefit at any time by filing a new written designation with the Committee.
(d)    Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a married Union Participant designates a contingent annuitant or Beneficiary
other than his Spouse and his Spouse does not consent to such designation  in writing witnessed by a notary public or a
representative of the Committee in a manner prescribed by the Committee, then the Union Participant’s Spouse shall be the
Participant’s sole Beneficiary. A Spouse’s consent to the Union Participant’s Beneficiary designation given in accordance
with the Committee’s rules shall be irrevocable by the Spouse with respect to the Beneficiary then designated by the Union
Participant unless the Participant makes a new Beneficiary designation.
(e)     Any  written  designation  shall  become  effective  only  upon  its  receipt  by  the  Committee.  If  the  Beneficiary
designated pursuant to this Section should die on or before distribution of benefits and the Union Participant fails to make a
new designation, then his Beneficiary shall be determined pursuant to Section G(iii). The Beneficiary of guaranteed monthly
payments shall select the faun of distribution in accordance with Section G(iv).
(iii)    Beneficiary List. If (1) a Union Participant omits or fails to designate a Beneficiary, (2) no designated Beneficiary
survives the Union Participant or (3) the Committee determines that the Union Participant’s Beneficiary designation is invalid for
any reason, then any guaranteed monthly payments or commuted benefit payable after the death of the Union Participant shall be
paid to his Spouse, or if the Union Participant is not survived by his Spouse, then to his estate. If the Union Participant’s designated
Beneficiary dies after the Union Participant, but before distribution of all guaranteed monthly payments, then the balance of the
payments shall be paid to the Beneficiary’s estate.
(iv)    Manner and Form of Payment.
(a)    Death benefits under Section G shall be distributed over a period not extending beyond five years of the Union
Participant’s date of death unless (1) payment of benefits commenced in the form of an annuity under Section E before the
Union  Participant’s  date  of  death,  in  which  case  benefits  shall  be  distributed  at  least  as  rapidly  as  under  the  method  of
distribution  in  effect  on  the  Union  Participant’s  date  of  death,  or  (2)  the  benefit  is  payable  to  the  Union  Participant’s
designated  Beneficiary  and  the  projected  distribution  period  does  not  exceed  the  life  expectancy  of  such  Beneficiary,
provided distribution begins not later than one year after the date of the Participant’s death or such later date as applicable
regulations under the Code may permit.
APP-5-9

(b)     Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  this  Section,  if  the  value  of  the  death  benefit  is  less  than  $5,000,  the
Committee shall direct the immediate distribution of the Actuarial Equivalent thereof in a single lump sum in cash to the
Union Participant’s Spouse or Beneficiary.
(v)    Distribution of Employee Contributions. If a Union Participant dies prior to retirement and his Spouse is not eligible for
a death benefit under Section G, his Beneficiary shall be paid a lump sum amount equal to the contributions, if any, which he made
to the Elizabethtown Plan, including interest. Interest will be compounded annually to the date of death based on the following rates:
(a)    from the date of contribution to December 31, 1987 at the rate of 5%;
(b)    from January 1, 1988 to the date of death at the rate of 120 percent of the Federal mid-term rate as in effect
under section 1274 of the Code for the first month of the Plan Year.
APP-5-10

TABLE 5
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
SPECIAL OPTION FACTORS TO BE APPLIED TO BENEFITS 
ACCRUED UNDER PRIOR PLANS OF DESIGNATED SUBSIDIARIES
1.    California-American Water Company Employee Retirement Plan:
(a)    Basis: Interest        5%
Mortality        1951 Group Annuity Mortality Table
(b)    Options available on this basis: Early retirement - 50%, 66 2/3%, and 100% Contingent Annuities.
2.    West Virginia Water Company Pension Plan:
(a)
Basis:  Interest     Rate  specified  by  Pension  Benefit  Guaranty  Corporation  for  immediate  annuities  as  of  the
Participant’s termination date.
Mortality        1971 TPF&C Forecast Mortality Table
(b)    Option available on this basis: Lump sum distribution if benefit payable is less than $240 per year, determined in
accordance with Section 2.1(b) of the Plan.
3.    Seymour Water Company and Pekin Water Works Company Pension Plans:
Early Retirement Reduction Factors: 1/15 for each of the first five years and 1/30 for each of the next five years by which
commencement of benefits precedes the Participant’s Normal Retirement Date.
4.    All other options for Prior Plans of Designated Subsidiaries will be calculated based on the option factors specified in Tables 1-
4(b).
TABLE 5

Exhibit 10.16.2
AMENDMENT TWO
TO THE
PENSION PLAN FOR EMPLOYEES OF
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
AND ITS DESIGNATED SUBSIDIARIES 
(As Amended and Restated Effective January 1, 2016)
WHEREAS,  American  Water  Works  Company,  Inc.  (the  “Company”)  sponsors  the  Pension  Plan  For  Employees  of
American Water Works Company, Inc. And Its Designated Subsidiaries (the “Plan”) and its corresponding trust for the benefit of its
eligible employees; and
WHEREAS,  Section  16.1  of  the  Plan  authorizes  the  Benefits  Administration  Committee  of  American  Water  Works
Company, Inc. and Its Designated Beneficiaries (the “Committee”) to amend the Plan for amendments that do not have a material
cost; and
WHEREAS, the Committee desires to amend the Plan, to (i) add a lump sum benefit payment option to the Plan, which will
be in addition to any other lump sum payment options currently available under the Plan, for all participants (both non-union and
those participants who are covered by a collective bargaining agreement), who retire from employment with the Company and all
affiliated employers on or after December 31, 2018, and whose annuity starting occurs on or after January 1, 2019, and (ii) provide
that a participant’s benefit payable as of normal retirement date, shall never be less than the benefit that is payable as of any earlier
retirement  age  under  the  Plan,  and  (iii)  provide  that  the  benefit  of  a  participant  who  is  not  a  “named  executive  officer”  of  the
Company will not decrease after attainment of age 62.
WHEREAS, this “Amendment” shall supersede the provisions of the Plan to the extent those provisions are inconsistent with
the provisions of this Amendment.
NOW THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that by virtue of the authority reserved to the Committee under Section 16.1 of the
Plan, the Plan is hereby amended as follows:
1.
Effective January 1, 2019, Section 2.1(b) of the Plan is amended to read as follows:
“(b)    ‘Actuarial Equivalent’ means a benefit of equivalent value (A) computed on the basis set out in Tables 2 through 4(a),
appended hereto, (B) derived based on interest rates and mortality tables set forth in Table 5 or (C) in any instance in which
neither (A) nor (B) applies, based on an assumed interest rate of 8% and using the 1983 Group Annuity Mortality Table (set-
back 1 year for Participants  and set back 5 years for Contingent  Annuitants).  For the purpose  of determining  lump sum
present values pursuant to Sections 6.4(h), 6.6 and 6.7, the calculation shall be made using the “applicable mortality table”
under section 417(e)(3)(B) of the Code and shall be based on the “applicable interest rate” under section 417(e)

(3)(C)  of  the  Code  for  the  third  calendar  month  preceding  the  calendar  month  during  which  the  Annuity  Starting  Date
occurs.”
2.    Effective January 1, 2019, Section 4.1(a) of the Plan is amended to read as follows:
“(a)    Upon retirement at his Normal Retirement Date, a Participant shall be entitled to receive a monthly retirement income
commencing on his Normal Retirement Date, which in accordance with Treas. Reg. section 1.411(a)-7(c)(1) shall be equal to
the greatest of: (i) the Participant's Accrued Benefit that he could have commenced on or after the date the Participant has
attained age 55, provided the sum of his age and Years of Service equals or exceeds 70; (ii) in the case of a Participant who,
as of January 1, 2019, is not a “named executive officer” (as defined in Item 402(a)(3) of Regulation S-K of the Securities
Act of 1933, as amended), the Participant’s Accrued Benefit that he could have commenced on or after attaining age 62; or
(iii) the Participant’s Accrued Benefit payable at Normal Retirement Date, or in the case of (i), (ii) or (iii), as applicable, the
Actuarial  Equivalent  of  such  Accrued  Benefit  in  an  amount  determined  under  Sections  5.2,  5.6,  5.7  and,  if  applicable,
Section 6.1(a).”
3.    Effective January 1, 2019, the title of Section 6.4 of the Plan is amended to read as follows:
“Survivor and Lump Sum Benefits Available by Election.”
4.    Effective January 1, 2019, Section 6.4(a) of the Plan is amended to read as follows:
“(a)    Participants whose benefits are not subject to an automatic surviving spouse benefit under Section 6.1 or who, with
their spouse’s written and notarized consent as described in Section 6.2, elect not to accept an automatic surviving spouse
benefit may elect to provide benefits for their Contingent Annuitants as described below, or effective January 1, 2019, elect
payment of benefits in the form of a lump sum payment if they meet the conditions set forth in subsection (h) below.”
5.    Effective January 1, 2019, Section 6.4 of the Plan is amended to add the following new subsection (h) to the Plan to the end
thereof to read as follows:
“(h)    Effective January 1, 2019, a Participant whose Annuity Starting Date occurs on or after January 1, 2019, and who
retires from employment with the Employer on or after December 31, 2018, may elect to receive his vested Accrued Benefit
in a single sum payment which shall be an amount equal to the Actuarial Equivalent present value of the Participant's vested
Accrued Benefit which would otherwise be payable at the Participant's Normal Retirement Date, excluding the value of any
early retirement subsidy.”
2

6.    Effective January 1, 2019, Article IX of the Plan is amended to add the following new Section 9.5 to the end thereof to read as
follows:
“9.5    Reinstatement of Years of Service for Benefit Accrual. A Participant’s Years of Service for benefit accrual
attributable  to  a  prior  cash-out  or  lump  sum  payment  equal  to  the  Actuarial  Equivalent  present  value  of  a  Participant’s
Accrued Benefit, shall be restored upon reemployment of the Participant if payment was made to the Participant later than
the last day of the second Plan Year following the Participant’s termination from employment with the Employer. Upon
subsequent termination, the Accrued Benefit payable to the Participant shall be offset by the value of the previous lump sum
distribution.”
(Signature Page Follows)
    
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, this Amendment has been executed this 19th day of December, 2018.
BENEFITS ADMINISTRATION
COMMITTEE OF
AMERICAN WATER WORKS
COMPANY,
INC. AND ITS DESIGNATED
SUBSIDIARIES
By:
/s/ Melanie M. Kennedy
Title: SVP, Human Resources
3

Exhibit 21.1
American Water Works Company, Inc.’s Subsidiaries
As of February 18, 2020
 
Entity Name
Entity Type
Jurisdiction of Organization
American Industrial Water LLC
Limited Liability Company
Ohio
American Lake Water Company
Corporation
Illinois
American Water – Acciona Agua LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water (USA), LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Canada Corp.
Corporation
Ontario
American Water Capital Corp.
Corporation
Delaware
American Water Carbon Services Corp.
Corporation
Ontario
American Water Enterprises Holding, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Enterprises, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Defense Services, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Federal Services, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Military Services, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Operations and Maintenance, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Texas
American Water Resources Holdings, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Resources of Florida, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Resources of Texas, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Resources, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Virginia
American Water Services CDM, Inc.
Corporation
Washington
American Water Services, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
American Water Works Service Company, Inc.
Corporation
Delaware
AW Contract Services (Canada), Inc.
Corporation
Canada
AW Insurance LLC
Series Limited Liability Company
Delaware
AWIP Holdings LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
AW Technologies, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
Bluefield Valley Water Works Company
Corporation
Virginia
California-American Water Company
Corporation
California
Edison Water Company
Corporation
New Jersey
EMC American Water Canada Inc.
Corporation
Canada
Environmental Disposal Corporation
Corporation
New Jersey
Environmental Management, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Missouri
E’town Properties, Inc.
Corporation
Delaware
E’town Services L.L.C.
Limited Liability Company
New Jersey
Georgia-American Water Company LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
Hawaii-American Water Company
Corporation
Nevada
Illinois-American Water Company
Corporation
Illinois
Indiana-American Water Company, Inc.
Corporation
Indiana
Iowa-American Water Company
Corporation
Delaware
Kentucky-American Water Company
Corporation
Kentucky
Laurel Oak Properties Corporation
Corporation
Delaware
Liberty Water Company
Corporation
New Jersey
Maryland-American Water Company
Corporation
Maryland
Michigan-American Water Company
Corporation
Michigan
Missouri-American Water Company
Corporation
Missouri
Mt. Ebo Sewage Works, Inc.
Corporation
New York

Entity Name
Entity Type
Jurisdiction of Organization
New Jersey-American Water Company, Inc.
Corporation
New Jersey
New York American Water Company, Inc.
Corporation
New York
OMI/Thames Water Stockton, Inc.
Corporation
Delaware
One Water Street LLC
Limited Liability Company
New Jersey
Pennsylvania-American Water Company
Corporation
Pennsylvania
Pivotal Home Solutions, LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
Prism-Berlie (Windsor) Limited
Corporation
Ontario
Tennessee-American Water Company
Corporation
Tennessee
TWH LLC
Limited Liability Company
Delaware
TWNA, Inc.
Corporation
Delaware
Virginia-American Water Company
Corporation
Virginia
West Virginia-American Water Company
Corporation
West Virginia

Exhibit 23.1
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
We hereby consent to the incorporation by reference in the Registration Statements on Form S-3 (Nos. 333-229994 and 333-224558) and Form S-8 (Nos. 333-
235598, 333-219682, 333-217975, 333-168543 and 333-150381) of American Water Works Company, Inc. of our report dated February 18, 2020 relating to the
financial statements and the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, which appears in this Form 10‑K.
/s/ PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
February 18, 2020

Exhibit 31.1
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL EXECUTIVE OFFICER
I, Susan N. Story, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of American Water Works Company, Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this report is being prepared;
b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles;
c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 18, 2020
 
By: 
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
 
Susan N. Story
 
President and Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)

Exhibit 31.2
CERTIFICATION OF PRINCIPAL FINANCIAL OFFICER  
I, M. Susan Hardwick, certify that:
1. I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of American Water Works Company, Inc.;
2. Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to make the statements
made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period covered by this report;
3. Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects the financial
condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined in Exchange Act
Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and 15d-15(f)) for the registrant and
have:
a) Designed such disclosure controls and procedures, or caused such disclosure controls and procedures to be designed under our supervision, to ensure that
material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by others within those entities, particularly during the
period in which this report is being prepared;
b) Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our supervision, to
provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external purposes in accordance with
generally accepted accounting principles;
c) Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the effectiveness of
the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation; and
d) Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most recent fiscal
quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably likely to materially affect, the registrant’s
internal control over financial reporting; and
5. The registrant’s other certifying officer and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting, to the registrant’s
auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
a) All significant deficiencies and material weaknesses in the design or operation of internal control over financial reporting which are reasonably likely to
adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
b) Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal control over
financial reporting.
Date: February 18, 2020
 
By:
/s/ M. SUSAN HARDWICK
 
M. Susan Hardwick
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (Principal
Financial Officer)

Exhibit 32.1
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14(b) UNDER THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 AND
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Susan N. Story, President and Chief Executive Officer of American Water Works Company, Inc. (the “Company”), hereby certify that, based on my knowledge:
(1) The Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2019 (the “Report”) fully complies with the requirements of Section
13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
 
By:
/s/ SUSAN N. STORY
 
Susan N. Story
President and Chief Executive Officer
(Principal Executive Officer)
 
February 18, 2020

Exhibit 32.2
AMERICAN WATER WORKS COMPANY, INC.
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14(b) UNDER THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934 AND
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, M. Susan Hardwick, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer of American Water Works Company, Inc. (the “Company”), hereby certify that, based
on my knowledge:
(1)  The  Company’s  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K  for  the  fiscal  year  ended December  31,  2019 (the  “Report”)  fully  complies  with  the  requirements  of
Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
 
By:
/s/ M. SUSAN HARDWICK
 
M. Susan Hardwick
 
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer (Principal
Financial Officer)
 
February 18, 2020
