 
 
UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 8-K
CURRENT REPORT
Pursuant to Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934
Date of Report (Date of earliest event reported) April 12, 2023
BEST BUY CO., INC.
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
 
 
 
 
Minnesota
 
1-9595
 
41-0907483
(State or other jurisdiction
of incorporation)
 
(Commission
File Number)
 
(IRS Employer
Identification No.)
 
 
7601 Penn Avenue South
 
 
Richfield, Minnesota
 
55423
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
(Zip Code)
 
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (612) 291-1000 
N/A
(Former name or former address, if changed since last report.)
Check the appropriate box below if the Form 8-K filing is intended to simultaneously satisfy the filing obligation of the registrant under any of the following 
provisions:
o
Written communications pursuant to Rule 425 under the Securities Act (17 CFR 230.425)
 
o
Soliciting material pursuant to Rule 14a-12 under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14a-12)
 
o
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 14d-2(b) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.14d-2(b))
 
o
Pre-commencement communications pursuant to Rule 13e-4(c) under the Exchange Act (17 CFR 240.13e-4(c))
 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
 
 
 
Title of each class
Trading symbol
Name of exchange on which registered
Common Stock, $0.10 par value per share
BBY
New York Stock Exchange
 
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is an emerging growth company as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act of 1933 (§230.405 of this chapter) 
or Rule 12b-2 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (§240.12b-2 of this chapter).
Emerging growth company o
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or 
revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. o
 
 

 
 
Item 1.01 
Entry into a Material Definitive Agreement.
On April 12, 2023, Best Buy Co., Inc. (“Best Buy” or the “registrant”) entered into a new $1.25 billion five-year senior unsecured revolving credit facility 
agreement (the “Five-Year Facility Agreement”) with JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. (“JPMorgan”), as administrative agent, and a syndicate of banks (collectively, 
the “Lenders”). The Five-Year Facility Agreement replaces the previous $1.25 billion senior unsecured revolving credit facility, dated as of May 18, 2021 (the 
“Previous Facility”), with a syndicate of banks, including JPMorgan acting as administrative agent, and U.S. Bank National Association acting as syndication 
agent. The Previous Facility, which was scheduled to expire in May 2026, was terminated on April 12, 2023. The Five-Year Facility Agreement permits 
borrowings of up to $1.25 billion and terminates in April 2028. No amounts are currently outstanding under the Five-Year Facility Agreement. The Five-Year 
Facility Agreement contains substantially the same terms as the Previous Facility with the primary exception being the adoption of Term SOFR as a pricing 
benchmark. 
The interest rate under the Five-Year Facility Agreement is variable and, barring certain events of default, is determined at the registrant’s option as: (i) the sum 
of (a) the greatest of (1) JPMorgan’s prime rate, (2) the greater of the federal funds effective rate and the overnight bank funding rate plus, in each case, 0.5%, 
and (3) Adjusted Term SOFR (as defined in the Five-Year Facility Agreement) for an interest period of one month plus 1%, and (b) a variable margin rate (the 
“ABR Margin”); or (ii) Adjusted Term SOFR for the applicable interest period plus a variable margin rate (the “Term SOFR Margin”). In addition, a facility fee is 
assessed on the commitment amount. The ABR Margin, Term SOFR Margin and the facility fee are based upon the registrant’s current senior unsecured debt 
rating. Under the Five-Year Facility Agreement, the ABR Margin ranges from 0.000% to 0.100%, the Term SOFR Margin ranges from 0.680% to 1.100%, and the 
facility fee ranges from 0.070% to 0.150%.
The Five-Year Facility Agreement is guaranteed by certain specified subsidiaries of the registrant and contains customary affirmative and negative covenants. 
Among other things, these covenants restrict the registrant’s and certain of its subsidiaries’ ability to incur liens on certain assets, make material changes in 
corporate structure or materially alter the nature of its business, dispose of material assets, engage in mergers, consolidations and certain other fundamental 
changes, or engage in certain transactions with affiliates. The Five-Year Facility Agreement also contains a covenant that requires the registrant to maintain a 
maximum quarterly cash flow leverage ratio. The Five-Year Facility Agreement contains customary default provisions, including, but not limited to, failure to pay 
interest or principal when due and failure to comply with covenants.
Some of the Lenders and/or their affiliates have other business relationships with the registrant involving the provision of financial and banking-related services, 
including cash management, loans, foreign exchange contracts, letters of credit and bank guarantee facilities, investment banking and trust services.
The foregoing description of the Five-Year Facility Agreement does not purport to be complete and is subject to, and qualified in its entirety by, the full text of the 
Five-Year Facility Agreement, which is attached hereto as Exhibit 10.1 and incorporated herein by reference.
Item 1.02 
Termination of a Material Definitive Agreement.
The description in Item 1.01 of this Current Report on Form 8-K is incorporated in its entirety into this Item 1.02 by reference.
Item 9.01 
Financial Statements and Exhibits. 
(d) Exhibits. 
The following are filed as Exhibits to this Current Report on Form 8-K. 
 
 
 
 
Exhibit No.
 
Description of Exhibit
10.1
 
Five-Year Credit Agreement dated as of April 12, 2023, among Best Buy Co., Inc., the Subsidiary Guarantors, the Lenders and JPMorgan 
Chase Bank, N.A. as administrative agent.
104
 
Cover Page Interactive Data File (embedded within the Inline XBRL document).
 
 

SIGNATURES
 
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its behalf by the 
undersigned hereunto duly authorized.
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
BEST BUY CO., INC.
 
 
(Registrant)
 
 
 
Date: April 13, 2023
By: 
/s/ TODD G. HARTMAN
 
 
Todd G. Hartman
 
 
Executive Vice President, General Counsel, Chief 
Risk Officer and Secretary
 
 

Exhibit 10.1
FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT
dated as of
April 12, 2023,
among
BEST BUY CO., INC.,
The SUBSIDIARY GUARANTORS Party Hereto,
The LENDERS Party Hereto
and
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A.,
as Administrative Agent
                   
JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A.,
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
BOFA SECURITIES, INC.,
CITIBANK, N.A.
and
PNC CAPITAL MARKETS LLC, 
as Joint Lead Arrangers and Joint Bookrunners 
U.S. BANK NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
as Syndication Agent
BANK OF AMERICA, N.A.,
CITIBANK, N.A.
and
PNC BANK, NATIONAL ASSOCIATION,
as Documentation Agents
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
ARTICLE I
Definitions
SECTION 1.01.
Defined Terms
1 
SECTION 1.02.
Classification of Loans and Borrowings
33 
SECTION 1.03.
Terms Generally
33 
SECTION 1.04.
Accounting Terms; GAAP
34 
SECTION 1.05.
Interest Rates; Benchmark Notification
34 
SECTION 1.06.
Divisions
35 
ARTICLE II
The Credits
SECTION 2.01.
The Commitments
35 
SECTION 2.02.
Loans and Borrowings
35 
SECTION 2.03.
Requests for Syndicated Borrowings
36 
SECTION 2.04.
Competitive Bid Procedure
37 
SECTION 2.05.
[Reserved]
40 
SECTION 2.06.
Letters of Credit
40 
SECTION 2.07.
Funding of Borrowings
48 
SECTION 2.08.
Interest Elections
48 
SECTION 2.09.
Termination, Reduction and Increase of the Commitments
50 
SECTION 2.10.
Repayment of Loans; Evidence of Debt
53 
SECTION 2.11.
Prepayment of Loans
54 
SECTION 2.12.
Fees
55 
SECTION 2.13.
Interest
56 
SECTION 2.14.
Alternate Rate of Interest
57 
SECTION 2.15.
Increased Costs
60 
SECTION 2.16.
Break Funding Payments
62 
SECTION 2.17.
Taxes
62 
SECTION 2.18.
Payments Generally; Pro Rata Treatment; Sharing of Setoffs
66 
SECTION 2.19.
Mitigation Obligations; Replacement of Lenders
69 
SECTION 2.20.
Extension of Commitment Termination Date
70 
SECTION 2.21.
Defaulting Lenders
72 
ARTICLE III
 

Guarantee
SECTION 3.01.
The Guarantee
74 
SECTION 3.02.
Obligations Unconditional
75 
SECTION 3.03.
Reinstatement
76 
SECTION 3.04.
Subrogation
76 
SECTION 3.05.
Remedies
76 
SECTION 3.06.
Instrument for the Payment of Money
77 
SECTION 3.07.
Continuing Guarantee
77 
SECTION 3.08.
Rights of Contribution
77 
SECTION 3.09.
General Limitation on Guarantee Obligations
78 
SECTION 3.10.
Designation of Subsidiary Guarantors
78 
SECTION 3.11.
Release of Guarantees
78 
ARTICLE IV
Representations and Warranties
SECTION 4.01.
Organization
79 
SECTION 4.02.
Authorization; Enforceability
79 
SECTION 4.03.
Governmental Approvals; No Conflicts
79 
SECTION 4.04.
Financial Condition; No Material Adverse Change
79 
SECTION 4.05.
Properties
80 
SECTION 4.06.
Litigation and Environmental Matters
80 
SECTION 4.07.
Compliance with Laws and Agreements
80 
SECTION 4.08.
Investment Company Status
81 
SECTION 4.09.
Taxes
81 
SECTION 4.10.
ERISA
81 
SECTION 4.11.
Subsidiaries
81 
SECTION 4.12.
Federal Reserve Regulations
81 
ARTICLE V
Conditions
SECTION 5.01.
Effective Date
81 
SECTION 5.02.
Each Credit Event
83 
ARTICLE VI
Affirmative Covenants
SECTION 6.01.
Financial Statements, Rating Changes and Other Information
84 
 

SECTION 6.02.
Notices of Material Events
85 
SECTION 6.03.
Existence; Conduct of Business
86 
SECTION 6.04.
Payment of Obligations
86 
SECTION 6.05.
Maintenance of Properties; Insurance
86 
SECTION 6.06.
Books and Records; Inspection Rights
86 
SECTION 6.07.
Compliance with Laws
87 
SECTION 6.08.
New Specified Subsidiaries to Become Subsidiary Guarantors
87 
SECTION 6.09.
Use of Proceeds; Federal Reserve Regulations
87 
SECTION 6.10.
Transactions with Affiliates
88 
ARTICLE VII
Negative Covenants
SECTION 7.01.
Liens
88 
SECTION 7.02.
Fundamental Changes
90 
SECTION 7.03.
Cash Flow Leverage Ratio
91 
ARTICLE VIII
Events of Default
ARTICLE IX
Agency
SECTION 9.01.
Authorization and Action
93 
SECTION 9.02.
Administrative Agent’s Reliance, Limitation of Liability, Etc
96 
SECTION 9.03.
Posting of Communications
97 
SECTION 9.04.
The Administrative Agent Individually
99 
SECTION 9.05.
Successor Administrative Agent
99 
SECTION 9.06.
Acknowledgments of Lenders and Issuing Lenders
100 
SECTION 9.07.
Certain ERISA Matters
102 
SECTION 9.08.
Miscellaneous
104 
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous
SECTION 10.01.
Notices
104 
SECTION 10.02.
Waivers; Amendments
105 
SECTION 10.03.
Expenses; Indemnity; Limitation of Liability; Etc
108 
SECTION 10.04.
Successors and Assigns
110 
 

SECTION 10.05.
Survival
114 
SECTION 10.06.
Counterparts; Integration; Effectiveness; Electronic Execution
115 
SECTION 10.07.
Severability
117 
SECTION 10.08.
Right of Setoff
117 
SECTION 10.09.
Governing Law; Jurisdiction; Etc
117 
SECTION 10.10.
WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL
118 
SECTION 10.11.
Headings
118 
SECTION 10.12.
Treatment of Certain Information; Confidentiality
118 
SECTION 10.13.
Non-Public Information
120 
SECTION 10.14.
USA PATRIOT Act and Beneficial Ownership Regulation
120 
SECTION 10.15.
Interest Rate Limitation
120 
SECTION 10.16.
No Fiduciary Relationship
121 
SECTION 10.17.
Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of Affected Financial
Institutions
121 
SCHEDULE 2.01 ‑ Commitments
SCHEDULE 2.06(a) ‑ Existing Letters of Credit
SCHEDULE 2.06(b) ‑ LC Sublimit Shares
SCHEDULE 4.11 ‑ Subsidiaries
SCHEDULE 7.01 ‑ Certain Existing Liens
EXHIBIT A ‑ Form of Assignment and Assumption
EXHIBIT B ‑ Form of Borrowing Request
EXHIBIT C ‑ Form of Guarantee Assumption Agreement
EXHIBIT D ‑ Form of Interest Election Request
EXHIBIT E-1 - Form of U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate for Foreign Lenders That Are Not
Partnerships
EXHIBIT E-2 - Form of U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate for Foreign Participants That Are Not
Partnerships
EXHIBIT E-3 - Form of U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate for Foreign Participants That Are
Partnerships
EXHIBIT E-4 - Form of U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate for Foreign Lenders That Are
Partnerships
 
 

FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT dated as of April 12, 2023,
among BEST BUY CO., INC., the SUBSIDIARY GUARANTORS party hereto,
the LENDERS party hereto and JPMORGAN CHASE BANK, N.A., as
Administrative Agent.
The Borrower (as hereinafter defined) has requested that the Lenders (as
hereinafter defined) and the Issuing Lenders (as hereinafter defined) make extensions of credit
(by means of loans and letters of credit) to the Borrower in an original aggregate principal or
face amount not exceeding $1,250,000,000 at any one time outstanding in Dollars.    The
Lenders and the Issuing Lenders are willing to extend such credit upon the terms and
conditions hereof, and, accordingly, the parties hereto agree as follows:
ARTICLE I
Definitions
SECTION 1.01.
 Defined Terms.  As used in this Agreement (including
the introductory paragraph hereto), the following terms have the meanings specified below:
“364-Day Credit Agreement” means any credit agreement establishing a 364-
day revolving credit facility of the Borrower that is entered into after the date hereof (as it may
be amended, supplemented or otherwise modified (subject to any restrictions on such
amendments, supplements or modifications set forth herein)), among the Borrower, the
Subsidiary Guarantors party thereto, any agents party thereto and the lenders party thereto.
“ABR”, when used in reference to any Loan or Borrowing, refers to whether
such Loan, or the Loans comprising such Borrowing, are bearing interest at a rate determined
by reference to the Alternate Base Rate.
“Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR” means an interest rate per annum equal to (a) the Daily
Simple SOFR plus (b) 0.10%; provided that if such rate as so determined would be less than zero, such
rate shall be deemed to be equal to zero.
“Adjusted Term SOFR” means, for any Interest Period, an interest rate per annum equal
to (a) the Term SOFR for such Interest Period plus (b) 0.10%; provided that if such rate as so
determined would be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be equal to zero.
“Additional Commitment Lender” means any Person that is an Eligible
Assignee and that agrees to provide a Commitment or (in the case of an existing Lender) agrees
to increase the amount of its Commitment, in each case pursuant to Section 2.09(e) or 2.20,
with the consent of the Administrative Agent and each Issuing Lender (in each case, such
consent not to be unreasonably withheld).
“Administrative Agent” means JPMorgan, in its capacity as administrative agent
for the Lenders hereunder and under the other Loan Documents, and its successors
 

in such capacity as provided in Article IX.  Unless the context requires otherwise, the term
“Administrative Agent” shall include any branch or Affiliate of JPMorgan through which
JPMorgan shall perform any of its obligations in such capacity hereunder.
“Administrative Agent’s Account” means an account designated by the
Administrative Agent in a notice to the Borrower and the Lenders.
“Administrative Questionnaire” means an Administrative Questionnaire in a
form supplied by the Administrative Agent.
“Affected Financial Institution” means (a) any EEA Financial Institution and (b)
any UK Financial Institution.
“Affiliate” means, with respect to a specified Person, another Person that
directly, or indirectly through one or more intermediaries, Controls or is Controlled by or is
under common Control with the Person specified.
“Agreement” means this Five-Year Credit Agreement, as the same may be
amended, restated, amended and restated, supplemented or otherwise modified from time to
time.
“Alternate Base Rate” means, for any day, a rate per annum equal to the greatest
of (a) the Prime Rate in effect on such day, (b) the NYFRB Rate in effect on such day plus
0.50% per annum and (c) the Adjusted Term SOFR for a one-month Interest Period as
published two U.S. Government Securities Business Days prior to such day (or if such day is
not a U.S. Government Securities Business Day, the immediately preceding U.S. Government
Securities Business Day) plus 1% per annum. For purposes of clause (c) above, the Adjusted
Term SOFR for any day shall be based on the Term SOFR Reference Rate at approximately
5:00 a.m., Chicago time, on such day (or any amended publication time for the Term SOFR
Reference Rate, as specified by the CME Term SOFR Administrator in the Term SOFR
Reference Rate methodology).  Any change in the Alternate Base Rate due to a change in the
Prime Rate, the NYFRB Rate or the Adjusted Term SOFR shall be effective from and including
the effective date of such change in the Prime Rate, the NYFRB Rate or the Adjusted Term
SOFR, as the case may be. If the Alternate Base Rate is being used as an alternate rate of
interest pursuant to Section 2.14 with respect to Adjusted Term SOFR (for the avoidance of
doubt, only until the Benchmark Replacement with respect thereto has been determined
pursuant to Section 2.14(b)(i)), then the Alternate Base Rate shall be the greater of clauses (a)
and (b) above and shall be determined without reference to clause (c) above.  If the Alternate
Base Rate as so determined would be less than 1%, such rate shall be deemed to be 1% for
purposes of this Agreement.
“Ancillary Document” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.06(b).
“Anti-Corruption Laws” means all laws, rules, and regulations of any
jurisdiction applicable to the Borrower or its Subsidiaries from time to time concerning or
relating to bribery, corruption or money laundering.
 

“Applicable Parties” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.03(c).
“Applicable Percentage” means, with respect to any Lender at any time, the
percentage of the total Commitments represented by such Lender’s Commitment at such time;
provided that, for purposes of Section 2.21 when a Defaulting Lender shall exist, “Applicable
Percentage” shall mean, with respect to any Lender at any such time, the percentage of the total
Commitments (disregarding any Defaulting Lender’s Commitment) represented by such
Lender’s Commitment at such time.  If all of the Commitments have terminated or expired, the
Applicable Percentages shall be determined based upon the Commitments most recently in
effect, giving effect to any assignments and to any Lender’s status as a Defaulting Lender at the
time of determination.
“Applicable Rate”   means, for any day, with respect to any Syndicated ABR
Loan, any Syndicated Term SOFR Loan or, if applicable pursuant to Section 2.14, any
Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Loan, or with respect to the facility fees payable hereunder, as
the case may be, the applicable rate per annum set forth below under the caption “ABR
Spread”, “Term SOFR/Daily Simple SOFR Spread” or “Facility Fee Rate”, as the case may be,
based upon the applicable Moody’s Rating and/or S&P Rating, respectively, applicable on such
date:
S&P Rating/
Moody’s Rating
ABR Spread
Term SOFR/Daily
Simple SOFR Spread Facility Fee Rate
Category 1
A2/A or higher
0.000%
0.680%
0.070%
Category 2
A3/A-
0.000%
0.795%
0.080%
Category 3
Baa1/BBB+
0.000%
0.910%
0.090%
Category 4
Baa2/BBB
0.015%
1.015%
0.110%
Category 5
Baa3/BBB- or lower, or
unrated
0.100%
1.100%
0.150%
For purposes of the foregoing, (a) if any of Moody’s or S&P shall not have in
effect a Moody’s Rating or an S&P Rating, as the case may be (other than by reason of the
circumstances referred to in the last sentence of this definition), then the Borrower and the
Lenders shall negotiate in good faith to amend this definition to reflect the unavailability of
ratings from such rating agency and, pending the effectiveness of
 

any such amendment, such rating agency shall be deemed to have established a rating in
Category 5; (b) if the Moody’s Rating or the S&P Rating established or deemed to have been
established by Moody’s or S&P, as the case may be, shall fall within different Categories, the
Applicable Rate shall be based on the higher of the two ratings, unless the ratings differ by two
or more Categories, in which case the Applicable Rate shall be based on the Category one level
below that corresponding to the higher rating; and (c) if the Moody’s Rating or the S&P Rating
established or deemed to have been established by Moody’s or S&P, as the case may be, shall
be changed (other than as a result of a change in the rating system of Moody’s or S&P), such
change shall be effective on the third Business Day following the date on which it is first
announced by the applicable rating agency, irrespective of when notice of such change shall
have been furnished by the Borrower to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders pursuant to
Section 6.01 or otherwise.  Each change in the Applicable Rate shall apply during the period
commencing on the effective date of such change and ending on the date immediately
preceding the effective date of the next such change.  If the rating system of Moody’s or S&P
shall change, or if any such rating agency shall cease to be in the business of rating corporate
debt obligations, the Borrower and the Lenders shall negotiate in good faith to amend this
definition to reflect such changed rating system or the unavailability of ratings from such rating
agency and, pending the effectiveness of any such amendment, the Applicable Rate shall be
determined by reference to the rating most recently in effect prior to such change or cessation.
“Approved Electronic Platform” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.03(a).
“Approved Fund” means any Person (other than a natural person) that is
engaged in making, purchasing, holding or investing in bank loans and similar extensions of
credit in the ordinary course of its business and that is administered or managed by (a)  a
Lender, (b) an Affiliate of a Lender or (c) an entity or an Affiliate of an entity that administers
or manages a Lender.
“Arranger” means each of JPMorgan, U.S. Bank National Association, BofA
Securities, Inc., Citibank, N.A. and PNC Capital Markets LLC, in its capacity as joint lead
arranger and joint bookrunner for the credit facility established hereunder.
“Assignment and Assumption” means an assignment and assumption entered
into by a Lender and an Eligible Assignee (with the consent of any Person whose consent is
required by Section 10.04), and accepted by the Administrative Agent, in substantially the form
of Exhibit  A or any other form (including electronic records generated by the use of an
electronic platform) approved by the Administrative Agent.
“Auto-Extension Letter of Credit” means a Letter of Credit with an initial expiry
date of one year or less after the date of its issuance that has automatic extension provisions.
 

“Availability Period” means the period from and including the Effective Date to
but excluding the earlier of the Commitment Termination Date and the date of termination of
all of the Commitments.
“Available Tenor” means, as of any date of determination and with respect to the
then-current Benchmark, any tenor for such Benchmark (or component thereof) or payment
period for interest calculated with reference to such Benchmark (or component thereof), as
applicable, that is or may be used for determining the length of an Interest Period for any term
rate or otherwise for determining any frequency of making payments of interest calculated
pursuant to this Agreement as of such date and not including, for the avoidance of doubt, any
tenor for such Benchmark that is then removed from the definition of the term “Interest Period”
pursuant to Section 2.14(b)(v).
“Bail-In Action” means the exercise of any Write-Down and Conversion Powers
by the applicable Resolution Authority in respect of any liability of an Affected Financial
Institution.
“Bail-In Legislation” means (a) with respect to any EEA Member Country
implementing Article 55 of Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the
Council of the European Union, the implementing law, regulation, rule or requirement for such
EEA Member Country from time to time that is described in the EU Bail-In Legislation
Schedule and (b) with respect to the United Kingdom, Part I of the United Kingdom Banking
Act 2009 (as amended from time to time) and any other law, regulation or rule applicable in the
United Kingdom relating to the resolution of unsound or failing banks, investment firms or
other financial institutions or their affiliates (other than through liquidation, administration or
other insolvency proceedings).
“Bankruptcy Event” means, with respect to any Person, that such Person has
become the subject of a voluntary or involuntary bankruptcy or insolvency proceeding, or has
had a receiver, conservator, trustee, administrator, custodian, assignee for the benefit of
creditors or similar Person charged with the reorganization or liquidation of its business
appointed for it, or, in the good faith determination of the Administrative Agent, has taken any
action in furtherance of, or indicating its consent to, approval of or acquiescence in any such
proceeding or appointment; provided that a Bankruptcy Event shall not result solely by virtue
of any ownership interest, or the acquisition of any ownership interest, in such Person by a
Governmental Authority; provided,  however, that such ownership interest  does not result in or
provide such Person with immunity from the jurisdiction of courts within the United States of
America or from the enforcement of judgments or writs of attachment on its assets or permit
such Person (or such Governmental Authority) to reject, repudiate, disavow or disaffirm any
agreements made by such Person.
“Benchmark” means, initially, the Term SOFR; provided that if a Benchmark
Transition Event and the related Benchmark Replacement Date have occurred with respect to
the Term SOFR or the then-current Benchmark, as applicable, then “Benchmark” means the
applicable Benchmark Replacement to the extent that such
 

Benchmark Replacement has replaced such prior benchmark rate pursuant to Section 2.14(b)
(i).
“Benchmark Replacement” means, for any Available Tenor, the first alternative
set forth in the order below that can be determined by the Administrative Agent for the
applicable Benchmark Replacement Date:
(a)
the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR; and
(b)
the sum of:  (i) the alternate benchmark rate that has been selected by
the Administrative Agent and the Borrower as the replacement for the then-current
Benchmark for the applicable Corresponding Tenor giving due consideration to (A) any
selection or recommendation of a replacement benchmark rate or the mechanism for
determining such a rate by the Relevant Governmental Body and/or (B) any evolving or
then-prevailing market convention for determining a benchmark rate as a replacement
for the then-current Benchmark for syndicated credit facilities denominated in Dollars
at such time in the United States and (ii) the related Benchmark Replacement
Adjustment.
If the Benchmark Replacement determined as set forth above would be less than the Floor, the
Benchmark Replacement will be deemed to be the Floor for the purposes of this Agreement
and the other Loan Documents.
“Benchmark Replacement Adjustment” means, with respect to any replacement
of the then-current Benchmark with an Unadjusted Benchmark Replacement for any applicable
Interest Period and Available Tenor for any setting of such Unadjusted Benchmark
Replacement, the spread adjustment, or method for calculating or determining such spread
adjustment, (which may be a positive or negative value or zero) that has been selected by the
Administrative Agent and the Borrower for the applicable Corresponding Tenor giving due
consideration to (a) any selection or recommendation of a spread adjustment, or method for
calculating or determining such spread adjustment, for the replacement of such Benchmark
with the applicable Unadjusted Benchmark Replacement by the Relevant Governmental Body
on the applicable Benchmark Replacement Date and/or (b) any evolving or then-prevailing
market convention for determining a spread adjustment, or method for calculating or
determining such spread adjustment, for the replacement of such Benchmark with the
applicable Unadjusted Benchmark Replacement for syndicated credit facilities denominated in
Dollars at such time in the United States.
“Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes” means, with respect to any
Benchmark Replacement and any Term SOFR Loan, any technical, administrative or
operational changes (including changes to the definition of the term “Alternate Base Rate”, the
definition of the term “Business Day”, the definition of the term “U.S. Government Securities
Business Day”, the definition of the term “Interest Period”, timing and frequency of
determining rates and making payments of interest, timing of borrowing requests or
prepayment, conversion or continuation notices, length of lookback periods, the applicability of
breakage provisions and other technical, administrative or operational
 

matters) that the Administrative Agent in consultation with the Borrower decides may be
appropriate to reflect the adoption and implementation of such Benchmark and to permit the
administration thereof by the Administrative Agent in a manner substantially consistent with
market practice (or, if the Administrative Agent decides that adoption of any portion of such
market practice is not administratively feasible or if the Administrative Agent determines that
no market practice for the administration of such Benchmark exists, in such other manner of
administration as the Administrative Agent in consultation with the Borrower decides is
reasonably necessary in connection with the administration of this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents).
“Benchmark Replacement Date” means, with respect to any Benchmark, the
earliest to occur of the following events with respect to such then-current Benchmark:
(a)
in the case of clause (a) or (b) of the definition of the term
“Benchmark Transition Event”, the later of (i) the date of the public statement or
publication of information referenced therein and (ii) the date on which the
administrator of such Benchmark (or the published component used in the calculation
thereof) permanently or indefinitely ceases to provide all Available Tenors of such
Benchmark (or such component thereof); or
(b)
in the case of clause (c) of the definition of the term “Benchmark
Transition Event”, the first date on which such Benchmark (or the published component
used in the calculation thereof) has been determined and announced by the regulatory
supervisor for the administrator of such Benchmark (or such component thereof) to be
no longer representative; provided that such non-representativeness will be determined
by reference to the most recent statement or publication  referenced in  such clause (c)
and even if any Available Tenor of such Benchmark (or such component thereof)
continues to be provided on such date.
For the avoidance of doubt, (x) if the event giving rise to the Benchmark Replacement Date
occurs on the same day as, but earlier than, the Reference Time in respect of any determination,
the Benchmark Replacement Date will be deemed to have occurred prior to the Reference Time
for such determination and (y) the “Benchmark Replacement Date” will be deemed to have
occurred in the case of clause (a) or (b) with respect to any Benchmark upon the occurrence of
the applicable event or events set forth therein with respect to all then-current Available Tenors
of such Benchmark (or the published component used in the calculation thereof).
“Benchmark Transition Event” means, with respect to any Benchmark, the
occurrence of one or more of the following events with respect to such then-current
Benchmark:
(a)
a public statement or publication of information by or on behalf of the
administrator of such Benchmark (or the published component used in the calculation
thereof) announcing that such administrator has ceased or will cease to provide all
Available Tenors of such Benchmark (or such component thereof),
 

permanently or indefinitely; provided that, at the time of such statement or publication,
there is no successor administrator that will continue to provide any Available Tenor of
such Benchmark (or such component thereof);
(b)
a public statement or publication of information by the regulatory
supervisor for the administrator of such Benchmark (or the published component used
in the calculation thereof), the Federal Reserve Board, the NYFRB, the CME Term
SOFR Administrator, an insolvency official with jurisdiction over the administrator for
such Benchmark (or such component), a resolution authority with jurisdiction over the
administrator for such Benchmark (or such component) or a court or an entity with
similar insolvency or resolution authority over the administrator for such Benchmark
(or such component), in each case, which states that the administrator of such
Benchmark (or such component) has ceased or will cease to provide all Available
Tenors of such Benchmark (or such component thereof) permanently or indefinitely;
provided that, at the time of such statement or publication, there is no successor
administrator that will continue to provide any Available Tenor of such Benchmark (or
such component thereof); or
(c)
a public statement or publication of information by the regulatory
supervisor for the administrator of such Benchmark (or the published component used
in the calculation thereof) announcing that all Available Tenors of such Benchmark (or
such component thereof) are no longer representative.
For the avoidance of doubt, a “Benchmark Transition Event” will be deemed to have occurred
with respect to any Benchmark if a public statement or publication of information set forth
above has occurred with respect to each then-current Available Tenor of such Benchmark (or
the published component used in the calculation thereof).
“Benchmark Unavailability Period” means, with respect to any Benchmark, the
period (if any) (a) beginning at the time that a Benchmark Replacement Date has occurred if, at
such time, no Benchmark Replacement has replaced such then-current Benchmark for all
purposes hereunder and under any Loan Document in accordance with Section 2.14 and (b)
ending at the time that a Benchmark Replacement has replaced such then-current Benchmark
for all purposes hereunder and under any Loan Document in accordance with Section 2.14.
“Beneficial Ownership Certification” means a certification regarding beneficial
ownership or control as required by the Beneficial Ownership Regulation.
“Beneficial Ownership Regulation” means 31 C.F.R. § 1010.230.
“Benefit Plan” means (a) an “employee benefit plan” (as defined in ERISA) that
is subject to the prohibited transaction provisions of Title I of ERISA, (b) a “plan” as defined in
Section 4975 of the Code which is subject to Section 4975 of the Code or (c) any Person whose
assets include the assets of any such “employee benefit plan” or “plan” within the meaning of
the Plan Asset Regulations.
“Borrower” means Best Buy Co., Inc., a Minnesota corporation.
 

“Borrowing” means (a) Syndicated ABR Loans or, if applicable pursuant to
Section 2.14, Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Loans made or converted on the same date,
(b) Syndicated Term SOFR Loans made, converted or continued on the same date and that have
the same Interest Period or (c) Competitive Loans made on the same date and of the same Type
that have the same Interest Period (or any single Competitive Loan that does not have the same
Interest Period as any other Competitive Loan of the same Type).
“Borrowing Request” means a request by the Borrower for a Syndicated
Borrowing in accordance with Section 2.03, which shall be, in the case of any such request in
writing, substantially in the form of Exhibit B or such other form as may be acceptable to the
Administrative Agent.
“Business Day” means any day that is not a Saturday, Sunday or other day on
which commercial banks in New York City are authorized or required by law to remain closed;
provided that, when used in relation to Term SOFR Loans or Daily Simple SOFR Loans and
any interest rate settings, fundings, disbursements, settlements or payments of any Term SOFR
Loan or Daily Simple SOFR Loan, or any other dealings with respect to any Term SOFR Loan
or Daily Simple SOFR Loan, the term “Business Day” shall also exclude any day that is not a
U.S. Government Securities Business Day.
“Cash Flow Leverage Ratio” means, as of the last day of any Measurement
Period, the ratio of (a) the sum of (i) Net Interest-bearing Indebtedness on such day, (ii) the
principal amount of the Securitization Transactions on such day plus (iii) the amount of
Operating Lease Liabilities on such day, to (b) the sum of EBITDA and Rental and Lease
Expense for the Measurement Period ended on such day.
“Change in Control” means either (a) any Person or two or more Persons acting
in concert acquiring beneficial ownership (within the meaning of Rule 13d-3 of the Securities
and Exchange Commission under the Exchange Act), directly or indirectly, of common stock of
the Borrower representing 50% or more of the combined voting power of all common stock of
the Borrower entitled to vote in the election of directors or (b) occupation at any time of a
majority of the seats (other than vacant seats) on the board of directors of the Borrower by
Persons who were not (i) directors of the Borrower on the date hereof, (ii) nominated or
appointed by the board of directors of the Borrower or (iii) approved by the board of directors
of the Borrower as director candidates prior to their election.
“Change in Law” means the occurrence, after the date of this Agreement, of any
of the following:  (a) the adoption or taking effect of any law, rule, regulation or treaty, (b) any
change in any law, rule, regulation or treaty or in the administration, interpretation,
implementation or application thereof by any Governmental Authority or (c)  the making or
issuance of any request, rule, guideline or directive (whether or not having the force of law) by
any Governmental Authority; provided that, notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (i)
the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act and all requests, rules,
guidelines or directives thereunder or issued in connection therewith and (ii) all requests, rules,
guidelines or directives promulgated by
 

the Bank for International Settlements, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (or any
successor or similar authority) or the United States or foreign regulatory authorities, in each
case pursuant to Basel III, shall in each case be deemed to be a “Change in Law”, regardless of
the date enacted, adopted, promulgated or issued; and provided further that the determination
by any Lender of any additional amount owing to it, to the extent claimed in reliance on the
preceding proviso, shall be made in good faith in a manner generally consistent with such
Lender’s standard practices and only if such Lender seeks, or intends to seek, reimbursement
for such additional amounts under other syndicated credit facilities involving similarly situated
borrowers under which such Lender is a lender and may seek such reimbursement.
“Class”, when used in reference to any Loan or Borrowing, refers to whether
such Loan, or the Loans comprising such Borrowing, are Syndicated Loans or Competitive
Loans.
“CME Term SOFR Administrator” means CME Group Benchmark
Administration Limited as administrator of the forward-looking term Secured Overnight
Financing Rate (SOFR) (or a successor administrator).
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
“Commitment” means, with respect to each Lender, the commitment of such
Lender to make Syndicated Loans and to acquire participations in Letters of Credit hereunder,
expressed as an amount representing the maximum aggregate amount of such Lender’s
Revolving Credit Exposure hereunder, as such commitment may be (a) reduced or increased
from time to time pursuant to Section 2.09 and (b)  reduced or increased from time to time
pursuant to assignments by or to such Lender pursuant to Section 10.04.  The initial amount of
each Lender’s Commitment is set forth on Schedule 2.01, in the Assignment and Assumption
pursuant to which such Lender shall have assumed its Commitment or, in the case of an
Additional Commitment Lender, in the agreement reflecting its Commitment Increase (in the
case of Section 2.09) or its new or additional commitment (in the case of Section 2.20), as
applicable.  The initial aggregate amount of the Lenders’ Commitments is $1,250,000,000.
“Commitment Increase” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.09(e).
“Commitment Increase Date” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.09(e).
“Commitment Termination Date” means (a) April 12, 2028 (or, if such date is
not a Business Day, the immediately preceding Business Day) or (b) with respect to any Lender
the Commitment of which has been extended pursuant to Section 2.20, the date to which such
Lender’s Commitment has been so extended.
“Communications” means, collectively, any notice, demand, communication,
information, document or other material provided by or on behalf of the Borrower or any other
Obligor pursuant to any Loan Document or the transactions contemplated therein that is
distributed by or to the Administrative Agent, any Lender or any Issuing Lender by means of
electronic communications pursuant to Section  9.03, including through the Approved
Electronic Platform.
“Competitive”, when used in reference to any Loan or Borrowing, refers to
whether such Loan, or the Loans comprising such Borrowing, are made pursuant to
Section 2.04.
 

“Competitive Bid” means an offer by a Lender to make a Competitive Loan in
accordance with Section 2.04.
“Competitive Bid Rate” means, with respect to any Competitive Bid, the Margin
or the Fixed Rate, as applicable, offered by the Lender making such Competitive Bid.
“Competitive Bid Request” means a request by the Borrower for Competitive
Bids in accordance with Section 2.04.
“Connection Income Taxes” means Other Connection Taxes that are imposed on
or measured by net income (however denominated) or that are franchise Taxes or branch profits
Taxes.
“Control” means the possession, directly or indirectly, of the power to direct or
cause the direction of the management or policies of a Person, whether through the ability to
exercise voting power, by contract or otherwise.    “Controlling” and “Controlled” have
meanings correlative thereto.
“Corresponding Tenor”   with respect to any Available Tenor means, as
applicable, either a tenor (including overnight) or an interest payment period having
approximately the same length (disregarding business day adjustment) as such Available Tenor.
“Daily Simple SOFR” means, for any day (a “SOFR Rate Day”), a rate per
annum equal to SOFR for the day that is five U.S. Government Securities Business Days prior
to (a) if such SOFR Rate Day is a U.S. Government Securities Business Day, such SOFR Rate
Day or (b) if such SOFR Rate Day is not a U.S. Government Securities Business Day, the U.S.
Government Securities Business Day immediately preceding such SOFR Rate Day, in each
case, as such SOFR is published by the SOFR Administrator on the SOFR Administrator’s
Website.  Any change in Daily Simple SOFR due to a change in SOFR shall be effective from
and including the effective date of such change in SOFR without notice to the Borrower.
“Daily Simple SOFR Borrowing” means any Borrowing comprised of Daily
Simple SOFR Loans.
“Daily Simple SOFR Loan” means any Loan that bears interest at a rate
determined by reference to the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR.
“Default” means any event or condition which constitutes an Event of Default
or which upon notice, lapse of time or both would, unless cured or waived, become an Event of
Default.
“Defaulting Lender” means any Lender that (a) has failed, within two Business
Days of the date required to be funded or paid, (i) to fund any portion of its Loans, (ii) to fund
any portion of its participations in Letters of Credit or (iii) to pay to the Administrative Agent,
any Issuing Lender or any other Lender any other amount
 

required to be paid by it hereunder, unless, in the case of clause (i) above, such Lender notifies
the Administrative Agent in writing that such failure is the result of such Lender’s good faith
determination that a condition precedent to funding (specifically identified in writing,
including, if applicable, by reference to a specific Default) has not been satisfied, (b) has
notified the Borrower, the Administrative Agent or any Issuing Lender in writing, or has made
a public statement to the effect, that it does not intend or expect to comply with any of its
funding obligations under this Agreement (unless such writing or public statement indicates
that such position is based on such Lender’s good-faith determination that a condition
precedent (specifically identified in such writing, including, if applicable, by reference to a
specific Default) to funding a Loan cannot be satisfied) or generally under other agreements in
which it commits to extend credit, (c) has failed, within three Business Days after request by
the Administrative Agent or any Issuing Lender, made in good faith, to provide a certification
in writing from an authorized officer of such Lender that it will comply with its obligations to
fund prospective Loans and participations in then outstanding Letters of Credit, provided that
such Lender shall cease to be a Defaulting Lender pursuant to this clause (c) upon the receipt
by the Administrative Agent or such Issuing Lender of such certification, (d) has become the
subject of a Bankruptcy Event or (e) has, or has a Lender Parent that has, become the subject of
a Bail-In Action.
“Documentary Letter of Credit” means a Letter of Credit which requires that the
drafts thereunder be accompanied by a document of title covering or securing title to the goods
acquired with the proceeds of such drafts.
“Documentation Agent” means each of Bank of America, N.A., Citibank, N.A.
and PNC Bank, National Association, in its capacity as documentation agent for the credit
facility established hereunder.
“Dollars” or “$” refers to lawful money of the United States of America.
“Domestic Securitization Transaction” means any transfer by the Borrower or any of its
Domestic Subsidiaries of its accounts receivable or interests (including security interests) therein  (a) to
a trust, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other entity, which transfer is funded in
whole or in part, directly or indirectly, by the incurrence or issuance by the transferee or successor
transferee of Indebtedness or other securities that are to receive payments from, or that represent
interests in, the cash flow derived from such accounts receivable or interests therein, or (b) directly to
one or more investors or other purchasers.
“Domestic Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary of the Borrower organized or
incorporated under the laws of any State within the United States of America or the District of
Columbia.
“EBITDA” means, for any period, the consolidated net earnings (loss) of the Borrower
and its consolidated Subsidiaries determined in accordance with GAAP (but excluding therefrom any
portion thereof attributable to any noncontrolling interest in a Subsidiary) plus (a) to the extent
deducted in determining such consolidated net earnings (loss), the sum of (i) interest expense (net of
interest income), income tax expense and depreciation and
 

amortization, all as determined in accordance with GAAP, (ii) extraordinary, non-recurring or unusual
charges or losses, (iii) charges resulting from the application of FASB Statement Number 123 (Revised),
(iv) other non-cash charges, and (v) losses arising from the sale of assets other than in the ordinary
course of business, minus (b) to the extent included in such consolidated net earnings (loss),
extraordinary gains and gains arising from the sale of assets other than in the ordinary course of
business.
“EEA Financial Institution” means (a) any credit institution or investment firm
established in any EEA Member Country that is subject to the supervision of an EEA
Resolution Authority, (b) any entity established in an EEA Member Country that is a parent of
an institution described in clause (a) above or (c) any financial institution established in an
EEA Member Country that is a subsidiary of an institution described in clause (a) or (b) above
and is subject to consolidated supervision with its parent.
“EEA Member Country” means any member state of the European Union,
Iceland, Liechtenstein and Norway.
“EEA Resolution Authority” means any public administrative authority or any
Person entrusted with public administrative authority of any EEA Member Country (including
any delegee) having responsibility for the resolution of any EEA Financial Institution.
“Effective Date” means the date on which the Administrative Agent declares
this Agreement effective as provided in Section 5.01.
“Electronic Signature”  means an electronic sound, symbol or process attached
to, or associated with, a contract or other record and adopted by a Person with the intent to
sign, authenticate or accept such contract or record.
“Eligible Assignee” means (a) a Lender, (b) an Affiliate of a Lender, (c) an
Approved Fund and (d) any other Person, other than, in each case, (i) a Defaulting Lender or a
Lender Parent thereof, (ii) the Borrower or any Subsidiary or other Affiliate of the Borrower,
(iii) a natural person or (iv) a holding company, investment vehicle or trust for, or owned and
operated for the primary benefit of, a natural person, other than, in the case of this clause (iv),
any such holding company, investment vehicle or trust that (A) has not been established for the
primary purpose of acquiring Loans or Commitments, (B) is managed by a professional
advisor, who is not such natural person or a relative thereof, having significant experience in
the business of making or purchasing commercial loans, (C) has assets greater than
$25,000,000 and (D) makes or purchases commercial loans and similar extensions of credit in
the ordinary course of its business as significant part of its activities.
“Environmental Laws” means all laws, rules, regulations, codes, ordinances,
orders, decrees, judgments, injunctions, notices or binding agreements issued, promulgated or
entered into by any Governmental Authority, relating in any way to the environment,
preservation or reclamation of natural resources, the management, release or threatened release
of any Hazardous Material or to health and safety matters.
 

“Environmental Liability” means any liability, contingent or otherwise
(including any liability for damages, costs of environmental remediation, fines, penalties or
indemnities), directly or indirectly resulting from or based upon (a)  violation of any
Environmental Law, (b)  the generation, use, handling, transportation, storage, treatment or
disposal of any Hazardous Materials, (c) exposure to any Hazardous Materials, (d) the Release
or threatened Release of any Hazardous Materials into the environment or (e) any contract,
agreement or other consensual arrangement pursuant to which liability is assumed or imposed
with respect to any of the foregoing.
“Equity Interests” means shares of capital stock, partnership interests,
membership interests in a limited liability company, beneficial interests in a trust or other
equity ownership interests in a Person, and any warrants, options or other rights entitling the
holder thereof to purchase or acquire any such equity interest (other than, prior to the date of
conversion, Indebtedness that is convertible into any such Equity Interests).
“ERISA” means the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 as
amended from time to time, and the rules and regulations promulgated thereunder.
“ERISA Affiliate” means any trade or business (whether or not incorporated)
that, together with the Borrower, is treated as a single employer under Section 414(b) or (c) of
the Code, or, solely for purposes of Section 302 of ERISA and Section 412 of the Code, is
treated as a single employer under Section 414 of the Code.
“ERISA Event” means (a) any “reportable event”, as defined in Section 4043 of
ERISA or the regulations issued thereunder with respect to a Plan (other than an event for
which the 30‑day notice period is waived); (b) a failure by any Plan to meet the “minimum
funding standard” (as defined in Section 412 of the Code or Section 302 of ERISA) applicable
to such Plan, in each instance, whether or not waived; (c) the filing pursuant to Section 412(c)
of the Code or Section 302(c) of ERISA of an application for a waiver of the minimum funding
standard with respect to any Plan; (d)  the incurrence by the Borrower or any of its ERISA
Affiliates of any liability under Title IV of ERISA with respect to the termination of any Plan;
(e) the receipt by the Borrower or any ERISA Affiliate from the PBGC or a plan administrator
of any notice relating to an intention to terminate any Plan or Plans or to appoint a trustee to
administer any Plan; (f) the incurrence by the Borrower or any of its ERISA Affiliates of any
liability with respect to the withdrawal or partial withdrawal from any Plan or Multiemployer
Plan; or (g) the receipt by the Borrower or any ERISA Affiliate of any notice, or the receipt by
any Multiemployer Plan from the Borrower or any ERISA Affiliate of any notice, concerning
the imposition of Withdrawal Liability or a determination that a Multiemployer Plan is, or is
expected to be, insolvent within the meaning of Title IV of ERISA.
“EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule” means the EU Bail-In Legislation Schedule
published by the Loan Market Association (or any successor Person), as in effect from time to
time.
“Events of Default” has the meaning set forth in Article VIII.
 

“Excess Funding Guarantor” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.08.
“Excess Payment” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.08.
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
“Excluded Taxes” means, with respect to the Administrative Agent, any Lender,
any Issuing Lender or any other recipient of any payment to be made by or on account of any
obligation of the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor hereunder or under any other Loan
Document, (a) Taxes imposed on or measured by net income (however denominated), franchise
Taxes or minimum Taxes (in lieu of net income Taxes), and branch profits Taxes, in each case
(i) imposed as a result of such recipient being organized under the laws of, or having its
principal office or, in the case of any Lender, its applicable lending office located in, the
jurisdiction imposing such Tax (or any political subdivision thereof) or (ii) that are Other
Connection Taxes, (b) in the case of a Lender (other than an assignee pursuant to a request by
the Borrower under Section 2.19(b) or 2.20(b)), any withholding Tax that is imposed by the
United States of America on amounts payable to such Lender at the time such Lender becomes
a party hereto (or designates a new lending office), except to the extent that such Lender (or its
assignor, if any) was entitled, at the time of designation of a new lending office (or
assignment), to receive additional amounts from the Borrower with respect to such withholding
tax pursuant to Section 2.17(a) or 2.17(c), (c) Taxes attributable to such Lender’s or Issuing
Lender’s failure to comply with Section 2.17(f) and (d) any U.S. Federal withholding Taxes
imposed under FATCA.
“Existing Commitment Termination Date” has the meaning set forth in
Section 2.20(a).
“Existing Credit Agreement” means the Five-Year Credit Agreement dated as of
May 18, 2021, among the Borrower, the subsidiary guarantors party thereto, JPMorgan, as
administrative agent, and the lenders party thereto.
“Existing Letters of Credit” means each letter of credit previously issued for the
account of the Borrower pursuant to the Existing Credit Agreement that is (a) outstanding on
the Effective Date and (b) listed on Schedule 2.06(a).
“Extension Closing Date” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.20(a).
“Extension Request” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.20(a).
“FATCA” means Sections 1471 through 1474 of the Code, as of the date of this
Agreement (or any amended or successor version that is substantively comparable and not
materially more onerous to comply with), any current or future regulations or official
interpretations thereof, any agreements entered into pursuant to Section  1471(b)(1) of the
Code, and any fiscal or regulatory legislation, rules or practices adopted pursuant to any
intergovernmental agreement, treaty or convention among Governmental Authorities and
implementing such Sections of the Code.
 

“Federal Funds Effective Rate” means, for any day, the rate calculated by the
NYFRB based on such day’s federal funds transactions by depository institutions, as
determined in such manner as shall be set forth on the NYFRB’s Website from time to time,
and published on the next succeeding Business Day by the NYFRB as the effective federal
funds rate; provided that if such rate shall be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be
zero.
“Federal Reserve Board” means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System of the United States of America.
“Finance Lease” means any lease of (or other arrangement conveying the right
to use) real or personal property, or a combination thereof, that is required to be classified and
accounted for as a finance lease, capital lease or otherwise as long-term debt (including the
current portion thereof) on a balance sheet (excluding the footnotes thereto) in accordance with
GAAP.  For purposes of Section 7.01, a Finance Lease shall be deemed to be secured by a Lien
on the property being leased and such property shall be deemed to be owned by the lessee.
“Finance Lease Obligations” means, as applied to any Person, the obligations of
such Person to pay rent or other amounts under any Finance Lease, and the amount of such
obligations shall be the amount thereof set forth on the balance sheet of such Person
determined in accordance with GAAP.
“Financial Officer” means the principal financial officer, chief financial officer,
principal accounting officer, treasurer, controller or director-treasury of the Borrower; provided
that, when such term is used in reference to any document executed by, or a certification of, a
Financial Officer, the secretary or assistant secretary of the Borrower shall have, theretofore
(including on the Effective Date) or concurrently therewith, delivered an incumbency
certificate to the Administrative Agent as to the authority of such individual.
“Fixed Rate” means, with respect to any Competitive Loan (other than a
Competitive Term SOFR Loan), the fixed rate of interest per annum specified by the Lender
making such Competitive Loan in its related Competitive Bid.  When used in reference to any
Loan or Borrowing, “Fixed Rate” refers to whether such Loan, or the Loans comprising such
Borrowing, are Competitive Loans bearing interest at a Fixed Rate.
“Floor” means the benchmark rate floor, if any, provided in this Agreement
initially (as of the execution of this Agreement, the modification, amendment or renewal of this
Agreement or otherwise) with respect to the Adjusted Term SOFR or the Adjusted Daily
Simple SOFR, as applicable.  For the avoidance of doubt, the initial Floor for each of Adjusted
Term SOFR or the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is zero.
“Foreign Lender” means any Lender that is not a “United States Person” as
defined in Section 7701(a)(30) of the Code.
 

“Foreign Securitization Transaction” means any transfer by any Foreign Subsidiary of its
accounts receivable or interests (including security interests) therein (a) to a trust, partnership,
corporation, limited liability company or other entity, which transfer is funded in whole or in part,
directly or indirectly, by the incurrence or issuance by the transferee or successor transferee of
Indebtedness or other securities that are to receive payments from, or that represent interests in, the
cash flow derived from such accounts receivable or interests therein, or (b) directly to one or more
investors or other purchasers.
“Foreign Subsidiary” means any Subsidiary of the Borrower that is not a Domestic
Subsidiary.
“Foreign Subsidiary Holding Corporation” means a Domestic Subsidiary substantially all
the assets of which are capital stock and/or Indebtedness of one or more Foreign Subsidiaries that are
“controlled foreign corporations” within the meaning of Section 957 of the Code.
“GAAP” means generally accepted accounting principles in the United States of
America as in effect from time to time.
“Governmental Authority” means the government of the United States of
America or any other nation, or of any political subdivision thereof, whether state or local, and
any agency, authority, instrumentality, regulatory body, court, central bank or other entity
exercising executive, legislative, judicial, taxing, regulatory or administrative powers or
functions of or pertaining to government (including any supra-national bodies such as the
European Union or the European Central Bank).
“Guarantee” of or by any Person (the “guarantor”) means any obligation,
contingent or otherwise, of the guarantor guaranteeing or having the economic effect of
guaranteeing any Indebtedness or other obligation of any other Person (the “primary obligor”)
in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, and including any obligation of the guarantor,
direct or indirect, (a)  to purchase or pay (or advance or supply funds for the purchase or
payment of) such Indebtedness or other obligation or to purchase (or to advance or supply
funds for the purchase of) any security for the payment thereof, (b)  to purchase or lease
property, securities or services for the purpose of assuring the owner of such Indebtedness or
other obligation of the payment thereof, (c) to maintain working capital, equity capital or any
other financial statement condition or liquidity of the primary obligor so as to enable the
primary obligor to pay such Indebtedness or other obligation or (d)  as an account party in
respect of any letter of credit or letter of guaranty issued to support such Indebtedness or
obligation; provided that the term Guarantee shall not include endorsements for collection or
deposit in the ordinary course of business.
“Guarantee Assumption Agreement” means a Guarantee Assumption Agreement
substantially in the form of Exhibit C by (a) any Domestic Subsidiary that, pursuant to Section
6.08, is required to become a “Subsidiary Guarantor” hereunder or (b) any Domestic
Subsidiary that, pursuant to Section 3.10, is designated a “Subsidiary Guarantor” by the
Borrower, in each case in favor of the Administrative Agent.
“Guaranteed Obligations” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.01.
 

“Hazardous Materials” means all explosive or radioactive substances or wastes
and all hazardous or toxic substances, wastes or other pollutants, including petroleum or
petroleum distillates, asbestos or asbestos containing materials, polychlorinated biphenyls,
radon gas, infectious or medical wastes and all other substances or wastes of any nature
regulated as “toxic” or “hazardous” or as a “pollutant” or “contaminant” by any Governmental
Authority.
“Hedging Agreement” means any agreement with respect to any swap, forward,
future or derivative transaction or option or similar agreement involving, or settled by reference
to, one or more rates, currencies, commodities, equity or debt instruments or securities, or
economic, financial or pricing indices or measures of economic, financial or pricing risk or
value or any similar transaction or any combination of these transactions; provided that no
phantom stock or similar plan (including the Borrower’s omnibus stock and incentive plan and
the Borrower’s employee stock purchase plan) providing for payments only on account of
services provided by current or former directors, officers, employees or consultants of the
Borrower or its Subsidiaries shall be a Hedging Agreement.
“Indebtedness”  means, with respect to any Person at any time of determination,
without duplication, (a) all obligations of such Person for borrowed money, (b) all obligations
of such Person evidenced by bonds, debentures, notes or other similar instruments, (c)  all
obligations of such Person upon which interest charges are customarily paid or accrued by such
Person, (d)  all obligations of such Person for the deferred purchase price of property not
constituting a current liability, (e)  all Finance Lease Obligations of such Person, (f)  all
obligations of such Person, actual or contingent, as an account party in respect of letters of
credit or bankers’ acceptances, (g) all Guarantees by such Person of Indebtedness of others and
(h) all Indebtedness of others secured by any Lien on property owned by such Person, whether
or not the Indebtedness secured thereby has been assumed.  The Indebtedness of any Person
shall include the Indebtedness of any other Person (including any partnership in which such
Person is a general partner) to the extent such Person is liable therefor as a result of such
Person’s ownership interest in or other relationship with such other Person, except to the extent
the terms of such Indebtedness provide that such Person is not liable therefor. For the
avoidance of doubt, the term “Indebtedness” does not include obligations in respect of
Operating Leases, including any Operating Leases arising under sale and lease back
transactions.
“Indemnified Taxes” means Taxes imposed on or with respect to any payment
made by or on account of any obligation of the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor, other
than Excluded Taxes.
“Indemnitee” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.03(b).
“Information” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.12.
“Interest Election Request” means a request by the Borrower to convert or
continue a Syndicated Borrowing in accordance with Section 2.08, which shall be, in the
 

case of any such request in writing, substantially in the form of Exhibit D or such other form as
may be acceptable to the Administrative Agent.
“Interest Payment Date” means (a) with respect to any Syndicated ABR Loan,
each Quarterly Date, (b) with respect to any Term SOFR Loan, the last day of each Interest
Period therefor and, in the case of any Interest Period for a Term SOFR Loan of more than
three months’ duration, each day prior to the last day of such Interest Period that occurs at
three-month intervals after the first day of such Interest Period, (c) with respect to any Daily
Simple SOFR Loan (if such Type of Loan is applicable pursuant to Section 2.14), each date
that is on the numerically corresponding date in each calendar month that is one month after
the borrowing of, or conversion to, such Daily Simple SOFR Loan (or if there is no such
numerically corresponding date in such month, then the last day of such month) and (d) with
respect to any Fixed Rate Loan, the last day of the Interest Period therefor and, in the case of
any Interest Period for a Fixed Rate Loan of more than 90 days’ duration (unless otherwise
specified in the applicable Competitive Bid Request), each day prior to the last day of such
Interest Period that occurs at 90‑day intervals after the first day of such Interest Period, and any
other dates that are specified in the applicable Competitive Bid Request as Interest Payment
Dates with respect to such Loan.
“Interest Period” means:
(a)
for any Syndicated Term SOFR Loan or Borrowing, the period
commencing on the date of such Loan or Borrowing and ending on the numerically
corresponding day in the calendar month that is one, three or six months (or, with the
consent of each Lender, twelve months) thereafter, as specified in the applicable
Borrowing Request or Interest Election Request;
(b)
for any Competitive Term SOFR Loan or Borrowing, the period
commencing on the date of such Loan or Borrowing and ending on the numerically
corresponding day in the calendar month that is one, three or six months thereafter, as
specified in the applicable Competitive Bid Request; and
(c)
for any Fixed Rate Loan or Borrowing, the period (which shall not be
less than seven days or more than 360 days) commencing on the date of such Loan or
Borrowing and ending on the date specified in the applicable Competitive Bid Request;
provided that (i) if any Interest Period would end on a day other than a Business Day, such
Interest Period shall be extended to the next succeeding Business Day unless, in the case of an
Interest Period pertaining to a Term SOFR Borrowing only, such next succeeding Business Day
would fall in the next calendar month, in which case such Interest Period shall end on the next
preceding Business Day, (ii) any Interest Period pertaining to a Term SOFR Borrowing that
commences on the last Business Day of a calendar month (or on a day for which there is no
numerically corresponding day in the last calendar month of such Interest Period) shall end on
the last Business Day of the last calendar month of such Interest Period, (iii) any Interest Period
must comply with Section
 

2.02(d) and (iv) no tenor that has been removed from this definition pursuant to Section 2.14(b)
(iv) shall be available for specification in any Borrowing Request or Interest Election
Request.  For purposes hereof, the date of a Loan or Borrowing initially shall be the date on
which such Loan or Borrowing is made and, in the case of a Syndicated Loan or Borrowing,
thereafter shall be the effective date of the most recent conversion or continuation of such Loan
or Borrowing.
“ISP” means the “International Standby Practices 1998” published by the
Institute of International Banking Law & Practice, Inc. (or such later version thereof as may be
in effect at the time of issuance).
“Issuing Lender” means each of JPMorgan, U.S. Bank National Association,
Bank of America, N.A., Citibank, N.A., PNC Bank, National Association and each other
Lender designated by the Borrower as an “Issuing Lender” hereunder that has agreed to such
designation (and is reasonably acceptable to the Administrative Agent) in accordance with
Section 2.06(j), each in its capacity as an issuer of one or more Letters of Credit hereunder, in
each case so long as such Person shall not have ceased to be an Issuing Lender hereunder
pursuant to a termination in accordance with Section 2.06(j).  Any Issuing Lender may, in its
discretion, arrange for one or more Letters of Credit to be issued by Affiliates of such Issuing
Lender, in which case the term “Issuing Lender” shall include any such Affiliate with respect to
Letters of Credit issued by such Affiliate (it being agreed that such Issuing Lender shall cause
such Affiliate to comply with the requirements of Section 2.06 with respect to such Letters of
Credit).
“JPMorgan” means JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
“LC Disbursement” means a payment made by an Issuing Lender pursuant to a
Letter of Credit.
“LC Exposure” means, at any time, the sum of (a)  the aggregate undrawn
amount of all outstanding Letters of Credit at such time plus (b) the aggregate amount of all LC
Disbursements that have not yet been reimbursed by or on behalf of the Borrower at such
time.  The LC Exposure of any Lender at any time shall be its Applicable Percentage of the
total LC Exposure at such time, adjusted to give effect to any reallocation under Section
2.21(c) of the LC Exposures of Defaulting Lenders in effect at such time. 
“LC Sublimit Share” means, with respect to any Issuing Lender, the maximum
permitted amount of the LC Exposure that may be attributable to Letters of Credit issued by
such Issuing Lender.  The amount of each Issuing Lender’s LC Sublimit Share is set forth on
Schedule 2.06(b) or, in the case of any Issuing Lender that becomes an Issuing Lender
hereunder pursuant to Section 2.06(j), in a written agreement referred to in such Section or, in
each case, is such other maximum permitted amount with respect to any Issuing Lender as may
have been agreed in writing (and notified in writing to the Administrative Agent) by such
Issuing Lender and the Borrower.
 

“Lender Parent” means, with respect to any Lender, any Person in respect of
which such Lender is a Subsidiary.
“Lender-Related Person” means each of the Administrative Agent (and any sub-
agent thereof), the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the Documentation Agents, the Issuing
Lenders and the Lenders and any Related Party of any of the foregoing Persons.
“Lenders” means the Persons listed on Schedule 2.01 and any other Person that
shall have become a party hereto pursuant to an Assignment and Assumption or in accordance
with Section 2.09 or 2.20, other than any such Person that ceases to be a party hereto pursuant
to an Assignment and Assumption. 
“Letter of Credit” means each Existing Letter of Credit and any letter of credit
issued pursuant to this Agreement.
“Liabilities” means any losses, claims (including intraparty claims), demands,
damages or liabilities.
“Lien” means, with respect to any asset, (a) any mortgage, deed of trust, lien,
pledge, hypothecation, encumbrance, charge or security interest in, on or of such asset and
(b)  the interest of a vendor or a lessor under any conditional sale agreement, title retention
agreement or Finance Lease (but not, for the avoidance of doubt, any Operating Lease) relating
to such asset.
“Loan Documents” means this Agreement, each Guarantee Assumption
Agreement, each agreement referred to in Section  2.06(j), each agreement referred to in
Section 2.09(e)(ii)(B) and each agreement referred to in Section 2.20(b).
“Loans” means the loans made by the Lenders to the Borrower pursuant to this
Agreement.
“Margin” means, with respect to any Competitive Loan bearing interest at a rate
based on the Adjusted Term SOFR, the marginal rate of interest, if any, to be added to or
subtracted from the Adjusted Term SOFR to determine the rate of interest applicable to such
Loan, as specified by the Lender making such Loan in its related Competitive Bid.
“Margin Stock” means “margin stock” within the meaning of Regulation  U
issued by the Federal Reserve Board, as from time to time amended.
“Material Adverse Effect” means (a) a materially adverse effect on the business,
assets, operations, or financial condition of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries taken as a whole,
(b) material impairment of the ability of the Obligors taken as a whole to perform any material
obligation under any Loan Document to which such Person is or becomes a party or
(c)  material impairment of any of the material rights of, or benefits available to, the
Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lenders or the Lenders under any Loan Document.
 

“Material Indebtedness” means Indebtedness (other than the Loans and Letters
of Credit) and Securitization Transactions, or obligations in respect of one or more Hedging
Agreements, of any one or more of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries in an aggregate principal
amount exceeding $150,000,000.    For purposes of determining Material Indebtedness, the
“principal amount” of (a) the obligations of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries in respect
of any Hedging Agreement at any time shall be the maximum aggregate amount (giving effect
to any netting agreements) that the Borrower or any Subsidiary would be required to pay if
such Hedging Agreement were terminated at such time and (b) any Securitization Transaction
shall be determined as set forth in the definition of such term.
“Material Subsidiary” means, at any time, with respect to any fiscal year of the
Borrower, any Subsidiary which accounted for an amount equal to or greater than 5.0% of the
consolidated aggregate revenues of the Borrower for such fiscal year, provided that,
notwithstanding the foregoing, each Subsidiary Guarantor shall be deemed to be a “Material
Subsidiary”.
“Measurement Period” means a period of four consecutive fiscal quarters
ending on the last day of a fiscal quarter of the Borrower.
“MNPI” means material information concerning the Borrower or any of its
Related Parties or any of their securities that has not been disseminated in a manner making it
available to investors generally, within the meaning of Regulation FD under the Exchange
Act.  For purposes of this definition, “material information” means information concerning the
Borrower, its Related Parties or any of their securities that could reasonably be expected to be
material for purposes of the United States federal and state securities laws.
“Moody’s” means Moody’s Investors Service, Inc., and any successor to its
rating agency business.
“Moody’s Rating” means Moody’s rating of the Borrower’s long-term, non-
credit enhanced, senior unsecured debt.
“Multiemployer Plan” means a multiemployer plan as defined in Section
4001(a)(3) of ERISA.
“Net Interest-bearing Indebtedness” means, as of the last day of any
Measurement Period, all Indebtedness of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries for borrowed
money or that bears interest (including all Finance Lease Obligations) and that, in accordance
with GAAP, would be classified as long-term or short-term debt on the consolidated balance
sheet of the Borrower, net of all the cash, cash equivalents and Permitted Investments held by
the Borrower or any Subsidiary as of such date, in the amount that would be set forth on the
consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower in accordance with GAAP, but excluding any such
cash, cash equivalents and Permitted Investments that (a) are subject to any Liens (other than
Liens in favor of the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lenders or the Lenders created under
the Loan
 

Documents), (b) are subject to any contractual restriction or any restriction imposed by any
Governmental Authority, in each case, that materially restricts (i) the use or disposition thereof
or (ii) in the case of any cash, cash equivalents or Permitted Investments denominated in a
currency other than Dollars, the conversion thereof to Dollars, (c) are held to fund deferred
compensation or other pension or other employee benefit obligations or (d) are held by a
Subsidiary, to the extent such Subsidiary (or any Subsidiary that is its parent company) is
subject to any restriction on the distribution of such cash, cash equivalents or Permitted
Investments to the Borrower without prior approval or waiver (that has not been obtained),
pursuant to the terms of such Subsidiary’s (or any such parent company’s) organizational
documents or any agreement, judgment, order, law or other restriction binding upon such
Subsidiary (or any such parent company); provided that in no event shall Net Interest-bearing
Indebtedness be less than zero.
“Non-Defaulting Lender” means, at any time, any Lender that is not a
Defaulting Lender at such time.
“Non-Extending Lender” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.20(a).
“NYFRB” means the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
“NYFRB Rate” means, for any day, the greater of (a) the Federal Funds
Effective Rate in effect on such day and (b) the Overnight Bank Funding Rate in effect on such
day (or for any day that is not a Business Day, for the immediately preceding Business Day);
provided that if none of such rates are published for any day that is a Business Day, the term
“NYFRB Rate” means the rate for a federal funds transaction quoted at 11:00 a.m., New York
City time, on such day received by the Administrative Agent from a federal funds broker of
recognized standing selected by it; provided  further that if any of the aforesaid rates as so
determined would be less than zero, such rate shall be deemed to be zero.
“NYFRB’s 
Website” 
means 
the 
website 
of 
the 
NYFRB 
at
http://www.newyorkfed.org, or any successor source.
“Obligor” means the Borrower and each Subsidiary Guarantor.
“OFAC” means the United States Treasury Department Office of Foreign Assets
Control.
“Operating Lease” means any lease of (or other arrangement conveying the right
to use) real or personal property, or a combination thereof, other than a Finance Lease.
“Operating Lease Liabilities” means, as applied to any Person, the obligations of
such Person to pay rent or other amounts under any Operating Lease, and the amount of such
obligations shall be the amount thereof set forth on the balance sheet of such Person
determined in accordance with GAAP.
 

“Other Connection Taxes” means, with respect to the Administrative Agent, any
Lender, any Issuing Lender or any other recipient, Taxes imposed as a result of a present or
former connection between such recipient and the jurisdiction imposing such Taxes (other than
connections arising from such recipient having executed, delivered, become a party to,
performed its obligations under, received payments under, received or perfected a security
interest under, engaged in any other transaction pursuant to or enforced any Loan Document, or
sold or assigned an interest in any Loan, any other Guaranteed obligation or any Loan
Document).
“Other Taxes” means all present or future stamp, court, or documentary,
intangible, recording, filing or similar Taxes arising from any payment made hereunder or
under any other Loan Document or from the execution, delivery, performance, enforcement or
registration of, from the receipt or perfection of a security interest under, or otherwise with
respect to, this Agreement or any other Loan Document, except (a) any such Taxes that are
Other Connection Taxes imposed with respect to an assignment (other than an assignment
pursuant to a request by the Borrower under Section 2.19(b) or 2.20(b)) and (b) any Excluded
Taxes.
“Overnight Bank Funding Rate” means, for any day, the rate comprised of both
overnight federal funds and overnight eurodollar transactions denominated in Dollars by U.S.-
managed banking offices of depository institutions, as such composite rate shall be determined
by the NYFRB as set forth on the NYFRB’s Website from time to time, and published on the
next succeeding Business Day by the NYFRB as an overnight bank funding rate.
“Participant” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.04(c)(i).
“Participant Register” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.04(c)(i).
“Payment” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.06(c)(i).
“Payment Notice” has the meaning set forth in Section 9.06(c)(ii).
“PBGC” means the Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation referred to and
defined in ERISA.
“Permitted Encumbrances” means:
(a)
Liens for Taxes not delinquent or which are being contested in good
faith by appropriate proceedings and for which whatever reserves required by GAAP
have been established;
(b)
Liens consisting of easements, rights-of-way, zoning restrictions,
restrictions on the use of real property, and defects and irregularities in the title thereto
and other similar charges or encumbrances;
(c)
Liens imposed by law, such as landlord’s, materialmens’, mechanic’s,
workmen’s, repairmen’s, carriers’, warehousemans’, vendors’ or
 

other similar liens and encumbrances arising in the ordinary course of the business of
the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries, or governmental (federal, state or municipal)
Liens arising out of contracts for the sale of products or services by the Borrower or any
of its Subsidiaries, in each case, securing obligations that are not overdue by more than
30 days or which are being contested in compliance with Section 6.04, or deposits or
pledges to obtain the release of any of the foregoing Liens;
(d)
deposits to secure the performance of bids, trade contracts, leases,
statutory obligations, government contracts, supply agreements, utilities, performance
and return-of money bonds contracts, surety and appeal bonds and other obligations of
a like nature, in each case in the ordinary course of business;
(e)
licenses, leases, or subleases granted to third Persons or to the
Borrower or its Subsidiaries by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries in the ordinary course
of business;
(f)
Liens encumbering deposits made to secure obligations arising from
statutory, regulatory, contractual or warranty requirements of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries (excluding deposits securing the repayment of Indebtedness);
(g)
Liens encumbering deposits made, and Liens encumbering deposit
and securities accounts (or funds, securities or other securities entitlements credited
thereto), to secure obligations of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries arising under
insurance relating to customer warranty, service or repair plans, including any such
Liens granted to any financial institution that has issued a letter of credit for the account
of the Borrower or any Subsidiary supporting any such obligations;
(h) 
Liens encumbering customary initial deposits and margin deposits,
and other Liens incurred in the ordinary course of business and which are within the
general parameters customary in the industry securing obligations, under commodities
agreements;
(i)
Liens arising in connection with Finance Lease Obligations; provided
that no such Lien shall extend to or cover any assets other than the assets subject to the
applicable leases;
(j)
 (i) any interest or title of a lessor or sublessor under any lease, (ii) any
restriction or encumbrance that the interest or title of such lessor or sublessor may be
subject to, or (iii) any subordination of the interest of the lessee or sublessee under such
lease to any restriction or encumbrance referred to in the preceding clause (ii);
(k)
Liens on any property or assets of any Person existing at the time
such Person is merged into or consolidated with the Borrower or any Subsidiary,
provided that such Lien was not incurred in contemplation thereof and does not extend
to any other property of the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries;
 

(l)
Liens arising from filing UCC financing statements relating solely to
leases not prohibited by this Agreement;
(m)
Liens in favor of customs and revenue authorities arising as a matter
of law to secure payment of customs duties in connection with the importation of
goods;
(n)
judgment Liens in respect of judgments that do not constitute an
Event of Default under clause (j) of Article VIII;
(o)
Liens solely on cash earnest money deposits made by Borrower or
any Subsidiary in connection with any letter of intent or purchase agreement permitted
hereunder; provided that such Liens are granted on customary business terms and in the
ordinary course of business of the Borrower or such Subsidiary; and
(p)
Liens (i) of a collection bank arising under Section 4-210 of the UCC
on items in the course of collection and (ii) in favor of a banking institution arising as a
matter of law encumbering deposits (including the right of set-off) and which are within
the general parameters customary in the banking industry, in each case existing solely
with respect to cash or cash equivalents.
“Permitted Investments” means:
(a)
direct obligations of, or obligations the principal of and interest on
which are unconditionally guaranteed by, the United States of America (or any agency
thereof to the extent such obligations are backed by the full faith and credit of the
United States of America), in each case maturing within one year from the date of
acquisition thereof;
(b)
investments in commercial paper maturing within one year from the
date of acquisition thereof and having, at the date of acquisition thereof, a credit rating
of at least A-1 from S&P or at least P-1 from Moody’s;
(c)
short-term investments in corporate bonds for which quoted market
prices are readily available and having a credit rating of at least A from S&P or at least
A2 from Moody’s;
(d)
short-term investments in certificates of deposit, banker’s acceptances
and demand or time deposits, in each case maturing within two years from the date of
acquisition thereof, issued or guaranteed by or placed with, and money market deposit
accounts issued or offered by, any commercial bank organized under the laws of the
United States of America or any State thereof, Canada or any province thereof, Austria,
Belgium, China, Denmark, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Luxembourg, Mexico,
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden or the United Kingdom that (i)  is at least “adequately
capitalized” (as defined in the regulations of its primary Federal banking regulator or
the equivalent in the applicable foreign jurisdiction) and (ii) has “Tier 1” capital (as
defined in the
 

regulations of its primary Federal banking regulator or the equivalent in the applicable
foreign jurisdiction) of not less than $500,000,000;
(e)
fully collateralized repurchase agreements with a term of not more
than 30 days for securities described in clause  (a) above and entered into with a
financial institution satisfying the criteria described in clause (d) above; and
(f)
in the case of any Foreign Subsidiary, other short-term investments
that are analogous to the foregoing, are of comparable credit quality and are
customarily used by companies in the jurisdiction of such Foreign Subsidiary for cash
management purposes.
“Person” means any natural person, corporation, limited liability company, trust,
joint venture, association, company, partnership, Governmental Authority or other entity.
“Plan” means any employee pension benefit plan (other than a Multiemployer
Plan) subject to the provisions of Title IV of ERISA or Section 412 of the Code or Section 302
of ERISA that is sponsored, maintained or contributed to by the Borrower or any ERISA
Affiliate.
“Plan Asset Regulations” means 29 CFR Section 2510.3-101, as modified by
Section 3(42) of ERISA, as amended.
“Prime Rate” means the rate of interest last quoted by The Wall Street Journal as
the “Prime Rate” in the United States or, if The Wall Street Journal ceases to quote such rate,
the highest per annum interest rate published by the Federal Reserve Board in Federal Reserve
Statistical Release H.15 (519) (Selected Interest Rates) as the “bank prime loan” rate or, if such
rate is no longer quoted therein, any similar rate quoted therein (as determined by the
Administrative Agent) or any similar release by the Federal Reserve Board (as determined by
the Administrative Agent).    Each change in the Prime Rate shall be effective from and
including the date such change is publicly announced or quoted as being effective.
“Pro Rata Share” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.08.
“Proceeding” means any claim, litigation, investigation, action, suit, arbitration
or administrative, judicial or regulatory action or proceeding in any jurisdiction.
“PTE” means a prohibited transaction class exemption issued by the U.S.
Department of Labor, as any such exemption may be amended from time to time.
“Quarterly Dates” means the last day of each calendar quarter, the first of which
shall be the first such day after the Effective Date.
“Reference Time” with respect to any setting of the then-current Benchmark
means (a) if such Benchmark is the Term SOFR, 5:00 a.m., Chicago time, on
 

the day that is two U.S. Government Securities Business Days preceding the date of such
setting and (b) if such Benchmark is not the Term SOFR, the time determined by the
Administrative Agent in its reasonable discretion.
“Register” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.04.
“Related Parties” means, with respect to any Person, such Person’s Affiliates
and the partners, members, trustees, directors, officers, employees, agents and advisors of such
Person and of such Person’s Affiliates.
“Release” means any release, spill, emission, leaking, dumping, injection,
pouring, deposit, disposal, discharge, dispersal, leaching or migration into or through the
environment.
“Relevant Governmental Body” means the Federal Reserve Board and/or the
NYFRB, or a committee officially endorsed or convened by the Federal Reserve Board and/or
the NYFRB or, in each case, any successor thereto.
“Relevant Rate” means (a) with respect to any Term SOFR Borrowing, the
Adjusted Term SOFR or (b) with respect to any Daily Simple SOFR Borrowing, the Adjusted
Daily Simple SOFR.
“Rental and Lease Expense” means, for any Measurement Period, all items that
would be classified for such Measurement Period as rental and lease expense that are included
in cost of sales and selling, general and administrative expenses on the consolidated statement
of earnings of the Borrower, in each case determined in accordance with GAAP, provided that
Rental and Lease Expense shall not include any Rental and Lease Expense incurred during
such Measurement Period under leases that have been assigned to and assumed by any Person
(other than the Borrower or a Subsidiary) or that constitute or relate to discontinued operations,
in each case, for which the Borrower and its Subsidiaries are no longer obligated.
“Required Lenders” means, at any time, Lenders having Revolving Credit
Exposures and unused Commitments representing more than 50% of the sum of the total
Revolving Credit Exposures and unused Commitments at such time; provided that, for
purposes of declaring the Loans to be due and payable pursuant to Article VIII, and for all
purposes after the Loans become due and payable pursuant to Article VIII or the Commitments
expire or terminate, the outstanding Competitive Loans of the Lenders shall be included in their
respective Revolving Credit Exposures in determining the Required Lenders.
“Resolution Authority” means an EEA Resolution Authority or, with respect to
any UK Financial Institution, a UK Resolution Authority.
“Responsible Officer” means the chief executive officer or the chairman of the
board (if an officer) of the Borrower or a Financial Officer; provided that, when such term is
used in reference to any document executed by, or a certification of, a Responsible Officer, the
secretary or assistant secretary of the Borrower shall have,
 

theretofore (including on the Effective Date) or concurrently therewith, delivered an
incumbency certificate to the Administrative Agent as to the authority of such individual.
“Resulting Syndicated Borrowings” has the meaning set forth in Section 2.09(e)
(ii).
“Revolving Credit Exposure” means, with respect to any Lender at any time, the
sum of the outstanding principal amount of such Lender’s Syndicated Loans and its LC
Exposure at such time.
“Sanctioned Person” means, at any time, any Person listed in any Sanctions-
related list of designated Persons maintained by the OFAC, the U.S. Department of State, the
United Nations Security Council, the European Union, any EU member state or His Majesty’s
Treasury of the United Kingdom.
“Sanctions” means economic or financial sanctions or trade embargoes imposed,
administered or enforced from time to time by (a) the U.S. government, including those
administered by the OFAC or the U.S. Department of State, or (b) the United Nations Security
Council, the European Union, any EU member state or His Majesty’s Treasury of the United
Kingdom.
“Securitization Transaction” means any Domestic Securitization Transaction or
any Foreign Securitization Transaction.  The “amount” or “principal amount” of any Domestic
Securitization Transaction or Foreign Securitization Transaction shall be deemed at any time to
be the aggregate principal or stated amount of the Indebtedness or other securities referred to in
the definition of the term “Domestic Securitization Transaction” or “Foreign Securitization
Transaction”, as applicable, or, if there shall be no such principal or stated amount, the
uncollected amount of the accounts receivable or interests therein transferred pursuant to such
Domestic Securitization Transaction or Foreign Securitization Transaction, as applicable, net of
any such accounts receivable or interests therein that have been written off as uncollectible.
“SOFR” means a rate equal to the secured overnight financing rate as
administered by the SOFR Administrator.
“SOFR Administrator” means the NYFRB (or a successor administrator of the
secured overnight financing rate).
“SOFR Administrator’s Website” means the NYFRB’s Website or any successor
source for the secured overnight financing rate identified as such by the SOFR Administrator
from time to time.
“Specified Subsidiary” means, with respect to any fiscal year of the Borrower,
any Domestic Subsidiary (other than a Foreign Subsidiary Holding Corporation) which
accounted for an amount equal to or greater than 20.0% of the consolidated revenues of the
Borrower for such fiscal year, provided that if, in any fiscal year of the Borrower, the
Subsidiaries (other than Best Buy Stores, L.P.), on a collective basis, accounted for more than
50.0% of the consolidated revenues of the Borrower for
 

such fiscal year, then the percentage amount stated in the clause preceding the proviso clause of
this definition shall be automatically and permanently reduced to 5.0%.
“S&P” means S&P Global Ratings, a division of S&P Global Inc., and any
successor to its rating agency business.
“S&P Rating” means S&P’s rating of the Borrower’s long term, non-credit
enhanced, senior unsecured debt.
“Subsidiary” means, with respect to any Person (the “parent”) at any date, any
corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association or other entity the accounts of
which would be consolidated with those of the parent in the parent’s consolidated financial
statements if such financial statements were prepared in accordance with GAAP as of such
date, as well as any other corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association or
other entity of which securities or other ownership interests representing more than 50% of the
equity or more than 50% of the ordinary voting power or, in the case of a partnership, more
than 50% of the general partnership interests are, as of such date, owned, controlled or held by
the parent or one or more subsidiaries of the parent or by the parent and one or more
subsidiaries of the parent.  Unless otherwise specified, “Subsidiary” means a Subsidiary of the
Borrower.
“Subsidiary Guarantor” means Best Buy Stores, L.P., BBC Investment Co.,
BBC Property Co., BestBuy.com, LLC, each Specified Subsidiary that becomes a “Subsidiary
Guarantor” after the date hereof pursuant to Section 6.08 and each Domestic Subsidiary that
becomes a “Subsidiary Guarantor” after the date hereof pursuant to Section 3.10.
“Syndicated”, when used in reference to any Loan or Borrowing, refers to
whether such Loan, or the Loans comprising such Borrowing, are made pursuant to
Section 2.01.
“Syndication Agent” means U.S. Bank National Association, in its capacity as
syndication agent for the credit facility established hereunder.
“Tangible Net Worth” means, as of any date, the sum for the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries (determined on a consolidated basis without duplication in accordance with GAAP, but
excluding all amounts attributable to noncontrolling interests in any Subsidiary), of the following:
(a)
the total assets of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries as shown on the
consolidated balance sheet of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries for the fiscal quarter or
fiscal year of the Borrower most recently ended on or prior to such date prepared in
accordance with GAAP, minus
(b)
the total liabilities of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries as shown on
such consolidated balance sheet, minus
 

(c)
the net book amount of all assets of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries
shown as intangible assets (including goodwill) on such consolidated balance sheet.
“Taxes” means all present or future taxes, levies, imposts, duties, deductions,
withholdings (including backup withholding), assessments, fees or other charges imposed by
any Governmental Authority, including any interest, additions to tax or penalties applicable
thereto.
“Term SOFR”  means, with respect to any Term SOFR Borrowing and for any tenor
comparable to the applicable Interest Period, the Term SOFR Reference Rate at approximately 5:00
a.m., Chicago time, two U.S. Government Securities Business Days prior to the commencement of such
tenor comparable to the applicable Interest Period, as such rate is published by the CME Term SOFR
Administrator.
“Term SOFR Borrowing” means any Borrowing comprised of Term SOFR Loans.
“Term SOFR Loan” means any Loan that bears interest at a rate determined by
reference to the Adjusted Term SOFR (other than solely as a result of clause (c) of the definition of the
term “Alternate Base Rate”).
“Term SOFR Reference Rate” means, for any day and time (such day, the “Term SOFR
Determination Day”), with respect to any Term SOFR Borrowing and for any tenor comparable to the
applicable Interest Period, the rate per annum published by the CME Term SOFR Administrator and
identified by the Administrative Agent as the forward-looking term rate based on SOFR.  If by 5:00
p.m., New York City time, on such Term SOFR Determination Day, the “Term SOFR Reference Rate” for
the applicable tenor has not been published by the CME Term SOFR Administrator and a Benchmark
Replacement Date with respect to the Term SOFR has not occurred, then, so long as such day is
otherwise a U.S. Government Securities Business Day, the Term SOFR Reference Rate for such Term
SOFR Determination Day will be the Term SOFR Reference Rate as published in respect of the first
preceding U.S. Government Securities Business Day for which such Term SOFR Reference Rate was
published by the CME Term SOFR Administrator, so long as such first preceding U.S. Government
Securities Business Day is not more than five U.S. Government Securities Business Days prior to such
Term SOFR Determination Day.
“Transactions” means the execution, delivery and performance by each Obligor
of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents to which such Obligor is intended to be a
party, the borrowing of Loans, the use of the proceeds thereof and the issuance of Letters of
Credit hereunder.
“Type”, when used in reference to any Loan or Borrowing, refers to whether the
rate of interest on such Loan, or on the Loans comprising such Borrowing, is determined by
reference to, in the case of a Syndicated Loan or Syndicated Borrowing, the Adjusted Term
SOFR (other than solely as a result of clause (c) of the definition of the term “Alternate Base
Rate”), the Alternate Base Rate or, if applicable pursuant to
 

Section 2.14, the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR or, in the case of a Competitive Loan or
Competitive Borrowing, the Adjusted Term SOFR or a Fixed Rate.
“UCC” means the Uniform Commercial Code as in effect in the State of New
York.
“UK Financial Institution” means any BRRD Undertaking (as such term is
defined under the PRA Rulebook (as amended form time to time) promulgated by the United
Kingdom Prudential Regulation Authority) or any Person falling within IFPRU 11.6 of the
FCA Handbook (as amended from time to time) promulgated by the United Kingdom Financial
Conduct Authority, which includes certain credit institutions and investment firms, and certain
affiliates of such credit institutions or investment firms.
“UK Resolution Authority” means the Bank of England or any other public
administrative authority having responsibility for the resolution of any UK Financial
Institution.
“Unadjusted Benchmark Replacement” means the applicable Benchmark
Replacement excluding the related Benchmark Replacement Adjustment.
“U.S. Government Securities Business Day” means any day except for (a) a
Saturday, (b) a Sunday or (c) a day on which the Securities Industry and Financial Markets
Association recommends that the fixed income departments of its members be closed for the
entire day for purposes of trading in United States government securities.
“USA PATRIOT Act” means the Uniting and Strengthening America by
Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism Act of 2001.
“Withdrawal Liability” means liability to a Multiemployer Plan as a result of a
complete or partial withdrawal from such Multiemployer Plan, as such terms are defined in
Part I of Subtitle E of Title IV of ERISA.
“Write-Down and Conversion Powers” means (a) with respect to any EEA
Resolution Authority, the write-down and conversion powers of such EEA Resolution
Authority from time to time under the Bail-In Legislation for the applicable EEA Member
Country, which write-down and conversion powers are described in the EU Bail-In Legislation
Schedule, and (b) with respect to the United Kingdom, any powers of the applicable Resolution
Authority under the Bail-In Legislation to cancel, reduce, modify or change the form of a
liability of any UK Financial Institution or any contract or instrument under which that liability
arises, to convert all or part of that liability into shares, securities or obligations of that Person
or any other Person, to provide that any such contract or instrument is to have effect as if a
right had been exercised under it or to suspend any obligation in respect of that liability or any
of the powers under that Bail-In Legislation that are related to or ancillary to any of those
powers.
SECTION 1.02.
 Classification of Loans and Borrowings.  For purposes
of this Agreement, Loans may be classified and referred to by Class (e.g., a “Competitive
Loan”), by Type (e.g., a “Term SOFR  Loan”) or by Class and Type (e.g., a
 

“Competitive Term SOFR Loan”).  Borrowings also may be classified and referred to by Class
(e.g., a “Syndicated Borrowing”), by Type (e.g., a “Term SOFR  Borrowing”) or by Class and
Type (e.g., a “Syndicated Term SOFR  Borrowing”).
SECTION 1.03.
 Terms Generally.  The definitions of terms herein shall
apply equally to the singular and plural forms of the terms defined.  Whenever the context may
require, any pronoun shall include the corresponding masculine, feminine and neuter
forms.  The words “include”, “includes” and “including” shall be deemed to be followed by the
phrase “without limitation”.  The word “will” shall be construed to have the same meaning and
effect as the word “shall”.  The words “asset” and “property” shall be construed to have the
same meaning and effect and to refer to any and all real and personal, tangible and intangible
assets and properties, including cash, securities, accounts and contract rights.  The word “law”
shall be construed as referring to all statutes, rules, regulations, codes and other laws (including
official rulings and interpretations thereunder having the force of law or with which affected
Persons customarily comply), and all judgments, orders, writs and decrees, of all Governmental
Authorities.    Except as otherwise expressly provided herein and unless the context requires
otherwise, (a) any definition of or reference to any agreement, instrument or other document
herein (including this Agreement or any other Loan Document) shall be construed as referring
to such agreement, instrument or other document as from time to time amended, supplemented
or otherwise modified (subject to any restrictions on such amendments, supplements or
modifications set forth herein), (b) any reference herein to any Person shall be construed to
include such Person’s successors and assigns (subject to any restrictions on assignment set
forth herein) and, in the case of any Governmental Authority, any other Governmental
Authority that shall have succeeded to any or all functions thereof, (c) any definition of or
reference to any statute, rule or regulation shall be construed as referring thereto as from time
to time amended, supplemented or otherwise modified (including by succession of comparable
successor laws), (d)  the words “herein”, “hereof” and “hereunder”, and words of similar
import, shall be construed to refer to this Agreement in its entirety and not to any particular
provision hereof and (e) all references herein to Articles, Sections, Exhibits and Schedules shall
be construed to refer to Articles and Sections of, and Exhibits and Schedules to, this
Agreement.
SECTION 1.04.
 Accounting Terms; GAAP.   Except as otherwise
expressly provided herein, all terms of an accounting or financial nature shall be construed in
accordance with GAAP; provided that if the Borrower notifies the Administrative Agent that
the Borrower requests an amendment to any provision hereof to eliminate the effect of any
change occurring after the date hereof to GAAP or in the application thereof on the operation
of such provision (or if the Administrative Agent notifies the Borrower that the Required
Lenders request an amendment to any provision hereof for such purpose), regardless of
whether any such notice is given before or after such change in GAAP or in the application
thereof, then such provision shall be interpreted on the basis of GAAP as in effect and applied
immediately before such change shall have become effective until such notice shall have been
withdrawn or such provision amended in accordance herewith.  Without limiting the foregoing,
the terms “cash”, “cash equivalents” and “short-term investments” shall be construed in
accordance
 

with GAAP.    Notwithstanding the foregoing (other than for purposes of sections 4.04(a),
6.01(a) and 6.01(b)), (a)  Indebtedness shall be determined without giving effect to the
application of Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification 815
(or any other Accounting Standards Codification having a similar result or effect) (and related
interpretations) to the extent such application would otherwise increase or decrease the
principal amount of Indebtedness for any purpose hereunder as a result of accounting for any
embedded derivatives created by the terms of such Indebtedness and (b)  all terms of an
accounting or financial nature used herein shall be construed, and all computations of amounts
and ratios referred to herein shall be made, without giving effect to (i)  any election under
Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification 825 (or any other
Accounting Standards Codification having a similar result or effect) (and related
interpretations) to value any Indebtedness of the Borrower or any Subsidiary at “fair value”, as
defined therein, (ii) any treatment of Indebtedness in respect of convertible debt instruments
under Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Codification 470-20 (or
any other Accounting Standards Codification having a similar result or effect) (and related
interpretation) to value any such Indebtedness in a reduced or bifurcated manner as described
therein or (iii) any valuation of Indebtedness below its full stated principal amount as a result
of application of Financial Accounting Standards Board Accounting Standards Update No.
2015-03, it being agreed that Indebtedness shall at all times be valued at the full stated
principal amount thereof.
SECTION 1.05.
 Interest Rates; Benchmark Notification.  The interest
rate on any Loan may be derived from an interest rate benchmark that may be discontinued or
is, or may in the future become, the subject of regulatory reform.  Upon the occurrence of a
Benchmark Transition Event, Section 2.14(b) provides a mechanism for determining an
alternative rate of interest.    The Administrative Agent does not warrant or accept any
responsibility for, and shall not have any liability with respect to, the administration,
submission, performance or any other matter related to any interest rate used in this Agreement,
or with respect to any alternative or successor rate thereto, or replacement rate thereof,
including whether the composition or characteristics of any such alternative, successor or
replacement reference rate will be similar to, or produce the same value or economic
equivalence of, the existing interest rate being replaced or have the same volume or liquidity as
did any existing interest rate prior to its discontinuance or unavailability.  The Administrative
Agent and its Affiliates and/or other related entities may engage in transactions that affect the
calculation of any interest rate used in this Agreement or any alternative, successor or
alternative rate (including any Benchmark Replacement) and/or any relevant adjustments
thereto, in each case, in a manner adverse to the Borrower.  The Administrative Agent may
select information sources or services in its reasonable discretion to ascertain any interest rate
used in this Agreement, any component thereof, or rates referenced in the definition thereof, in
each case pursuant to the terms of this Agreement, and shall have no liability to the Borrower,
any Lender or any other Person for damages of any kind, including direct or indirect, special,
punitive, incidental or consequential damages, costs, losses or expenses (whether in tort,
contract or otherwise and whether at law or in equity), for any error or calculation of any such
rate (or component thereof) provided by any such information source or service.
 

SECTION 1.06.
 Divisions.  For all purposes under the Loan Documents,
in connection with any division or plan of division under Section 18-217 of the Delaware
Limited Liability Company Act (or any comparable event under the Delaware Limited Liability
Company Act or a different jurisdiction’s laws): (a) if any asset, right, obligation or liability of
any Person becomes the asset, right, obligation or liability of a different Person, then it shall be
deemed to have been transferred from the original Person to the subsequent Person and (b) if
any new Person comes into existence, such new Person shall be deemed to have been organized
and acquired on the first date of its existence by the holders of its Equity Interests at such time.
ARTICLE II
The Credits
SECTION 2.01.
 The Commitments.  Subject to the terms and conditions
set forth herein, each Lender agrees to make Syndicated Loans in Dollars to the Borrower from
time to time during the Availability Period in an aggregate principal amount that will not result
in (a)  such Lender’s Revolving Credit Exposure exceeding such Lender’s Commitment or
(b) the sum of the total Revolving Credit Exposures plus the aggregate principal amount of
outstanding Competitive Loans exceeding the total Commitments.  Within the foregoing limits
and subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, the Borrower may borrow, prepay and
reborrow Syndicated Loans.
SECTION 2.02.
 Loans and Borrowings.        Obligations of Lenders.
 Each Syndicated Loan shall be made as part of a Borrowing consisting of Loans of the same
Class and Type made by the Lenders ratably in accordance with their respective
Commitments.  Each Competitive Loan shall be made in accordance with the procedures set
forth in Section 2.04.  The failure of any Lender to make any Loan required to be made by it
shall not relieve any other Lender of its obligations hereunder; provided that the Commitments
and Competitive Bids of the Lenders are several and no Lender shall be responsible for any
other Lender’s failure to make Loans as required.
(a)
 Type of Loans.  Subject to Section 2.14, (i) each Syndicated Borrowing
shall be comprised entirely of ABR Loans, Term SOFR Loans or, if applicable pursuant to
Section 2.14, Daily Simple SOFR Loans, as the Borrower may request in accordance herewith,
and (ii) each Competitive Borrowing shall be comprised entirely of Term SOFR Loans or Fixed
Rate Loans, as the Borrower may request in accordance herewith.  Each Lender at its option
may make any Term SOFR Loan by causing any domestic or foreign branch or Affiliate of such
Lender to make such Loan; provided that any exercise of such option shall not affect the
obligation of the Borrower to repay such Loan in accordance with the terms of this
Agreement.
(b)
 Minimum Amounts; Limitation on Number of Borrowings.   Each
Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing shall be in an aggregate amount of $5,000,000 or a larger
multiple of $500,000.    Each Syndicated ABR Borrowing or Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR
Borrowing shall be in an aggregate amount equal to $2,000,000 or a larger
 

multiple of $500,000; provided that a Syndicated ABR Borrowing or Syndicated Daily Simple
SOFR Borrowing may be in an aggregate amount that is equal to the entire unused balance of
the total Commitments or that is required to finance the reimbursement of an LC
Disbursement as contemplated by Section 2.06(f).  Each Competitive Borrowing shall be in an
aggregate amount equal to $5,000,000 or a larger multiple of $1,000,000.    Borrowings of
more than one Class and Type may be outstanding at the same time; provided that there shall
not at any time be more than a total of 20 Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowings outstanding.
(c)
 Limitations on Interest Periods.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
this Agreement, the Borrower shall not be entitled to request (or to elect to convert to or
continue as a Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing) any Borrowing if the Interest Period
requested therefor would end after the earliest Commitment Termination Date then in effect.
SECTION 2.03.
 Requests for Syndicated Borrowings.        Notice by the
Borrower.  To request a Syndicated Borrowing, the Borrower shall notify the Administrative
Agent of such request by telephone (i) in the case of a Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing, not
later than 1:00 p.m., New York City time, three U.S. Government Securities Business Days
before the date of the proposed Borrowing, (ii) if applicable pursuant to Section 2.14, in the
case of a Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Borrowing, not later than 1:00 p.m., New York City
time, five U.S. Government Securities Business Days before the date of the proposed
Borrowing or (iii) in the case of a Syndicated ABR Borrowing, not later than 2:00 p.m., New
York City time, on the same Business Day as the date of the proposed Borrowing.  Each such
telephonic Borrowing Request shall be irrevocable and shall be confirmed promptly by hand-
delivery or e-mail (in .pdf or .tif format) to the Administrative Agent of a written Borrowing
Request signed by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower.
(a)
 Content of Borrowing Requests.   Each telephonic and written
Borrowing Request shall specify the following information in compliance with Section 2.02:
(i)
 the aggregate principal amount of the requested Borrowing;
(ii)
 the date of such Borrowing, which shall be a Business Day;
(iii)
 whether such Borrowing is to be an ABR Borrowing, a Term SOFR
Borrowing or, if applicable pursuant to Section 2.14, a Daily Simple SOFR Borrowing;
(iv)
 in the case of a Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing, the Interest Period
therefor, which shall be a period contemplated by the definition of the term “Interest
Period” and permitted under Section 2.02(d); and
 

(v)
 the location and number of the Borrower’s account to which funds are
to be disbursed, or, in the case of any Syndicated ABR Borrowing requested to finance
the reimbursement of an LC Disbursement as provided in Section 2.06(f), the identity
of the Issuing Lender that made such LC Disbursement.
(b)
 Notice by the Administrative Agent to the Lenders.  Promptly following
receipt of a Borrowing Request in accordance with this Section 2.03, the Administrative Agent
shall advise each Lender of the details thereof and of the amount of such Lender’s Loan to be
made as part of the requested Syndicated Borrowing.
(c)
 Failure to Elect.  If no election as to the Type of a Syndicated Borrowing
is specified, then the requested Borrowing shall be an ABR Borrowing.  If no Interest Period is
specified with respect to any requested Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing, the Borrower shall
be deemed to have selected an Interest Period of one month’s duration.
SECTION 2.04.
 Competitive Bid Procedure.        Requests for Bids by
the Borrower.  Subject to the terms and conditions set forth herein, from time to time during the
Availability Period the Borrower may request Competitive Bids and may (but shall not have
any obligation to) accept Competitive Bids and borrow Competitive Loans denominated in
Dollars; provided that (i) the sum of the total Revolving Credit Exposures plus the aggregate
principal amount of outstanding Competitive Loans at any time shall not exceed the total
Commitments and (ii) in the event the Commitment Termination Date shall have been extended
as provided in Section 2.20, the sum of (x) the LC Exposure attributable to Letters of Credit
expiring after any Existing Commitment Termination Date, plus (y)  the aggregate principal
amount of outstanding Competitive Loans maturing after such Existing Commitment
Termination Date shall not exceed the total Commitments that shall have been extended to a
date after the latest expiration date of such Letters of Credit and the latest maturity date of such
Competitive Loans.  To request Competitive Bids, the Borrower shall notify the Administrative
Agent of such request, by telephone, in the case of a Term SOFR Borrowing, not later than
1:00 p.m., New York City time, four U.S. Government Securities Business Days before the date
of the proposed Borrowing and, in the case of a Fixed Rate Borrowing, not later than 12:00
noon, New York City time, one Business Day before the date of the proposed Borrowing;
provided that the Borrower may submit up to (but not more than) one Competitive Bid Request
on the same day, but a Competitive Bid Request shall not be made within four Business Days
after the date of any previous Competitive Bid Request, unless any and all such previous
Competitive Bid Requests shall have been withdrawn or all Competitive Bids received in
response thereto rejected.  Each such telephonic Competitive Bid Request shall be confirmed
promptly by hand delivery or e-mail (in .pdf or .tif format) to the Administrative Agent of a
written Competitive Bid Request in a form approved by the Administrative Agent and signed
by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower.  Each such telephonic and written Competitive Bid
Request shall specify the following information in compliance with Section 2.02:
 

(i)
 the aggregate amount of the requested Borrowing;
(ii)
 the date of such Borrowing, which shall be a Business Day;
(iii)
 the maturity date of such Borrowing, which date shall not be less than
seven days or more than 360 days after the date of such Borrowing;
(iv)
 whether such Borrowing is to be a Term SOFR Borrowing or a Fixed
Rate Borrowing;
(v)
 the Interest Period for such Borrowing, which shall be a period
contemplated by the definition of the term “Interest Period” that does not extend
beyond the earliest Commitment Termination Date then in effect; and
(vi)
 the location and number of the Borrower’s account to which funds are
to be disbursed.
Promptly following receipt of a Competitive Bid Request in accordance with this Section 2.04,
the Administrative Agent shall notify the Lenders of the details thereof, inviting the Lenders to
submit Competitive Bids.
(d)
 Making of Bids by Lenders.  Each Lender may (but shall not have any
obligation to) make one or more Competitive Bids to the Borrower in response to a
Competitive Bid Request.  Each Competitive Bid by a Lender must be in a form approved by
the Administrative Agent and must be received by the Administrative Agent by e-mail (in .pdf
or .tif format), in the case of a Competitive Term SOFR Borrowing, not later than 9:30 a.m.,
New York City time, three U.S. Government Securities Business Days before the proposed date
of such Borrowing, and in the case of a Fixed Rate Borrowing, not later than 9:30 a.m., New
York City time, on the proposed date of such Borrowing.    Competitive Bids that do not
conform substantially to the form approved by the Administrative Agent may be rejected by
the Administrative Agent, and the Administrative Agent shall notify the applicable Lender of
such rejection as promptly as practicable.  Each Competitive Bid shall specify (i) the principal
amount (which shall be $5,000,000 or a larger multiple of $1,000,000 and which may equal
the entire principal amount of the Competitive Borrowing requested by the Borrower) of the
Competitive Loan or Loans that the Lender is willing to make, (ii) the Competitive Bid Rate or
Competitive Bid Rates at which the Lender is prepared to make such Loan or Loans (expressed
as a percentage rate per annum in the form of a decimal to no more than four decimal places)
and (iii) the Interest Period for each such Loan and the last day thereof.
(e)
 Notification of Bids by Administrative Agent.  The Administrative Agent
shall promptly notify the Borrower by e-mail of the Competitive Bid Rate and the principal
amount specified in each Competitive Bid and the identity of the Lender that shall have made
such Competitive Bid.
 

(f)
 Acceptance of Bids by the Borrower.  Subject only to the provisions of
this paragraph, the Borrower may accept or reject any Competitive Bid.  The Borrower shall
notify the Administrative Agent by telephone, confirmed by e-mail (in .pdf or .tif format) of a
writing signed by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower and in a form approved by the
Administrative Agent, whether and to what extent it has decided to accept or reject each
Competitive Bid, in the case of a Competitive Term SOFR Borrowing, not later than 12:00
noon, New York City time, three U.S. Government Securities Business Days before the date of
the proposed Competitive Borrowing, and in the case of a Fixed Rate Borrowing, not later than
11:00 a.m., New York City time, on the proposed date of the Competitive Borrowing; provided
that (i) the failure of the Borrower to give such notice shall be deemed to be a rejection of
each Competitive Bid, (ii) the Borrower shall not accept a Competitive Bid made at a particular
Competitive Bid Rate if the Borrower rejects a Competitive Bid made at a lower Competitive
Bid Rate, (iii) the aggregate amount of the Competitive Bids accepted by the Borrower shall
not exceed the aggregate amount of the requested Competitive Borrowing specified in the
related Competitive Bid Request, (iv) to the extent necessary to comply with clause (iii) of this
proviso, the Borrower may accept Competitive Bids at the same Competitive Bid Rate in part,
which acceptance, in the case of multiple Competitive Bids at such Competitive Bid Rate, shall
be made pro rata in accordance with the amount of each such Competitive Bid, and (v) except
pursuant to clause (iv) of this proviso, no Competitive Bid shall be accepted for a Competitive
Loan unless such Competitive Loan is in a principal amount of $5,000,000 or a larger multiple
of $1,000,000; provided further that if a Competitive Loan must be in an amount less than
$5,000,000 because of the provisions of clause (iv) of the first proviso of this paragraph, such
Competitive Loan may be in the amount of $1,000,000 or any multiple thereof, and in
calculating the pro rata allocation of acceptances of portions of multiple Competitive Bids at a
particular Competitive Bid Rate pursuant to such clause (iv) the amounts shall be rounded to
multiples of $1,000,000 in a manner determined by the Borrower.    A notice given by the
Borrower pursuant to this paragraph shall be irrevocable.
(g)
 Notification of Acceptances by the Administrative Agent.   The
Administrative Agent shall promptly notify each bidding Lender whether or not its Competitive
Bid has been accepted (and, if so, the amount and Competitive Bid Rate so accepted), and
each successful bidder will thereupon become bound, subject to the terms and conditions
hereof, to make the Competitive Loan in respect of which its Competitive Bid has been
accepted.
(h)
 Bids by the Administrative Agent.   If the Administrative Agent shall
elect to submit a Competitive Bid in its capacity as a Lender, it shall submit such Competitive
Bid directly to the Borrower at least one quarter of an hour earlier than the time by which the
other Lenders are required to submit their Competitive Bids to the Administrative Agent
pursuant to paragraph  (b) of this Section 2.04.    Any Competitive Bid submitted by the
Administrative Agent that fails to comply with the provisions of paragraph (b) above and this
paragraph (f) shall be void ab initio.
 

SECTION 2.05.
 [Reserved].
SECTION 2.06.
 Letters of Credit.        General.  Subject to the terms
and conditions set forth herein, in addition to the Loans provided for in Section  2.01, the
Borrower may request any Issuing Lender to issue Letters of Credit denominated in Dollars (or
to amend or extend outstanding Letters of Credit), at any time and from time to time during the
Availability Period, for its own account or, so long as the Borrower is a co-applicant with
respect thereto, the account of any Subsidiary in such form as is acceptable to such Issuing
Lender in its reasonable determination.    Letters of Credit issued hereunder shall constitute
utilization of the Commitments.  From and after the Effective Date, each Existing Letter of
Credit shall be deemed, for all purposes of this Agreement (including paragraphs (e) and (f) of
this Section  2.06), to be a Letter of Credit issued for the account of the Borrower on the
Effective Date.  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (i) no Issuing Lender shall
have any obligation hereunder to issue, amend or extend any Letter of Credit (or, in the case of
an Auto-Extension Letter of Credit, to permit the automatic extension thereof), and any
issuance, amendment or extension of any Letter of Credit (or, in the case of an Auto-Extension
Letter of Credit, any failure to give a Non-Extension Notice with respect thereto) by an Issuing
Lender shall be in its sole discretion and (ii) without limiting clause (i) above, no Issuing
Lender shall have an obligation hereunder to issue, amend or extend any Letter of Credit if any
order, judgment or decree of any Governmental Authority or arbitrator shall by its terms
purport to enjoin or restrain such Issuing Lender from issuing, amending or extending such
Letter of Credit, or any law, rule or regulation of any Governmental Authority applicable to
such Issuing Lender or any request, rule, guideline or directive (whether or not having the force
of law) from any Governmental Authority with jurisdiction over such Issuing Lender shall
prohibit, or request that such Issuing Lender refrain from, the issuance of letters of credit
generally or such Letter of Credit in particular.    
(a)
 Notice of Issuance, Amendment or Extension; Auto-Extension Letters of
Credit.
(i)
 To request the issuance of a Letter of Credit (or the amendment or
extension of an outstanding Letter of Credit, other than an automatic extension of an
Auto-Extension Letter of Credit permitted pursuant to clause (ii) of this Section
2.06(b)), the Borrower shall deliver to the relevant Issuing Lender and the
Administrative Agent (reasonably in advance of the requested date of issuance,
amendment or extension) a notice requesting the issuance of a Letter of Credit, or
identifying the Letter of Credit to be amended or extended, and specifying the date of
issuance, amendment or extension (which shall be a Business Day), the date on which
such Letter of Credit is to expire (which shall comply with paragraph  (d) of this
Section  2.06), the amount of such Letter of Credit, the name and address of the
beneficiary thereof and such other information as shall be necessary to prepare,
amend or extend such Letter of Credit.  If requested by the relevant Issuing Lender, the
Borrower also shall submit a letter of credit application on such Issuing Lender’s
standard form in connection with any request for a Letter of Credit.  In the event of any
 

inconsistency between the terms and conditions of this Agreement and the terms and
conditions of any form of letter of credit application or other agreement submitted by
the Borrower to, or entered into by the Borrower with, an Issuing Lender relating to
any Letter of Credit, the terms and conditions of this Agreement shall control.
(ii)
 Any Letter of Credit under this Agreement may be issued, if the
Borrower so requests and the relevant Issuing Lender so agrees, in the form of an
Auto-Extension Letter of Credit; provided that any such Auto-Extension Letter of Credit
must permit such Issuing Lender to prevent any such extension at least once in each
twelve-month period (commencing with the date of issuance of such Letter of Credit)
by giving prior notice to the beneficiary thereof of such Issuing Lender’s option not to
extend the Letter of Credit beyond the expiration date (a “Non-Extension Notice”). 
Such Issuing Lender shall have the option to issue a Non-Extension Notice during a
specified period in each such twelve-month period to be agreed upon by the Borrower
and such Issuing Lender at the time such Letter of Credit is issued.  Once an Auto-
Extension Letter of Credit has been issued, each Lender shall be deemed to have
authorized (but may not require) the relevant Issuing Lender to permit the extension
of such Letter of Credit at any time to an expiry date not later than one year after its
date of issuance or extension; provided that such Issuing Lender shall not permit any
such extension if such Issuing Lender has reasonably determined that it would have no
obligation at such time to issue such Letter of Credit in its extended form under the
terms of this Agreement (by reason of the provisions of paragraph (c) or (d) of this
Section 2.06 or otherwise).
(b)
 Limitations on Amounts.  A Letter of Credit shall be issued, amended or
extended only if (and upon each issuance, amendment or extension of any Letter of Credit the
Borrower shall be deemed to represent and warrant that), after giving effect to such issuance,
amendment or extension, (i) the aggregate LC Exposure shall not exceed $150,000,000, (ii) the
aggregate amount of the LC Exposure attributable to Letters of Credit issued by any Issuing
Lender shall not exceed the LC Sublimit Share of such Issuing Lender, (iii) the Revolving Credit
Exposure of any Lender shall not exceed the Commitment of such Lender, (iv) the sum of the
total Revolving Credit Exposures plus the aggregate principal amount of outstanding
Competitive Loans shall not exceed the total Commitments and (v)  in the event the
Commitment Termination Date shall have been extended as provided in Section 2.20, the sum
of (x) the LC Exposure attributable to Letters of Credit expiring after any Existing Commitment
Termination Date, plus (y) the aggregate principal amount of outstanding Competitive Loans
maturing after such Existing Commitment Termination Date shall not exceed the total
Commitments that shall have been extended to a date after the latest expiration date of such
Letters of Credit and the latest maturity date of such Competitive Loans; provided that there
shall not at any time be more than a total of 20 Letters of Credit outstanding.
 

(c)
 Expiration Date.   Each Letter of Credit shall expire at or prior to the
close of business on the earlier of (i) the date 12 months after the date of the issuance of such
Letter of Credit (or, in the case of any extension of the expiration date thereof, 12 months after
the then‑current expiration date of such Letter of Credit), subject to automatic extension of
any Auto-Extension Letter of Credit as provided in Section 2.06(b)(ii), and (ii) the date that is
five Business Days prior to the Commitment Termination Date.
(d)
 Participations.  By the issuance of a Letter of Credit (or an amendment
to a Letter of Credit increasing the amount thereof) by any Issuing Lender, and without any
further action on the part of such Issuing Lender or the Lenders, such Issuing Lender hereby
grants to each Lender, and each Lender hereby acquires from such Issuing Lender, a
participation in such Letter of Credit equal to such Lender’s Applicable Percentage of the
aggregate amount available to be drawn under such Letter of Credit.    Each Lender
acknowledges and agrees that its obligation to acquire participations pursuant to this
paragraph in respect of Letters of Credit is absolute and unconditional and shall not be
affected by any circumstance whatsoever, including any amendment or extension of any Letter
of Credit, the occurrence and continuance of a Default or reduction or termination of the
Commitments, or any force majeure or other event that under any rule of law or uniform
practices to which any Letter of Credit is subject (including Section 3.14 of the ISP) permits a
drawing to be made under such Letter of Credit after the expiration thereof or of the
Commitments.  Each Lender further acknowledges and agrees that, in issuing, amending or
extending any Letter of Credit, the relevant Issuing Lender shall be entitled to rely, and shall
not incur any liability for relying, upon the representation and warranty of the Borrower
deemed made pursuant to Section 5.02, unless, at least two Business Days prior to the time of
issuance, or the time of any amendment or extension subject to Section 5.02, of any Letter of
Credit by such Issuing Lender (or, in the case of an automatic extension permitted pursuant to
clause (ii) of Section 2.06(b), at least two Business Days prior to the time by which the election
not to permit extension must be made by the relevant Issuing Lender), the Required Lenders
shall have notified the applicable Issuing Lender (with a copy to the Administrative Agent) in
writing that, as a result of one or more events or circumstances described in such notice, one
or more of the conditions precedent set forth in Section 5.02 would not be satisfied if such
Letter of Credit were then issued or so amended or extended (it being understood and agreed
that, in the event any Issuing Lender shall have received any such notice, no Issuing Lender
shall issue, amend or extend any Letter of Credit until and unless it shall be satisfied that the
events and circumstances described in such notice shall have been cured or otherwise shall
have ceased to exist).
In consideration and in furtherance of the foregoing, each Lender hereby
absolutely and unconditionally agrees to pay to the Administrative Agent, for account of the
relevant Issuing Lender, such Lender’s Applicable Percentage of each LC Disbursement made
by an Issuing Lender (i) in the event the Borrower fails to reimburse
 

such LC Disbursement when due, as provided in paragraph (f) of this Section 2.06, promptly
upon the receipt of notice from the Administrative Agent referred to in paragraph (f) of this
Section 2.06 and (ii) if any reimbursement payment is required to be refunded to the Borrower
for any reason, at any time thereafter (including after the Commitment Termination Date),
promptly upon the request of such Issuing Lender.  Such payment shall be made without any
offset, abatement, withholding or reduction whatsoever.  Each such payment shall be made in
the same manner as provided in Section 2.07 with respect to Syndicated Loans made by such
Lender (and Section  2.07 shall apply, mutatis  mutandis, to the payment obligations of the
Lenders under this paragraph), and the Administrative Agent shall promptly pay to the relevant
Issuing Lender the amounts so received by it from the Lenders.  Promptly following receipt by
the Administrative Agent of any payment from the Borrower pursuant to paragraph (f) of this
Section 2.06, the Administrative Agent shall distribute such payment to the relevant Issuing
Lender or, to the extent that the Lenders have made payments pursuant to this paragraph to
reimburse such Issuing Lender, then to such Lenders and such Issuing Lender as their interests
may appear.   Any payment made by a Lender pursuant to this paragraph to reimburse an
Issuing Lender for any LC Disbursement shall not constitute a Loan and shall not relieve the
Borrower of its obligation to reimburse such LC Disbursement.
(e)
 Disbursement and Reimbursement.  If an Issuing Lender shall make any
LC Disbursement in respect of a Letter of Credit, such Issuing Lender shall give prompt notice
thereof to the Administrative Agent and the Borrower by telephone (confirmed by hand
delivery or e-mail), and the Borrower shall reimburse such Issuing Lender in respect of such LC
Disbursement by paying to such Issuing Lender an amount equal to such LC Disbursement not
later than 12:00 noon, New York City time, on (i) the Business Day that the Borrower receives
notice of such LC Disbursement, if such notice is received prior to 10:00 a.m., New York City
time, or (ii) the Business Day immediately following the day that the Borrower receives such
notice, if such notice is not received prior to such time; provided that if such LC Disbursement
is not less than $2,000,000, the Borrower may, subject to the conditions to borrowing set forth
herein, request in accordance with Section  2.03 that such payment be financed with a
Syndicated ABR  Borrowing in an equivalent amount and, to the extent so financed, the
Borrower’s obligation to make such payment shall be discharged and replaced by the resulting
Syndicated ABR Borrowing.
If the Borrower fails to make such payment when due, the applicable Issuing
Lender shall promptly inform the Administrative Agent thereof, whereupon the Administrative
Agent shall promptly notify each Lender of the applicable LC Disbursement, the payment then
due from the Borrower in respect thereof and such Lender’s Applicable Percentage thereof.
(f)
 Obligations Absolute.   The Borrower’s obligation to reimburse LC
Disbursements as provided in paragraph (f) of this Section 2.06 shall be absolute,
unconditional and irrevocable, and shall be performed strictly in accordance with the terms of
this Agreement under any and all circumstances whatsoever and irrespective of
 

(i) any lack of validity or enforceability of any Letter of Credit or this Agreement, or any term
or provision therein, (ii)  any draft or other document presented under a Letter of Credit
proving to be forged, fraudulent or invalid in any respect or any statement therein being
untrue or inaccurate in any respect, (iii) payment by an Issuing Lender under a Letter of Credit
against presentation of a draft or other document that does not comply strictly with the terms
of such Letter of Credit, (iv) the failure to perfect any lien or security interest granted to, or in
favor of, the Administrative Agent or any of the Lenders as security for any reimbursement
obligations in respect of any LC Disbursement, (v) any force majeure or other event that under
any rule of law or uniform practices to which any Letter of Credit is subject (including Section
3.14 of the ISP) permits a drawing to be made under such Letter of Credit after the stated
expiration date thereof or of the Commitments or (vi)  any other event or circumstance
whatsoever, whether or not similar to any of the foregoing, that might, but for the provisions
of this Section 2.06, constitute a legal or equitable discharge of, or provide a right of setoff
against, the Borrower’s obligations hereunder.
None of the Administrative Agent, the Lenders or the Issuing Lenders, or any of
their Related Parties, shall have any liability or responsibility by reason of or in connection
with the issuance or transfer of any Letter of Credit by any Issuing Lender or any payment or
failure to make any payment thereunder (irrespective of any of the circumstances referred to in
the preceding sentence), or any error, omission, interruption, loss or delay in transmission or
delivery of any draft, notice or other communication under or relating to any Letter of Credit
(including any document required to make a drawing thereunder), any error in interpretation of
technical terms, any error in translation or any consequence arising from causes beyond the
control of the relevant Issuing Lender; provided that the foregoing shall not be construed to
excuse an Issuing Lender from liability to the Borrower to the extent of any direct damages (as
opposed to special, indirect, consequential or punitive damages, claims in respect of which are
hereby waived by the Borrower to the extent permitted by applicable law) suffered by the
Borrower that are caused by such Issuing Lender’s failure to exercise care when determining
whether drafts and other documents presented under a Letter of Credit comply with the terms
thereof.  The parties hereto expressly agree, to the fullest extent permitted by law, that, in the
absence of gross negligence or willful misconduct on the part of an Issuing Lender (with such
absence to be presumed unless otherwise determined by a court of competent jurisdiction in a
final and nonappealable judgment), such Issuing Lender shall be deemed to have exercised care
in each such determination, and that:
(i)
 an Issuing Lender may accept documents that appear on their face to
be in substantial compliance with the terms of a Letter of Credit without responsibility
for further investigation, regardless of any notice or information to the contrary, and
may make payment upon presentation of documents that appear on their face to be in
substantial compliance with the terms of such Letter of Credit;
 

(ii)
 an Issuing Lender shall have the right, in its sole discretion, to decline to
accept such documents and to make such payment if such documents are not in strict
compliance with the terms of such Letter of Credit; and
(iii)
 this sentence shall establish the standard of care to be exercised by an
Issuing Lender when determining whether drafts and other documents presented
under a Letter of Credit comply with the terms thereof (and the parties hereto hereby
waive, to the extent permitted by applicable law, any standard of care inconsistent
with the foregoing).
(g)
 Disbursement Procedures.  The Issuing Lender for any Letter of Credit
shall, within a reasonable time following its receipt thereof, examine all documents purporting
to represent a demand for payment under such Letter of Credit.  Such Issuing Lender shall
promptly after such examination notify the Administrative Agent and the Borrower by
telephone (confirmed by hand delivery or e-mail) of such demand for payment and whether
such Issuing Lender has made or will make an LC Disbursement thereunder; provided that any
failure to give or delay in giving such notice shall not relieve the Borrower of its obligation to
reimburse such Issuing Lender and the Lenders with respect to any such LC Disbursement.
(h)
 Interim Interest.   If the Issuing Lender for any Letter of Credit shall
make any LC Disbursement, then, unless the Borrower shall reimburse such LC Disbursement
in full on the date such LC Disbursement is made, the unpaid amount thereof shall bear
interest, for each day from and including the date such LC Disbursement is made to, but
excluding the date that the Borrower reimburses such LC Disbursement, at the rate per annum
then applicable to Syndicated ABR Loans; provided that, if the Borrower fails to reimburse
such LC Disbursement when due pursuant to paragraph  (f) of this Section  2.06, then
Section  2.13(e) shall apply.    Interest accrued pursuant to this paragraph shall be for the
account of such Issuing Lender, except that interest accrued on and after the date of payment
by any Lender pursuant to paragraph (e) of this Section 2.06 to reimburse such Issuing Lender
shall be for the account of such Lender to the extent of such payment, and shall be payable on
demand or, if no demand has been made, on the date on which the Borrower reimburses the
applicable LC Disbursement in full.
(i)
 Additional Issuing Lenders; Termination of Issuing Lenders.  An Issuing
Lender may be added, or an existing Issuing Lender may be terminated, under this Agreement
at any time by written agreement between the Borrower, the Administrative Agent and the
applicable new or terminated Issuing Lender (which agreement shall, in the case of any new
Issuing Lender, set forth the LC Sublimit Share thereof).  The Administrative Agent shall notify
the Lenders of any such addition or termination.    At the time any such termination shall
become effective, the Borrower shall pay all unpaid fees accrued for the account of the Issuing
Lender being terminated pursuant to Section 2.12(b).  From and after the effective date of any
such addition, the
 

new Issuing Lender shall have all the rights and obligations of an Issuing Lender under this
Agreement with respect to Letters of Credit to be issued thereafter.  After the termination of
an Issuing Lender hereunder, the terminated Issuing Lender shall remain a party hereto and
shall continue to have all the rights and obligations of an Issuing Lender under this Agreement
with respect to any outstanding Letters of Credit issued by it prior to such termination.
(j)
 Issuing Lender Reports to the Administrative Agent.  Unless otherwise
agreed by the Administrative Agent, each Issuing Lender shall report in writing to the
Administrative Agent such information as the Administrative Agent shall reasonably request as
to the Letters of Credit issued by such Issuing Lender.
(k)
 Cash Collateralization.   If any Event of Default shall occur and be
continuing, on the Business Day that the Borrower receives notice from the Administrative
Agent or the Required Lenders (or, if the maturity of the Loans has been accelerated pursuant
to Article VIII, Lenders with LC Exposure representing more than 50% of the total LC Exposure)
demanding the deposit of cash collateral pursuant to this paragraph, the Borrower shall
immediately deposit into an account established and maintained on the books and records of
the Administrative Agent, which account may be a “securities account” (within the meaning of
Section 8‑501 of the UCC), in the name of the Administrative Agent and for the benefit of the
Lenders, an amount in immediately available funds in Dollars equal to 103% of the LC
Exposure as of such date plus any accrued and unpaid interest thereon; provided that the
obligation to deposit such cash collateral shall become effective immediately, and such deposit
shall become immediately due and payable, without demand or other notice of any kind,
upon the occurrence of any Event of Default with respect to the Borrower described in
clause (h) or (i) of Article VIII.  The Borrower also shall deposit cash collateral in accordance
with this paragraph as and to the extent required by Section 2.21.  Each such deposit shall be
held by the Administrative Agent as collateral for the LC Exposure and other obligations of the
Borrower under this Agreement, and for this purpose the Borrower hereby grants a security
interest to the Administrative Agent for the benefit of the Lenders and the Issuing Lenders in
such collateral account and in any financial assets (as defined in the UCC) or other property
held therein.
The Administrative Agent shall have exclusive dominion and control, including
the exclusive right of withdrawal, over such account.  All amounts on deposit pursuant to this
paragraph (l) shall be invested by the Administrative Agent in interest bearing instruments or
accounts, with the selection of  which instruments or accounts to be determined by the
Administrative Agent in its sole discretion; provided that the Administrative Agent shall
consult with the Borrower as to the selection of such instruments or accounts; provided further
that such investments shall be at the risk and expense of the Borrower.  Other than any interest
earned on the investment of such deposits, such deposits shall not bear interest.  Interest or
profits, if any, on such investments shall accumulate in such account.  Moneys in such account
shall be applied by the Administrative Agent to reimburse the relevant Issuing Lender for LC
 

Disbursements for which it has not been reimbursed and, to the extent not so applied, shall be
held for the satisfaction of the reimbursement obligations of the Borrower for the LC Exposure
at such time or, if the maturity of the Loans has been accelerated (but (i) subject to the consent
of Lenders with LC Exposure representing 100% of the total LC Exposure and (ii) in the case
of any such application at a time when any Lender is a Defaulting Lender (but only if, after
giving effect thereto, the remaining cash collateral shall be less than the aggregate LC
Exposure of all the Defaulting Lenders), the consent of each Issuing Lender), be applied to
satisfy other obligations of the Borrower under this Agreement.  If the Borrower is required to
provide an amount of cash collateral hereunder as a result of the occurrence of an Event of
Default, the amount (including any interest and profits earned thereon as aforesaid) standing to
the credit of such account (to the extent not applied as aforesaid) shall be returned to the
Borrower within three Business Days after all Events of Default have been cured or waived.  If
the Borrower is required to provide an amount of cash collateral hereunder pursuant to Section
2.21, such amount (to the extent not applied as aforesaid) shall be returned to the Borrower, as
promptly as practicable, to the extent that, after giving effect to such return, no Issuing Lender
shall have any exposure in respect of any outstanding Letter of Credit that is not fully covered
by the Commitments of the Non-Defaulting Lenders and/or the remaining cash collateral and
no Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing.
(l)
 Letter of Credit Amounts.  For all purposes of this Agreement, (i) the
amount of a Letter of Credit that, by its terms or the terms of any document related thereto,
provides for one or more automatic increases in the stated amount thereof shall be deemed
to be the maximum stated amount of such Letter of Credit after giving effect to all such
increases (other than any such increase consisting of the reinstatement of an amount
previously drawn thereunder and reimbursed), whether or not such maximum stated amount
is in effect at the time of determination and (ii) if on any date of determination a Letter of
Credit has expired by its terms but any amount may still be drawn thereunder by reason of the
operation of Article 29(a) of the Uniform Customs and Practice for Documentary Credits,
International Chamber of Commerce Publication No. 600 (or such later version thereof as may
be in effect at the applicable time) or Rule 3.13 or Rule 3.14 of the ISP or similar terms of the
Letter of Credit itself, or if compliant documents have been presented but not yet honored,
such Letter of Credit shall be deemed to be “outstanding” and “undrawn” in the amount so
remaining available to be paid, and the obligations of the Borrower and each Lender
hereunder shall remain in full force and effect until the Issuing Lenders and the Lenders shall
have no further obligations to make any payments or disbursements under any circumstances
with respect to any Letter of Credit.
(m)
 Application of ISP and UCP.  Unless otherwise expressly agreed by an
Issuing Lender and the Borrower when a Letter of Credit is issued (including any such
agreement applicable to an Existing Letter of Credit), (i) the rules of the ISP shall apply to each
standby Letter of Credit, and (ii) the rules of the Uniform Customs and Practice for
Documentary Credits, as most recently published by the International Chamber of Commerce
at the time of issuance, shall apply to each commercial Letter of Credit.
 

(n)
 Letters of Credit Issued for Account of Others. Notwithstanding that a
Letter of Credit (including any Existing Letter of Credit) issued or outstanding hereunder
supports any obligations of, or is for the account of, any Subsidiary of the Borrower, or states
that any such Subsidiary is the “account party”, “applicant”, “customer”, “instructing party” or
the like of or for such Letter of Credit, and without derogating from any rights of the
applicable Issuing Lender (whether arising by contract, at law, in equity or otherwise) against
such Subsidiary in respect of such Letter of Credit, the Borrower (i) shall reimburse, indemnify
and compensate the applicable Issuing Lender hereunder for such Letter of Credit (including
to reimburse any and all LC Disbursements thereunder, the payment of interest thereon and
the payment of fees due under Section 2.12(b)) as if such Letter of Credit had been issued
solely for the account of the Borrower and (ii) irrevocably waives any and all defenses that
might otherwise be available to it as a guarantor or surety of any or all of the obligations of
such Subsidiary in respect of such Letter of Credit.  The Borrower hereby acknowledges that
the issuance of Letters of Credit for its Subsidiaries inures to the benefit of the Borrower, and
that the Borrower’s business derives substantial benefits from the businesses of its
Subsidiaries.
SECTION 2.07.
 Funding of Borrowings.            Funding by
Lenders.  Each Lender shall make each Loan to be made by it hereunder on the proposed date
thereof by wire transfer of immediately available funds by 2:00 p.m., New York City time (or,
in the case of any Syndicated ABR Loan, 4:00 p.m., New York City time), to the account of the
Administrative Agent most recently designated by it for such purpose by notice to the
Lenders.    The Administrative Agent will make such Loans available to the Borrower by
promptly crediting the amounts so received, in like funds, to an account of the Borrower
designated by the Borrower in the applicable Borrowing Request; provided that Syndicated
ABR Borrowings made to finance the reimbursement of an LC Disbursement as provided in
Section 2.06(f) shall be remitted by the Administrative Agent to the relevant Issuing Lender
specified in the applicable Borrowing Request.
(a)
 Presumption by the Administrative Agent.  Unless the Administrative
Agent shall have received notice from a Lender prior to the proposed date of any Borrowing
that such Lender will not make available to the Administrative Agent such Lender’s share of
such Borrowing, the Administrative Agent may assume that such Lender has made such share
available on such date in accordance with paragraph  (a) of this Section 2.07 and may, in
reliance upon such assumption, make available to the Borrower a corresponding amount.  In
such event, if a Lender has not in fact made its share of the applicable Borrowing available to
the Administrative Agent, then the applicable Lender and the Borrower severally agree to pay
to the Administrative Agent forthwith on demand such corresponding amount with interest
thereon, for each day from and including the date such amount is made available to the
Borrower to but excluding the date of payment to the Administrative Agent, at (i) in the case
of a payment to be made by such Lender, the greater of the NYFRB Rate and a rate
determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on
interbank compensation and (ii) in the case of a payment to be made by the Borrower,
 

the interest rate applicable to Syndicated ABR Loans.  If the Borrower and such Lender shall
pay such interest to the Administrative Agent for the same or an overlapping period, the
Administrative Agent shall promptly remit to the Borrower the amount of such interest paid
by the Borrower for such period.  If such Lender pays its share of the applicable Borrowing to
the Administrative Agent, then the amount so paid shall constitute such Lender’s Loan
included in such Borrowing.  Any payment by the Borrower shall be without prejudice to any
claim the Borrower may have against a Lender that shall have failed to make such payment to
the Administrative Agent.
SECTION 2.08.
 Interest Elections.        Elections by the Borrower for
Syndicated Borrowings.  The Loans comprising each Syndicated Borrowing initially shall be of
the Type specified in the applicable Borrowing Request or as otherwise provided in Section
2.03(d) and, in the case of a Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing, shall have the Interest Period
specified in such Borrowing Request or as otherwise provided in Section 2.03(d).  Thereafter,
the Borrower may elect to convert such Syndicated Borrowing to a Borrowing of a different
Type or to continue such Borrowing as a Borrowing of the same Type and, in the case of a
Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing, may elect the Interest Period therefor, all as provided in
this Section 2.08.  The Borrower may elect different options with respect to different portions
of the affected Syndicated Borrowing, in which case each such portion shall be allocated
ratably among the Lenders holding the Loans comprising such Borrowing, and the Loans
comprising each such portion shall be considered a separate Borrowing.   This Section 2.08
shall not apply to Competitive Borrowings, which may not be converted or continued.
(a)
 Notice of Elections.  To make an election pursuant to this Section 2.08,
the Borrower shall notify the Administrative Agent of such election by telephone by the time
that a Borrowing Request would be required under Section  2.03 if the Borrower were
requesting a Syndicated Borrowing of the Type resulting from such election to be made on the
effective date of such election.    Each such telephonic Interest Election Request shall be
irrevocable and shall be confirmed promptly by hand delivery or e-mail (in .pdf or .tif format)
to the Administrative Agent of a written Interest Election Request in a form approved by the
Administrative Agent and signed by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower.
(b)
 Content of Interest Election Requests.   Each telephonic and written
Interest Election Request shall specify the following information in compliance with
Section 2.02:
(i)
 the Borrowing to which such Interest Election Request applies and, if
different options are being elected with respect to different portions thereof, the
portions thereof to be allocated to each resulting Borrowing (in which case the
information to be specified pursuant to clauses (iii) and (iv) below shall be specified for
each resulting Borrowing);
 

(ii)
 the effective date of the election made pursuant to such Interest
Election Request, which shall be a Business Day;
(iii)
 whether the resulting Borrowing is to be an ABR Borrowing, a Term
SOFR Borrowing or, if applicable pursuant to Section 2.14, a Daily Simple SOFR
Borrowing; and
(iv)
 if the resulting Borrowing is a Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing, the
Interest Period therefor after giving effect to such election, which shall be a period
contemplated by the definition of the term “Interest Period” and permitted under
Section 2.02(d).
If any such Interest Election Request requests a Term SOFR Borrowing but does
not specify an Interest Period, then the Borrower shall be deemed to have selected an Interest
Period of one month’s duration.
(c)
 Notice by the Administrative Agent to the Lenders.  Promptly following
receipt of an Interest Election Request, the Administrative Agent shall advise each Lender of
the details thereof and of such Lender’s portion of each resulting Borrowing.
(d)
 Failure to Elect; Events of Default.   If the Borrower fails to deliver a
timely and complete Interest Election Request with respect to a Syndicated Term SOFR
Borrowing prior to the end of the Interest Period therefor, then, unless such Syndicated Term
SOFR Borrowing is repaid as provided herein, the Borrower shall be deemed to have selected
an Interest Period of one month’s duration.
Notwithstanding any contrary provision hereof, if an Event of Default has
occurred and is continuing and the Administrative Agent, at the request of the Required
Lenders, so notifies the Borrower (provided that no such notice shall be required in the case of
any Event of Default under clause (h) or (i) of Article VII with respect to the Borrower), then,
so long as an Event of Default is continuing (A) no outstanding Syndicated Borrowing may be
converted to or continued as a Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing and (B) unless repaid, each
Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing shall be converted to a Syndicated ABR Borrowing at the
end of the Interest Period therefor.
SECTION 2.09.
 Termination, Reduction and Increase of the
Commitments.        Scheduled Termination.  Unless previously terminated, each Commitment
shall terminate on the Commitment Termination Date applicable to such Commitment.
(a)
 Voluntary Termination or Reduction.  The Borrower may at any time
terminate, or from time to time reduce, the Commitments; provided that (i)  each partial
reduction of the Commitments shall be in an amount that is $5,000,000 or a larger multiple
thereof and (ii) the Borrower shall not terminate or reduce the Commitments if, after giving
effect to any concurrent prepayment of the Loans in
 

accordance with Section  2.11, the sum of the total Revolving Credit Exposures plus the
aggregate principal amount of outstanding Competitive Loans would exceed the total
Commitments.
(b)
 Notice of Voluntary Termination or Reduction.   The Borrower shall
notify the Administrative Agent of any election to terminate or reduce the Commitments
under paragraph (b) of this Section 2.09 at least three Business Days prior to the effective date
of such termination or reduction, specifying such election and the effective date
thereof.  Promptly following receipt of any notice, the Administrative Agent shall advise the
Lenders of the contents thereof.    Each notice delivered by the Borrower pursuant to this
Section 2.09 shall be irrevocable; provided that a notice of termination of the Commitments
delivered by the Borrower may state that such notice is conditioned upon the occurrence of
one or more events set forth therein, in which case such notice may be revoked by the
Borrower (by notice to the Administrative Agent on or prior to the specified effective date) if
such condition is not satisfied.
(c)
 Effect of Termination or Reduction.  Any termination or reduction of the
Commitments shall be permanent.  Each reduction of the Commitments shall be made ratably
among the Lenders in accordance with their respective Commitments.
(d)
 Increase of Commitments.
(i)
 Requests for Increase.  The Borrower may, at any time following the
Effective Date, effect an increase in the Commitments hereunder (each such increase
being a “Commitment Increase”) by having one or more Additional Commitment
Lenders provide new or additional Commitments hereunder, by notice to the
Administrative Agent specifying the amount of the relevant Commitment Increase, the
identity of the Additional Commitment Lender(s) and the date on which such increase
is to be effective (the “Commitment Increase Date”), which shall be a Business Day at
least three Business Days after delivery of such notice and 30 days prior to the
Commitment Termination Date (or, if at such time, there shall exist different
Commitment Termination Dates for the Lenders hereunder, the latest applicable
Commitment Termination Date); provided that:
(A)
 the minimum amount of each Commitment Increase shall be
$25,000,000;
(B)
 immediately after giving effect to any Commitment Increase,
the aggregate Commitments hereunder shall not exceed $1,875,000,000;
(C)
 at the time of any such Commitment Increase, no Default shall
have occurred and be continuing or would result therefrom; and
 

(D)
 the representations and warranties set forth in Article IV and in
the other Loan Documents shall be true and correct (x) in the case of the
representations and warranties qualified as to materiality, in all respects and (y)
otherwise, in all material respects, in each case on and as of the Commitment
Increase Date as if made on and as of such date (or, if any such representation
or warranty is expressly stated to have been made as of a specific date, as of
such specific date).
Each notice by the Borrower under this paragraph shall be deemed to constitute a
representation and warranty by the Borrower as to the matters specified in clauses (B), (C) and
(D) above as of the relevant Commitment Increase Date.  Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, no Lender shall have any obligation hereunder to become an Additional
Commitment Lender and any election to do so shall be in the sole discretion of each Lender.
(ii)
 Effectiveness of Increase.  Each Commitment Increase (and the new or
additional Commitment of each Additional Commitment Lender resulting therefrom)
shall become effective as of the relevant Commitment Increase Date upon receipt by
the Administrative Agent, on or prior to 2:00  p.m., New York City time, on such
Commitment Increase Date, of:
(A)
 a certificate executed by a Responsible Officer of the Borrower
stating that the conditions with respect to such Commitment Increase under
this paragraph (e) have been satisfied;
(B)
 an agreement, in form and substance satisfactory to the
Borrower and the Administrative Agent, pursuant to which each such
Additional Commitment Lender shall, effective as of such Commitment Increase
Date, provide a new or additional Commitment hereunder in the amount
specified therein and (if not then an existing Lender) become a Lender
hereunder, in each case duly executed by each such Additional Commitment
Lender and the Borrower and acknowledged by the Administrative Agent; and
(C)
 such evidence of authority of the Borrower to effect such
Commitment Increase as the Administrative Agent may reasonably request.
Upon the Administrative Agent’s receipt of a fully executed agreement from each Additional
Commitment Lender referred to in clause (B) above, together with the certificates and/or other
documents referred to in clauses (A) and (C) above, the Administrative Agent shall record the
information contained in each such agreement in the Register and give prompt notice of the
effectiveness of the relevant Commitment Increase to the Borrower and the Lenders (including
each Additional Commitment Lender), which notice of effectiveness shall be conclusive and
binding on the parties hereto.
 

(iii)
 On each Commitment Increase Date, (i) the aggregate principal amount
of the Syndicated Loans outstanding (the “Existing Syndicated Borrowings”)
immediately prior to the effectiveness of such  Commitment Increase shall be deemed
to be repaid, (ii)  each Additional Commitment Lender that shall have had a
Commitment prior to the effectiveness of such Commitment Increase shall pay to the
Administrative Agent in Dollars, in immediately available funds, an amount equal to
the difference between (A)  the product of (1)  such Lender’s Applicable Percentage
(calculated after giving effect to the effectiveness of such Commitment Increase)
multiplied by (2) the aggregate amount of the Resulting Syndicated Borrowings and
(B) the product of (1) such Lender’s Applicable Percentage (calculated without giving
effect to the effectiveness of such Commitment Increase) multiplied by (2)  the
aggregate amount of the Existing Syndicated Borrowings, (iii)  each Additional
Commitment Lender that shall not have had a Commitment prior to the effectiveness
of such Commitment Increase shall pay to Administrative Agent in Dollars, in
immediately available funds, an amount equal to the product of (1)  such Lender’s
Applicable Percentage (calculated after giving effect to the effectiveness of such
Commitment Increase) multiplied by (2)  the aggregate amount of the Resulting
Syndicated Borrowings, (iv) after the Administrative Agent receives the funds specified
in clauses (ii) and (iii) above, the Administrative Agent shall pay to each Lender the
portion of such funds that is equal to the difference between (A)  the product of
(1)  such Lender’s Applicable Percentage (calculated without giving effect to the
effectiveness of such Commitment Increase) multiplied by (2) the aggregate amount of
the Existing Syndicated Borrowings, and (B) the product of (1) such Lender’s Applicable
Percentage (calculated after giving effect to the effectiveness of such Commitment
Increase) multiplied by (2)  the aggregate amount of the Resulting Syndicated
Borrowings, (v) after the effectiveness of such  Commitment Increase, the Borrower
shall be deemed to have made new Syndicated Borrowings (the “Resulting Syndicated
Borrowings”) in an aggregate amount equal to the aggregate amount of the Existing
Syndicated Borrowings and of the Types and for the Interest Periods specified in a
Borrowing Request delivered to the Administrative Agent in accordance with
Section 2.03 (and the Borrower shall deliver such Borrowing Request), (vi) each Lender
shall be deemed to hold its Applicable Percentage of each Resulting Syndicated
Borrowing (calculated after giving effect to the effectiveness of such Commitment
Increase) and (vii) the Borrower shall pay each Lender any and all accrued but unpaid
interest on its Loans comprising the Existing Syndicated Borrowings.    The deemed
payments of the Existing Syndicated Borrowings made pursuant to clause (i) above
shall be subject to compensation by the Borrower pursuant to the provisions of
Section 2.16 if the date of the effectiveness of such Commitment Increase occurs other
than on the last day of the Interest Period relating thereto.  Upon each Commitment
Increase, the participation interests of the Lenders in the then outstanding Letters of
Credit shall automatically be adjusted to reflect,
 

and each Lender (including each Additional Commitment Lender) shall have a
participation in each such Letter of Credit equal to, the Lenders’ respective Applicable
Percentage of the aggregate amount available to be drawn under each such Letter of
Credit, after giving effect to such Commitment Increase.
SECTION 2.10.
 Repayment of Loans; Evidence of Debt.    Repayment.
 The Borrower hereby unconditionally promises to pay the Loans as follows:
(i)
 to the Administrative Agent for account of each Lender the outstanding
principal amount of the Syndicated Loans of such Lender on the Commitment
Termination Date applicable to such Syndicated Loans, and
(ii)
 to the Administrative Agent for account of each Lender the then unpaid
principal amount of each Competitive Loan of such Lender on the last day of the
Interest Period therefor.
(e)
 Maintenance of Records by Lenders.   Each Lender shall maintain in
accordance with its usual practice records evidencing the indebtedness of the Borrower to
such Lender resulting from each Loan made by such Lender, including the amounts of principal
and interest payable and paid to such Lender from time to time hereunder.
(f)
 Maintenance of Records by the Administrative Agent.   The
Administrative Agent shall maintain records in which it shall record (i) the amount of each
Loan made hereunder, the Class and Type thereof and, if applicable, each Interest Period
therefor, (ii) the amount of any principal or interest due and payable or to become due and
payable from the Borrower to each Lender hereunder and (iii)  the amount of any sum
received by the Administrative Agent hereunder for account of the Lenders and each Lender’s
share thereof.
(g)
 Effect of Entries.  The entries made in the records maintained pursuant
to paragraph (b) or (c) of this Section 2.10 shall be prima facie evidence of the existence and
amounts of the obligations recorded therein; provided that the failure of any Lender or the
Administrative Agent to maintain such records or any error therein shall not in any manner
affect the obligation of the Borrower to repay the Loans or pay any other amounts hereunder
in accordance with the terms of this Agreement.
(h)
 Promissory Notes.  Any Lender may request that Loans made by it be
evidenced by a promissory note.    In such event, the Borrower shall prepare, execute and
deliver to such Lender a promissory note payable to such Lender and its registered assigns and
in customary form reasonably satisfactory to the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent.  Thereafter, the Loans evidenced by such promissory note and interest thereon shall at
all times (including after assignment pursuant to Section  10.04) be represented by one or
more promissory notes in such form payable to the payee named therein or its registered
assigns.
 

SECTION 2.11.
 Prepayment of Loans.        Optional Prepayments.  The
Borrower shall have the right at any time and from time to time to prepay any Borrowing in
whole or in part, without premium or penalty, subject to the requirements of this Section 2.11;
provided that the Borrower shall not have the right to prepay any Competitive Loan without the
prior consent of the Lender thereof.
(a)
 Notices, Etc.   The Borrower shall notify the Administrative Agent by
telephone (confirmed by hand delivery or e-mail (in .pdf or .tif format)) of any prepayment
hereunder (i)  in the case of prepayment of a Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing or of a
Competitive Borrowing, not later than 12:00 noon, New York City time, three Business Days
before the date of prepayment, (ii) in the case of prepayment of a Syndicated Daily Simple
SOFR Borrowing, 1:00 p.m., New York City time, five U.S. Government Securities Business Days
before the date of prepayment or (iii)  in the case of prepayment of a Syndicated ABR
Borrowing, not later than 12:00 noon, New York City time, on the date of prepayment.  Each
such notice shall be irrevocable and shall specify the prepayment date and the principal
amount of each Borrowing or portion thereof to be prepaid; provided that a notice of
prepayment delivered by the Borrower may state that such notice is conditioned upon the
occurrence of one or more events set forth therein, in which case such notice of prepayment
may be revoked by the Borrower (by notice to the Administrative Agent on or prior to the
specified effective date) if such condition is not satisfied.  Promptly following receipt of any
such notice relating to a Syndicated Borrowing or Competitive Borrowing, the Administrative
Agent shall advise the Lenders of the contents thereof.    Each partial prepayment of any
Borrowing shall be in an amount that would be permitted in the case of a Borrowing of the
same Class and Type as provided in Section 2.02.  Each prepayment of a Borrowing shall be
applied ratably to the Loans included in the prepaid Borrowing.    Prepayments shall be
accompanied by accrued interest to the extent required by Section 2.13 and any payments
pursuant to Section 2.16, if applicable.  If the Borrower provides a notice of prepayment of
Syndicated Loans but fails to make a timely selection of the Syndicated Borrowing or
Syndicated Borrowings to be prepaid, such prepayment shall be applied, first, to any
outstanding Syndicated ABR Borrowings, second, to the outstanding Syndicated Daily Simple
SOFR Borrowings, and, third, to the outstanding Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowings in the
order of the remaining duration of their respective Interest Periods (the Borrowing with the
shortest remaining Interest Period to be repaid first).
SECTION 2.12.
 Fees.        Facility Fees.  The Borrower agrees to pay to
the Administrative Agent for account of each Lender a facility fee, which shall accrue at the
Applicable Rate on the daily amount of the Commitment of such Lender (whether used or
unused) during the period from and including the date hereof to but excluding the date such
Commitment terminates; provided that if such Lender continues to have any Revolving Credit
Exposure after its Commitment terminates, then such facility fee shall continue to accrue on the
daily amount of such Lender’s Revolving Credit Exposure from and including the date on
which its Commitment terminates to but excluding the date on which such Lender ceases to
have any Revolving Credit Exposure.  Facility fees accrued
 

through and including each Quarterly Date shall be payable on the 15th Business Day
following such Quarterly Date and on the date the Commitments terminate, commencing on
the first such date to occur after the date hereof; provided that all facility fees shall be payable
on the date on which the Commitments terminate and any facility fees accruing after the date
on which the Commitments terminate shall be payable on demand.  All facility fees shall be
computed on the basis of a year of 360 days and shall be payable for the actual number of days
elapsed (including the first day but excluding the last day).
(a)
 Letter of Credit Fees.   The Borrower agrees to pay (i)  to the
Administrative Agent for account of each Lender a participation fee with respect to its
participations in Letters of Credit, which shall accrue at a rate per annum equal to the
Applicable Rate applicable to interest on Syndicated Term SOFR Loans (or, the case of
Documentary Letters of Credit, 50% of such Applicable Rate) on the average daily amount of
such Lender’s LC Exposure (excluding any portion thereof attributable to unreimbursed LC
Disbursements) during the period from and including the Effective Date to but excluding the
later of the date on which such Lender’s Commitment terminates and the date on which such
Lender ceases to have any LC Exposure, and (ii) to each Issuing Lender a fronting fee, which
shall accrue at the rate or rates per annum separately agreed upon between the Borrower and
such Issuing Lender on the average daily amount of the LC Exposure (excluding any portion
thereof attributable to unreimbursed LC Disbursements) in respect of Letters of Credit issued
by such Issuing Lender during the period from and including the Effective Date to but
excluding the later of the date of termination of the Commitments and the date on which
there ceases to be any such LC Exposure, as well as such Issuing Lender’s standard fees with
respect to the administration, issuance, amendment or extension of any Letter of Credit or
processing of drawings thereunder.  Participation fees and fronting fees accrued through and
including each Quarterly Date shall be payable on the 15th Business Day following such
Quarterly Date, commencing on the first such date to occur after the Effective Date; provided
that all such fees shall be payable on the date on which the Commitments terminate and any
such fees accruing after the date on which the Commitments terminate shall be payable on
demand.  Any other fees payable to any Issuing Lender pursuant to this paragraph shall be
payable within 10 days after demand.    All participation fees and fronting fees shall be
computed on the basis of a year of 360 days and shall be payable for the actual number of
days elapsed (including the first day but excluding the last day).
(b)
 Administrative Agent Fees.   The Borrower agrees to pay to the
Administrative Agent, for its own account, fees payable in the amounts and at the times
separately agreed upon between the Borrower and the Administrative Agent.
(c)
 Payment of Fees.  All fees payable hereunder shall be paid on the dates
due, in Dollars and immediately available funds, to the Administrative Agent (or to the
relevant Issuing Lender, in the case of fees payable to it) for distribution, in the case of facility
fees and participation fees, to the Lenders entitled thereto.  Fees paid shall not be refundable
under any circumstances.
 

SECTION 2.13.
 Interest.        ABR Loans.  The Loans comprising each
ABR Borrowing shall bear interest at a rate per annum equal to the Alternate Base Rate plus
the Applicable Rate.
(a)
 Term SOFR Loans.  The Loans comprising each Term SOFR Borrowing
shall bear interest at a rate per annum equal to (i) in the case of a Syndicated Term SOFR
Borrowing, the Adjusted Term SOFR for the Interest Period for such Borrowing plus the
Applicable Rate, or (ii) in the case of a Competitive Term SOFR Borrowing, the Adjusted Term
SOFR for the Interest Period for such Borrowing plus (or minus, as applicable) the Margin
applicable to such Borrowing.
(b)
 Daily Simple SOFR Loans.   The Loans comprising each Daily Simple
SOFR Borrowing (if such Type of Borrowing is applicable pursuant to Section 2.14) shall bear
interest at a rate per annum equal to the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR plus the Applicable Rate.
(c)
 Fixed Rate Loans.  Each Fixed Rate Loan shall bear interest at a rate per
annum equal to the Fixed Rate applicable to such Loan.
(d)
 Default Interest.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any principal of or
interest on any Loan or any fee or other amount payable by the Borrower hereunder is not
paid when due, whether at stated maturity, upon acceleration or otherwise, such overdue
amount shall bear interest, after as well as before judgment, at a rate per annum equal to (i) in
the case of overdue principal of any Loan, 2% plus the rate otherwise applicable to such Loan
as provided above or (ii) in the case of any other amount, 2% plus the rate applicable to ABR
Loans as provided in paragraph (a) of this Section 2.13.
(e)
 Payment of Interest.  Accrued interest on each Loan shall be payable in
arrears on each Interest Payment Date for such Loan and, in the case of Syndicated Loans,
upon termination of the Commitments; provided that (i)  interest accrued pursuant to
paragraph  (e) of this Section 2.13 shall be payable on demand; (ii)  in the event of any
repayment or prepayment of any Loan (other than a prepayment of a Syndicated ABR Loan
prior to the Commitment Termination Date applicable to such Loan), accrued interest on the
principal amount repaid or prepaid shall be payable on the date of such repayment or
prepayment; and (iii) in the event of any conversion of any Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing
prior to the end of the Interest Period therefor, accrued interest on such Borrowing shall be
payable on the effective date of such conversion.
(f)
 Computation.  All interest hereunder shall be computed on the basis of
a year of 360 days, except that interest computed by reference to the Alternate Base Rate at
times when the Alternate Base Rate is based on the Prime Rate shall be computed on the
basis of a year of 365 days (or 366 days in a leap year), and in each case shall be payable for
the actual number of days elapsed (including the first day but
 

excluding the last day).  The applicable Alternate Base Rate, Adjusted Term SOFR or Adjusted
Daily Simple SOFR shall be determined by the Administrative Agent, and such determination
shall be conclusive absent manifest error.
SECTION 2.14.
 Alternate Rate of Interest.     Subject to paragraph (b) of
this Section  2.14, if prior to the commencement of the Interest Period for any Term SOFR
Borrowing:
(i)
 the Administrative Agent determines (which determination shall be
conclusive absent manifest error) (A) prior to the commencement of any Interest
Period for a Term SOFR Borrowing, that adequate and reasonable means do not exist
for ascertaining the Adjusted Term SOFR for such Interest Period (including because
the Term SOFR Reference Rate is not available or published on a current basis) or (B) at
any time, that adequate and reasonable means do not exist for ascertaining the
Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR; or
(ii)
 the Administrative Agent is advised by the Required Lenders (or, in the
case of a Competitive Term SOFR Borrowing, any Lender that is required to make a
Loan included in such Borrowing) that (A) prior to the commencement of any Interest
Period for a Term SOFR Borrowing, the Adjusted Term SOFR for such Interest Period
will not adequately and fairly reflect the cost to such Lenders (or such Lender) of
making or maintaining their Loans (or its Loan) included in such Borrowing for such
Interest Period or (B) at any time, the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR will not adequately
and fairly reflect the cost to such Lenders of making or maintaining their Loans
included in any Daily Simple SOFR Borrowing;
then the Administrative Agent shall give notice thereof (which may be by telephone) to the
Borrower and the Lenders as promptly as practicable thereafter and, until (x) the
Administrative Agent notifies the Borrower and the Lenders that the circumstances giving rise
to such notice no longer exist with respect to the relevant Benchmark and (y) the Borrower
delivers a new Interest Election Request in accordance with the terms of Section 2.08 or a new
Borrowing Request in accordance with the terms of Section 2.03, any Interest Election Request
that requests the conversion of any Syndicated Borrowing to, or the continuation of any
Syndicated Borrowing as, a Term SOFR Borrowing and any Borrowing Request that requests a
Syndicated Term SOFR Borrowing shall instead be deemed to be an Interest Election Request
or a Borrowing Request, as applicable, for (x) a Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Borrowing so
long as the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is not also the subject of Section 2.14(a)(i) or 2.14(a)
(ii) above or (y) a Syndicated ABR Borrowing if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR also is the
subject of Section 2.14(a)(i) or 2.14(a)(ii) above; provided that, in the case of any Competitive
Term SOFR Borrowing, notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the
applicable Lender or Lenders shall have no obligation to make, and the Borrower shall have no
right or obligation to borrow, the Loan of such Lender or the Loans of such Lenders, in each
case, included in such Borrowing.    Furthermore, if any Syndicated Term SOFR Loan or
Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Loan is outstanding on the date of the Borrower’s receipt
 

of the notice from the Administrative Agent referred to in this ‎Section 2.14(a) with respect to
the Relevant Rate applicable to such Syndicated Term SOFR Loan or Syndicated Daily Simple
SOFR Loan, then until (x) the Administrative Agent notifies the Borrower and the Lenders that
the circumstances giving rise to such notice no longer exist with respect to the relevant
Benchmark and (y) the Borrower delivers a new Interest Election Request in accordance with
the terms of Section 2.08 or a new Borrowing Request in accordance with the terms of Section
2.03, (1) any Syndicated Term SOFR Loan shall on the last day of the Interest Period
applicable to such Loan convert to, and shall constitute, (x) a Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR
Loan so long as the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is not also the subject of Section 2.14(a)(i) or
2.14(a)(ii) above or (y) a Syndicated ABR Loan if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR also is the
subject of Section 2.14(a)(i) or 2.14(ii) above, on such day and (2) any Syndicated Daily
Simple SOFR Loan shall on and from such day convert to, and shall constitute, a Syndicated
ABR Loan.
(g)
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other Loan
Document, if a Benchmark Transition Event and its related Benchmark Replacement Date have
occurred prior to the Reference Time in respect of any setting of the then-current Benchmark,
then (x) if a Benchmark Replacement is determined in accordance with clause (a) of the
definition of “Benchmark Replacement” for such Benchmark Replacement Date, such
Benchmark Replacement will replace such Benchmark for all purposes hereunder and under
any other Loan Document in respect of such Benchmark setting and subsequent Benchmark
settings without any amendment to, or further action or consent of any other party to, this
Agreement or any other Loan Document and (y) if a Benchmark Replacement is determined in
accordance with clause (b) of the definition of “Benchmark Replacement” for such Benchmark
Replacement Date, such Benchmark Replacement will replace such Benchmark for all
purposes hereunder and under any other Loan Document in respect of any Benchmark setting
at or after 5:00 p.m., New York City time, on the fifth Business Day after the date notice of
such Benchmark Replacement is provided to the Lenders without any amendment to, or
further action or consent of any other party to, this Agreement or any other Loan Document
so long as the Administrative Agent has not received, by such time, written notice of objection
to such Benchmark Replacement from Lenders comprising the Required Lenders.
(i)
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other Loan
Document, the Administrative Agent will have the right to make Benchmark
Replacement Conforming Changes from time to time and, notwithstanding anything to
the contrary herein or in any other Loan Document, any amendments implementing
such Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes will become effective without any
further action or consent of any other party to this Agreement or any other Loan
Document.
(ii)
 The Administrative Agent will promptly notify the Borrower and the
Lenders of (A) any occurrence of a Benchmark Transition Event, (B) the
 

implementation of any Benchmark Replacement, (C) the effectiveness of any
Benchmark Replacement Conforming Changes, (D) the removal or reinstatement of
any tenor of a Benchmark pursuant to paragraph (b)(iv) below and (E) the
commencement or conclusion of any Benchmark Unavailability Period.    Any
determination, decision or election that may be made by the Administrative Agent or,
if applicable, any Lender (or group of Lenders) pursuant to this Section 2.14, including
any determination with respect to a tenor, rate or adjustment or of the occurrence or
non-occurrence of an event, circumstance or date and any decision to take or refrain
from taking any action or any selection, will be conclusive and binding absent manifest
error and may be made in its or their sole discretion and without consent from any
other party to this Agreement or any other Loan Document, except, in each case, as
expressly required pursuant to this Section 2.14.
(iii)
 Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein or in any other Loan
Document, at any time (including in connection with the implementation of a
Benchmark Replacement), (A) if the then-current Benchmark is a term rate (including
the Term SOFR) and either (x) any tenor for such Benchmark is not displayed on a
screen or other information service that publishes such rate from time to time as
selected by the Administrative Agent in its reasonable discretion or (y) the regulatory
supervisor for the administrator of such Benchmark has provided a public statement or
publication of information announcing that any tenor for such Benchmark is or will be
no longer representative, then the Administrative Agent may modify the definition of
“Interest Period” for any Benchmark settings at or after such time to remove such
unavailable or non-representative tenor and (B) if a tenor that was removed pursuant
to clause (A) above either (x) is subsequently displayed on a screen or information
service for a Benchmark (including a Benchmark Replacement) or (y) is not, or is no
longer, subject to an announcement that it is or will no longer be representative for a
Benchmark (including a Benchmark Replacement), then the Administrative Agent may
modify the definition of “Interest Period” for all Benchmark settings at or after such
time to reinstate such previously removed tenor.
(iv)
 Upon the Borrower’s receipt of notice of the commencement of a
Benchmark Unavailability Period, (A) the Borrower may revoke any request for a
borrowing of, conversion to or continuation of Syndicated Term SOFR Loans to be
made, converted or continued during any Benchmark Unavailability Period and, failing
that, the Borrower will be deemed to have converted any such request into a request
for a borrowing of or conversion to (x) a Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Borrowing so
long as the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is not the subject of a Benchmark Transition
Event or (y) a Syndicated ABR Borrowing if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is the
subject of a Benchmark Transition Event and (B) any Competitive Bid for a Competitive
Term SOFR Borrowing shall be ineffective, and notwithstanding anything to the
contrary set forth herein, the
 

applicable Lender or Lenders shall have no obligation to make, and the Borrower shall
have no right or obligation to borrow, the Loan of such Lender or the Loans of such
Lenders, in each case, proposed in any such Competitive Bid.    Furthermore, if any
Syndicated Term SOFR Loan or Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Loan is outstanding on
the date of the Borrower’s receipt of notice of the commencement of a Benchmark
Unavailability Period with respect to a Relevant Rate applicable to such Syndicated
Term SOFR Loan or Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Loan, then until such time as a
Benchmark Replacement is implemented pursuant to this‎ Section 2.14(b), (1) any
Syndicated Term SOFR Loan shall on the last day of the Interest Period applicable to
such Loan convert to, and shall constitute, (x) a Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR Loan so
long as the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is not the subject of a Benchmark Transition
Event or (y) a Syndicated ABR Loan if the Adjusted Daily Simple SOFR is the subject of a
Benchmark Transition Event on such day and (2) any Syndicated Daily Simple SOFR
Loan shall on and from such day convert to, and shall constitute, a Syndicated ABR
Loan.  During any Benchmark Unavailability Period or at any time that a tenor for the
then-current Benchmark is not an Available Tenor, the component of the Alternate
Base Rate based upon the then-current Benchmark or such tenor for such Benchmark,
as applicable, will not be used in any determination of the Alternate Base Rate.
SECTION 2.15.
 Increased Costs.        Increased Costs Generally.  If any
Change in Law shall:
(i)
 impose, modify or deem applicable any reserve, special deposit,
compulsory loan, insurance charge or similar requirement against assets of, deposits
with or for the account of, or credit extended or participated in by, any Lender or any
Issuing Lender;
(ii)
 subject any Lender or any Issuing Lender or the Administrative Agent to
any Tax (other than (A) Indemnified Taxes, (B) Other Taxes, (C) Taxes described in
clauses (a) and (c) through (e) of the definition of the term “Excluded Taxes”, (D)
Connection Income Taxes and (E) Taxes imposed on gross or net income, profits or
revenue, including value-added and similar Taxes) of any kind whatsoever with respect
to its loans, loan principal, letters of credit, commitments or other obligations, or its
deposits, reserves, other liabilities or capital attributable thereto; or
(iii)
 impose on any Lender or any Issuing Lender or the applicable interbank
market any other condition, cost or expense affecting this Agreement, Loans made by
such Lender or any Letter of Credit or participation therein;
and the result of any of the foregoing shall be to increase the cost to such Lender of making,
converting to, continuing or maintaining any Loan (or of maintaining its obligation to make
any such Loan) or to increase the cost to such Lender or such Issuing
 

Lender of participating in, issuing or maintaining any Letter of Credit (or of maintaining its
obligation to participate in or to issue any Letter of Credit), or to reduce the amount of any sum
received or receivable by such Lender or such Issuing Lender or the Administrative Agent
hereunder (whether of principal, interest or any other amount) then, upon request of such
Lender, such Issuing Lender or the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, the Borrower will
pay to such Lender, such Issuing Lender or the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, in
Dollars, such additional amount or amounts as will compensate such Lender, such Issuing
Lender or the Administrative Agent, as the case may be, for such additional costs or expense
incurred or reduction suffered.
(h)
 Capital and Liquidity Requirements.  If any Lender or any Issuing Lender
determines that any Change in Law affecting such Lender or such Issuing Lender or any
lending office of such Lender or such Issuing Lender or such Lender’s or such Issuing Lender’s
holding company, if any, regarding capital or liquidity requirements has had or would have the
effect of reducing the rate of return on such Lender’s or such Issuing Lender’s capital or on the
capital of such Lender’s or such Issuing Lender’s holding company, if any, as a consequence of
this Agreement, the Commitment of such Lender or the Loans made by, or participations in
Letters of Credit held by, such Lender, or the Letters of Credit issued by such Issuing Lender, to
a level below that which such Lender or such Issuing Lender or such Lender’s or such Issuing
Lender’s holding company could have achieved but for such Change in Law (taking into
consideration such Lender’s or such Issuing Lender’s policies and the policies of such Lender’s
or such Issuing Lender’s holding company with respect to capital adequacy and liquidity), then
from time to time the Borrower will pay to such Lender or such Issuing Lender, as the case
may be, in Dollars, such additional amount or amounts as will compensate such Lender or
such Issuing Lender or such Lender’s or such Issuing Lender’s holding company for any such
reduction suffered.
(i)
 Certificates for Reimbursement.  A certificate of a Lender or an Issuing
Lender setting forth the amount or amounts in Dollars (and including a reasonable statement
as to the calculation of such amount or amounts) necessary to compensate such Lender or
such Issuing Lender or its holding company, as the case may be, as specified in paragraph (a)
or (b) of this Section 2.15 and delivered to the Borrower shall be conclusive absent manifest
error.  The Borrower shall pay such Lender or such Issuing Lender, as the case may be, the
amount shown as due on any such certificate within 10 days after receipt thereof.
(j)
 Delay in Requests.  Failure or delay on the part of any Lender or any
Issuing Lender to demand compensation pursuant to this Section 2.15 shall not constitute a
waiver of such Lender’s or such Issuing Lender’s right to demand such compensation,
provided that the Borrower shall not be required to compensate a Lender or an Issuing Lender
pursuant to this Section 2.15 for any increased costs incurred or reductions suffered more
than nine months prior to the date that such Lender or such Issuing Lender, as the case may
be, notifies the Borrower of the Change in Law giving rise to such increased costs or
reductions and of such Lender’s or such
 

Issuing Lender’s intention to claim compensation therefor (except that, if the Change in Law
giving rise to such increased costs or reductions is retroactive, then the nine‑month period
referred to above shall be extended to include the period of retroactive effect thereof).
(k)
 Competitive Loans.  Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
Section 2.15, a Lender shall not be entitled to compensation pursuant to this Section 2.15 in
respect of any Competitive Loan if the Change in Law (other than any Change in Law referred
to in the proviso of the definition of such term) that would otherwise entitle it to such
compensation shall have been publicly announced prior to submission of the Competitive Bid
pursuant to which such Loan was made.
SECTION 2.16.
 Break Funding Payments.   In the event of (a)  the
payment of any principal of any Term SOFR Loan or Fixed Rate Loan other than on the last
day of the Interest Period applicable thereto (including as a result of an Event of Default),
(b) the conversion or continuation of any Syndicated Term SOFR Loan other than on the last
day of the Interest Period therefor, (c) the failure to borrow, convert, continue or prepay any
Syndicated Loan on the date specified in any notice delivered pursuant hereto (regardless of
whether such notice is permitted to be revocable under Section  2.11(b) or 2.14(a) and is
revoked in accordance therewith), (d)  the failure to borrow any Competitive Loan after
accepting the Competitive Bid to make such Loan, or (e) the assignment as a result of a request
by the Borrower pursuant to Section 2.19(b) of any Syndicated Term SOFR Loan other than on
the last day of the Interest Period applicable thereto, then, in any such event, the Borrower shall
compensate each Lender for the loss, cost and expense attributable to such event.  A certificate
of any Lender setting forth any amount or amounts that such Lender is entitled to receive
pursuant to this Section 2.16 shall be delivered to the Borrower and shall be conclusive absent
manifest error.  The Borrower shall pay such Lender the amount shown as due on any such
certificate within 10 days after receipt thereof.
SECTION 2.17.
 Taxes.            Payments Free of Taxes.  Any and all
payments by or on account of any obligation of the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor
hereunder or under any other Loan Document shall be made free and clear of and without
deduction or withholding for any Indemnified Taxes (including Other Taxes); provided that if
the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor shall be required by applicable law to deduct any
Indemnified Taxes (including any Other Taxes) from such payments, then (i) the sum payable
shall be increased as necessary so that after making all required deductions (including
deductions applicable to additional sums payable under this Section 2.17) the Administrative
Agent or Lender, as the case may be, receives an amount equal to the sum it would have
received had no such deductions been made, (ii) the Borrower or such Subsidiary Guarantor
shall make or cause to be made such deductions and (iii)  the Borrower or such Subsidiary
Guarantor shall timely pay or cause to be paid the full amount deducted to the relevant
Governmental Authority in accordance with applicable law.
 

(a)
 Payment of Other Taxes by the Borrower.   Without limiting the
provisions of paragraph (a) above, the Borrower and each Subsidiary Guarantor shall timely
pay any Other Taxes to the relevant Governmental Authority in accordance with applicable
law.
(b)
 Indemnification by the Borrower.   The Borrower shall indemnify the
Administrative Agent and each Lender, within 30 days after written demand therefor, for the
full amount of any Indemnified Taxes (including Other Taxes and Indemnified Taxes imposed or
asserted on or attributable to amounts paid or payable under this Section 2.17, but excluding
Excluded Taxes under all circumstances) paid or payable by the Administrative Agent or such
Lender, as the case may be, and any penalties and interest  arising therefrom or with respect
thereto, whether or not such Indemnified Taxes (including Other Taxes) were correctly or
legally imposed or asserted by the relevant Governmental Authority.  A certificate as to the
amount of such payment or liability, prepared in good faith and delivered to the Borrower by a
Lender (with a copy to the Administrative Agent), or by the Administrative Agent on its own
behalf or on behalf of a Lender, shall be conclusive absent manifest error.  The Borrower shall
not be obligated to indemnify for any Indemnified Taxes (including Other Taxes) if a written
demand therefor is not made by the Administrative Agent or a Lender, as the case may be,
within 120 days from the first date the Administrative Agent or such Lender, as the case may
be, knows or reasonably should have known of the imposition of such Taxes.
(c)
 Evidence of Payments.   As soon as practicable after any payment of
Indemnified Taxes (including Other Taxes) by the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor to a
Governmental Authority, the Borrower or such Subsidiary Guarantor shall deliver to the
Administrative Agent the original or a certified copy of a receipt issued by such Governmental
Authority evidencing such payment or other evidence of such payment reasonably satisfactory
to the Administrative Agent.
(d)
 Indemnification by the Lenders.  Each Lender shall severally indemnify
the Administrative Agent for any Taxes attributable to such Lender (but only to the extent that
the Borrower and the Subsidiary Guarantors have not already indemnified the Administrative
Agent for such Taxes and without limiting the obligation of the Borrower and the Subsidiary
Guarantors to do so) that are paid or payable by the Administrative Agent in connection with
any Loan Document and any reasonable expenses arising therefrom or with respect thereto,
whether or not such Taxes were correctly or legally imposed or asserted by the relevant
Governmental Authority.  The indemnity under this paragraph (e) shall be paid within 10 days
after the Administrative Agent delivers to the applicable Lender a certificate stating the
amount of Taxes so paid or payable by the Administrative Agent.    Such certificate shall be
conclusive of the amount so paid or payable absent manifest error.
 

(e)
 Lender Tax Certifications.     Any Lender that is entitled to an exemption
from, or reduction of, any applicable withholding Tax with respect to any payments under any
Loan Document shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent, at the time or
times reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, such properly
completed and executed documentation reasonably requested by the Borrower or the
Administrative Agent as will permit such payments to be made without, or at a reduced rate
of, withholding.   In addition, any Lender, if reasonably requested by the Borrower or the
Administrative Agent, shall deliver such other documentation prescribed by applicable law or
reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent as will enable the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent to determine whether or not such Lender is subject to
backup withholding or information reporting requirements.  Notwithstanding anything to the
contrary in the preceding two sentences, the completion, execution and submission of such
documentation (other than such documentation set forth in Section 2.17(f)(ii)(A), 2.17(f)(ii)(B)
or 2.17(f)(ii)(D)) shall not be required if in the Lender’s reasonable judgment such completion,
execution or submission would subject such Lender to any material unreimbursed cost or
expense or would materially prejudice the legal or commercial position of such Lender.  Upon
the reasonable request of the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, any Lender shall update
any form or certification previously delivered pursuant to this paragraph (f).  If any form or
certification previously delivered pursuant to this Section 2.17 expires or becomes obsolete or
inaccurate in any respect with respect to a Lender, such Lender shall promptly (and in any
event within 10 days after such expiration, obsolescence or inaccuracy) notify the Borrower
and the Administrative Agent in writing of such expiration, obsolescence or inaccuracy and
update the form or certification or promptly notify the Borrower and Administrative Agent in
writing of its legal inability to do so.
(i)
 Without limiting the generality of the foregoing;
(A)
 Any Lender that is a United States person, as defined in Section
7701(a)(30) of the Code shall deliver to the Borrower (with a copy to the
Administrative Agent) on or prior to the date on which such Lender becomes a
Lender under this Agreement (and from time to time thereafter upon the
reasonable request of the Borrower and the Administrative Agent), two
accurate and complete original signed copies of Internal Revenue Service Form
W-9, or any successor form, certifying that such Lender is exempt from U.S.
Federal backup withholding Tax.
(B)
 Any Foreign Lender shall, to the extent it is legally entitled to do
so, deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent (in such number of
copies as shall be requested by the recipient) on or prior to the date on which
such Foreign Lender becomes a Lender under this Agreement (and from time to
time thereafter upon the reasonable
 

request of the Borrower or the Administrative Agent), whichever of the
following is applicable:
(1)
 in the case of a Foreign Lender claiming the benefits of
an income tax treaty to which the United States is a party (x) with
respect to payments of interest under this Agreement or any other Loan
Document, executed originals of IRS Form W-8BEN or IRS Form W-8BEN-
E, as applicable, establishing an exemption from, or reduction of, U.S.
Federal withholding Tax pursuant to the “interest” article of such tax
treaty and (y) with respect to any other applicable payments under this
Agreement or any other Loan Document, IRS Form W-8BEN or IRS Form
W-8BEN-E, as applicable, establishing an exemption from, or reduction
of, U.S. Federal withholding Tax pursuant to the “business profits” or
“other income” article of such tax treaty;
(2)
 executed originals of IRS Form W-8ECI;
(3)
 in the case of a Foreign Lender claiming the benefits of
the exemption for portfolio interest under Section 881(c) of the Code,
(x) a certificate substantially in the form of Exhibit E-1 to the effect that
such Foreign Lender is not a “bank” within the meaning of Section
881(c)(3)(A) of the Code, a “10 percent shareholder” of the Borrower
within the meaning of Section 871(h)(3)(B) of the Code or a “controlled
foreign corporation” described in Section 881(c)(3)(C) of the Code (a
“U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate”) and (y) executed originals of IRS Form
W-8BEN or IRS Form W-8BEN-E, as applicable; or
(4)
 to the extent a Foreign Lender is not the beneficial
owner, executed originals of IRS Form W-8IMY, accompanied by IRS
Form W-8ECI, IRS Form W-8BEN or IRS Form W-8BEN-E, as applicable, a
U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate substantially in the form of Exhibit E-2 or
Exhibit E-3, IRS Form W-9 and/or other certification documents from
each beneficial owner, as applicable; provided that if the Foreign Lender
is a partnership and one or more direct or indirect partners of such
Foreign Lender are claiming the portfolio interest exemption, such
Foreign Lender may provide a U.S. Tax Compliance Certificate
substantially in the form of Exhibit E-4 on behalf of each such direct or
indirect partner.
(C)
 Any Foreign Lender shall, to the extent it is legally entitled to do
so, deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent (in such number of
copies as shall be requested by the recipient) on or prior to
 

the date on which such Foreign Lender becomes a Lender under this
Agreement (and from time to time thereafter upon the reasonable request of
the Borrower or the Administrative Agent), executed originals of any other
form prescribed by applicable law as a basis for claiming exemption from, or a
reduction in, U.S. Federal withholding Tax, duly completed, together with such
supplementary documentation as may be prescribed by applicable law to
permit the Borrower or the Administrative Agent to determine withholding or
deduction required to be made.
(D)
 If a payment made to a Lender under any Loan Document
would be subject to U.S.  Federal withholding Tax imposed by FATCA if such
Lender were to fail to comply with the applicable reporting requirements of
FATCA (including those contained in Section 1471(b) or 1472(b) of the Code, as
applicable), such Lender shall deliver to the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent, at the time or times prescribed by law and at such time or times
reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent, such
documentation prescribed by applicable law (including as prescribed by
Section  1471(b)(3)(C)(i) of the Code) and such additional documentation
reasonably requested by the Borrower or the Administrative Agent as may be
necessary for the Borrower and the Administrative Agent to comply with their
obligations under FATCA and to determine that such Lender has complied with
such Lender’s obligations under FATCA or to determine the amount to deduct
and withhold from such payment.    Solely for purposes of this clause (D),
“FATCA” shall include any amendments made to FATCA after the date of this
Agreement.
(f)
 Cooperation in Contesting Indemnified Taxes.   If the Borrower
determines in good faith that a reasonable basis exists for contesting any Indemnified Taxes
(including Other Taxes) for which additional amounts have been paid under this Section 2.17,
the Administrative Agent or the relevant Lender, as the case may be, shall cooperate with the
Borrower in challenging such Indemnified Taxes (including Other Taxes) at the Borrower’s
expense, if so requested by the Borrower in writing; provided that, in the sole discretion,
exercised in good faith, of the Administrative Agent or such Lender, as the case may be, doing
so would not materially prejudice the Administrative Agent or such Lender, and the
Administrative Agent or such Lender would not be required to disclose any information it
considers proprietary or make available its Tax returns (or any other information relating to its
Taxes that it deems confidential) to the Borrower or any other Person.
(g)
 Treatment of Certain Refunds.   If the Administrative Agent or any
Lender determines, in its reasonable discretion, that it has received a refund of any
Indemnified Taxes (including Other Taxes) as to which it has been indemnified by the
 

Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor or with respect to which the Borrower or any Subsidiary
Guarantor has paid additional amounts pursuant to this Section 2.17, it shall pay to the
Borrower or such Subsidiary Guarantor an amount equal to such refund (but only to the
extent of indemnity payments made, or additional amounts paid, by the Borrower or such
Subsidiary Guarantor under this Section 2.17 with respect to the Indemnified Taxes (including
Other Taxes) giving rise to such refund), net of all reasonable out-of-pocket expenses of the
Administrative Agent or such Lender, as the case may be, and without interest (other than any
interest paid by the relevant Governmental Authority with respect to such refund); provided
that the Borrower or such Subsidiary Guarantor, upon the request of the Administrative Agent
or such Lender, shall repay the amount paid over to the Borrower or such Subsidiary
Guarantor (plus any penalties, interest or other charges imposed by the relevant
Governmental Authority) to the Administrative Agent or such Lender in the event the
Administrative Agent or such Lender is required to repay such refund to such Governmental
Authority.  This paragraph shall not be construed to require the Administrative Agent or any
Lender to disclose any information it considers proprietary or make available its Tax returns (or
any other information relating to its Taxes that it deems confidential) to the Borrower, any
Subsidiary Guarantor or any other Person.
(h)
 Defined Terms.  For purposes of this Section 2.17, the term “Lender”
includes any Issuing Lender.
SECTION 2.18.
 Payments Generally; Pro Rata Treatment; Sharing of
Setoffs.        Payments by the Obligors.  Each Obligor shall make each payment required to be
made by it hereunder (whether of principal, interest, fees or reimbursement of LC
Disbursements, or of amounts payable under Section 2.15, 2.16 or 2.17, or otherwise), or under
any other Loan Document (except to the extent otherwise provided therein), prior to 1:00 p.m.,
New York City time, on the date when due, in immediately available funds, without setoff or
counterclaim.  Any amounts received after such time on any date may, in the discretion of the
Administrative Agent, be deemed to have been received on the next succeeding Business Day
for purposes of calculating interest thereon.    All such payments shall be made to the
Administrative Agent at the Administrative Agent’s Account, except as otherwise expressly
provided in the relevant Loan Document and except payments to be made directly to an Issuing
Lender as expressly provided herein and except payments pursuant to Sections 2.15, 2.16, 2.17
and 10.03, which shall be made directly to the Persons entitled thereto.  The Administrative
Agent shall distribute any such payments received by it for account of any other Person to the
appropriate recipient promptly following receipt thereof.  If any payment hereunder shall be
due on a day that is not a Business Day, the date for payment shall be extended to the next
succeeding Business Day and, in the case of any payment accruing interest, interest thereon
shall be payable for the period of such extension.  All payments under each Loan Document
shall be made in Dollars.
(a)
 Application of Insufficient Payments.  If at any time insufficient funds
are received by and available to the Administrative Agent to pay fully all amounts
 

of principal, unreimbursed LC Disbursements, interest and fees then due hereunder, such
funds shall be applied (i) first, to pay all fees then due, and all costs and expenses then due or
reimbursable, to the Administrative Agent, in its capacity as such, under any Loan Document,
(ii) second, to reimburse all unreimbursed LC Disbursements and to pay all letter of credit
fronting fees then due hereunder, ratably between the Issuing Lenders entitled thereto in
accordance with the amounts thereof then due to the Issuing Lenders, (iii) third, to pay all
other interest and other fees then due hereunder, ratably among the parties entitled thereto
in accordance with the amounts of such interest and fees then due to such parties, and
(iv) fourth, to pay all other principal then due hereunder, ratably among the parties entitled
thereto in accordance with the amounts of such principal then due to such parties.
(b)
 Pro Rata Treatment.  Except to the extent otherwise provided herein
(for the avoidance of doubt, as this Agreement is in effect from time to time), including
Sections 2.09(e)(iii), 2.20(d) and 2.21: (i) each payment of facility fees under Section 2.12(a)
and letter of credit participation fees under Section 2.12(b) shall be made for account of the
Lenders, and each termination or reduction of the amount of the Commitments under
Section  2.09 shall be applied to the respective Commitments of the Lenders, pro rata
according to the amounts of their respective Commitments (or, in the case of any such
payment of facility fees or letter of credit participation fees at a time when the Commitments
shall have terminated or expired, pro rata according to the amounts of their respective
Revolving Credit Exposure or LC Exposure, as applicable); (ii) each Syndicated Borrowing shall
be allocated pro rata among the Lenders according to the amounts of their respective
Commitments (in the case of the making of Syndicated Loans) or their respective Loans that
are to be included in such Borrowing (in the case of conversions and continuations of
Syndicated Loans); and (iii) each payment or prepayment of any Syndicated Borrowing shall be
applied ratably to the Loans included in the repaid or prepaid Syndicated Borrowing.
(c)
 Sharing of Payments by Lenders.  If any Lender shall, by exercising any
right of setoff or counterclaim or otherwise, obtain payment in respect of any principal of or
interest on any of its Loans (other than a Competitive Loan) or participations in LC
Disbursements resulting in such Lender’s receiving payment of a greater proportion of the
aggregate amount of its Loans (other than Competitive Loans) and accrued interest thereon
than the proportion received by any other Lender, then the Lender receiving such greater
proportion shall (i) notify the Administrative Agent of such fact and (ii) purchase (for cash at
face value) participations in the Loans (other than Competitive Loans) and participations in LC
Disbursements of other Lenders, or make such other adjustments as shall be equitable, so
that the benefit of all such payments shall be shared by the Lenders ratably in accordance with
the aggregate amounts of principal of and accrued interest on their Loans (other than
Competitive Loans) and participations in LC Disbursements, provided that:
 

(i)
 if any such participations are purchased and all or any portion of the
payment giving rise thereto is recovered, such participations shall be rescinded and the
purchase price restored to the extent of such recovery, without interest; and
(ii)
 the provisions of this paragraph shall not be construed to apply to
(x) any payment made by any Obligor pursuant to and in accordance with the express
terms of this Agreement (for the avoidance of doubt, as this Agreement is in effect
from time to time), including Sections 2.09(e)(iii), 2.20(d) and 2.21, or (y) any payment
obtained by a Lender as consideration for the assignment of or sale of a participation
in any of its Loans or participations in LC Disbursements to any Eligible Assignee.
Each Obligor consents to the foregoing and agrees, to the extent it may effectively do so under
applicable law, that any Lender acquiring a participation pursuant to the foregoing
arrangements may exercise against each Obligor rights of setoff and counterclaim with respect
to such participation as fully as if such Lender were a direct creditor of each Obligor in the
amount of such participation.
(d)
 Payments by the Borrower; Presumptions by the Administrative Agent.
 Unless the Administrative Agent shall have received notice from the Borrower prior to the
date on which any payment is due to the Administrative Agent for the account of the Lenders
or an Issuing Lender hereunder that the Borrower will not make such payment, the
Administrative Agent may assume that the Borrower has made such payment on such date in
accordance herewith and may, in reliance upon such assumption, distribute to the Lenders or
such Issuing Lender, as the case may be, the amount due.  In such event, if the Borrower has
not in fact made such payment, then each of the Lenders or such Issuing Lender, as the case
may be, severally agrees to repay to the Administrative Agent forthwith on demand the
amount so distributed to such Lender or such Issuing Lender with interest thereon, for each
day from and including the date such amount is distributed to it to but excluding the date of
payment to the Administrative Agent, at the greater of the NYFRB Rate and a rate determined
by the Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on interbank
compensation.
(e)
 Certain Deductions by the Administrative Agent.  If any Lender shall fail
to make any payment required to be made by it hereunder to or for the account of the
Administrative Agent or any Issuing Lender, then the Administrative Agent may, in its
discretion (notwithstanding any contrary provision hereof), (i) apply any amounts thereafter
received by the Administrative Agent for the account of such Lender to satisfy such Lender’s
obligations in respect of such payment until all such unsatisfied obligations have been
discharged or (ii) hold any such amounts in a segregated account as cash collateral for, and
application to, any future funding obligations of such Lender pursuant to this Agreement
(including pursuant to
 

Sections 2.06(e), 2.06(f), 2.07(b), 2.18(e) and 10.03(c)), in each case in such order as shall be
determined by the Administrative Agent in its discretion.
SECTION 2.19.
 Mitigation Obligations; Replacement of Lenders.  
  Designation of a Different Lending Office.   If any Lender requests compensation under
Section  2.15, or requires the Borrower to pay any additional amount to any Lender or any
Governmental Authority for the account of any Lender pursuant to Section  2.17, then such
Lender shall use reasonable efforts to designate a different lending office for funding or
booking its Loans hereunder or to assign and delegate its rights and obligations hereunder to
another of its offices, branches or Affiliates, if, in the judgment of such Lender, such
designation or assignment and delegation (i)  would eliminate or reduce amounts payable
pursuant to Section 2.15 or 2.17, as the case may be, in the future and (ii) would not subject
such Lender to any unreimbursed cost or expense and would not otherwise be disadvantageous
to such Lender.  The Borrower hereby agrees to pay all reasonable costs and expenses incurred
by any Lender in connection with any such designation or assignment and delegation.
(a)
 Replacement of Lenders.   If (i) any Lender requests compensation
under Section 2.15, (ii) the Borrower is required to pay any additional amount to any Lender
or any Governmental Authority for the account of any Lender pursuant to Section 2.17, (iii)
any Lender has become a Defaulting Lender, (iv) any Lender has become a Non-Extending
Lender or (v) any Lender does not consent to any proposed amendment, supplement,
modification, consent or waiver of any provision of this Agreement or any other Loan
Document that requires the consent of such Lender or each of the Lenders or each of the
Lenders affected thereby (so long as the consent of the Required Lenders has been obtained),
then the Borrower may, at its sole expense and effort, upon notice to such Lender and the
Administrative Agent, require such Lender to assign and delegate, without recourse (in
accordance with and subject to the restrictions contained in, and consents required by,
Section 10.04), all of its interests, rights (other than its existing rights to payment pursuant to
Section 2.15 or 2.17) and obligations under this Agreement and the related Loan Documents
(other than any outstanding Competitive Loans held by it) to an Eligible Assignee that shall
assume such obligations (which assignee may be another Lender, if a Lender accepts such
assignment), provided that:
(A)
 the Borrower shall have received the prior written consent of
the Administrative Agent (and, if a Commitment or any Lender’s obligations in
respect of LC Exposure is being assigned, each Issuing Lender), which consent
shall not unreasonably be withheld;
(B)
 the Borrower shall have paid to the Administrative Agent the
assignment fee specified in Section 10.04;
(C)
 such Lender shall have received payment of an amount equal to
the outstanding principal of its Loans (other than Competitive
 

Loans) and participations in LC Disbursements that have been funded by such
Lender, accrued interest thereon, accrued fees and all other amounts (except
Competitive Loans) payable to it hereunder and under the other Loan
Documents (including any amounts under Section 2.16) from the assignee (to
the extent of such outstanding principal and accrued interest and fees) or the
Borrower (in the case of all other amounts);
(D)
 in the case of any such assignment and delegation resulting
from a claim for compensation under Section 2.15 or payments required to be
made pursuant to Section 2.17, such assignment and delegation will result in a
reduction in such compensation or payments thereafter;
(E)
 in the case of any such assignment and delegation resulting
from any Lender becoming a Non-Extending Lender, the assignee shall be an
Additional Commitment Lender and, upon the effectiveness of any such
assignment and delegation, such assignee shall be deemed to have consented
to the extension of the Commitment Termination Date requested in the
relevant Extension Request (and, if such assignment and delegation shall
become effective after the relevant Extension Closing Date, the Commitment
Termination Date with respect to such Additional Commitment Lender (insofar
as relating to the interests, rights and obligations under this Agreement and the
related Loan Documents so assigned and delegated) shall automatically extend
to the date specified in the relevant Extension Request); and
(F)
 such assignment does not conflict with applicable law.
A Lender shall not be required to make any such assignment or delegation if, prior thereto, as a
result of a waiver by such Lender or otherwise, the circumstances entitling the Borrower to
require such assignment and delegation cease to apply.    Each party hereto agrees that an
assignment and delegation required pursuant to this paragraph may be effected pursuant to an
Assignment and Assumption executed by the Borrower, the Administrative Agent and the
assignee and that the Lender required to make such assignment and delegation need not be a
party thereto.
SECTION 2.20.
 Extension of Commitment Termination Date.      The
Borrower may, by notice to the Administrative Agent (which shall promptly notify the Lenders)
not more than 90 days and not less than 30 days prior to each anniversary of the date hereof (or
if such anniversary date is not a Business Day, the Business Day next succeeding such
anniversary), request (each, an “Extension Request”) that the Lenders extend, effective on such
anniversary date, the Commitment Termination Date then in effect (or, if at such time there
shall exist different Commitment Termination Dates for the Lenders hereunder, the latest
applicable Commitment Termination Date then in effect) (the “Existing Commitment
Termination Date”) for an additional one year (the
 

date on which the closing with respect to any such Extension Request shall occur is referred to
herein as an “Extension Closing Date”); provided that only two Extension Requests may be
requested hereunder.  Each Lender, acting in its sole discretion, shall, by notice to the Borrower
and the Administrative Agent given not later than the 20th day (or such later day as shall be
acceptable to the Borrower) following the date of the Borrower’s notice, advise the Borrower
and the Administrative Agent whether or not such Lender agrees to such extension; provided
that any Lender that does not so advise the Borrower shall be deemed to have rejected such
Extension Request (any such Lender which shall have rejected or is deemed to have rejected
such extension being a “Non-Extending Lender”).  The election of any Lender to agree to such
extension shall not obligate any other Lender to so agree.  Notwithstanding anything herein to
the contrary, no Lender shall have any obligation hereunder to extend its Commitment.
(a)
 The Borrower shall have the right, at any time on or prior to, or at any
time following, the relevant Extension Closing Date, unless an Event of Default shall have
occurred and be continuing, to replace any Non-Extending Lender with one or more
Additional Commitment Lenders in accordance with Section 2.19(b).    If requested by the
Borrower or the Administrative Agent, each such Additional Commitment Lender shall enter
into an agreement with the Borrower and the Administrative Agent, in form and substance
satisfactory to the Borrower and the Administrative Agent, pursuant to which such Additional
Commitment Lender shall reconfirm its Commitment hereunder so assumed from the relevant
Non-Extending Lender and, in the case of any such replacement becoming effective after the
relevant Extension Closing Date, reconfirm the extension of the Commitment Termination
Date applicable thereto as contemplated by clause (E) of Section 2.19(b).
(b)
 If (and only if) the total of the Commitments of the Lenders that have
agreed in connection with any Extension Request to extend the Existing Commitment
Termination Date and (if applicable) the Commitments of the Additional Commitment
Lender(s) that shall have replaced any Non-Extending Lender as contemplated by paragraph
(b) above shall, in the aggregate, be at least 50% of the aggregate amount of the
Commitments in effect immediately prior to the Extension Closing Date, then, subject to the
occurrence of the Extension Closing Date, effective as of the Extension Closing Date, the
Commitment Termination Date, but only with respect to each Lender that has agreed to so
extend its Commitment and (if applicable) each Additional Commitment Lender that has
replaced a Non-Extending Lender (and to Commitments and Loans of each such Lender and
Additional Commitment Lender), shall be extended to the date that is one year after the then
Existing Commitment Termination Date (or, if such date is not a Business Day, the immediately
preceding Business Day); provided that the occurrence of the Extension Closing Date and the
effectiveness of the extension of the Existing Commitment Termination Date shall not become
effective with respect to any Lender unless as of the Extension Closing Date: (i) no Default
shall have occurred and be continuing; (ii) the representations and warranties of the Obligors
set forth in Article IV and in the other Loan Documents shall be true and correct (A) in the case
of the representations and warranties qualified as to
 

materiality, in all respects and (B) otherwise, in all material respects, in each case on and as of
the Extension Closing Date as if made on and as of such date (or, if any such representation or
warranty is expressly stated to have been made as of a specific date, as of such specific date);
and (iii) the Administrative Agent shall have received a certificate executed by a Responsible
Officer of the Borrower, dated as of the Extension Closing Date, stating that the conditions
with respect to such extension have been satisfied.  Upon the occurrence of the Extension
Closing Date, the Administrative Agent shall record the relevant information in the Register
and give prompt notice of such occurrence to the Borrower and the Lenders, which notice
shall be conclusive and binding.
(c)
 Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, (i) with respect to any
Non-Extending Lender, the Commitment Termination Date for such Lender shall remain
unchanged (and the Commitment of such Lender shall terminate, the Loans made by such
Lender to the Borrower hereunder shall mature and be payable by the Borrower, and all other
amounts owing to such Non-Extending Lender hereunder shall be payable, on such date), and
on such date the Borrower shall also make such other prepayments of Loans as shall be
required in order that, after giving effect to the termination of the Commitments of, and all
payments to, the Non-Extending Lenders pursuant to this sentence, the sum of (x)  the
outstanding aggregate principal amount of all Loans and (y) the LC Exposure will not exceed
the Commitments and (ii) the “Availability Period” and the “Commitment Termination Date”
(without taking into consideration any extension pursuant to this Section 2.20), as such terms
are used in reference to any Issuing Lender or any Letters of Credit issued by such Issuing
Lender may not be extended without the prior written consent of such Issuing Lender (it being
understood and agreed that, in the event any Issuing Lender shall not have consented to any
such extension, (x) such Issuing Lender shall continue to have all the rights and obligations of
an Issuing Lender hereunder through the Existing Commitment Termination Date (or the
Availability Period determined on the basis thereof, as applicable), and thereafter, for the
avoidance of doubt, shall have no obligation to issue, amend or extend any Letter of Credit
(but shall, in each case, continue to be entitled to the benefits of Sections 2.06, 2.13, 2.15,
10.03 and 10.09, as applicable as to Letters of Credit issued or made prior to such time), and
(y) the Borrower shall cause the LC Exposure attributable to Letters of Credit issued by such
Issuing Lender to be zero no later than the day on which such LC Exposure would have been
required to have been reduced to zero in accordance with the terms hereof without giving
effect to any effectiveness of the extension of the applicable Existing Commitment
Termination Date pursuant to this Section 2.20 (and, in any event, no later than such Existing
Commitment Termination Date)).
SECTION 2.21.
 Defaulting Lenders.  Notwithstanding any provision of
this Agreement to the contrary, if any Lender becomes a Defaulting Lender, then the following
provisions shall apply for so long as such Lender is a Defaulting Lender:
 

(a)
 facility fees shall continue to accrue on the amount of the Commitment
of such Defaulting Lender pursuant to Section 2.12(a) only to the extent of the Revolving
Credit Exposure of such Defaulting Lender (excluding any portion thereof constituting LC
Exposure of such Defaulting Lender that is subject to reallocation under clause (c)(i) below);
(b)
 the Commitment, the Revolving Credit Exposure and the aggregate
principal amount of outstanding Competitive Loans of such Defaulting Lender shall not be
included in determining whether the Required Lenders or any other requisite Lenders have
taken or may take any action hereunder or under any other Loan Document (including any
consent to any amendment, waiver or other modification pursuant to Section 10.02); provided
that any amendment, waiver or other modification requiring the consent of all Lenders or all
Lenders affected thereby shall, except as otherwise provided in Section 10.02, require the
consent of such Defaulting Lender in accordance with the terms hereof;
(c)
 if any LC Exposure exists at the time such Lender becomes a Defaulting
Lender then:
(i)
 the LC Exposure of such Defaulting Lender (other than any portion
thereof attributable to unreimbursed LC Disbursements with respect to which such
Defaulting Lender shall have funded its participation as contemplated by Sections
2.06(e) and 2.06(f)) shall be reallocated among the Non-Defaulting Lenders in
accordance with their respective Applicable Percentages but only to the extent that (A)
the sum of all Non-Defaulting Lenders’ Revolving Credit Exposures plus such Defaulting
Lender’s LC Exposure (excluding the portion thereof referred to above) does not
exceed the sum of all Non-Defaulting Lenders’ Commitments and (B) after giving effect
thereto, the Revolving Credit Exposure of any Non-Defaulting Lender shall not exceed
the Commitment of such Non-Defaulting Lender;
(ii)
 if the reallocation described in clause (i) above cannot, or can only
partially, be effected, the Borrower shall within one Business Day following notice by
the Administrative Agent cash collateralize for the benefit of the Issuing Lenders the
portion of such Defaulting Lender’s LC Exposure (excluding the portion thereof referred
to in the parenthetical in clause (i) above) that has not been reallocated as set forth in
such clause in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 2.06(l) for so long as
such LC Exposure is outstanding;
(iii)
 if the Borrower cash collateralizes any portion of such Defaulting
Lender’s LC Exposure pursuant to clause (ii) above, the Borrower shall not be required
to pay participation fees to such Defaulting Lender pursuant to Section 2.12(b) with
respect to such portion of such Defaulting Lender’s LC Exposure for so long as such
Defaulting Lender’s LC Exposure is cash collateralized;
 

(iv)
 if any portion of the LC Exposure of such Defaulting Lender is
reallocated pursuant to clause (i) above, then the participation fees payable to the
Lenders pursuant to Section 2.12(b) (and, if applicable, the facility fees payable to the
Lenders pursuant to Section  2.12(a)) shall be adjusted to give effect to such
reallocation; and
(v)
 if all or any portion of such Defaulting Lender’s LC Exposure that is
subject to reallocation pursuant to clause (i) above is neither reallocated nor cash
collateralized pursuant to clause (i) or (ii) above, then, without prejudice to any rights
or remedies of any Issuing Lender or any other Lender hereunder, all facility fees that
otherwise would have been payable to such Defaulting Lender with respect to such
portion of its LC Exposure, and all participation fees payable under Section 2.12(b) with
respect to such portion of its LC Exposure, shall be payable to the Issuing Lenders (and
allocated among them ratably based on the amount of such portion of the LC Exposure
of such Defaulting Lender attributable to Letters of Credit issued by each Issuing
Lender) until and to the extent that such LC Exposure is reallocated and/or cash
collateralized; and
(d)
 so long as such Lender is a Defaulting Lender, participating interests in
each issued, amended or extended Letter of Credit will be allocated among the Non-
Defaulting Lenders in a manner consistent with clause (c)(i) above (and such Defaulting Lender
shall not participate therein).
In the event that the Administrative Agent, the Borrower and each Issuing
Lender each agree that a Defaulting Lender has adequately remedied all matters that caused
such Lender to be a Defaulting Lender, then the LC Exposure of the Lenders shall be readjusted
to reflect the inclusion of such Lender’s Commitment and on such date such Lender shall
purchase at par (plus pay any break funding amounts, determined in accordance with Section
2.16, to the extent such purchase occurs on a date other than on the last day of the Interest
Period applicable to thereto) such of the Syndicated Loans of the other Lenders as the
Administrative Agent shall determine may be necessary in order for such Lender to hold such
Loans in accordance with its Applicable Percentage, and such Lender shall thereupon cease to
be a Defaulting Lender (but shall not be entitled to receive any fees accrued during the period
when it was a Defaulting Lender and that are not payable to it pursuant to this Section 2.21,
and all amendments, waivers or other modifications effected without its consent in
accordance with the provisions of Section 10.02 and this Section 2.21 during such period shall
be binding on it).  The rights and remedies against, and with respect to, a Defaulting Lender
under this Section 2.21 are in addition to, and cumulative and not in limitation of, all other
rights and remedies that the Administrative Agent, any Lender, any Issuing Lender or the
Borrower may at any time have against, or with respect to, such Defaulting Lender.
 

ARTICLE III
Guarantee
SECTION 3.01.
 The Guarantee.   The Subsidiary Guarantors hereby
jointly and severally, as a primary obligor and not merely as a surety, guarantee to each Lender,
each Issuing Lender, each other holder of a Guaranteed Obligation and the Administrative
Agent and their respective successors and assigns the prompt payment in full when due
(whether at stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise) of (a) the principal of and interest on
the Loans made by the Lenders to the Borrower, (b) each payment required to be made by the
Borrower in respect of any Letter of Credit, including payments in respect of reimbursement of
LC Disbursements, interest thereon and obligations to provide cash collateral, and (c) all fees,
indemnification payments and other amounts whatsoever, whether direct or indirect, absolute
or contingent, now or hereafter from time to time owing to the Lenders, the Issuing Lenders or
the Administrative Agent by the Borrower under this Agreement and by any Obligor under any
of the other Loan Documents, in each case strictly in accordance with the terms thereof and
including all interest, fees and expenses accrued or incurred subsequent to the commencement
of any bankruptcy or insolvency proceedings with respect to the Borrower, whether or not such
interest, fees or expenses are allowed as a claim in such proceeding (such obligations being
herein collectively called the “Guaranteed Obligations”).  The Subsidiary Guarantors hereby
further jointly and severally agree that if the Borrower shall fail to pay in full when due
(whether at stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise) any of the Guaranteed Obligations,
the Subsidiary Guarantors will promptly pay the same, without any demand or notice
whatsoever, and that in the case of any extension of time of payment or renewal of any of the
Guaranteed Obligations, the same will be promptly paid in full when due (whether at extended
maturity, by acceleration or otherwise) in accordance with the terms of such extension or
renewal.
SECTION 3.02.
 Obligations Unconditional.   The obligations of the
Subsidiary Guarantors under Section  3.01 are absolute and unconditional, joint and several,
irrespective of the value, genuineness, validity, regularity or enforceability of the obligations of
the Borrower under this Agreement or any other agreement or instrument referred to herein, or
any substitution, release or exchange of any other guarantee of or security for any of the
Guaranteed Obligations, and, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, irrespective of
any other circumstance whatsoever that might otherwise constitute a legal or equitable
discharge or defense of a surety or guarantor, it being the intent of this Section 3.02 that the
obligations of the Subsidiary Guarantors hereunder shall be absolute and unconditional, joint
and several, under any and all circumstances.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing,
it is agreed that the occurrence of any one or more of the following shall not alter or impair the
liability of the Subsidiary Guarantors hereunder, which shall remain absolute and unconditional
as described above:
(i)
 at any time or from time to time, without notice to the Subsidiary
Guarantors, the time for any performance of or compliance with any of the
 

Guaranteed Obligations shall be extended, or such performance or compliance shall be
waived;
(ii)
 any of the acts mentioned in any of the provisions of this Agreement or
any other agreement or instrument referred to herein shall be done or omitted;
(iii)
 the maturity of any of the Guaranteed Obligations shall be accelerated,
or any of the Guaranteed Obligations shall be modified, supplemented or amended in
any respect, or any right under this Agreement or any other agreement or instrument
referred to herein  shall be waived or any other guarantee of any of the Guaranteed
Obligations or any security therefor shall be released or exchanged in whole or in part
or otherwise dealt with; or
(iv)
 any lien or security interest granted to, or in favor of, the Administrative
Agent or any Lender or Issuing Lender as security for any of the Guaranteed
Obligations shall fail to be perfected.
The Subsidiary Guarantors hereby expressly waive diligence, presentment,
demand of payment, protest and all notices whatsoever.  Each Subsidiary Guarantor agrees that
its guarantee hereunder constitutes a guarantee of payment when due (whether or not any
bankruptcy, insolvency, receivership or similar proceeding shall have stayed the accrual or
collection of any of the Guaranteed Obligations or operated as a discharge thereof) and not
merely of collection, and hereby expressly waives any requirement that the Administrative
Agent or any Lender or Issuing Lender exhaust any right, power or remedy or proceed against
the Borrower under this Agreement or any other agreement or instrument referred to herein, or
against any other Person under any other guarantee of, or security for, any of the Guaranteed
Obligations.
SECTION 3.03.
 Reinstatement.   The obligations of the Subsidiary
Guarantors under this Article III shall be automatically reinstated if and to the extent that for
any reason any payment by or on behalf of the Borrower in respect of the Guaranteed
Obligations is rescinded or must be otherwise restored by any holder of any of the Guaranteed
Obligations, whether as a result of any proceedings in bankruptcy or reorganization or
otherwise, and the Subsidiary Guarantors jointly and severally agree that they will indemnify
the Administrative Agent and each Lender and Issuing Lender on demand for all reasonable
costs and expenses (including fees of counsel) incurred by the Administrative Agent or such
Lender or Issuing Lender in connection with such rescission or restoration, including any such
costs and expenses incurred in defending against any claim alleging that such payment
constituted a preference, fraudulent transfer or similar payment under any bankruptcy,
insolvency or similar law.
SECTION 3.04.
 Subrogation.  The Subsidiary Guarantors hereby jointly
and severally agree that until the payment and satisfaction in full of all Guaranteed Obligations
and the expiration and termination of the Commitments of the Lenders under this Agreement
they shall not exercise any right or remedy arising by reason of any
 

performance by them of their guarantee in Section 3.01, whether by subrogation or otherwise,
against the Borrower or any other guarantor of any of the Guaranteed Obligations or any
security for any of the Guaranteed Obligations.
SECTION 3.05.
 Remedies.   The Subsidiary Guarantors jointly and
severally agree that, as between the Subsidiary Guarantors and the Lenders and the Issuing
Lenders, the obligations of the Borrower under this Agreement may be declared to be forthwith
due and payable as provided in Article VIII (and shall be deemed to have become automatically
due and payable in the circumstances provided in Article VIII) for purposes of Section 3.01
notwithstanding any stay, injunction or other prohibition preventing such declaration (or such
obligations from becoming automatically due and payable) as against the Borrower and that, in
the event of such declaration (or such obligations being deemed to have become automatically
due and payable), such obligations (whether or not due and payable by the Borrower) shall
forthwith become due and payable by the Subsidiary Guarantors for purposes of Section 3.01.
SECTION 3.06.
 Instrument for the Payment of Money.  To the fullest
extent permitted by N.Y. Civ. Prac. L&R §  3213 and other applicable law, each Subsidiary
Guarantor hereby acknowledges that the guarantee in this Article III constitutes an instrument
for the payment of money, and consents and agrees that the Administrative Agent and any
Lender or Issuing Lender, at its sole option, in the event of a dispute by such Subsidiary
Guarantor in the payment of any moneys due hereunder, shall have the right to bring motion
action under N.Y. Civ. Prac. L&R § 3213.
SECTION 3.07.
 Continuing Guarantee.  The guarantee in this Article III
is a continuing guarantee, and shall apply to all Guaranteed Obligations whenever
arising.    Each Subsidiary Guarantor further agrees that the Guaranteed Obligations may be
extended or renewed, in whole or in part, or amended or modified, without notice to or further
assent from it, and that it will remain bound upon its guarantee hereunder notwithstanding any
extension, renewal, amendment or modification of any Guaranteed Obligation. 
SECTION 3.08.
 Rights of Contribution.   The Subsidiary Guarantors
hereby agree, as between themselves, that if any Subsidiary Guarantor shall become an Excess
Funding Guarantor by reason of the payment by such Subsidiary Guarantor of any Guaranteed
Obligations, then each other Subsidiary Guarantor shall, on demand of such Excess Funding
Guarantor (but subject to the next sentence), pay to such Excess Funding Guarantor an amount
equal to such Subsidiary Guarantor’s Pro Rata Share (determined, for this purpose, without
reference to the properties, debts and liabilities of such Excess Funding Guarantor) of the
Excess Payment in respect of such Guaranteed Obligations.    The payment obligation of a
Subsidiary Guarantor to any Excess Funding Guarantor under this Section 3.08 shall be
subordinate and subject in right of payment to the prior payment in full of the obligations of
such Subsidiary Guarantor under the other provisions of this Article III and such Excess
Funding Guarantor shall not exercise any right or remedy with respect to such excess until
payment and satisfaction in full of all of such obligations.
 

For purposes of this Section 3.08, (a) “Excess Funding Guarantor” means, in
respect of any Guaranteed Obligations, a Subsidiary Guarantor that has paid an amount in
excess of its Pro Rata Share of such Guaranteed Obligations, (b) “Excess Payment” means, in
respect of any Guaranteed Obligations, the amount paid by an Excess Funding Guarantor in
excess of its Pro Rata Share of such Guaranteed Obligations and (c) “Pro Rata Share” means,
for any Subsidiary Guarantor, the ratio (expressed as a percentage) of (i) the amount by which
the aggregate present fair saleable value of all properties of such Subsidiary Guarantor
(excluding any shares of stock or other equity interest of any other Subsidiary Guarantor)
exceeds the amount of all the debts and liabilities of such Subsidiary Guarantor (including
contingent, subordinated, unmatured and unliquidated liabilities, but excluding the obligations
of such Subsidiary Guarantor hereunder and any obligations of any other Subsidiary Guarantor
that have been Guaranteed by such Subsidiary Guarantor) to (ii)  the amount by which the
aggregate fair saleable value of all properties of all of the Subsidiary Guarantors exceeds the
amount of all the debts and liabilities (including contingent, subordinated, unmatured and
unliquidated liabilities, but excluding the obligations of the Borrower and the Subsidiary
Guarantors hereunder and under the other Loan Documents) of all of the Subsidiary
Guarantors, determined (A) with respect to any Subsidiary Guarantor that is a party hereto on
the Effective Date, as of the Effective Date, and (B)  with respect to any other Subsidiary
Guarantor, as of the date such Subsidiary Guarantor becomes a Subsidiary Guarantor
hereunder.
SECTION 3.09.
 General Limitation on Guarantee Obligations.  In any
action or proceeding under the Bankruptcy Code, if the obligations of any Subsidiary
Guarantor under Section  3.01 would otherwise, taking into account the provisions of
Section 3.08, be held or determined to be void, invalid or unenforceable under Section 548 of
the Bankruptcy Code or any comparable applicable provisions of state law on account of the
amount of its liability under Section 3.01, then, notwithstanding any other provision hereof to
the contrary, the amount of such liability shall, without any further action by such Subsidiary
Guarantor, any Lender, the Administrative Agent or any other Person, be automatically limited
and reduced to the highest amount that is valid and enforceable as determined in such action or
proceeding.  The term “Bankruptcy Code” means Title 11 of the United States Code entitled
“Bankruptcy”.
SECTION 3.10.
 Designation of Subsidiary Guarantors.  The Borrower
may at any time and from time to time designate, in its sole discretion, any Domestic
Subsidiary as a Subsidiary Guarantor, in each case by delivery to the Administrative Agent of
(a) a duly executed Guarantee Assumption Agreement properly completed for such Subsidiary
and (b)  proof of corporate action, incumbency of officers, opinions of counsel and other
documents consistent with those delivered by the Subsidiary Guarantors pursuant to Section
5.01 on the Effective Date as may reasonably be requested by the Administrative Agent.  Any
Subsidiary Guarantor designated as such pursuant to this Section 3.10 shall continue to be a
Subsidiary Guarantor until the Borrower shall have delivered written notice to the
Administrative Agent of the termination of such designation; provided that (i)  no Event of
Default shall exist after giving pro forma effect to such designation and (ii) this sentence shall
not limit the Borrower’s obligations with respect to Specified Subsidiaries pursuant to Section
6.08.
 

SECTION 3.11.
 Release of Guarantees.  A Subsidiary Guarantor will
automatically be released from its obligations under this Article III upon the consummation of
any transaction permitted by this Agreement as a result of which neither the Borrower nor any
of its Subsidiaries owns any Equity Interest in such Subsidiary Guarantor, provided that, if so
required by this Agreement, the Required Lenders shall have consented to such transactions
and the terms of such consent shall not have provided otherwise.    In connection with any
release pursuant to this Section 3.11, the Administrative Agent shall execute and deliver to any
Obligor, at such Obligor’s expense, all documents that such Obligor shall reasonably request to
evidence such release.   Any execution and delivery of documents pursuant to this Section
3.11 shall be without recourse to or warranty by the Administrative Agent.
ARTICLE IV
Representations and Warranties
The Borrower represents and warrants to the Administrative Agent and the
Lenders that:
SECTION 4.01.
 Organization.  Each Obligor is duly organized, validly
existing and in good standing under the laws of the jurisdiction of its organization.
SECTION 4.02.
 Authorization; Enforceability.   The Transactions are
within each Obligor’s corporate or other organizational powers and have been duly authorized
by all necessary corporate or other organizational action.    This Agreement has been duly
executed and delivered by each Obligor identified herein as a signatory party hereto and
constitutes, and each of the other Loan Documents to which any Obligor is a party when
executed and delivered by such Obligor will constitute, a legal, valid and binding obligation of
such Obligor, enforceable against each Obligor in accordance with its terms, except as such
enforceability may be limited by (a)  bankruptcy, insolvency, reorganization, moratorium or
similar laws of general applicability affecting the enforcement of creditors’ rights and (b) the
application of general principles of equity (regardless of whether such enforceability is
considered in a proceeding in equity or at law).
SECTION 4.03.
 Governmental Approvals; No Conflicts.   The
Transactions (a) do not require any consent or approval of, registration or filing with, or any
other action by, any Governmental Authority, except such as have been obtained or made and
are in full force and effect, (b)(i) do not violate the charter, by‑laws or other organizational
documents of any Obligor and (ii) do not violate any applicable law or regulation or any order
of any Governmental Authority and (c) do not constitute (and will not, with notice or lapse of
time or both, constitute) a default under any material indenture, agreement or other instrument
binding upon the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries, except, in each case above (other than in
the case of clause (b)(i) above), where failure to obtain or make such consent, approval,
registration, filing or other action, any such violation or any such default could not,
individually or in the aggregate, reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect.
 

SECTION 4.04.
 Financial Condition; No Material Adverse Change.  
  Financial Condition.  The Borrower’s consolidated balance sheet and statements of earnings,
changes in shareholders’ equity and cash flows as of and for the fiscal year ended January 28,
2023, reported on by Deloitte & Touche LLP, independent registered public accounting firm,
certified by a Financial Officer of the Borrower, present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position and results of operations and cash flows of the Borrower and its consolidated
Subsidiaries as of such dates and for such periods in accordance with GAAP.
(a)
 No Material Adverse Change.  Since January 28, 2023, there has been
no material adverse change in the business, assets, operations or condition (financial or
otherwise) of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries taken as a whole.
SECTION 4.05.
 Properties.  Except in respect of matters that would not
reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect, the Borrower and its Subsidiaries
have title to, or leasehold interests in, or the use of, property sufficient to conduct their
business, except for defects in title that do not interfere with their ability to conduct their
business.
SECTION 4.06.
 Litigation and Environmental Matters.        Actions,
Suits and Proceedings.      There are no actions, suits or proceedings by or before any arbitrator
or Governmental Authority now pending against or, to the knowledge of the Borrower,
threatened against or affecting the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries that, individually or in
the aggregate, could reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse Effect,  except as
disclosed in the Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Borrower for the fiscal year ended January
28, 2023 as filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission prior to the date hereof.
(i)
 There are no actions, suits or proceedings by or before any arbitrator or
Governmental Authority now pending against or, to the knowledge of the Borrower,
threatened against or affecting the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries that purport to
affect the legality, validity or enforceability of any Loan Document, the borrowing or
repayment of any Loans, or the issuance of any Letter of Credit or payment of any
reimbursement obligation in respect thereof.
(b)
 Environmental, Health and Safety Laws.  Neither the Borrower nor any
Subsidiary has received any notice to the effect that any part of its operations or properties is
not in compliance with any Environmental Law or order or any notice that it or its property is
the subject of any governmental investigation evaluating whether any remedial action is
needed to respond to any release of any Hazardous Material into the environment, which
non-compliance or remedial action could reasonably be expected to have a Material Adverse
Effect.
SECTION 4.07.
 Compliance with Laws and Agreements.     Each of the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries is in compliance with all laws, regulations and orders of
 

any Governmental Authority applicable to it or its property and all indentures, agreements and
other instruments binding upon it or its property, except where the failure to do so, individually
or in the aggregate, would not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse
Effect.  No Default has occurred and is continuing.
(a)
 The Borrower has implemented and maintains in effect policies and
procedures designed to ensure compliance by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries and their
respective directors, officers and employees with Anti-Corruption Laws and applicable
Sanctions, and the Borrower and the other Obligors and, to the knowledge of the Borrower,
their respective officers, employees and directors are in compliance with Anti-Corruption Laws
and applicable Sanctions in all material respects. None of the Borrower or any other Obligor
or, to the knowledge of the Borrower, any of their respective directors, officers or employees
is a Sanctioned Person.
SECTION 4.08.
 Investment Company Status.   No Obligor is an
“investment company” as defined in, or subject to regulation under, the Investment Company
Act of 1940.
SECTION 4.09.
 Taxes.  Each of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries has
timely filed or caused to be filed all material Tax returns and reports required to have been filed
and has paid or caused to be paid all Taxes required to have been paid by it, except (a) Taxes
that are being contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings and for which such Person
has set aside on its books adequate reserves in accordance with GAAP or (b) to the extent that
the failure to do so would not reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 4.10.
 ERISA.   No ERISA Event has occurred or is
reasonably expected to occur that, when taken together with all other such ERISA Events for
which liability is reasonably expected to occur, could reasonably be expected to result in a
Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 4.11.
 Subsidiaries.  Set forth on Schedule 4.11 is a complete
and correct list as of the Effective Date of (a)  all of the Subsidiaries of the Borrower and
(b) each Subsidiary holding ownership interests in other Subsidiaries of the Borrower, together
with, for each such Subsidiary, the jurisdiction of organization of such Subsidiary.  Schedule
4.11 separately identifies all Specified Subsidiaries and Material Subsidiaries as of the date
hereof.
SECTION 4.12.
 Federal Reserve Regulations.  Neither the Borrower nor
any Subsidiary is engaged principally or as one of its important activities in the business of
extending credit for the purpose of purchasing or carrying Margin Stock.   The value of all
Margin Stock owned by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries (including all capital stock of the
Borrower held by the Borrower in treasury) does not constitute more than 25.0% of the value
of the consolidated assets of the Borrower.
 

ARTICLE V
Conditions
SECTION 5.01.
 Effective Date.  The obligation of the Lenders to make
Loans and the ability of the Borrower to request that the Issuing Lenders issue Letters of Credit
hereunder shall not become effective until the date on which the following conditions shall
have been satisfied (or delivery of such documents is waived in accordance with
Section 10.02):
(a)
 Executed Counterparts.  The Administrative Agent shall have received
from each party hereto a counterpart of this Agreement signed on behalf of such party
(which, subject to ‎Section 10.06(b), may include any Electronic Signatures transmitted
by e-mailed .pdf or any other electronic means that reproduces an image of an actual
executed signature page).
(b)
 Opinion of Counsel to the Obligors.   The Administrative Agent shall
have received opinions dated the Effective Date, of General Counsel of the Borrower
and of Simpson Thacher & Bartlett LLP, special counsel for the Borrower, in form and
substance reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent (and each Obligor
hereby instructs such counsel to deliver such opinion to the Administrative Agent).
(c)
 Corporate Documents.  The Administrative Agent shall have received
such documents and certificates as the Administrative Agent may reasonably request
relating to the organization, existence and good standing of each Obligor and the
authorization of the Transactions, all in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to
the Administrative Agent.
(d)
 Officer’s Certificate.   The Administrative Agent shall have received a
certificate, dated the Effective Date and signed by the president, a vice president or a
Financial Officer of the Borrower, confirming, to the best knowledge of such Person,
following due inquiry, satisfaction of the conditions set forth in the lettered clauses of
the first sentence of Section  5.02 (in the case of clause  (a) thereof, without giving
effect to the parenthetical statement therein).
(e)
 Repayment of Existing Indebtedness.   The Administrative Agent shall
have received evidence that the principal of and interest on, and all other amounts
owing in respect of, Indebtedness under the Existing Credit Agreement shall have been
(or shall simultaneously be) paid in full, that the commitments to extend credit under
the Existing Credit Agreement have been (or shall simultaneously be) canceled or
terminated and letters of credit outstanding thereunder shall have expired or been
terminated or shall be Existing Letters of Credit.    JPMorgan, in its capacity as
administrative agent under the Existing
 

Credit Agreement, and each Lender (as defined in the Existing Credit Agreement) party
hereto hereby agrees that, upon the delivery of a notice of termination of
commitments under the Existing Credit Agreement pursuant to this Section 5.01(e),
any notice requirement under the Existing Credit Agreement for such notice of
termination by the Borrower shall be deemed to be satisfied.
(f)
 Delivery of Information.  The Administrative Agent shall have received
(i) all documentation and other information required by bank regulatory authorities
under applicable “know your customer” and anti-money laundering rules and
regulations, including the USA PATRIOT Act, and (ii) if the Borrower qualifies as a “legal
entity customer” under the Beneficial Ownership Regulation, a Beneficial Ownership
Certification in relation to the Borrower, in each case that have been requested at least
five Business Days prior to the Effective Date.
(g)
 Fees and Expense Reimbursement.  The payment by the Borrower of
such fees and expense reimbursement as the Borrower shall have agreed in writing to
pay to any Lender or the Administrative Agent in connection herewith, including the
reasonable and documented fees and expenses of Cravath, Swaine & Moore LLP, New
York counsel to JPMorgan, in connection with the negotiation, preparation, execution
and delivery of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents and the extensions of
credit hereunder (to the extent that statements for such fees and expenses have been
delivered to the Borrower at least one Business Day prior to the Effective Date).
The Administrative Agent shall notify the Borrower and the Lenders when it
determines that this Agreement has become effective, and such notice shall be conclusive and
binding. 
SECTION 5.02.
 Each Credit Event.  The obligation of each Lender to
make any Loan, and the ability of the Borrower to request that any Issuing Lender issue, amend
(if increasing the amount thereof) or extend (other than automatic extensions of any Auto-
Extension Letter of Credit) any Letter of Credit, is additionally subject to the receipt of a
request therefor in accordance herewith and the satisfaction of the following conditions:
(a)
 the representations and warranties of the Borrower set forth in this
Agreement (other than, after the Effective Date, those set forth in Sections 4.04(b) and
4.06(a)(i)) shall be true and correct (i) in the case of the representations and warranties
qualified as to materiality, in all respects and (ii) otherwise, in all material respects, in
each case on and as of the date of such Loan or the date of such issuance, amendment
or extension, as applicable, except in the case of any such representation and warranty
that expressly relates to a prior date, in which case such representation and warranty
shall be so true and correct on and as of such prior date; and
 

(b)
 at the time of and immediately after giving effect to such Loan or such
issuance, amendment or extension, no Default or Event of Default shall have occurred
and be continuing.
Each Borrowing and each issuance, amendment (if increasing the amount
thereof) or extension (other than automatic extensions of any Auto-Extension Letter of Credit)
of any Letter of Credit shall be deemed to constitute a representation and warranty by the
Borrower on the date thereof that the conditions specified in the preceding sentence have been
satisfied.
ARTICLE VI
Affirmative Covenants
Until the Commitments have expired or been terminated and the principal of
and interest on each Loan and all fees payable hereunder shall have been paid in full, and all
Letters of Credit shall have expired or terminated (or have been cash collateralized or
backstopped on terms reasonably satisfactory to each applicable Issuing Lender) and all LC
Disbursements shall have been reimbursed, the Borrower covenants and agrees with the
Lenders that:
SECTION 6.01.
 Financial Statements, Rating Changes and Other
Information.  The Borrower will furnish to the Administrative Agent and each Lender (through
the Administrative Agent):
(a)
 as soon as available and in any event within 90 days after the end of
each fiscal year of the Borrower, the audited consolidated balance sheet and related
statements of earnings, shareholders’ equity and cash flows of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries as of the end of and for such year, setting forth in each case in
comparative form the figures for the previous fiscal year, all reported on by Deloitte &
Touche LLP or another independent registered public accounting firm of recognized
national standing (without a “going concern” or like qualification or exception and
without any qualification or exception as to the scope of such audit) to the effect that
such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial condition and results of operations and cash flows of the Borrower and its
Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis in accordance with GAAP;
(b)
 as soon as available and in any event within 45 days after the end of
each of the first three fiscal quarters of each fiscal year of the Borrower, the
consolidated balance sheet and related statements of earnings, shareholders’ equity
and cash flows of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries as of the end of and for such fiscal
quarter and the then elapsed portion of the fiscal year, setting forth in each case in
comparative form the figures for (or, in the case of the balance sheet, as of the end of)
the corresponding period or periods of the previous fiscal year, all certified by a
Financial Officer of the Borrower as
 

presenting fairly, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of
operations and cash flows of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries on a consolidated basis
in accordance with GAAP, subject to normal year‑end audit adjustments and the
absence of certain footnotes;
(c)
 concurrently with any delivery of financial statements under clause (a)
or (b) of this Section 6.01, a certificate executed by a Financial Officer of the Borrower
(i) certifying as to whether, to the best knowledge of such Financial Officer (following
due inquiry), a Default has occurred and, if a Default has occurred, specifying the
details thereof and any action taken or proposed to be taken with respect thereto,
(ii)  setting forth reasonably detailed calculations demonstrating compliance with
Section 7.03 and (iii) stating whether any change in GAAP or in the application thereof
has been given effect in the preparation of such financial statements that became
effective after the date of the audited financial statements referred to in Section 4.04
that affects calculations pursuant to Section 7.03 and has not previously been reported
in such a certificate and, if any such not previously reported change has occurred,
specifying the effect of such change on the financial statements accompanying such
certificate;
(d)
 promptly after Moody’s or S&P shall have publicly announced a change
in the Moody’s Rating or the S&P Rating, as the case may be, written notice of such
rating change; and
(e)
 promptly following any request therefor, (i) such other information
regarding the operations, business affairs and financial condition of the Borrower or
any of its Subsidiaries or compliance with the terms of this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents or (ii) such other documentation and information required by bank
regulatory authorities under applicable “know your customer” and anti-money
laundering rules and regulations, including the USA PATRIOT Act and the Beneficial
Ownership Regulation, in each case, as the Administrative Agent or any Lender through
the Administrative Agent may reasonably request.
The Borrower’s obligations under clauses (a) and (b) of this Section 6.01 shall in any event be
deemed sufficiently performed if the financial statements referred to therein are delivered by
the time required under the applicable clause in such form and content as permitted under the
Exchange Act.    Documents required to be delivered pursuant to clauses (a) and (b) of this
Section 6.01 (to the extent any such documents are included in materials otherwise filed and
publicly available with the Securities and Exchange Commission), may be delivered
electronically and, if so delivered, shall be deemed to have been delivered on the date on which
the Borrower posts such documents on www.sec.gov, or provides a link thereto on the
Borrower’s website at www.bestbuy.com.  Notices required to be delivered pursuant to clause
(d) of this Section 6.01 may be delivered electronically and, if so delivered, shall be deemed
delivered on the date on which the applicable rating agency posts such notice, or provides a
link thereto, on the
 

website of such rating agency.  All documents and notices required by this Section 6.01 shall be
deemed sufficiently delivered when posted by the Administrative Agent on the Approved
Electronic Platform.
SECTION 6.02.
 Notices of Material Events.  The Borrower will furnish
to the Administrative Agent and each Lender (through the Administrative Agent) prompt
written notice of the following:
(a)
 the occurrence of any Default;
(b)
 the filing or commencement of any action, suit or proceeding by or
before any arbitrator or Governmental Authority against or affecting the Borrower or
any of its Subsidiaries that could reasonably be expected to result in a Material
Adverse Effect;
(c)
 the occurrence of any ERISA Event that, alone or together with any
other ERISA Events that have occurred, results in, or could reasonably be expected to
result in, a Material Adverse Effect; and
(d)
 any other development that results in, or could reasonably be expected
to result in, a Material Adverse Effect.
Each notice delivered under this Section 6.02 shall be accompanied by a
statement of a Financial Officer or other executive officer of the Borrower setting forth the
details of the event or development requiring such notice and any action taken or proposed to
be taken with respect thereto.
SECTION 6.03.
 Existence; Conduct of Business.  The Borrower will,
and will cause each of its Material Subsidiaries to, do or cause to be done all things necessary
to obtain, preserve, renew and keep in full force and effect its legal existence and the rights,
licenses, permits, privileges, authorizations and franchises material to the conduct of its
business, except (other than with respect to the legal existence of the Borrower) to the extent
that failure to do so, individually or in the aggregate, would not reasonably be expected to have
a Material Adverse Effect; provided that the foregoing shall not prohibit any transaction
permitted under Section 7.02.
SECTION 6.04.
 Payment of Obligations.  The Borrower will, and will
cause each of its Subsidiaries to, pay its obligations, including Tax liabilities, that, if not paid,
would result in a Material Adverse Effect before the same shall become delinquent or in
default, except where (a) the validity or amount thereof is being contested in good faith by
appropriate proceedings and (b) the Borrower or such Subsidiary has set aside on its books
adequate reserves with respect thereto in accordance with GAAP.
SECTION 6.05.
 Maintenance of Properties; Insurance.  The Borrower
will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, (a) keep and maintain all property material to
the conduct of its business in working order and condition sufficient to permit the conduct of
business in the ordinary course, ordinary wear and tear excepted, except to the
 

extent that failure to do so, individually or in the aggregate, would not reasonably be expected
to have a Material Adverse Effect, and (b)  maintain, with financially sound and reputable
insurance companies (or with the Borrower’s captive self-insurance Subsidiary or other
customary self insurance, so long as such arrangements are administered in accordance with
sound business practices), insurance in such amounts and against such risks as are customarily
maintained by companies engaged in the same or similar businesses operating in the same or
similar locations.
SECTION 6.06.
 Books and Records; Inspection Rights.  The Borrower
will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, keep proper books of record and account in such
detail as is necessary to allow the delivery of the reports required by Section 6.01, in which
full, true and correct entries are made of all dealings and transactions in relation to its business
and activities in accordance with and as required by GAAP in all material respects.    The
Borrower will, and will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, permit any representatives designated
by the Administrative Agent (on its own behalf or as requested by any Lender), upon
reasonable prior notice, to visit and inspect its properties, to examine and make extracts from
its books and records, and to discuss its affairs, finances and condition with its officers and
independent accountants, all at such reasonable times and as often as reasonably requested
(collectively, the “Inspections”); provided that the Borrower shall not be obligated to permit
more than one Inspection in any calendar year unless a Default or Event of Default is then
continuing or to make available MNPI to any Person in any respect that would (in the opinion
of counsel to the Borrower) violate applicable law, including the Exchange Act.
SECTION 6.07.
 Compliance with Laws.  The Borrower will, and will
cause each of its Subsidiaries to, comply with all laws (including ERISA and Environmental
Laws) and all rules, regulations and orders of any Governmental Authority applicable to it or
its property, except where the failure to do so, individually or in the aggregate, would not
reasonably be expected to result in a Material Adverse Effect.
SECTION 6.08.
 New Specified Subsidiaries to Become Subsidiary
Guarantors.  With respect to each Subsidiary that becomes a Specified Subsidiary after the
Effective Date, the Borrower will (a) within 30 Business Days after such Subsidiary becomes a
Specified Subsidiary, cause such Subsidiary to duly execute and deliver to the Administrative
Agent a Guarantee Assumption Agreement properly completed for such Subsidiary and (b)
deliver to the Administrative Agent within a reasonable time (not exceeding 30 days) after its
request therefor, such proof of corporate action, incumbency of officers, opinions of counsel
and other documents consistent with those delivered by the Subsidiary Guarantors pursuant to
Section 5.01 on the Effective Date as may reasonably be requested by the Administrative
Agent.  Subject to Section 3.11, nothing in this Agreement shall obligate the Administrative
Agent or the Lenders to release or terminate the Guarantee under Article III of this Agreement
or any Guarantee Assumption Agreement of any Subsidiary Guarantor which ceases to be a
Specified Subsidiary.
SECTION 6.09.
 Use of Proceeds; Federal Reserve Regulations.   The
Borrower will use the proceeds of the Loans, and the Letters of Credit will be used, for
 

general corporate purposes in compliance with all applicable legal and regulatory requirements;
provided that neither the Administrative Agent nor any Lender shall have any responsibility as
to the use of any of such proceeds.  No part of the proceeds of any Loan will be used, whether
directly or indirectly, for any purpose that entails a violation of any of the Regulations of the
Federal Reserve Board, including Regulations T, U and X, and the Borrower will not permit the
value of all Margin Stock owned by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries (including all capital
stock of the Borrower from time to time held by the Borrower in treasury) to constitute more
than 25.0% of the value of the consolidated assets of the Borrower.  The Borrower will not
request any Borrowing or Letter of Credit, and the Borrower shall not use, and shall not permit
its Subsidiaries and its or their respective directors, officers and employees to use, the proceeds
of any Borrowing or Letter of Credit (a) in furtherance of an offer, payment, promise to pay, or
authorization of the payment or giving of money, or anything else of value, to any Person in
violation of any Anti-Corruption Laws or (b) in any manner that would result in the violation of
any Sanctions applicable to any party hereto.
SECTION 6.10.
 Transactions with Affiliates.  The Borrower will, and
will cause each of its Subsidiaries to, cause any of its transactions with any of its Affiliates,
including any sale, lease or other transfer any property to, or purchase, lease or other
acquisition of any property from, any of its Affiliates, to be on prices and terms and conditions
that are not less favorable to the Borrower or such Subsidiary than those that could be obtained
on an arm’s-length basis from unrelated third parties; provided that nothing in this Section 6.10
shall apply to transactions between or among the Borrower and its Subsidiaries.
ARTICLE VII
Negative Covenants
Until the Commitments have expired or terminated and the principal of and
interest on each Loan and all fees payable hereunder have been paid in full, and all Letters of
Credit have expired or terminated (or have been cash collateralized or backstopped on terms
reasonably satisfactory to each applicable Issuing Lender) and all LC Disbursements shall have
been reimbursed, the Borrower covenants and agrees with the Lenders that:
SECTION 7.01.
 Liens.  The Borrower will not, nor will it permit any of
its Subsidiaries to, create, incur, assume or permit to exist any Lien on any property or asset
now owned or hereafter acquired by it, or assign or sell any income or revenues (including
accounts receivable) or rights in respect of any thereof or enter into any Securitization
Transaction, except:
(a)
 Liens existing on the Effective Date and, if securing a liability in excess
of $150,000,000, described on Schedule 7.01, and Liens on the same property (or, if such Lien
attaches to a type or class of property of any Person, on the same type or class of property of
such Person) securing any extension, renewal, refinancing,
 

refunding or replacement of the liability secured by such Liens that do not increase the
outstanding principal amount thereof;
(b)
 deposits or pledges, or cash collateral given to any financial institution
that has issued a letter of credit, to secure payment of workers’ compensation, unemployment
insurance, old age pensions or other social security or employee benefit obligations, daylight
overdraft exposure or ACH obligations, or liabilities under or in respect of self-insurance
programs, in each case in the ordinary course of business of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries;
(c)
 Liens created or assumed in connection with the acquisition of real
property by the Borrower or any Subsidiary; provided that such Liens attach only to the
property acquired and secure only Indebtedness incurred solely to finance the acquisition of
such property, and Liens on the same property securing any Indebtedness the proceeds of
which are used solely to refinance such Indebtedness;
(d)
 Liens on inventory of the Borrower or any Subsidiary and proceeds
thereof pursuant to agreements with the suppliers of inventory or inventory letter of credit
providers to the Borrower or such Subsidiary; provided that such Liens attach only to
inventory financed pursuant to such agreements and secure only Indebtedness or other
obligations, in each case, incurred solely to finance the acquisition of such inventory by the
Borrower or such Subsidiary;
(e)
 Liens securing Indebtedness and related obligations incurred to finance
the acquisition or construction of capital assets not constituting real property or to reimburse
the Borrower or a Subsidiary for expenditures made to acquire or construct such capital
assets, and Liens securing Indebtedness and related obligations incurred by the same obligor
to extend, renew, refinance, refund or replace any such Indebtedness or obligations so long as
the outstanding principal amount thereof is not increased; provided that such Liens attach
only to such capital assets and the proceeds thereof;
(f)
 Liens securing Indebtedness and related obligations of any Subsidiary
which became a Subsidiary after the Effective Date if such Indebtedness and Liens were
outstanding prior to the time it became a Subsidiary and not incurred in contemplation of its
becoming a Subsidiary, and Liens on the same property (or, if such Lien attaches to a type or
class of property of any Person, on the same type or class of property of such Person) securing
Indebtedness and related obligations incurred by the same obligor to extend, renew,
refinance, refund or replace such Indebtedness or obligations so long as the outstanding
principal thereof is not increased;
(g)
 Permitted Encumbrances;
(h)
 Liens consisting of easements, rights of way, zoning restrictions,
restrictions on the use of real property and defects and irregularities in the title thereto,
 

landlords’, materialmen’s or mechanic’s liens and other similar liens and encumbrances  none
of which interfere materially with the use of the property covered thereby in the ordinary
course of the business of the Borrower or such Subsidiary and which do not materially detract
from the value of such properties;
(i)
 Liens on assets of Foreign Subsidiaries securing Indebtedness or other
liabilities of Foreign Subsidiaries;
(j)
 cash collateral given to any financial institution that has issued a trade
bank acceptance draft in the ordinary course of business of the Borrower and its Subsidiaries;
(k)
 Securitization Transactions, and Liens on accounts receivable, interests
therein and the proceeds thereof existing or deemed to exist in connection with any
Securitization Transaction; provided that the aggregate amount of the Domestic Securitization
Transactions shall not exceed $300,000,000 at any time;
(l)
 Liens on assets securing obligations under any 364-Day Credit
Agreement so long as obligations under this Agreement are secured on an equal and ratable
basis on terms reasonably satisfactory to the Administrative Agent; and
(m)
 Liens securing other liabilities, provided that, as of the Effective Date
and as of the time any Lien securing any obligations is created, incurred or assumed in reliance
on this clause (m), the aggregate principal amount of all liabilities secured by Liens in reliance
on this clause (m) (together with the aggregate principal amount of all liabilities secured by
such Lien to be created, incurred or assumed in reliance on this clause (m)) does not exceed
the greater of (i) $250,000,000 and (ii) 10.0% of Tangible Net Worth as of the Effective Date or
as of the date any such Lien is created, incurred or assumed, as applicable.
SECTION 7.02.
 Fundamental Changes.        Mergers, Consolidations,
Sales of Assets, Etc.
(i)
 The Borrower will not, and will not permit any Subsidiary Guarantor to,
merge with or into or consolidate with (collectively, “merge” or a “merger”) any other
Person, or permit any other Person to merge with or into it, or liquidate or dissolve;
provided that, if at the time thereof and immediately after giving effect thereto no
Default or Event of Default shall have occurred and be continuing, (A) any Subsidiary
Guarantor may merge into the Borrower in a transaction in which the Borrower is the
surviving entity; (B) any Subsidiary Guarantor may merge with or into any other Person
(including in connection with any acquisition) in a transaction in which the surviving
entity is, or concurrently with the consummation of such merger becomes, a
Subsidiary Guarantor; (C) any Subsidiary Guarantor may be disposed of pursuant to a
merger with or into another Person so long as such disposition does not violate
 

clause (ii) below; (D)  any Subsidiary Guarantor may liquidate or dissolve if the
Borrower determines in good faith that such liquidation or dissolution is in the best
interests of the Borrower and is not materially disadvantageous to the Lenders; and (E)
the Borrower may merge with or into any other Person organized under the laws of
the United States of America or any State thereof, provided that (1) the Borrower is the
surviving entity or (2) if the surviving entity is not the Borrower, then (x) the surviving
entity assumes all of the Borrower’s obligations under this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents pursuant to an agreement reasonably satisfactory to the
Administrative Agent and (y) the Lenders shall have received all documentation and
other information required by bank regulatory authorities under applicable “know
your customer” and anti-money laundering rules and regulations, including the USA
PATRIOT Act, with respect to such surviving entity, and provided further that on the
date of consummation of any such merger, the Borrower shall deliver to the
Administrative Agent a certificate executed by a Financial Officer of the Borrower
demonstrating that the Borrower would be in pro forma compliance with Section 7.03
as of the last day of the fiscal quarter then most recently ended (determined as if such
merger, and any related incurrence of Indebtedness, had occurred on the first day of
the period of four consecutive fiscal quarters ending on such last day).
(ii)
 The Borrower will not, and will not permit any of its Subsidiaries to,
sell, transfer, lease, license or otherwise dispose of (in one transaction or in a series of
transactions, and whether directly or through any merger or consolidation) assets
representing all or substantially all the consolidated assets of the Borrower and the
Subsidiaries (whether now owned or hereafter acquired), taken as a whole.
(n)
 Lines of Business.  The Borrower will not, and will not permit any of its
Subsidiaries to, engage to any material extent in any business other than businesses of the
type conducted by the Borrower and its Subsidiaries on the date of execution of this
Agreement and businesses reasonably related thereto.
SECTION 7.03.
 Cash Flow Leverage Ratio.   The Borrower will not
permit the Cash Flow Leverage Ratio on the last day of any fiscal quarter to exceed 3.50 to
1.00.
ARTICLE VIII
Events of Default
If any of the following events (“Events of Default”) shall occur:
(a)
 the Borrower shall fail to pay any principal of any Loan or any
reimbursement obligation in respect of any LC Disbursement when and as the same
 

shall become due and payable, whether at the due date thereof or at a date fixed for
prepayment thereof or otherwise;
(b)
 the Borrower shall fail to pay any interest on any Loan or any fee or any
other amount (other than an amount referred to in clause  (a) of this Article  VIII) payable
under this Agreement or under any other Loan Document, when and as the same shall
become due and payable, and such failure shall continue unremedied for a period of three or
more Business Days;
(c)
 any representation or warranty made or deemed made by or on behalf
of the Borrower or any other Obligor in or in connection with this Agreement or any other
Loan Document or any amendment or modification hereof or thereof, or any waiver
hereunder or thereunder, or in any report, certificate, financial statement or other document
furnished pursuant to or in connection with this Agreement or any other Loan Document or
any amendment or modification hereof or thereof, or any waiver hereunder or thereunder,
shall prove to have been incorrect in any material respect when made or deemed made;
(d)
 the Borrower shall fail to observe or perform any covenant, condition
or agreement contained in Section 6.02(a), 6.03 (with respect to the Borrower’s legal
existence) or 6.09 or in Article VII;
(e)
 any Obligor shall fail to observe or perform any covenant, condition or
agreement contained in this Agreement or any other Loan Document (other than those
specified in clause (a), (b) or (d) of this Article VIII) and such failure shall continue unremedied
for a period of 30 or more days after written notice thereof from the Administrative Agent or
the Required Lenders to the Borrower;
(f)
 the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries shall fail to make any payment
(whether of principal or interest and regardless of amount) in respect of any Material
Indebtedness, when and as the same shall become due and payable (after giving effect to any
grace period applicable thereto); provided that any such failure with respect to any
Indebtedness arising from the purchase of goods or services by the Borrower that is being
contested in good faith by appropriate proceedings shall not constitute an Event of Default as
long as the Borrower’s or such Subsidiary’s title to any substantial part of its property is not
materially adversely affected, its use of such property in the ordinary course of its business is
not materially interfered with and adequate reserves with respect thereto have been set aside
on its books in conformity with GAAP;
(g)
 any event or condition occurs that results in any Material Indebtedness
(i) becoming due or required to be prepaid, repurchased, redeemed or defeased or (ii) in the
case of any Hedging Agreement or Securitization Transaction, terminated, in each case prior to
its scheduled maturity or that enables or permits (with or without the giving of notice, the
lapse of time or both) the holder or holders of any
 

Material Indebtedness (other than in respect of any Hedging Agreement) or any trustee or
agent on its or their behalf, or, in the case of any Securitization Transaction, the purchasers or
lenders thereunder, to cause any such Material Indebtedness to become due, or to require the
prepayment, repurchase, redemption or defeasance thereof, prior to its scheduled maturity
or, in the case of any Securitization Transaction, to cause the termination thereof; provided
that this clause (g) shall not apply to (A) secured Indebtedness that becomes due as a result of
the voluntary sale or transfer of the property or assets securing such Indebtedness or (B) any
Indebtedness that becomes due as a result of a voluntary refinancing thereof by the Borrower
or any of its Subsidiaries or, in the case of any Indebtedness in respect of a Hedging
Agreement, a voluntary termination thereof by the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries;
(h)
 an involuntary proceeding shall be commenced or an involuntary
petition shall be filed seeking (i) liquidation, reorganization or other relief in respect of the
Borrower or any of its Material Subsidiaries or its debts, or of a substantial part of its assets,
under any Federal, state or foreign bankruptcy, insolvency, receivership or similar law now or
hereafter in effect or (ii)  the appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian, sequestrator,
conservator or similar official for the Borrower or any of its Material Subsidiaries or for a
substantial part of its assets, and, in any such case, such proceeding or petition shall continue
undismissed for a period of 60 or more days or an order or decree approving or ordering any
of the foregoing shall be entered;
(i)
 the Borrower or any of its Material Subsidiaries shall (i)  voluntarily
commence any proceeding or file any petition seeking liquidation, reorganization or other
relief under any Federal, state or foreign bankruptcy, insolvency, receivership or similar law
now or hereafter in effect, (ii) consent to the institution of, or fail to contest in a timely and
appropriate manner, any proceeding or petition described in clause  (h) of this Article VIII,
(iii) apply for or consent to the appointment of a receiver, trustee, custodian, sequestrator,
conservator or similar official for the Borrower or any of its Material Subsidiaries or for a
substantial part of its assets, (iv) file an answer admitting the material allegations of a petition
filed against it in any such proceeding or (v) make a general assignment for the benefit of
creditors;
(j)
 one or more judgments for the payment of money in an aggregate
amount in excess of $150,000,000 shall be rendered against the Borrower or any of its
Subsidiaries or any combination thereof and the same shall remain undischarged for a period
of 60 consecutive days during which execution shall not be effectively stayed, or any action
shall be legally taken by a judgment creditor to attach or levy upon any assets of the Borrower
or any of its Subsidiaries to enforce any such judgment;
(k)
 an ERISA Event shall have occurred that, when taken together with all
other ERISA Events that have occurred, could reasonably be expected to result in a Material
Adverse Effect; or
(l)
 a Change in Control shall occur;
 

then, and in every such event (other than an event with respect to the Borrower described in
clause (h) or (i) of this Article VIII), and at any time thereafter during the continuance of such
event, the Administrative Agent shall at the request, and may with the consent, of the
Required Lenders, by notice to the Borrower, take either or both of the following actions, at
the same or different times: (i) terminate the Commitments, and thereupon the Commitments
shall terminate immediately, and (ii)  declare the Loans then outstanding to be due and
payable in whole, and thereupon the principal of the Loans, together with accrued interest
thereon and all fees and other obligations of the Obligors accrued hereunder, shall become
due and payable immediately, without presentment, demand, protest or other notice of any
kind, all of which are hereby waived by each Obligor; and in case of any event with respect to
the Borrower described in clause  (h) or (i) of this Article VIII, the Commitments shall
automatically terminate and the principal of the Loans then outstanding, together with
accrued interest thereon and all fees and other obligations of the Obligors accrued hereunder,
shall automatically become due and payable, without presentment, demand, protest or other
notice of any kind, all of which are hereby waived by each Obligor.
ARTICLE IX
Agency
SECTION 9.01.
 Authorization and Action.     Each of the Lenders and
the Issuing Lenders hereby irrevocably appoints the entity named as Administrative Agent in
the heading of this Agreement and its successors and assigns to serve as Administrative Agent
under the Loan Documents and authorizes the Administrative Agent to take such actions on its
behalf and to exercise such powers under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents as are
delegated to the Administrative Agent by the terms hereof or thereof, together with such actions
and powers as are reasonably incidental thereto.  Without limiting the foregoing, each of the
Lenders and the Issuing Lenders hereby authorizes the Administrative Agent (i) to execute and
deliver, and to perform its obligations under, each of the Loan Documents to which the
Administrative Agent is a party, and to exercise all rights, powers and remedies that the
Administrative Agent may have under such Loan Documents and (ii) to release any Subsidiary
Guarantor from its guarantee of the Guaranteed Obligations in accordance with the terms
thereof. 
(a)
 As to any matters not expressly provided for herein and in the other
Loan Documents (including enforcement or collection), the Administrative Agent shall not be
required to exercise any discretion or take any action, but shall be required to act or to refrain
from acting (and shall be fully protected in so acting or refraining from acting) upon the
written instructions of the Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of the
Lenders as shall be necessary, or as the Administrative Agent shall believe in good faith to be
necessary, pursuant to the terms in the Loan Documents), and, unless and until revoked in
writing, such instructions shall be binding upon each Lender and each Issuing Lender;
provided,  however, that the Administrative
 

Agent shall not be required to take any action that the Administrative Agent in good faith
believes exposes the Administrative Agent to liability unless the Administrative Agent receives
an indemnification and is exculpated in a manner satisfactory to it from the Lenders and the
Issuing Lenders with respect to such action or is contrary to this Agreement or any other Loan
Document or applicable law, including any action that may be in violation of the automatic
stay under any requirement of law relating to bankruptcy, insolvency or reorganization or
relief of debtors or that may effect a forfeiture, modification or termination of property of a
Defaulting Lender in violation of any requirement of law relating to bankruptcy, insolvency or
reorganization or relief of debtors; provided,  further, that the Administrative Agent may seek
clarification or direction from the Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of
the Lenders as shall be necessary, or as the Administrative Agent shall believe in good faith to
be necessary, pursuant to the terms in the Loan Documents) prior to the exercise of any such
instructed action and may refrain from acting until such clarification or direction has been
provided.  Except as expressly set forth in the Loan Documents, the Administrative Agent shall
not have any duty to disclose, and shall not be liable for the failure to disclose, any
information relating to the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries or other Affiliates that is
communicated to or obtained by the Person serving as the Administrative Agent or any of its
Affiliates in any capacity.  Nothing in this Agreement shall require the Administrative Agent to
expend or risk its own funds or otherwise incur any financial liability in the performance of
any of its duties hereunder or in the exercise of any of its rights or powers if it shall have
reasonable grounds for believing that repayment of such funds or adequate indemnity against
such risk or liability is not reasonably assured to it.
(b)
 In performing its functions and duties hereunder and under the other
Loan Documents, the Administrative Agent is acting solely on behalf of the Lenders and the
Issuing Lenders (except in limited circumstances expressly provided for herein relating to the
maintenance of the Register), and its duties are entirely mechanical and administrative in
nature.  Without limiting the generality of the foregoing:
(i)
 the Administrative Agent does not assume and shall not be deemed to
have assumed any obligation or duty or any other relationship as the agent, fiduciary
or trustee of or for any Lender or Issuing Lender other than as expressly set forth
herein and in the other Loan Documents, regardless of whether a Default or an Event
of Default has occurred and is continuing (and it is understood and agreed that the use
of the term “agent” (or any similar term) herein or in any other Loan Document with
reference to the Administrative Agent is not intended to connote any fiduciary duty or
other implied (or express) obligations arising under agency doctrine of any applicable
law, and that such term is used as a matter of market custom and is intended to create
or reflect only an administrative relationship between contracting parties); and each
Lender and each Issuing Lender agrees that it will not assert any claim against
 

the Administrative Agent based on an alleged breach of fiduciary duty by the
Administrative Agent in connection with this Agreement, any other Loan Document
and/or the transactions contemplated hereby or thereby; and
(ii)
 nothing in this Agreement or any other Loan Document shall require
the Administrative Agent to account to any Lender for any sum or the profit element of
any sum received by the Administrative Agent for its own account.
(c)
 The Administrative Agent may perform any and all of its duties and
exercise its rights and powers hereunder or under any other Loan Document by or through
any one or more sub‑agents appointed by the Administrative Agent.  The Administrative Agent
and any such sub‑agent may perform any and all of their respective duties and exercise their
respective rights and powers by or through their respective Related Parties.  The exculpatory
provisions of this Article IX shall apply to any such sub‑agent and to the Related Parties of the
Administrative Agent and any such sub-agent, and shall apply to their respective activities in
connection with the syndication of the credit facility provided for herein as well as activities as
Administrative Agent.  The Administrative Agent shall not be responsible for the negligence or
misconduct of any sub-agents except to the extent that a court of competent jurisdiction
determines in a final and nonappealable judgment that the Administrative Agent acted with
gross negligence or willful misconduct in the selection of such sub-agents.
(d)
 In case of the pendency of any proceeding with respect to any Obligor
under any Federal, state or foreign bankruptcy, insolvency, receivership or similar law now or
hereafter in effect, the Administrative Agent (irrespective of whether the principal of any Loan
or any LC Disbursement shall then be due and payable as herein expressed or by declaration
or otherwise and irrespective of whether the Administrative Agent shall have made any
demand on the Borrower) shall be entitled and empowered (but not obligated) by
intervention in such proceeding or otherwise:
(i)
 to file and prove a claim for the whole amount of the principal and
interest owing and unpaid in respect of the Loans, LC Exposure and all other
Guaranteed Obligations that are owing and unpaid and to file such other documents as
may be necessary or advisable in order to have the claims of the Lenders, the Issuing
Lenders and the Administrative Agent (including any claim under Sections 2.12, 2.13,
2.15, 2.16, 2.17 and 10.03) allowed in such judicial proceeding; and
(ii)
 to collect and receive any monies or other property payable or
deliverable on any such claims and to distribute the same;
and any custodian, receiver, assignee, trustee, liquidator, sequestrator or other similar official in
any such proceeding is hereby authorized by each Lender and each Issuing
 

Lender to make such payments to the Administrative Agent and, in the event that the
Administrative Agent shall consent to the making of such payments directly to the Lenders or
the Issuing Lenders, to pay to the Administrative Agent any amount due to it, in its capacity as
the Administrative Agent, under the Loan Documents (including under Section
10.03).  Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to authorize the Administrative Agent to
authorize or consent to or accept or adopt on behalf of any Lender or Issuing Lender any plan
of reorganization, arrangement, adjustment or composition affecting the Guaranteed
Obligations or the rights of any Lender or Issuing Lender or to authorize the Administrative
Agent to vote in respect of the claim of any Lender or Issuing Lender in any such proceeding.
SECTION 9.02.
 Administrative Agent’s Reliance, Limitation of
Liability, Etc.     Neither the Administrative Agent nor any of its Related Parties shall be liable
for any action taken or omitted to be taken by the Administrative Agent or any of its Related
Parties under or in connection with this Agreement or the other Loan Documents (x) with the
consent of or at the request of the Required Lenders (or such other number or percentage of the
Lenders as shall be necessary, or as the Administrative Agent shall believe in good faith to be
necessary, under the circumstances as provided in the Loan Documents) or (y) in the absence of
its own gross negligence or willful misconduct (such absence to be presumed unless otherwise
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by a final and non-appealable judgment).    
(a)
 The Administrative Agent shall be deemed not to have knowledge of
any (i) any of the events or circumstances set forth or described in ‎Section 6.02 unless and
until written notice thereof stating that it is a “notice under Section 6.02” in respect of this
Agreement and identifying the specific clause under said Section is given to the Administrative
Agent by the Borrower, or (ii) any Default or Event of Default unless and until written notice
thereof (stating that it is a “notice of Default” or a “notice of an Event of Default”) is given to
the Administrative Agent by the Borrower, a Lender or an Issuing Lender.    Further, the
Administrative Agent shall not be responsible for or have any duty to ascertain or inquire into
(A) any recital, statement, warranty or representation made in or in connection with any Loan
Document, (B) the contents of any certificate, report or other document delivered thereunder
or in connection therewith, (C) the performance or observance of any of the covenants,
agreements or other terms or conditions set forth in any Loan Document or the occurrence of
any Default or Event of Default, (D) the sufficiency, value, validity, enforceability, effectiveness
or genuineness of any Loan Document or any other agreement, instrument or document
(including, for the avoidance of doubt, in connection with the Administrative Agent’s reliance
on any Electronic Signature transmitted by e-mailed .pdf or any other electronic means that
reproduces an image of an actual executed signature page) or (E) the satisfaction of any
condition set forth in ‎Article V or elsewhere in any Loan Document, other than to confirm
receipt of items (which on their face purport to be such items) expressly required to be
delivered to the Administrative Agent or satisfaction of any condition that expressly refers to
the matters described therein being acceptable or satisfactory to the Administrative
Agent.  Notwithstanding anything
 

herein to the contrary, the Administrative Agent shall not be liable for, or be responsible for
any loss, cost or expense suffered by the Borrower, any Lender or any Issuing Lender as a
result of, any determination of the Revolving Credit Exposure, or the component amounts
thereof, or any determination that any Lender is a Defaulting Lender, or the effective date of
such status, it being further understood and agreed that the Administrative Agent shall not
have any obligation to determine whether any Lender is a Defaulting Lender.
(b)
 Without limiting the foregoing, the Administrative Agent (i) may treat
the payee of any promissory note as its holder until such promissory note has been assigned
in accordance with ‎Section 10.04, (ii) may rely on the Register to the extent set forth in ‎Section
10.04(b), (iii) may consult with legal counsel (including counsel to the Borrower), independent
public accountants and other experts selected by it, and shall not be liable for any action taken
or omitted to be taken in good faith by it in accordance with the advice of such counsel,
accountants or experts, (iv) in determining compliance with any condition hereunder to the
making of a Loan, or the issuance, amendment or extension of a Letter of Credit, that by its
terms must be fulfilled to the satisfaction of a Lender or an Issuing Lender, may presume that
such condition is satisfactory to such Lender or Issuing Lender unless the Administrative Agent
shall have received notice to the contrary from such Lender or Issuing Lender sufficiently in
advance of the making of such Loan or the issuance, amendment or extension of such Letter
of Credit and (v) shall be entitled to rely on, and shall incur no liability under or in respect of
this Agreement or any other Loan Document by acting upon, any notice, consent, certificate or
other instrument or writing (which writing may be any electronic message, internet or intranet
website posting or other distribution) or any statement made to it orally or by telephone and
believed by it to be genuine and signed or sent or otherwise authenticated by the proper
Person (whether or not such Person in fact meets the requirements set forth in the Loan
Documents for being the signatory, sender or maker thereof), and may act upon any such oral
or telephonic statement prior to receipt of written confirmation thereof.
SECTION 9.03.
 Posting of Communications.     The Borrower and the
Subsidiary Guarantors agree that the Administrative Agent may, but shall not be obligated to,
make any Communications available to the Lenders and the Issuing Lenders by posting the
Communications on IntraLinks™, DebtDomain, SyndTrak, ClearPar or any other electronic
platform chosen by the Administrative Agent to be its electronic transmission system (the
“Approved Electronic Platform”).
(a)
 Although the Approved Electronic Platform and its primary web portal
are secured with generally-applicable security procedures and policies implemented or
modified by the Administrative Agent from time to time (including, as of the Effective Date, a
user ID/password authorization system) and the Approved Electronic Platform is secured
through a per-deal authorization method whereby each user may access the Approved
Electronic Platform only on a deal-by-deal basis, each of the Lenders, the Issuing Lenders and
the Obligors acknowledges and agrees that the
 

distribution of material through an electronic medium is not necessarily secure, that the
Administrative Agent is not responsible for approving or vetting the representatives or
contacts of any Lender that are added to the Approved Electronic Platform and that there may
be confidentiality and other risks associated with such distribution.  Each of the Lenders, the
Issuing Lenders and the Obligors hereby approves distribution of the Communications through
the Approved Electronic Platform and understands and assumes the risks of such distribution.
(b)
 THE APPROVED ELECTRONIC PLATFORM AND THE COMMUNICATIONS
ARE PROVIDED “AS IS” AND “AS AVAILABLE”.  THE APPLICABLE PARTIES DO NOT WARRANT THE
ACCURACY OR COMPLETENESS OF THE COMMUNICATIONS, OR THE ADEQUACY OF THE
APPROVED ELECTRONIC PLATFORM AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM LIABILITY FOR ERRORS OR
OMISSIONS IN THE APPROVED ELECTRONIC PLATFORM AND THE COMMUNICATIONS.    NO
WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS, IMPLIED OR STATUTORY, INCLUDING ANY WARRANTY OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE, NON-INFRINGEMENT OF THIRD
PARTY RIGHTS OR FREEDOM FROM VIRUSES OR OTHER CODE DEFECTS, IS MADE BY THE
APPLICABLE PARTIES IN CONNECTION WITH THE COMMUNICATIONS OR THE APPROVED
ELECTRONIC PLATFORM.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT, ANY ARRANGER,
ANY DOCUMENTATION AGENT, THE SYNDICATION AGENT OR ANY OF THEIR RESPECTIVE
RELATED PARTIES (COLLECTIVELY, THE “APPLICABLE PARTIES”) HAVE ANY LIABILITY TO ANY
OBLIGOR, ANY LENDER, ANY ISSUING LENDER OR ANY OTHER PERSON FOR DAMAGES OF ANY
KIND, INCLUDING DIRECT OR INDIRECT, SPECIAL, INCIDENTAL OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES,
LOSSES OR EXPENSES (WHETHER IN TORT, CONTRACT OR OTHERWISE) ARISING OUT OF ANY
OBLIGOR’S OR THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT’S TRANSMISSION OF COMMUNICATIONS
THROUGH THE INTERNET OR THE APPROVED ELECTRONIC PLATFORM.
(c)
 Each Lender and each Issuing Lender agrees that notice to it (as
provided in the next sentence) specifying that Communications have been posted to the
Approved Electronic Platform shall constitute effective delivery of the Communications to such
Lender or Issuing Lender for purposes of the Loan Documents.    Each Lender and Issuing
Lender agrees (i) to notify the Administrative Agent in writing (which could be in the form of
electronic communication) from time to time of such Lender’s or Issuing Lender’s (as
applicable) e-mail address to which the foregoing notice may be sent by electronic
transmission and (ii) that the foregoing notice may be sent to such e-mail address.
(d)
 Each of the Lenders, the Issuing Lenders and the Obligors agrees that
the Administrative Agent may, but (except as may be required by applicable law) shall not be
obligated to, store the Communications on the Approved Electronic Platform in accordance
with the Administrative Agent’s generally applicable document retention procedures and
policies.
 

(e)
 Nothing herein shall prejudice the right of the Administrative Agent,
any Lender or any Issuing Lender to give any notice or other communication pursuant to any
Loan Document in any other manner specified in such Loan Document.
SECTION 9.04.
 The Administrative Agent Individually.  With respect to
its Commitment, Loans, LC Sublimit Share and Letters of Credit, the Person serving as the
Administrative Agent shall have and may exercise the same rights and powers hereunder and is
subject to the same obligations and liabilities as and to the extent set forth herein for any other
Lender or Issuing Lender, as the case may be.    The terms “Issuing Lenders”, “Lenders”,
“Required Lenders” and any similar terms shall, unless the context clearly otherwise indicates,
include the Administrative Agent in its individual capacity as a Lender, Issuing Lender or as
one of the Required Lenders, as applicable.  The Person serving as the Administrative Agent
and its Affiliates may accept deposits from, lend money to, own securities of, act as the
financial advisor or in any other advisory capacity for and generally engage in any kind of
banking, trust or other business with, the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries or other Affiliates
as if such Person was not acting as the Administrative Agent and without any duty to account
therefor to the Lenders or the Issuing Lenders.
SECTION 9.05.
 Successor Administrative Agent.      The Administrative
Agent may resign at any time by giving 30 days’ prior written notice thereof to the Lenders, the
Issuing Lenders and the Borrower, whether or not a successor Administrative Agent has been
appointed.  Upon any such resignation, the Required Lenders shall have the right to appoint a
successor Administrative Agent.    If no successor Administrative Agent shall have been so
appointed by the Required Lenders, and shall have accepted such appointment, within 30 days
after the retiring Administrative Agent’s giving of notice of resignation, then the retiring
Administrative Agent may, on behalf of the Lenders and the Issuing Lenders, appoint a
successor Administrative Agent, which shall be a bank with an office in New York, New York
or an Affiliate of any such bank.  In either case, such appointment shall be subject to the prior
written approval of the Borrower (which approval may not be unreasonably withheld and shall
not be required while an Event of Default under clauses (a), (b), (h) or (i) of Article VIII has
occurred and is continuing).  Upon the acceptance of any appointment as Administrative Agent
by a successor Administrative Agent, such successor Administrative Agent shall succeed to,
and become vested with, all the rights, powers, privileges and duties of the retiring
Administrative Agent.    Upon the acceptance of appointment as Administrative Agent by a
successor Administrative Agent, the retiring Administrative Agent shall be discharged from its
duties and obligations under this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.    Prior to any
retiring Administrative Agent’s resignation hereunder as Administrative Agent, the retiring
Administrative Agent shall take such action as may be reasonably necessary to assign to the
successor Administrative Agent its rights as Administrative Agent under the Loan
Documents.  The fees payable by the Borrower to a successor Administrative Agent shall be the
same as those payable to its predecessor unless otherwise agreed by the Borrower and such
successor.
(a)
 Notwithstanding paragraph (a) of this Section  9.05, in the event no
successor Administrative Agent shall have been so appointed and shall have
 

accepted such appointment within 30 days after the retiring Administrative Agent gives notice
of its intent to resign, the retiring Administrative Agent may give notice of the effectiveness of
its resignation to the Lenders, the Issuing Lenders and the Borrower, whereupon, on the date
of effectiveness of such resignation stated in such notice, (i) the retiring Administrative Agent
shall be discharged from its duties and obligations hereunder and under the other Loan
Documents and (ii) the Required Lenders shall succeed to and become vested with all the
rights, powers, privileges and duties of the retiring Administrative Agent; provided that (A) all
payments required to be made hereunder or under any other Loan Document to the
Administrative Agent for the account of any Person other than the Administrative Agent shall
be made directly to such Person and (B) all notices and other communications required or
contemplated to be given or made to the Administrative Agent shall directly be given or made
to each Lender and each Issuing Lender. 
(b)
 Following the effectiveness of the Administrative Agent’s resignation
from its capacity as such, the provisions of this Article IX and ‎Sections 2.17(e) and 10.03, as
well as any exculpatory, reimbursement and indemnification provisions set forth in any other
Loan Document, shall continue in effect for the benefit of such retiring Administrative Agent,
its sub-agents and their respective Related Parties in respect of any actions taken or omitted
to be taken by any of them while the retiring Administrative Agent was acting as
Administrative Agent.
SECTION 9.06.
 Acknowledgments of Lenders and Issuing Lenders.  
   Each Lender and each Issuing Lender acknowledges and agrees that (i) the Loan Documents
set forth the terms of a commercial lending facility, (ii) it is engaged in making, acquiring or
holding commercial loans and in providing other facilities set forth herein as may be applicable
to such Lender or Issuing Lender, in each case in the ordinary course of business, and not for
the purpose of purchasing, acquiring or holding any other type of financial instrument (and
each Lender and each Issuing Lender agrees not to assert a claim in contravention of the
foregoing), (iii) it has, independently and without reliance upon the Administrative Agent, any
Arranger, the Syndication Agent, any Documentation Agent or any other Lender or Issuing
Lender, or any of the Related Parties of any of the foregoing, and based on such documents and
information as it has deemed appropriate, made its own credit analysis and decision to enter
into this Agreement as a Lender or an Issuing Lender, as applicable, and to make, acquire or
hold Loans and/or LC Sublimit Shares hereunder and (iv) it is sophisticated with respect to
decisions to make, acquire and/or hold commercial loans and to provide other facilities set
forth herein, as may be applicable to such Lender or such Issuing Lender, and either it, or the
Person exercising discretion in making its decision to make, acquire and/or hold such
commercial loans or to provide such other facilities, is experienced in making, acquiring or
holding such commercial loans or providing such other facilities.    Each Lender and each
Issuing Lender also acknowledges that it will, independently and without reliance upon the
Administrative Agent, any Arranger, the Syndication Agent, any Documentation Agent or any
other Lender or Issuing Lender, or any of the Related Parties of any of the foregoing, and based
on such documents and information (which
 

may contain MNPI) as it shall from time to time deem appropriate, continue to make its own
decisions in taking or not taking action under or based upon this Agreement, any other Loan
Document or any related agreement or any document furnished hereunder or thereunder.
(a)
 Each Lender and each Issuing Lender, by delivering its signature page to
this Agreement on the Effective Date, or delivering its signature page to an Assignment and
Assumption or an agreement to provide a new Commitment pursuant to Section 2.09(e)(ii)(B)
pursuant to which it shall become a Lender hereunder, shall be deemed to have
acknowledged receipt of, and consented to and approved, this Agreement and each other
document required to be delivered to, or be approved by or satisfactory to, the Administrative
Agent or the Lenders on the Effective Date.
(b)
 Each Lender and each Issuing Lender hereby agrees that (A) if the
Administrative Agent notifies such Lender or Issuing Lender that the Administrative Agent has
determined in its sole discretion that any funds received by such Lender or Issuing Lender
from the Administrative Agent or any of its Affiliates (whether as a payment, prepayment or
repayment of principal, interest, fees or otherwise; individually and collectively, a “Payment”)
were erroneously transmitted to such Lender or Issuing Lender (whether or not known to such
Lender or Issuing Lender), and demands the return of such Payment (or a portion thereof),
such Lender or Issuing Lender shall promptly, but in no event later than one Business Day
thereafter, return to the Administrative Agent the amount of any such Payment (or portion
thereof) as to which such a demand was made in same day funds, together with interest
thereon in respect of each day from and including the date such Payment (or portion thereof)
was received by such Lender or Issuing Lender to the date such amount is repaid to the
Administrative Agent at the greater of the NYFRB Rate and a rate determined by the
Administrative Agent in accordance with banking industry rules on interbank compensation
from time to time in effect, and (B) to the extent permitted by applicable law, such Lender or
Issuing Lender shall not assert, and hereby waives, as to the Administrative Agent, any claim,
counterclaim, defense or right of set-off or recoupment with respect to any demand, claim or
counterclaim by the Administrative Agent for the return of any Payments received, including
any defense based on “discharge for value” or any similar doctrine.    A notice of the
Administrative Agent to any Lender or Issuing Lender under this Section  9.06(c) shall be
conclusive, absent manifest error.
(i)
 Each Lender and each Issuing Lender hereby further agrees that if
it receives a Payment from the Administrative Agent or any of its Affiliates (A) that is in
a different amount than, or on a different date from, that specified in a notice of
payment sent by the Administrative Agent (or any of its Affiliates) with respect to such
Payment (a “Payment Notice”) or (B) that was not preceded or accompanied by a
Payment Notice, it shall be on notice, in each such case, that an error has been made
with respect to such Payment.  Each Lender and each Issuing Lender agrees that, in
each such case, or if it otherwise becomes aware a Payment (or portion thereof) may
have been sent in error, such Lender or Issuing
 

Lender shall promptly notify the Administrative Agent of such occurrence and, upon
demand from the Administrative Agent, it shall promptly, but in no event later than
one Business Day thereafter, return to the Administrative Agent the amount of any
such Payment (or portion thereof) as to which such a demand was made in same day
funds, together with interest thereon in respect of each day from and including the
date such Payment (or portion thereof) was received by such Lender or Issuing Lender
to the date such amount is repaid to the Administrative Agent at the greater of the
NYFRB Rate and a rate determined by the Administrative Agent in accordance with
banking industry rules on interbank compensation from time to time in effect.
(ii)
 The Borrower and each other Obligor hereby agrees that (A) in the
event an erroneous Payment (or portion thereof) is not recovered from any Lender or
Issuing Lender that has received such Payment (or portion thereof) for any reason, the
Administrative Agent shall be subrogated to all the rights of such Lender or Issuing
Lender with respect to such amount and (B) an erroneous Payment shall not pay,
prepay, repay, discharge or otherwise satisfy any Guaranteed Obligations owed by the
Borrower or any other Obligor, except, in each case, to the extent such erroneous
Payment is, and solely with respect to the amount of such erroneous Payment that is,
comprised of funds received by the Administrative Agent from the Borrower or any
other Obligor for the purpose of making a payment to satisfy certain Guaranteed
Obligations owed by the Borrower or any other Obligor and is not otherwise repaid or
returned to the Borrower or such Obligor by the Administrative Agent, a Lender or
Issuing Lender or any of their respective Affiliates whether pursuant to a legal
proceeding or otherwise.
(iii)
 Each party’s obligations under this Section 9.06(c) shall survive the
resignation of the Administrative Agent or any transfer of rights or obligations by, or
the replacement of, a Lender, or the repayment of the Loans, the expiration or
termination of the Letters of Credit and the Commitments or the termination of this
Agreement or any provision hereof.
SECTION 9.07.
 Certain ERISA Matters.   Each Lender (a) represents
and warrants, as of the date such Person became a Lender party hereto, to, and (b) covenants,
from the date such Person became a Lender party hereto to the date such Person ceases being a
Lender party hereto, that at least one of the following is and will be true: 
(i)
 such Lender is not using “plan assets” (within the meaning of the Plan
Asset Regulations or otherwise) of one or more Benefit Plans in connection with such
Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the
Loans, the Letters of Credit, the Commitments or otherwise under this Agreement,
 

(ii)
 the transaction exemption set forth in one or more PTEs, such as PTE
84-14 (a class exemption for certain transactions determined by independent qualified
professional asset managers), PTE 95-60 (a class exemption for certain transactions
involving insurance company general accounts), PTE 90-1 (a class exemption for certain
transactions involving insurance company pooled separate accounts), PTE 91-38 (a
class exemption for certain transactions involving bank collective investment funds) or
PTE 96-23 (a class exemption for certain transactions determined by in-house asset
managers), is applicable with respect to such Lender’s entrance into, participation in,
administration of and performance of the Loans, the Letters of Credit, the
Commitments and this Agreement,
(iii)
 (A) such Lender is an investment fund managed by a “Qualified
Professional Asset Manager” (within the meaning of Part VI of PTE 84-14), (B) such
Qualified Professional Asset Manager made the investment decision on behalf of such
Lender to enter into, participate in, administer and perform the Loans, the Letters of
Credit, the Commitments and this Agreement, (C) such Lender’s entrance into,
participation in, administration of and performance of the Loans, the Letters of Credit,
the Commitments and this Agreement satisfies the requirements of sub-sections (b)
through (g) of Part I of PTE 84-14 and (D) to the best knowledge of such Lender, the
requirements of subsection (a) of Part I of PTE 84-14 are satisfied with respect to such
Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration of and performance of the
Loans, the Letters of Credit, the Commitments and this Agreement, or
(iv)
 such other representation, warranty and covenant as may be agreed in
writing between the Administrative Agent, in its sole discretion, the Borrower and such
Lender to the effect that such Lender’s participation in the Loans, the Letters of Credit,
the Commitments and this Agreement will not give rise to a non-exempt prohibited
transaction under Section 406 of ERISA or Section 4975 of the Code.
In addition, unless either (1) sub-clause (i) in the immediately preceding
paragraph is true with respect to a Lender or (2) a Lender has provided another representation,
warranty and covenant in accordance with sub-clause (iv) in the immediately preceding
paragraph, such Lender further (a) represents and warrants, as of the date such Person became a
Lender party hereto, to, and (b) covenants, from the date such Person became a Lender party
hereto to the date such Person ceases being a Lender party hereto, for the benefit of the
Administrative Agent, the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the Documentation Agents and
their respective Affiliates, and not, for the avoidance of doubt, to or for the benefit of the
Borrower, that the Administrative Agent, the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the
Documentation Agents and their respective Affiliates are not fiduciaries with respect to the
assets of such Lender involved in such Lender’s entrance into, participation in, administration
of and performance of the Loans, the Letters of Credit, the Commitments and this Agreement
(including in connection with
 

the reservation or exercise of any rights by the Administrative Agent under this Agreement, any
Loan Document or any documents related hereto or thereto).
SECTION 9.08.
 Miscellaneous.    Anything herein to the contrary
notwithstanding, none of the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent and the Documentation Agents
shall have any duties or responsibilities under this Agreement or any of the other Loan
Documents, except in its capacity, as applicable, as the Administrative Agent, a Lender or an
Issuing Lender hereunder, and shall incur no liability hereunder or thereunder, but shall have
the benefit of the indemnities, reimbursement and exculpation provisions set forth herein.  The
provisions of this Article IX are solely for the benefit of the Administrative Agent, the Lenders
and the Issuing Lenders, and, except solely to the extent of the Borrower’s rights to consent
pursuant to and subject to the conditions set forth in this Article IX, none of the Borrower or
any of its Subsidiaries or other Affiliates shall have any rights as a third party beneficiary under
any such provisions.
ARTICLE X
Miscellaneous
SECTION 10.01.
 Notices.        Notices Generally.  Except in the case of
notices and other communications expressly permitted to be given by telephone (and except as
provided in paragraph (b) below), all notices and other communications provided for herein
shall be in writing and shall be delivered by hand or overnight courier service, mailed by
certified or registered mail or sent by e-mail, as follows:
(i)
 if to the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor, to Best Buy Co., Inc. at
7601 Penn Avenue South, Richfield, Minnesota, 55423, Attention of Ryan Meinert
(Telephone No. (612) 291-2256; e-mail EFT@bestbuy.com), with a copy to Best Buy
Co., Inc. at 7601 Penn Avenue South, Richfield, Minnesota, 55423, Attention of Legal
Department-Corporate and Securities (Telephone No. (612) 291-7412; e-mail
wanda.sigurdson@bestbuy.com);
(ii)
 if to the Administrative Agent, to JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., 131 S
Dearborn, Floor 04, Chicago, IL 60603-5506, Attention of Loan and Agency Servicing
(email Jpm.agency.cri@jpmchase.com);
 
(iii)
 if to JPMorgan as Issuing Lender, to JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., 10410
Highland Manor Drive, 4th Floor, Tampa, Florida 33610-9128, Attention of Standby LC
Unit (Telephone No. (813) 432-1210; e-mail gts.client.services@jpmchase.com), with a
copy to JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., 10 S. Dearborn, 9th Floor, Chicago, IL 60603-2300,
Attention 
of 
Garrett 
Leider 
(Telephone 
No. 
(214) 
849-3579; 
e-mail
garrett.leider@jpmorgan.com);
(iv)
 if to any other Issuing Lender, to it at its address (or e-mail) as provided
in writing to the Administrative Agent and the Borrower; and
 

(v)
 if to a Lender, to it at its address (or e-mail) set forth in its
Administrative Questionnaire.
Notices sent by hand or overnight courier service, or mailed by certified or registered mail,
shall be deemed to have been given when received.    Notices delivered through electronic
communications shall be effective as provided in paragraph (b) below.
(c)
 Electronic Communications.  Notices and other communications to the
Lenders and the Issuing Lenders hereunder may, in addition to e-mail, be delivered or
furnished by using Approved Electronic Platforms pursuant to procedures approved by the
Administrative Agent; provided that the foregoing shall not apply to notices under Article II to
any Lender or Issuing Lender if such Lender or Issuing Lender, as applicable, has notified the
Administrative Agent that it is incapable of receiving notices under such Article by electronic
communication.    The Administrative Agent or the Borrower may, in its discretion, agree to
accept notices and other communications to it hereunder by, in addition to e-mail, other
electronic communications pursuant to procedures approved by it; provided that approval of
such procedures may be limited to particular notices or communications.    Unless the
Administrative Agent otherwise prescribes, (i) notices and other communications sent to an e-
mail address shall be deemed received upon the sender’s receipt of an acknowledgement
from the intended recipient (such as by the “return receipt requested” function, as available,
return e-mail or other written acknowledgement) and (ii) notices or communications posted
to an Approved Electronic Platform shall be deemed received upon the deemed receipt by the
intended recipient, at its e-mail address as described in the foregoing clause (i), of notification
that such notice or communication is available and identifying the website address therefor;
provided that, for both clauses (i) and (ii) above, if such notice, e-mail or other communication
is not sent during the normal business hours of the recipient, such notice or communication
shall be deemed to have been sent at the opening of business on the next business day for the
recipient.
(d)
 Change of Address, Etc.  Any party hereto may change its address or e-
mail address for notices and other communications hereunder by notice to the other parties
hereto (or, in the case of any such change by a Lender, by notice to the Borrower and the
Administrative Agent).
SECTION 10.02.
 Waivers; Amendments.            No Deemed Waivers;
Remedies Cumulative.  No failure or delay by the Administrative Agent, any Issuing Lender or
any Lender in exercising any right or power hereunder or under any other Loan Document shall
operate as a waiver thereof, nor shall any single or partial exercise of any such right or power,
or any abandonment or discontinuance of steps to enforce such a right or power, preclude any
other or further exercise thereof or the exercise of any other right or power.  The rights and
remedies of the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lenders and the Lenders hereunder and
under the other Loan Documents are cumulative and are not exclusive of any rights or remedies
that they would otherwise have.  No waiver of any provision of this Agreement or any other
Loan Document or consent to any departure
 

by any Obligor therefrom shall in any event be effective unless the same shall be permitted by
paragraph (b) of this Section 10.02, and then such waiver or consent shall be effective only in
the specific instance and for the purpose for which given.  Without limiting the generality of
the foregoing, the execution and delivery of this Agreement, the making of a Loan or the
issuance of a Letter of Credit shall not be construed as a waiver of any Default, regardless of
whether the Administrative Agent, any Lender or any Issuing Lender may have had notice or
knowledge of such Default at the time.
(a)
 Amendments.   Except as provided for in, and subject to,
Sections  2.06(j), 2.09(e), 2.14(b) and 2.20, neither this Agreement nor any other Loan
Document nor any provision hereof or thereof may be waived, amended or modified except
pursuant to an agreement or agreements in writing entered into by the Borrower and the
Required Lenders or by the Borrower and the Administrative Agent with the consent of the
Required Lenders; provided that no such agreement shall:
(i)
 increase the Commitment of any Lender, or change the currency in
which Loans are available thereunder, without the written consent of such Lender,
(ii)
 reduce the principal amount of any Loan or LC Disbursement
outstanding to any Lender or reduce the rate of interest thereon (except in connection
with the waiver of applicability of any post-default increase in interest rates pursuant
to Section 2.13(e)), or reduce any fees payable to any Lender hereunder, without the
written consent of such Lender,
(iii)
 postpone the scheduled date of payment of the principal amount of
any Loan or LC Disbursement outstanding to any Lender, or any interest thereon, or
any fees payable to any Lender hereunder, or reduce the amount of, waive or excuse
any such payment, or postpone the scheduled date of expiration of any Commitment
of any Lender, without the written consent of such Lender,
(iv)
 change Section 2.18(b), 2.18(c) or 2.18(d) in a manner that would alter
the pro rata sharing of payments required thereby without the written consent of each
Lender directly and adversely affected thereby,
(v)
 change any of the provisions of this Section 10.02 or the percentage in
the definition of the term “Required Lenders” or any other provision hereof specifying
the number or percentage of Lenders required to waive, amend or modify any rights
hereunder or make any determination or grant any consent hereunder, without the
written consent of each Lender directly and adversely affected thereby, or
(vi)
 release all or substantially all of the Guarantors from their guarantee
obligations under Article III without the written consent of each Lender, and
 

provided further that no such agreement shall amend, modify or otherwise affect the rights or
duties of the Administrative Agent or any Issuing Lender hereunder without the prior written
consent of the Administrative Agent, such Issuing Lender, as the case may be.
Notwithstanding the foregoing (but subject to the immediately preceding proviso):
(A) 
any amendment of the definition of the term “Applicable Rate”
pursuant to the last sentence of such definition shall require only the written consent
of the Borrower and the Required Lenders,
(B) 
no consent with respect to any amendment, waiver or other
modification of this Agreement shall be required of (x) any Defaulting Lender, except
with respect to any amendment, waiver or other modification referred to in clause (i),
(ii) or (iii) of the first proviso of this paragraph and then only in the event such
Defaulting Lender shall be directly affected by such amendment, waiver or other
modification or (y) in the case of any amendment, waiver or other modification
referred to in the first proviso of this paragraph (b), any Lender that receives payment
in full of the principal of and interest accrued on each Loan made by, and all other
amounts owing to, such Lender or accrued for the account of such Lender under this
Agreement and the other Loan Documents at the time such amendment, waiver or
other modification becomes effective and whose Commitment terminates by the
terms and upon the effectiveness of such amendment, waiver or other modification,
(C) 
the Administrative Agent may enter into one or more security
agreements (including mortgages and pledge agreements) in connection with any
grant of a security interest securing Indebtedness under this Agreement as
contemplated by Section 7.01(l) without the consent of any Lender,
(D) 
this Agreement may be amended (or amended and restated) with the
written consent of the Required Lenders, the Administrative Agent and the Borrower
(x) to add one or more additional credit facilities to this Agreement and to permit the
extensions of credit from time to time outstanding thereunder and the accrued
interest and fees in respect thereof to share in the benefits of this Agreement and the
other Loan Documents and (y) to include appropriately the Lenders holding such credit
facilities in any determination of the Required Lenders,
(E) 
any provision of this Agreement or any other Loan Document may be
amended by an agreement in writing entered into by the Borrower and the Administrative
Agent to cure any ambiguity, omission, defect or inconsistency so long as, in each case, the
Lenders shall have received at least five Business Days’ prior written notice thereof and the
Administrative Agent shall not have received, within five Business
 

Days of the date of such notice to the Lenders, a written notice from the Required Lenders
stating that the Required Lenders object to such amendment, and
(F) 
the term “LC Sublimit Share”, as such term is used in reference to any Issuing
Lender, may be modified as contemplated by the definition of such term.
(c)  Administrative Agent Execution.  The Administrative Agent may, but shall have
no obligation to, with the written concurrence of any Lender, execute amendments, waivers or
other modifications on behalf of such Lender.  Any amendment, waiver or other modification
effected in accordance with this Section 10.02 shall be binding upon each Person that is at the
time thereof a Lender and each Person that subsequently becomes a Lender.
SECTION 10.03.
 Expenses; Indemnity; Limitation of Liability; Etc.      
 Costs and Expenses.  The Borrower shall pay (i) all reasonable and documented out‑of‑pocket
expenses incurred by the Administrative Agent, the Arrangers, the Documentation Agents, the
Syndication Agent and each of their respective Affiliates (including the reasonable and
documented fees, charges and disbursements of one firm of counsel (and one firm of local
counsel in each applicable jurisdiction) for the foregoing), in connection with the syndication
of the credit facility provided for herein, the preparation, negotiation, execution, delivery and
administration of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents or any amendments,
modifications or waivers of the provisions hereof or thereof (whether or not the transactions
contemplated hereby or thereby shall be consummated), (ii)  all reasonable and documented
out‑of‑pocket expenses incurred by any Issuing Lender in connection with the issuance,
amendment or extension of any Letter of Credit or any demand for payment thereunder and
(iii) all out‑of‑pocket expenses incurred by the Administrative Agent, any Issuing Lender or
any Lender (including the reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of one firm of counsel
(and one firm of local counsel in each applicable jurisdiction) for the Administrative Agent, the
Issuing Lenders and the Lenders and of any separate counsel (including local counsel) that may
be required in light of any conflicting interests among the foregoing parties) in connection with
the enforcement or protection of its rights (A) in connection with this Agreement and the other
Loan Documents, including its rights under this Section 10.03, or (B) in connection with the
Loans made or Letters of Credit issued hereunder, including all such out‑of‑pocket expenses
incurred during any workout, restructuring or negotiations in respect of such Loans or Letters
of Credit.
(a)
 Indemnification by the Borrower.   The Borrower shall indemnify the
Administrative Agent (and any sub‑agent thereof), the Arrangers, the Documentation Agents,
the Syndication Agent, each Lender and each Issuing Lender, and each Related Party of any of
the foregoing Persons (each such Person being called an “Indemnitee”), against, and hold each
Indemnitee harmless from, any and all Liabilities and related expenses (including the
reasonable fees, charges and disbursements of one firm of counsel (and one firm of local
counsel in each applicable jurisdiction) for the Indemnitees and of any separate counsel
(including local counsel) that may be required in light of any conflicting interests among
Indemnitees), incurred
 

by any Indemnitee or asserted against any Indemnitee by any third party or by the Borrower,
any other Obligor or any of their Affiliates arising out of, in connection with, or as a result of
(i) the execution or delivery of this Agreement, any other Loan Document or any agreement or
instrument contemplated hereby or thereby, the performance by the parties hereto of their
respective obligations hereunder or thereunder or the consummation of the transactions
contemplated hereby or thereby, (ii) any Loan or Letter of Credit or the use or proposed use of
the proceeds therefrom (including any refusal by any Issuing Lender to honor a demand for
payment under a Letter of Credit if the documents presented in connection with such demand
do not strictly comply with the terms of such Letter of Credit), (iii)  any actual or alleged
presence or Release of Hazardous Materials on or from any property owned or operated by
the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries, or any Environmental Liability related in any way to the
Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries, or (iv) any actual or prospective Proceeding relating to any
of the foregoing, whether based on contract, tort or any other theory, whether brought by a
third party or by the Borrower, any other Obligor or any of their Affiliates, and regardless of
whether any Indemnitee is a party thereto; provided that such indemnity shall not, as to any
Indemnitee, be available to the extent that such Liabilities or related expenses (x) are
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction by final and nonappealable judgment to have
resulted from the bad faith, gross negligence or willful misconduct of such Indemnitee or its
Related Parties or (y) result from a claim brought in good faith by the Borrower or any other
Obligor against an Indemnitee for breach by such Indemnitee or its Related Parties of its
obligations under this Agreement.    In the case of any Proceeding brought by a third party
against any Indemnitee that is also brought against the Borrower, the Borrower shall be
entitled to assume the defense of such Proceeding with counsel reasonably satisfactory to
such Indemnitee. Upon assumption by the Borrower of the defense of any such Proceeding,
the applicable Indemnitee shall have the right to participate in such Proceeding and to retain
its own firm of counsel, but the Borrower shall not be liable for any fees, charges and
disbursements of such other firm of counsel subsequently incurred by such Indemnitee in
connection with the defense thereof unless (i) the Borrower has agreed to pay such fees,
charges or disbursements, (ii) the Borrower shall have failed to employ counsel reasonably
satisfactory to such Indemnitee in a timely manner or (iii) such Indemnitee shall have been
advised in writing by counsel that there are actual or potential conflicting interests between
the Borrower and such Indemnitee.    The Borrower shall not consent to the terms of any
compromise or settlement of any Proceeding defended by the Borrower in accordance with
the foregoing without the prior written consent of the applicable Indemnitee, provided,
  however, that such Indemnitee’s prior written consent shall not be required if such
compromise or settlement (x) includes an unconditional release of such Indemnitee from all
liability arising out of such Proceeding and (y) does not include a statement as to or an
admission of fault, culpability or a failure to act, by or on behalf of such Indemnitee.
(b)
 Reimbursement by Lenders.    To the extent that the Borrower for any
reason fails to indefeasibly pay any amount required under paragraph (a) or (b) of
 

this Section to be paid by it to the Administrative Agent (or any sub‑agent thereof) or an
Issuing Lender, or any Related Party of any of the foregoing, each Lender severally agrees to
pay to the Administrative Agent (or any such sub‑agent), such Issuing Lender or such Related
Party, as the case may be, such Lender’s Applicable Percentage (determined as of the time
that the applicable unreimbursed expense or indemnity payment is sought) of such unpaid
amount; provided that the unreimbursed expense or indemnified Liability or related expense,
as the case may be, was incurred by or asserted against the Administrative Agent (or any such
sub‑agent) or such Issuing Lender in its capacity as such, or against any Related Party of any of
the foregoing acting for the Administrative Agent (or any such sub‑agent) or such Issuing
Lender in connection with such capacity.  The obligations of the Lenders under this paragraph
are several obligations.
(c)
 Limitation of Liability.  To the extent permitted by applicable law (i) the
Borrower and the other Obligors shall not assert, and the Borrower and each Obligor hereby
waives, any claim against any Lender-Related Person for any Liabilities arising from the use by
others of information or other materials (including any personal data) obtained through
telecommunications, electronic or other information transmission systems (including the
internet), except to the extent such Liabilities are determined by a final and non-appealable
judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction to have resulted from the bad faith, willful
misconduct or gross negligence of such Lender-Related Person or its Related Parties, and (ii)
no party hereto shall assert, and each such party hereby waives, any Liabilities against any
other party hereto, on any theory of liability, for special, indirect, consequential or punitive
damages (as opposed to direct or actual damages) arising out of, in connection with, or as a
result of, this Agreement, any other Loan Document or any agreement or instrument
contemplated hereby or thereby, the Transactions, any Loan or Letter of Credit or the use of
the proceeds thereof; provided that nothing in this sentence shall diminish the obligations of
any Obligor under paragraphs (a) or (b) of this Section or any other expense reimbursement or
indemnity obligations of any Obligor set forth herein or in any other Loan Document.
(d)
 Payments.  All amounts due under this Section 10.03 shall be payable
promptly after demand therefor.
SECTION 10.04.
 Successors and Assigns.       Assignments Generally.
 The provisions of this Agreement shall be binding upon and inure to the benefit of the parties
hereto and their respective successors and assigns permitted hereby (including any Affiliate of
an Issuing Lender that issues any Letter of Credit), except that (i)  other than as expressly
provided in Section 7.02(a)(i), the Borrower may not assign or otherwise transfer any of their
respective rights or obligations hereunder without the prior written consent of each Lender (and
any attempted assignment or transfer by the Borrower without such consent shall be null and
void) and (ii) no Lender may assign or otherwise transfer its rights or obligations hereunder
except in accordance with this Section  10.04.    Nothing in this Agreement, expressed or
implied, shall be construed to confer upon any
 

Person (other than the parties hereto, their respective successors and assigns permitted hereby
(including any Affiliate of an Issuing Lender that issues any Letter of Credit), Participants (to
the extent provided in paragraph (c) of this Section 10.04), the Arrangers, the Documentation
Agents, the Syndication Agent and, to the extent expressly contemplated hereby, the sub-agents
of the Administrative Agent and the Related Parties of each of the Administrative Agent, the
Issuing Lenders and the Lenders) any legal or equitable right, remedy or claim under or by
reason of this Agreement.
(a)
 Assignments by Lenders.
(i)
 Assignments Generally.   Subject to the conditions set forth in
paragraph (b)(ii) below, any Lender may assign to one or more Eligible Assignees all or
a portion of its rights and obligations under this Agreement (including all or a portion
of its Commitment and the Loans at the time owing to it) with the prior written
consent (such consent not to be unreasonably withheld) of:
(A)
 the Borrower; provided that (x)  no consent of the Borrower
shall be required for an assignment to a Lender, an Affiliate of a Lender, an
Approved Fund or, if an Event of Default described in any of clauses (a), (b), (h)
or (i) of Article VIII has occurred and is continuing, any other assignee, and
(y) the Borrower shall be deemed to have consented to any assignment unless
it shall object thereto by written notice (which may be by e-mail) to the
Administrative Agent within 15 Business Days after having received a written
request for its consent to such assignment;
(B)
 the Administrative Agent; provided that no consent of the
Administrative Agent shall be required for an assignment of all or any portion of
the Commitments or Loans to a Lender or an Affiliate of a Lender; and
(C)
 each Issuing Lender; provided that no consent of the Issuing
Lenders shall be required for an assignment of all or any portion of a
Competitive Loan.
(ii)
 Certain Conditions to Assignments.  Assignments shall be subject to the
following additional conditions:
(A)
 except in the case of an assignment to a Lender, an Affiliate of a
Lender or an Approved Fund or an assignment of the entire remaining amount
of the assigning Lender’s Commitment or Loans of any Class, the amount of the
Commitment or Loans of the assigning Lender subject to each such assignment
(determined as of the date the Assignment and Assumption with respect to
such assignment is delivered to the Administrative Agent) shall not be less than
$5,000,000 unless
 

each of the Borrower and the Administrative Agent otherwise consent,
provided that (x) no such consent of the Borrower shall be required if an Event
of Default described in any of clauses (a), (b), (h) or (i) of Article VIII has
occurred and is continuing and (y)  the Borrower shall be deemed to have
provided such consent unless it shall object thereto by written notice (which
may be by e-mail) to the Administrative Agent within 15 Business Days after
having received a written request for its consent to such assignment;
(B)
 each partial assignment shall be made as an assignment of a
proportionate part of all the assigning Lender’s rights and obligations under this
Agreement; provided that this clause (B) shall not be construed to prohibit the
assignment of a proportionate part of all the assigning Lender’s rights and
obligations solely in respect of Syndicated Loans (and not Loans of any other
Class) or of Loans of any Class (other than Syndicated Loans);
(C)
 the parties to each assignment shall execute and deliver to the
Administrative Agent an Assignment and Assumption (or an agreement
incorporating by reference a form of Assignment and Assumption posted on
the Approved Electronic Platform), together with a processing and recordation
fee of $3,500; and
(D)
 the assignee, if it shall not be a Lender, shall deliver to the
Administrative Agent an Administrative Questionnaire in which the assignee
designates one or more credit contacts to whom all syndicate-level information
(which may contain MNPI) will be made available and who may receive such
information in accordance with the assignee’s compliance procedures and
applicable laws, including Federal and state securities laws.
(iii)
 Effectiveness of Assignments.   Subject to acceptance and recording
thereof pursuant to paragraph (b)(iv) of this Section 10.04, from and after the effective
date specified in each Assignment and Assumption (or an agreement incorporating by
reference a form of Assignment and Assumption posted on the Approved Electronic
Platform) the assignee thereunder shall be a party hereto and, to the extent of the
interest assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, have the rights and obligations
of a Lender under this Agreement, and the assigning Lender thereunder shall, to the
extent of the interest assigned by such Assignment and Assumption, be released from
its obligations under this Agreement (and, in the case of an Assignment and
Assumption covering all of the assigning Lender’s rights and obligations under this
Agreement, such Lender shall cease to be a party hereto but shall continue to be
entitled to the benefits of Sections 2.15, 2.16, 2.17 and 10.03).  Any assignment or
transfer by a Lender
 

of rights or obligations under this Agreement that does not comply with this Section
10.04 shall be treated for purposes of this Agreement as a sale by such Lender of a
participation in such rights and obligations in accordance with paragraph  (c) of this
Section 10.04.
(iv)
 Maintenance of Register.   The Administrative Agent, acting for this
purpose as a non-fiduciary agent of the Borrower, shall maintain at one of its offices a
copy of each Assignment and Assumption (or an agreement incorporating by reference
a form of Assignment and Assumption posted on the Approved Electronic Platform)
delivered to it and a register for the recordation of the names and addresses of the
Lenders, and the Commitment of, and principal amount of the Loans and LC
Disbursements owing to, each Lender pursuant to the terms hereof from time to time
(the “Register”).  The entries in the Register shall be conclusive, absent manifest error,
and the Borrower, the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lenders and the Lenders may
treat each Person whose name is recorded in the Register pursuant to the terms
hereof as a Lender hereunder for all purposes of this Agreement, notwithstanding
notice to the contrary.  The Register shall be available for inspection by the Borrower,
any Issuing Lender and any Lender, at any reasonable time and from time to time upon
reasonable prior notice.
(v)
 Acceptance of Assignments by Administrative Agent.  Upon its receipt
of a duly completed Assignment and Assumption (or an agreement incorporating by
reference a form of Assignment and Assumption posted on the Approved Electronic
Platform), executed by an assigning Lender and an assignee, the assignee’s completed
Administrative Questionnaire (unless the assignee shall already be a Lender
hereunder), the processing and recordation fee referred to in paragraph  (b) of this
Section 10.04 and any written consent to such assignment required by paragraph (b) of
this Section 10.04, the Administrative Agent shall accept such Assignment and
Assumption and record the information contained therein in the Register; provided
that if either the assigning Lender or the assignee shall have failed to make any
payment required to be made by it pursuant to Section 2.06(e), 2.06(f), 2.07(b),
2.18(d) or 10.03(c), the Administrative Agent shall have no obligation to accept such
Assignment and Assumption and record the information therein in the Register unless
and until such payment shall have been made in full, together with all accrued interest
thereon.  No assignment shall be effective for purposes of this Agreement unless it has
been recorded in the Register as provided in this paragraph.  Each assigning Lender
and the assignee, by its execution and delivery of an Assignment and Assumption, shall
be deemed to have represented to the Administrative Agent that all written consents
required by this Section 10.04 with respect thereto (other than the consent of the
Administrative Agent) have been obtained and that such Assignment and Assumption
is otherwise duly completed and in proper form (it being acknowledged that the
Administrative
 

Agent shall have no duty or obligation (and shall incur no liability) with respect to
obtaining (or confirming the receipt) of any such written consent or with respect to the
form of (or any defect in) such Assignment and Assumption, any such duty and
obligation being solely with the assigning Lender and the assignee), and each assignee,
by its execution and delivery of an Assignment and Assumption, shall be deemed to
have represented to the assigning Lender and the Administrative Agent that such
assignee is an Eligible Assignee.
(b)
 Participations.
(i)
 Participations Generally.  Any Lender may, without the consent of the
Borrower, the Administrative Agent or any Issuing Lender, sell participations to one or
more Eligible Assignees (a “Participant”) in all or a portion of such Lender’s rights and
obligations under this Agreement (including all or a portion of its Commitment and the
Loans owing to it); provided that (A) such Lender’s obligations under this Agreement
shall remain unchanged, (B) such Lender shall remain solely responsible to the other
parties hereto for the performance of such obligations and (C)  the Borrower, the
Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lenders and the other Lenders shall continue to deal
solely and directly with such Lender in connection with such Lender’s rights and
obligations under this Agreement.  Any agreement or instrument pursuant to which a
Lender sells such a participation shall provide that such Lender shall retain the sole
right to enforce this Agreement and to approve any amendment, modification or
waiver of any provision of this Agreement; provided that such agreement or
instrument may provide that such Lender will not, without the consent of the
Participant, agree to any amendment, modification or waiver described in the first
proviso to Section 10.02(b) that directly and adversely affects such Participant.  Subject
to paragraph  (c)(ii) of this Section 10.04, the Borrower agrees that each Participant
shall be entitled to the benefits of Sections  2.15, 2.16 and 2.17 (subject to the
requirements 
and 
limitations 
therein, 
including 
the 
requirements 
under
Sections 2.17(f) (it being understood that the documentation required under Sections
2.17(f) shall be delivered to the participating Lender)) to the same extent as if it were a
Lender and had acquired its interest by assignment pursuant to paragraph (b) of this
Section 10.04.  To the extent permitted by law, each Participant also shall be entitled to
the benefits of Section 10.08 as though it were a Lender, provided that such Participant
agrees to be subject to Section 2.18(d) as though it were a Lender.  Each Lender selling
participations shall keep a register (the “Participant Register”) in which it shall record
the name and address of each Participant to which such Lender sells participations and
the amount and terms of such participations, acting for this purpose as a non-fiduciary
agent of the Borrower; provided that no Lender shall have any obligation to disclose all
or any portion of the Participant Register (including the identity of any Participant or
any information relating to a Participant’s interest in any Commitments, Loans, Letters
of Credit or its other obligations under any
 

Loan Document) to any Person except to the extent that such disclosure is necessary to
establish that such Commitment, Loan, Letter of Credit or other obligation is in
registered form under Section 5f.103-1(c) of the United States Treasury
Regulations.  The entries in the Participant Register shall be conclusive absent manifest
error, and such Lender shall treat each Person whose name is recorded in the
Participant Register as the owner of such participation for all purposes of this
Agreement notwithstanding any notice to the contrary.  For the avoidance of doubt,
the Administrative Agent (in its capacity as Administrative Agent) shall have no
responsibility for maintaining a Participant Register.
(ii)
 Limitations on Rights of Participants.  A Participant shall not be entitled
to receive any greater payment under Section 2.15 or 2.17 than the applicable Lender
would have been entitled to receive with respect to the participation sold to such
Participant, unless the sale of the participation to such Participant is made with the
Borrower’s prior written consent.  A Participant that would be a Foreign Lender if it
were a Lender shall not be entitled to the benefits of Section 2.17 unless the Borrower
is notified of the participation sold to such Participant and such Participant agrees, for
the benefit of the Borrower, to comply with Section 2.17(f) as though it were a Lender.
(c)
 Certain Pledges.   Any Lender may at any time pledge or assign a
security interest in all or any portion of its rights under this Agreement to secure obligations of
such Lender, including any pledge or assignment to secure obligations to a Federal Reserve
Bank or other central banking authority, and this Section 10.04 shall not apply to any such
pledge or assignment of a security interest; provided that no such pledge or assignment of a
security interest shall release a Lender from any of its obligations hereunder or substitute any
such pledgee or assignee for such Lender as a party hereto.
SECTION 10.05.
 Survival.  All covenants, agreements, representations
and warranties made by the Obligors herein and in the certificates or other instruments
delivered in connection with or pursuant to this Agreement or any other Loan Document shall
be considered to have been relied upon by the other parties hereto and shall survive the
execution and delivery of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents and the making of any
Loans and issuance of any Letters of Credit, regardless of any investigation made by any such
other party or on its behalf and notwithstanding that the Administrative Agent, any Issuing
Lender, any Lender or any Affiliate of any of the foregoing may have had notice or knowledge
of any Default or incorrect representation or warranty at the time any Loan Document is
executed and delivered or any credit is extended hereunder, and shall continue in full force and
effect as long as the principal of or any accrued interest on any Loan or any fee or any other
amount payable under this Agreement is outstanding and unpaid or any LC Exposure is
outstanding and so long as the Commitments have not expired or terminated.  Notwithstanding
the foregoing or anything else to the contrary set forth in this Agreement or any other Loan
Document, in the event that, in connection with the refinancing or repayment in full of the
credit facility
 

provided for herein, an Issuing Lender shall have provided to the Administrative Agent a
written consent to the release of the Lenders from their obligations hereunder with respect to
any Letter of Credit issued by such Issuing Lender (whether as a result of the obligations of the
Borrower (and any other account party) in respect of such Letter of Credit having been
collateralized in full by a deposit of cash with such Issuing Lender, or being supported by a
letter of credit that names such Issuing Lender as the beneficiary thereunder, or otherwise),
then from and after such time such Letter of Credit shall cease to be a “Letter of Credit”
outstanding hereunder for all purposes of this Agreement and the other Loan Documents
(including for purposes of determining whether the Borrower is required to comply with
Articles VI and VII hereof, but excluding Sections 2.15, 2.17 and 10.03 and any expense
reimbursement or indemnity provisions set forth in any other Loan Document), and the
Lenders shall be deemed to have no participations in such Letter of Credit, and no obligations
with respect thereto, under Section 2.06(e) or 2.06(f).  The provisions of Sections 2.15, 2.16,
2.17, 2.18(f), 3.03 and 10.03 and Article IX shall survive and remain in full force and effect
regardless of the consummation of the transactions contemplated hereby, the repayment of the
Loans, the expiration or termination of the Letters of Credit and the Commitments or the
termination of this Agreement or any provision hereof.
SECTION 10.06.
 Counterparts; Integration; Effectiveness; Electronic
Execution.        Counterparts; Integration; Effectiveness.  This Agreement may be executed in
counterparts (and by different parties hereto in different counterparts), each of which shall
constitute an original, but all of which when taken together shall constitute a single
contract.  This Agreement and the other Loan Documents, and any separate letter agreements
with respect to fees payable to the Administrative Agent or any Issuing Lender, constitute the
entire contract between and among the parties relating to the subject matter hereof and
supersede any and all previous agreements and understandings, oral or written, relating to the
subject matter hereof, including the commitments of the Lenders and, if applicable, their
Affiliates under any commitment letter entered in connection herewith (but do not supersede
any provisions of any separate letter agreements with respect to fees payable to the
Administrative Agent or any Issuing Lender).    Except as provided in Section 5.01, this
Agreement shall become effective when it shall have been executed by the Administrative
Agent and when the Administrative Agent shall have received counterparts hereof that, when
taken together, bear the signatures of each of the other parties hereto.
(a)
 Electronic Execution.      Delivery of an executed counterpart of a
signature page of (i) this Agreement, (ii) any other Loan Document and/or (iii) any document,
amendment, approval, consent, information, notice (including, for the avoidance of doubt,
any notice delivered pursuant to Section 10.01), certificate, request, statement, disclosure or
authorization related to this Agreement, any other Loan Document and/or the transactions
contemplated hereby and/or thereby (each an “Ancillary Document”) that is an Electronic
Signature transmitted by e-mailed .pdf or any other electronic means that reproduces an
image of an actual executed signature page shall be effective as delivery of a manually
executed counterpart of this Agreement, such other Loan Document or such Ancillary
Document, as applicable.  The words
 

“execution”, “signed”, “signature”, “delivery” and words of like import in or relating to this
Agreement, any other Loan Document and/or any Ancillary Document shall be deemed to
include Electronic Signatures, deliveries or the keeping of records in any electronic form
(including deliveries by e-mailed .pdf or any other electronic means that reproduces an image
of an actual executed signature page), each of which shall be of the same legal effect, validity
or enforceability as a manually executed signature, physical delivery thereof or the use of a
paper-based recordkeeping system, as the case may be; provided that nothing herein shall
require the Administrative Agent to accept Electronic Signatures in any form or format without
its prior written consent and pursuant to procedures approved by it; provided,   further,
without limiting the foregoing, (i) to the extent the Administrative Agent has agreed to accept
any Electronic Signature, the Administrative Agent and each of the Lenders and the Issuing
Lenders shall be entitled to rely on such Electronic Signature purportedly given by or on behalf
of the Borrower or any other Obligor without further verification thereof and without any
obligation to review the appearance or form of any such Electronic Signature and (ii) upon the
request of the Administrative Agent or any Lender or Issuing Lender, any Electronic Signature
shall be promptly followed by a manually executed counterpart.    Without limiting the
generality of the foregoing, the Borrower and each Obligor hereby (A) agrees that, for all
purposes, including in connection with any workout, restructuring, enforcement of remedies,
bankruptcy proceedings or litigation among the Administrative Agent, the Lenders, the Issuing
Lenders, the Borrower and the Obligors, Electronic Signatures transmitted by e-mailed .pdf or
any other electronic means that reproduces an image of an actual executed signature page
and/or any electronic images of this Agreement, any other Loan Document and/or any
Ancillary Document shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability as any paper
original, (B) agrees that the Administrative Agent and each of the Lenders and the Issuing
Lenders may, at its option, create one or more copies of this Agreement, any other Loan
Document and/or any Ancillary Document in the form of an imaged electronic record in any
format, which shall be deemed created in the ordinary course of such Person’s business, and
destroy the original paper document (and all such electronic records shall be considered an
original for all purposes and shall have the same legal effect, validity and enforceability as a
paper record), (C) waives any argument, defense or right to contest the legal effect, validity or
enforceability of this Agreement, any other Loan Document and/or any Ancillary Document
based solely on the lack of paper original copies of this Agreement, such other Loan
Document and/or such Ancillary Document, respectively, including with respect to any
signature pages thereto and (D) waives any claim against any Lender-Related Person for any
Liabilities arising solely from the Administrative Agent’s and/or any Lender’s or Issuing
Lender’s reliance on or use of Electronic Signatures and/or transmissions by e-mailed .pdf or
any other electronic means that reproduces an image of an actual executed signature page,
including any Liabilities arising as a result of the failure of the Borrower and/or any Obligor to
use any available security measures in connection with the execution, delivery or transmission
of any Electronic Signature.
 

SECTION 10.07.
 Severability.  Any provision of this Agreement held to
be invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any jurisdiction shall, as to such jurisdiction, be
ineffective to the extent of such invalidity, illegality or unenforceability without affecting the
validity, legality and enforceability of the remaining provisions hereof; and the invalidity of a
particular provision in a particular jurisdiction shall not invalidate such provision in any other
jurisdiction.
SECTION 10.08.
 Right of Setoff.  In addition to any rights and remedies
of the Lenders and the Issuing Lenders provided by law, each Lender and each Issuing Lender
shall have the right, without notice to the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor, any such
notice being expressly waived by the Borrower and each Subsidiary Guarantor to the extent
permitted by applicable law, upon any obligations of the Borrower or any Subsidiary Guarantor
under this Agreement or any other Loan Document becoming due and payable (whether at the
stated maturity, by acceleration or otherwise), to apply to the payment of such obligations, by
setoff or otherwise, any and all deposits (general or special, time or demand, provisional or
final), in any currency, and any other credits, indebtedness or claims, in any currency, in each
case whether direct or indirect, absolute or contingent, matured or unmatured, at any time held
or owing by such Lender or such Issuing Lender, any Affiliate thereof or any of their respective
branches or agencies to or for the credit or the account of the Borrower or any Subsidiary
Guarantor; provided that if any Defaulting Lender shall exercise any such right of setoff, all
amounts so set off shall be paid over immediately to the Administrative Agent for further
application in accordance with the provisions of this Agreement and, pending such payment,
shall be segregated by such Defaulting Lender from its other funds and deemed held in trust for
the benefit of the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lenders and the Lenders.  Each Lender
(including any Defaulting Lender) and each Issuing Lender agrees to notify the Borrower and
the Administrative Agent promptly after any such application made by such Lender, provided
that the failure to give such notice shall not affect the validity of such application.
SECTION 10.09.
 Governing Law; Jurisdiction; Etc.        Governing Law.
 This Agreement shall be governed by, and construed in accordance with, the law of the State
of New York.
(a)
 Submission to Jurisdiction.  Each of the parties hereto irrevocably and
unconditionally submits, for itself and its property, to the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court of
the State of New York sitting in the Borough of Manhattan and of the United States District
Court of the Southern District of New York sitting in the Borough of Manhattan, and any
appellate court from any thereof, in any action or proceeding arising out of or relating to this
Agreement or any other Loan Document, or for recognition or enforcement of any judgment,
and each of the parties hereto irrevocably and unconditionally agrees that all claims arising
out of or relating to this Agreement or any other Loan Document brought by it or any of its
Affiliates shall be brought, and shall be heard and determined, exclusively in such New York
State court or, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, in such Federal court.  Each of
the parties hereto agrees that a final judgment in any such action or proceeding shall be
conclusive and
 

may be enforced in other jurisdictions by suit on the judgment or in any other manner
provided by law.
(b)
 Waiver of Venue.   Each of the parties hereto irrevocably and
unconditionally waives, to the fullest extent permitted by applicable law, any objection that it
may now or hereafter have to the laying of venue of any action or proceeding arising out of or
relating to this Agreement or any other Loan Document in any court referred to in
paragraph  (b) of this Section 10.09.    Each of the parties hereto irrevocably waives, to the
fullest extent permitted by applicable law, the defense of an inconvenient forum to the
maintenance of such action or proceeding in any such court.
(c)
 Service of Process.  Each party hereto irrevocably consents to service of
process in the manner provided for notices in Section 10.01.  Nothing in this Agreement will
affect the right of any party hereto to serve process in any other manner permitted by
applicable law.
SECTION 10.10.
 WAIVER OF JURY TRIAL.  EACH PARTY HERETO
HEREBY IRREVOCABLY WAIVES, TO THE FULLEST EXTENT PERMITTED BY
APPLICABLE LAW, ANY RIGHT IT MAY HAVE TO A TRIAL BY JURY IN ANY LEGAL
PROCEEDING DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY ARISING OUT OF OR RELATING TO THIS
AGREEMENT OR ANY OTHER LOAN DOCUMENT OR THE TRANSACTIONS
CONTEMPLATED HEREBY OR THEREBY (WHETHER BASED ON CONTRACT, TORT
OR ANY OTHER THEORY).    EACH PARTY HERETO (A)  CERTIFIES THAT NO
REPRESENTATIVE, AGENT OR ATTORNEY OF ANY OTHER PERSON HAS
REPRESENTED, EXPRESSLY OR OTHERWISE, THAT SUCH OTHER PERSON WOULD
NOT, IN THE EVENT OF LITIGATION, SEEK TO ENFORCE THE FOREGOING WAIVER
AND (B)  ACKNOWLEDGES THAT IT AND THE OTHER PARTIES HERETO HAVE
BEEN INDUCED TO ENTER INTO THIS AGREEMENT AND THE OTHER LOAN
DOCUMENTS BY, AMONG OTHER THINGS, THE MUTUAL WAIVERS AND
CERTIFICATIONS IN THIS SECTION 10.10.
SECTION 10.11.
 Headings.  Article and Section headings and the Table
of Contents used herein are for convenience of reference only, are not part of this Agreement
and shall not affect the construction of, or be taken into consideration in interpreting, this
Agreement.
SECTION 10.12.
 Treatment of Certain Information; Confidentiality.  
  Treatment of Certain Information.   The Borrower acknowledges that from time to time
financial advisory, investment banking and other services may be offered or provided to the
Borrower or one or more of its Subsidiaries (in connection with this Agreement or otherwise)
by any Lender, any Issuing Lender or by one or more Subsidiaries or other Affiliates of such
Lender or such Issuing Lender, and the Borrower hereby authorizes each Lender and each
Issuing Lender to share any information delivered to such Lender or such Issuing Lender by the
Borrower and its Subsidiaries pursuant to this Agreement, or in connection with the decision of
such Lender or such Issuing Lender to enter into this
 

Agreement, with any Subsidiary or other Affiliate of such Lender or Issuing Lender, it being
understood that any such Subsidiary or other Affiliate of any Lender receiving such
information shall be bound by the provisions of paragraph (b) of this Section 10.12 as if it were
a Lender or an Issuing Lender hereunder.  Such authorization shall survive the repayment of
the Loans, the expiration or termination of the Letters of Credit and the Commitments or the
termination of this Agreement or any provision hereof.
(a)
 Confidentiality.  Each of the Administrative Agent, the Issuing Lenders
and the Lenders agrees to maintain the confidentiality of the Information, except that
Information may be disclosed (i)  to its Related Parties and other representatives (it being
understood that the Persons to whom such disclosure is made shall be subject to a
professional or other obligation of confidentiality or will be informed of the confidential
nature of such Information and instructed to keep such Information confidential), (ii) to the
extent requested by any Governmental Authority purporting to have jurisdiction over it or its
Affiliates (including any self-regulatory authority, such as the National Association of Insurance
Commissioners), (iii)  to the extent required by applicable laws or regulations or by any
subpoena or similar legal process, (iv) to any other party hereto, (v) in connection with the
exercise of any remedies hereunder or under any other Loan Document or any action or
proceeding relating to this Agreement or any other Loan Document or the enforcement of
rights hereunder or thereunder, (vi)  subject to an agreement containing provisions
substantially the same as those of this Section 10.12, to (x) any assignee of or Participant in, or
any prospective assignee of or Participant in, any of its rights or obligations under this
Agreement or (y)  any actual or prospective counterparty (or its Related Parties) to any
securitization, swap or derivative transaction relating to the Borrower and its obligations,
(vii)  with the consent of the Borrower, (viii)  to the extent such Information (x)  becomes
publicly available other than as a result of a breach of this Section 10.12 or (y)  becomes
available to the Administrative Agent, any Issuing Lender or any Lender or any of their
respective Affiliates on a nonconfidential basis from a source other than an Obligor, (ix) to
Moody’s, S&P or any other nationally recognized rating agency or (x) to the CUSIP Service
Bureau or any similar agency in connection with the issuance and monitoring of CUSIP
numbers with respect to the credit facility provided for herein.  In addition, the Administrative
Agent and each Lender may disclose the existence of this Agreement and the information
about this Agreement to service providers to the Administrative Agent and the Lenders,
including league table providers, in connection with the administration and management of
this Agreement and the other Loan Documents.
For purposes of this Section 10.12, “Information” means all information
received from any Obligor or any of its Subsidiaries relating to any Obligor or any of its
Subsidiaries or any of their respective businesses, other than (a) any such information that is
available to the Administrative Agent, any Issuing Lender or any Lender on a nonconfidential
basis prior to disclosure by an Obligor or any of its Subsidiaries and (b) any such information
that is publicly disclosed by the Borrower in connection with its public filings with the
Securities and Exchange Commission.  Any Person required to
 

maintain the confidentiality of Information as provided in this Section 10.12 shall be
considered to have complied with its obligation to do so if such Person has exercised the same
degree of care to maintain the confidentiality of such Information as such Person would accord
to its own confidential information.
SECTION 10.13.
 Non-Public Information.    EACH LENDER, EACH
ISSUING LENDER AND THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT ACKNOWLEDGES THAT
INFORMATION FURNISHED TO IT PURSUANT TO OR IN CONNECTION WITH THIS
AGREEMENT OR THE OTHER LOAN DOCUMENTS MAY INCLUDE MNPI, AND
CONFIRMS THAT IT HAS DEVELOPED COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES REGARDING
THE USE OF MNPI AND THAT IT WILL HANDLE MNPI IN ACCORDANCE WITH
APPLICABLE LAW, INCLUDING FEDERAL AND STATE SECURITIES LAWS.
(a)
 ALL INFORMATION, INCLUDING REQUESTS FOR WAIVERS AND
AMENDMENTS, FURNISHED BY ANY OBLIGOR OR THE ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT PURSUANT TO,
OR IN THE COURSE OF ADMINISTERING, THIS AGREEMENT OR THE OTHER LOAN DOCUMENTS
WILL BE SYNDICATE-LEVEL INFORMATION, WHICH MAY CONTAIN MNPI. ACCORDINGLY, EACH
LENDER AND EACH ISSUING LENDER REPRESENTS TO THE BORROWER AND THE
ADMINISTRATIVE AGENT THAT IT HAS IDENTIFIED IN ITS ADMINISTRATIVE QUESTIONNAIRE A
CREDIT CONTACT WHO MAY RECEIVE INFORMATION THAT MAY CONTAIN MNPI IN
ACCORDANCE WITH ITS COMPLIANCE PROCEDURES AND APPLICABLE LAW, INCLUDING
FEDERAL AND STATE SECURITIES LAWS.
SECTION 10.14.
 USA PATRIOT Act and Beneficial Ownership
Regulation.  Each Lender and the Administrative Agent (for itself and not on behalf of any
Lender) hereby notifies the Borrower and the other Obligors that pursuant to the requirements
of the USA PATRIOT Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation, it is required to obtain,
verify and record information that identifies the Borrower and the other Obligors, which
information includes the names, addresses, tax identification numbers and other information of
the Borrower and the other Obligors that will allow such Lender or the Administrative Agent,
as applicable, to identify the Borrower and the other Obligors in accordance with the USA
PATRIOT Act and the Beneficial Ownership Regulation.
SECTION 10.15.
 Interest Rate Limitation.   Notwithstanding anything
herein to the contrary, if at any time the interest rate applicable to any Loan, together with all
fees, charges and other amounts which are treated as interest on such Loan under applicable
law (collectively the “Charges”), shall exceed the maximum lawful rate (the “Maximum Rate”)
which may be contracted for, charged, taken, received or reserved by the Lender holding such
Loan in accordance with applicable law, the rate of interest payable in respect of such Loan
hereunder, together with all Charges payable in respect thereof, shall be limited to the
Maximum Rate and, to the extent lawful, the interest and Charges that would have been
payable in respect of such Loan but were not payable as a result of the operation of this Section
10.15 shall be cumulated and the interest and
 

Charges payable to such Lender in respect of other Loans or periods shall be increased (but not
above the Maximum Rate therefor) until such cumulated amount, together with interest thereon
at the NYFRB Rate for each day to the date of repayment, shall have been received by such
Lender.
SECTION 10.16.
 No Fiduciary Relationship.  The Borrower, on behalf of
itself and its Subsidiaries, agrees that (a) in connection with all aspects of the transactions
contemplated hereby and any communications in connection therewith, the Borrower, its
Subsidiaries and their Affiliates, on the one hand, and the Administrative Agent, the Lenders,
the Issuing Lenders, the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the Documentation Agents and their
Affiliates, on the other hand, will have a business relationship that does not create, by
implication or otherwise, any fiduciary duty on the part of the Administrative Agent, the
Lenders, the Issuing Lenders, the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the Documentation Agents
or their Affiliates, and no such duty will be deemed to have arisen in connection with any such
transactions or communications, and (b) the Administrative Agent, the Lenders, the Issuing
Lenders, the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the Documentation Agents and their Affiliates
may have economic interests that conflict with those of the Borrower, its Subsidiaries and their
Affiliates, and none of the Administrative Agent, the Lenders, the Issuing Lenders, the
Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the Documentation Agents or their Affiliates has any
obligation to disclose any of such interests to the Borrower or any of its Subsidiaries.  To the
fullest extent permitted by law, the Borrower hereby agrees, on behalf of itself and its
Subsidiaries, not to assert any claims against any of the Administrative Agent, the Lenders, the
Issuing Lenders, the Arrangers, the Syndication Agent, the Documentation Agents or their
Affiliates with respect to any breach or alleged breach of fiduciary duty in connection with any
aspect of any transaction contemplated hereby or any communications in connection therewith.
SECTION 10.17.
 Acknowledgement and Consent to Bail-In of Affected
Financial Institutions.  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in any Loan Document or in
any other agreement, arrangement or understanding among any such parties, each party hereto
acknowledges that any liability of any Affected Financial Institution arising under any Loan
Document, to the extent such liability is unsecured, may be subject to the Write-Down and
Conversion Powers of the applicable Resolution Authority and agrees and consents to, and
acknowledges and agrees to be bound by:
(a)
 the application of any Write-Down and Conversion Powers by the
applicable Resolution Authority to any such liabilities arising hereunder that may be
payable to it by any party hereto that is an Affected Financial Institution; and
(b)
 the effects of any Bail-In Action on any such liability, including, if
applicable, (i) a reduction in full or in part or cancelation of any such liability, (ii) a
conversion of all, or a portion of, such liability into shares or other instruments of
ownership in such Affected Financial Institution, its parent entity, or a bridge institution
that may be issued to it or otherwise conferred on it, and that such shares or other
instruments of ownership will be accepted by it in lieu of any
 

rights with respect to any such liability under this Agreement or any other Loan
Document or (iii) the variation of the terms of such liability  in connection with the
exercise of the Write-Down and Conversion Powers of the applicable Resolution
Authority.
[Signature Pages Follow]
 
 

IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have caused this Agreement to be
duly executed by their respective authorized officers as of the day and year first above written.
BORROWER
Best Buy Co., Inc.,
by:
/s/ Christopher Samson
Name: Christopher Samson
Title:
Vice President and Treasurer
SUBSIDIARY GUARANTORS
Best Buy Stores, L.P.,
by: BBC Property Co., its General Partner
by: 
/s/ Christopher Samson
Name: Christopher Samson
Title:
Vice President and Treasurer
BBC Property Co.,
by:
/s/ Christopher Samson
Name: Christopher Samson
Title:
Vice President and Treasurer
BBC Investment Co.,
by:
/s/ Christopher Samson
Name: Christopher Samson
Title:
Vice President and Treasurer
 

BestBuy.COM, LLC,
by:  Best Buy Stores, L.P., its sole member
 
by:  BBC Property Co., the General Partner
of Best Buy Stores, L.P
 
by:
/s/ Christopher Samson
Name: Christopher Samson
Title:
Vice 
President 
and
Treasurer
 

LENDERS
JPMORGAN 
CHASE 
BANK, 
N.A.,
individually, 
as 
Issuing 
Lender 
and 
as
Administrative Agent
by:
/s/ Gregory T. Martin
Name:
Gregory T. Martin
Title:
Executive Director
 

U.S. Bank National association, individually
and as Issuing Lender
by:
/s/ Mark D. Rodgers
Name:
Mark D. Rodgers
Title:
Vice President
 

BANK OF AMERICA, N.A., individually and
as Issuing Lender
by:
/s/ Michelle L. Walker
Name:
Michelle L. Walker
Title:
Vice President
 

CITIBANK, N.A., individually and as Issuing
Lender
by:
/s/ Michael Vondriska
Name:
Michael Vondriska
Title:
Vice President
 

PNC Bank, national association, individually
and as Issuing Lender
by:
/s/ Ana Gaytan
Name:
Ana Gaytan
Title:
Assistant Vice President
 
 

INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL BANK OF CHINA LIMITED,
NEW YORK BRANCH, as a Lender
By:
/s/ Yuanyuan Peng
Name:
Yuanyuan Peng
Title:
Executive Director
By:
/s/ Lindsay Du
Name:
Lindsay Du
Title:
Director
 

LENDER SIGNATURE PAGE TO
BEST BUY CO., INC. FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT
MUFG BANK, LTD.
 
By:
/s/ Jack Lonker
Name:
Jack Lonker
Title:
Authorized Signatory
 

LENDER SIGNATURE PAGE TO
BEST BUY CO., INC. FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT
Name of Institution:
Royal Bank of Canada
by:
/s/ Derek Au-Yeung
Name:
Derek Au-Yeung
Title:
Director, Corporate Client
Group - Finance
by:
 
Name:
Title:
 

LENDER SIGNATURE PAGE TO
BEST BUY CO., INC. FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT
Name of Institution:
Bank of China, New York Branch
by:
/s/ Raymond Qiao
Name:
Raymond Qiao
Title:
Executive Vice President
by:1
 
Name:
Title:
_____________________
1 The second signature block is for the use of those Lenders that require two signatures.
 

LENDER SIGNATURE PAGE TO
BEST BUY CO., INC. FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT
Name of Institution:
Wells Fargo Bank, National Association
by:
/s/ Ryan Tegeler
Name:
Ryan Tegeler
Title:
Vice President
by:1
 
Name:
Title:
_____________________
1 The second signature block is for the use of those Lenders that require two signatures.
 

LENDER SIGNATURE PAGE TO
BEST BUY CO., INC. FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT
Name of Institution:
BMO Harris Bank N.A. successor in interest to
Bank of the West
by:
/s/ Michael A. Berent
Name:
Michael A. Berent
Title:
V.P.
 

LENDER SIGNATURE PAGE TO
BEST BUY CO., INC. FIVE-YEAR CREDIT AGREEMENT
GOLDMAN SACHS BANK USA
by:
/s/ Amanda DeRoche
Name:
Amanda DeRoche
Title:
Authorized Signatory
