UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
☒
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021
or
☐
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from                          to                         
Commission file number 1-442
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
 
91-0425694
(State or other jurisdiction of 
incorporation or organization)
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
100 N. Riverside Plaza,
Chicago,
IL
 
60606-1596
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (312)-544-2000
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Common Stock, $5.00 Par Value
BA
New York Stock Exchange
(Title of each class)
(Trading Symbol)
(Name of each exchange on which registered)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes ☐ No ☒
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during the preceding 12
months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for the past 90 days. Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically every Interactive Data File required to be submitted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§
232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to submit such files). Yes ☒ No ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated  filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging growth
company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large Accelerated Filer
☒
Accelerated filer 
☐
Non-accelerated filer
☐
Smaller reporting company
☐
Emerging growth company
☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has filed a report on and attestation to its management’s assessment of the effectiveness of its internal control over financial
reporting under Section 404(b) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act (15 U.S.C. 7262(b)) by the registered public accounting firm that prepared or issued its audit report. ☒
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or revised financial
accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ☐
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes ☐ No ☒
As of June 30, 2021, there were 585,875,929 common shares outstanding held by nonaffiliates of the registrant, and the aggregate market value of the common shares (based
upon the closing price of these shares on the New York Stock Exchange) was approximately $140.4 billion.
The number of shares of the registrant’s common stock outstanding as of January 24, 2022 was 582,999,765.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference to the registrant’s definitive proxy statement, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission within 120 days after the
close of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2021.

Table of Contents
THE BOEING COMPANY
Index to the Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2021
PART I
 
 
Page
Item  1.
Business
1
Item  1A.
Risk Factors
7
Item  1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
20
Item  2.
Properties
21
Item  3.
Legal Proceedings
21
Item  4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
21
PART II
Item  5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of
Equity Securities
22
Item  6.
[Reserved]
22
Item  7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
23
Item  7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
56
Item  8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
57
Item  9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
132
Item  9A.
Controls and Procedures
132
Item  9B.
Other Information
132
PART III
Item  10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
133
Item  11.
Executive Compensation
136
Item  12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder
Matters
137
Item  13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
137
Item  14.
Principal Accountant Fees and Services
138
PART IV
Item  15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
138
Item  16.
Form 10-K Summary
141
Signatures
142

Table of Contents
PART I
Item 1. Business
The Boeing Company, together with its subsidiaries (herein referred to as “Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our”), is one of the world’s major
aerospace firms.
We are organized based on the products and services we offer. We operate in four reportable segments:
•
Commercial Airplanes (BCA);
•
Defense, Space & Security (BDS);
•
Global Services (BGS);
•
Boeing Capital (BCC).
Commercial Airplanes Segment
This  segment  develops,  produces  and  markets  commercial  jet  aircraft  and  provides  fleet  support  services,  principally  to  the  commercial  airline
industry worldwide. We are a leading producer of commercial aircraft and offer a family of commercial jetliners designed to meet a broad spectrum
of global passenger and cargo requirements of airlines. This family of commercial jet aircraft in production includes the 737 narrow-body model and
the 747, 767, 777 and 787 wide-body models. Development continues on the 777X program and certain 737 MAX derivatives.
Defense, Space & Security Segment
This segment engages in the research, development, production and modification of manned and unmanned military aircraft and weapons systems
for  strike,  surveillance  and  mobility,  including  fighter  and  trainer  aircraft;  vertical  lift,  including  rotorcraft  and  tilt-rotor  aircraft;  and  commercial
derivative aircraft,  including anti-submarine and tanker aircraft.  In addition, this segment engages in the research, development,  production and
modification  of  the  following  products  and  related  services:  strategic  defense  and  intelligence  systems,  including  strategic  missile  and  defense
systems, command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR), cyber and information solutions,
and intelligence systems, satellite systems, including government and commercial satellites and space exploration.
BDS'  primary  customer  is  the  United  States  Department  of  Defense  (U.S.  DoD).  Revenues  from  the  U.S.  DoD,  including  foreign  military  sales
through  the  U.S.  government,  accounted  for  approximately  84%  of  its  2021  revenues.  Other  significant  BDS  customers  include  the  National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and customers in international defense, civil and commercial satellite markets.
This segment's primary products include the following fixed-wing military aircraft: F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, F-15 programs, P-8 programs, KC-46A
Tanker and T-7A Red Hawk. This segment produces rotorcraft and rotary-wing programs, such as CH-47 Chinook, AH-64 Apache and V-22 Osprey.
Unmanned  vehicles  include  the  MQ-25,  QF-16  and  Insitu’s  Scan  Eagle  aircraft.  In  addition,  this  segment's  products  include  space  and  missile
systems including: government and commercial satellites, NASA’s Space Launch System (SLS), the International Space Station, Commercial Crew,
missile defense and weapons programs and Joint Direct Attack Munition, as well as the United Launch Alliance joint venture.
1

Table of Contents
Global Services Segment
This segment provides services to our commercial and defense customers worldwide. BGS sustains aerospace platforms and systems with a full
spectrum of products and services, including supply chain and logistics management, engineering, maintenance and modifications, upgrades and
conversions,  spare  parts,  pilot  and  maintenance  training  systems  and  services,  technical  and  maintenance  documents,  and  data  analytics  and
digital services.
Boeing Capital Segment
BCC seeks to ensure that Boeing customers have the financing they need to buy and take delivery of their Boeing product, while managing overall
financing exposure. BCC’s portfolio consists of equipment under operating leases, sales-type/finance leases, notes and other receivables, assets
held for sale or re-lease and investments.
Intellectual Property
We own numerous patents and have licenses for the use of patents owned by others, which relate to our products and their manufacture. In addition
to owning a large portfolio of intellectual property, we also license intellectual property to and from third parties. For example, the U.S. government
has licenses in our patents that are developed in performance of government contracts, and it may use or authorize others to use the inventions
covered by such patents for government purposes. Unpatented research, development and engineering skills, as well as certain trademarks, trade
secrets  and  other  intellectual  property  rights,  also  make  an  important  contribution  to  our  business.  While  our  intellectual  property  rights  in  the
aggregate  are  important  to  the  operation  of  each  of  our  businesses,  we  do  not  believe  that  our  business  would  be  materially  affected  by  the
expiration of any particular intellectual property right or termination of any particular intellectual property patent license agreement.
Human Capital
The COVID-19 pandemic continues to impact lives and businesses around the world. We have taken proactive steps to help protect the health and
safety of our employees and maintain business continuity. As COVID-19 vaccines became available, we strongly encouraged employees to get
vaccinated when eligible, followed federal and state government vaccination requirements, provided resources and support to help employees get
vaccinated, offered paid time off for primary and booster vaccinations, and supported vaccination clinics for our employees and their families. We
provided access to virtual primary care physicians at no cost. We expanded our virtual work options and many of our office workers continue to
telecommute. We have maintained safety protocols at our sites, including face coverings, physical distance requirements and enhanced cleaning
requirements. We continue to encourage daily self-health checks and operate our coronavirus hotline, which enables employees to report exposure
to COVID-19 and positive COVID-19 test results directly to our Health Services group. As part of that reporting process, we have a robust contact
tracing program to identify those who have been in close contact in the workplace with employees who have tested positive for COVID-19. All of the
actions  above  are  overseen  by  Boeing’s  Crisis  Management  Working  Group,  a  multi-functional,  multi-discipline  team  tasked  with  integrating  all
aspects of Boeing’s COVID-19 response.
As of December 31, 2021, Boeing’s total workforce was approximately 142,000, with 12% located outside of the U.S.
2

Table of Contents
As of December 31, 2021, our workforce is composed of approximately 47,000 union members. Our principal collective bargaining agreements were
with the following unions:
Union
Percent of our Employees
Represented
Status of the Agreements with Major Union
The International Association of Machinists and
Aerospace Workers (IAM)
20%
We have two major agreements; one expiring in July 2022 and
one in September 2024.
The Society of Professional Engineering Employees in
Aerospace (SPEEA)
10%
We have two major agreements expiring in October 2026.
The United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural
Implement Workers of America (UAW)
1%
We have one major agreement expiring in October 2022.
We aspire to be the most equitable, diverse and inclusive company. Guided by our values, we are committed to creating a company where everyone
is included and respected, and where we support each other in reaching our full potential. We are committed to diverse representation across all
levels of our workforce to reflect the vibrant and thriving diversity of the communities in which we live and work. In June of 2021, we released our
first  Global  Equity,  Diversity  and  Inclusion  report  with  our  workforce  composition.  As  of  December  2020,  our  U.S.  workforce  was  comprised  of
approximately 23% women, 31% racial and ethnic minorities and 15% veterans. We also support Business Resource Groups open to all employees
with  more  than  13,000  participants  across  150  chapters  globally  that  focus  on  gender,  race  &  ethnicity,  generations,  gender  identity,  sexual
orientation,  disability  or  veteran  status.  These  groups  help  foster  inclusion  among  all  teammates,  build  awareness,  recruit  and  retain  a  diverse
workforce  and  support  the  company  in successfully  operating  in  a global,  multicultural  business  environment.  We  are  committed  to  releasing  a
Global Equity, Diversity and Inclusion report in 2022 which will be updated with 2021 information. Our 2021 report can be found on our website.
To attract and retain the best-qualified talent, we offer competitive benefits, including market-competitive compensation, healthcare, paid time off,
parental leave, retirement benefits, tuition assistance, employee skills development, leadership development and rotation programs. In 2021, our
voluntary resignation rate was approximately 4%. Additionally, we hired approximately 9,800 new employees in 2021 for critical skills and had an
offer acceptance rate of 83%.
Employees are encouraged to provide feedback about their experience through ongoing employee engagement activities. Boeing actively listens to
its employees via surveys ranging from pre-hire to exiting the company. These voluntary surveys provide aggregate trend reports for the company to
address in real time and ensure Boeing maintains an employee-focused experience and culture. We also invest in rewarding performance and have
established a multi-level recognition program for the purpose of acknowledging the achievements of excellent individual or team performance.
We are committed to supporting our employees’ continuous development of professional, technical and leadership skills through access to digital
learning resources and through partnerships with leading professional/technical  societies and organizations around the world. For 2021, Boeing
employees  consumed  approximately  3.6  million  hours  of  learning.  We  offer  the  ability  for  our  people  to  pursue  degree  programs,  professional
certificates and individual courses in strategic fields of study from more than 300 accredited colleges and universities, online and across the globe
through our tuition assistance program. Over 10,000 Boeing employees leverage these programs every year.
3

Table of Contents
Safety, quality, integrity and sustainability are at the core of how Boeing operates. We aspire to achieve zero workplace injuries and provide a safe,
open and accountable work environment for our employees. We provide several channels for all employees to speak up, ask for guidance and
report concerns related to ethics or safety violations. We address employee concerns and take appropriate actions that uphold our Boeing values.
Competition
The commercial jet aircraft  market and the airline industry remain extremely competitive.  We face aggressive international competitors  who are
intent  on  increasing  their  market  share,  such  as  Airbus  and  other  entrants  from  Russia,  China  and  Japan.  We  are  focused  on  improving  our
processes and continuing cost reduction efforts. We intend to continue to compete with other airplane manufacturers by providing customers with
higher quality products.
BDS  faces  strong  competition  in  all  market  segments,  primarily  from  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation,  Northrop  Grumman  Corporation,  Raytheon
Technologies Corporation, General Dynamics Corporation and SpaceX. Non-U.S. companies such as BAE Systems and Airbus Group continue to
build a strategic presence in the U.S. market by strengthening their North American operations and partnering with U.S. defense companies. In
addition, certain competitors have occasionally formed teams with other competitors to address specific customer requirements. BDS expects the
trend of strong competition to continue into 2022.
The  commercial  and  defense  services  markets  are  extremely  challenging  and  are  made  up  of  many  of  the  same  strong  U.S.  and  non-U.S.
competitors facing BCA and BDS along with other competitors in those markets. BGS leverages our extensive services network offering products
and services which span the life cycle of our defense and commercial airplane programs: training, fleet services and logistics, maintenance and
engineering, modifications and upgrades, as well as the daily cycle of gate-to-gate operations. BGS expects the market to remain highly competitive
in 2022, and intends to grow market share by leveraging a high level of customer satisfaction and productivity.
Regulatory Matters
Our businesses are heavily regulated in most of our markets. We work with numerous U.S. government agencies and entities, including but not
limited to, all of the branches of the U.S. military,  NASA, the Federal Aviation Administration  (FAA) and the Department of Homeland Security.
Similar government authorities exist in our non-U.S. markets.
Government Contracts. The U.S. government, and other governments, may terminate any of our government contracts at their convenience, as well
as for default based on our failure to meet specified performance requirements. If any of our U.S. government contracts were to be terminated for
convenience, we generally would be entitled to receive payment for work completed and allowable termination or cancellation costs. If any of our
government contracts were to be terminated for default, generally the U.S. government would pay only for the work that has been accepted and
could require us to pay the difference between the original contract price and the cost to re-procure the contract items, net of the work accepted from
the original contract. The U.S. government can also hold us liable for damages resulting from the default.
Commercial Aircraft. In the U.S., our commercial aircraft products are required to comply with FAA regulations governing production and quality
systems,  airworthiness  and  installation  approvals,  repair  procedures  and  continuing  operational  safety.  New  aircraft  models  and  new  derivative
aircraft are required to obtain FAA certification prior to entry into service. Outside the U.S., similar requirements exist for airworthiness, installation
and operational approvals. These requirements are generally
4

Table of Contents
administered by the national aviation authorities of each country and, in the case of Europe, coordinated by the European Union Aviation Safety
Agency.
Environmental. We are subject to various federal, state, local and non-U.S. laws and regulations relating to environmental protection, including the
discharge,  treatment,  storage,  disposal  and  remediation  of  hazardous  substances  and  wastes.  We  could  also  be  affected  by  future  laws  and
regulations relating to climate change, including laws related to greenhouse gas emissions. These laws and regulations could lead to increased
environmental  compliance  expenditures,  increased  energy  and  raw  materials  costs  and  new  and/or  additional  investment  in  designs  and
technologies. We continually assess our compliance status and management of environmental matters to ensure our operations are in compliance
with  all  applicable  environmental  laws  and  regulations.  Investigation,  remediation  and  operation  and  maintenance  costs  associated  with
environmental compliance and management of sites are a normal, recurring part of our operations. These costs often are allowable costs under our
contracts  with  the  U.S.  government.  It  is  reasonably  possible  that  costs  incurred  to  ensure  continued  environmental  compliance  could  have  a
material impact on our results of operations, financial condition or cash flows if additional work requirements or more stringent clean-up standards
are imposed by regulators, new areas of soil, air and groundwater contamination are discovered and/or expansions of work scope are prompted by
the results of investigations.
A Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) has joint and several liability under existing U.S. environmental laws. Where we have been designated a PRP
by the Environmental Protection Agency or a state environmental agency, we are potentially liable to the government or third parties for the full cost
of remediating contamination at our facilities, former facilities or third-party sites. If we were required to fully fund the remediation of a site for which
we were originally assigned a partial share, the statutory framework would allow us to pursue rights to contribution from other PRPs. For additional
information relating to environmental contingencies, see Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-U.S.  Sales. Our  non-U.S.  sales  are  subject  to  both  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  governmental  regulations  and  procurement  policies  and  practices,
including regulations relating to import-export control, tariffs, investment, exchange controls, anti-corruption and repatriation of earnings. Non-U.S.
sales are also subject to varying currency, political and economic risks.
Raw Materials, Parts and Subassemblies
We  are  highly  dependent  on  the  availability  of  essential  materials,  parts  and  subassemblies  from  our  suppliers  and  subcontractors.  The  most
important raw materials required for our aerospace products are aluminum (sheet, plate, forgings and extrusions), titanium (sheet, plate, forgings
and extrusions) and composites (including carbon and boron). Although alternative sources generally exist for these raw materials, qualification of
the sources could take a year or more. Many major components and product equipment items are procured or subcontracted on a sole-source
basis.
Suppliers
We are dependent upon the ability of a large number of U.S. and non-U.S. suppliers and subcontractors to meet performance specifications, quality
standards and delivery schedules at our anticipated costs. While we maintain an extensive qualification and performance surveillance system to
control  risk  associated  with  such  reliance  on  third  parties,  failure  of  suppliers  or  subcontractors  to  meet  commitments  could  adversely  affect
production  schedules  and  program/contract  profitability,  thereby  jeopardizing  our  ability  to  fulfill  commitments  to  our  customers.  We  are  also
dependent on the availability of energy sources, such as electricity, at affordable prices.
5

Table of Contents
Seasonality
No material portion of our business is considered to be seasonal.
Executive Officers of the Registrant
See “Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance” in Part III.
Other Information
Boeing was originally incorporated in the State of Washington in 1916 and reincorporated in Delaware in 1934. Our principal executive offices are
located at 100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60606, and our telephone number is (312) 544-2000.
General information about us can be found at www.boeing.com. The information contained on or connected to our website is not incorporated by
reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K and should not be considered part of this or any other report filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission  (SEC).  Our  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  Quarterly  Reports  on  Form  10-Q  and  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K,  as  well  as  any
amendments to those reports, are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish
them  to,  the SEC. The SEC maintains  a website  at  www.sec.gov  that  contains  reports,  proxy  statements  and other information  regarding  SEC
registrants, including Boeing.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report, as well as our annual report to shareholders, quarterly reports and other filings we make with the SEC, press and earnings releases and
other written and oral communications, contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of
1995. Words such as “may,” “should,” “expects,” “intends,” “projects,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” “targets,” “anticipates” and similar expressions
generally  identify  these  forward-looking  statements.  Examples  of  forward-looking  statements  include  statements  relating  to  our  future  financial
condition and operating results, as well as any other statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact.
Forward-looking statements are based on expectations and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable when made, but that may not prove to be
accurate. These statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict.
Many factors, including those set forth in the “Risk Factors” section below and other important factors disclosed in this report and from time to time in
our other filings with the SEC, could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely from these forward-looking statements. Any forward-
looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we assume no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
6

Table of Contents
Item 1A. Risk Factors
An investment in our common stock or debt securities involves risks and uncertainties and our actual results and future trends may differ materially
from our past or projected future performance. We urge investors to consider carefully the risk factors described below in evaluating the information
contained in this report.
Risks Related to COVID-19
We face significant risks related to the spread of the COVID-19 virus and developments surrounding the global pandemic have had, and
will  continue  to  have,  significant  effects  on  our  business,  financial  condition,  results  of  operations  and  cash  flows.  We  also  face
significant risks related to the global economic downturn and severe reduction in commercial air traffic caused by the pandemic. These
risks include materially reduced demand for our products and services, increased instability in our operations and in our supply chain
and  challenges  to  the  ongoing  viability  of  some  of  our  customers.  In  addition,  future  vaccination  mandates  or  other  government
requirements may further disrupt our operations and those of our customers and suppliers. We may face similar risks in connection with
any future public health crises, including resurgences in the spread of COVID-19.
The COVID-19 pandemic has subjected our business, operations, financial performance, cash flows and financial condition to a number of risks,
including, but not limited to those discussed below.
Operations-related  risks: As  a  result  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  we  are  facing  increased  operational  challenges  from  the  need  to  protect
employee health and safety. These challenges have included, and may in the future include, production site shutdowns, workplace disruptions and
restrictions  on  the  movement  of  people,  social  distancing  guidelines,  increased  employee  absenteeism  due  to  illness  and/or  quarantine/contact
tracing requirements, as well as reduced availability of raw materials and goods, both at our own facilities and those of our customers and suppliers.
During the second quarter of 2020, we temporarily suspended operations in Puget Sound, South Carolina, and Philadelphia, as well as at several
other key production sites. We had not previously experienced a complete suspension of our operations at these production sites. While we have
resumed operations at all of our production sites, we cannot predict whether or where further production disruptions could be required or what the
ongoing impact of COVID-19-related operating restrictions will be. For example, we continue to experience near-term production disruptions and
inefficiencies  as  well  as  additional  operating  costs  due  to  social  distancing  requirements,  increased  levels  of  employee  absenteeism  and  other
factors related to COVID-19 restrictions. We cannot predict the impact that future production disruptions may have on our business, operations,
financial performance and financial condition. We continue to monitor federal, state and municipal health authorities for new or modified guidance
and  requirements  concerning  the  COVID-19  pandemic,  and  we  may  be  required  to  impose  additional  operational  restrictions  and/or  suspend
operations at key production sites based on these requirements and recommendations and/or workplace disruptions caused by COVID-19. If future
vaccination mandates or other similar governmental requirements take effect, or if COVID-19 case rates worsen at one or more of our production
facilities, we may face further increases in employee absenteeism and/or attrition, any of which could cause operational disruptions and otherwise
have an adverse effect on our business and results of operations.
Many of our suppliers also were required to suspend operations during the second quarter of 2020. In 2021, we experienced part shortages which
disrupted our operations and delayed deliveries. We may experience additional disruptions and/or part shortages in 2022. Any such disruptions
could have severe adverse impacts on our production costs, delivery schedule and/or ability to meet customer commitments.
7

Table of Contents
Further production disruptions and inefficiencies, suspension of operations or delayed recovery in our operations, and/or any comparable impacts
involving one or more of our key suppliers, or the failure of any of our key suppliers, would result in further challenges to our business, which could
have a further material adverse effect on our business, financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
Liquidity  risks: The  COVID-19  pandemic  has  also  had  a  significant  impact  on  our  liquidity  and  overall  debt  levels.  During  the  year  ended
December 31, 2021, net cash used by operating activities was $3.4 billion. At December 31, 2021, cash and short-term investments totaled $16.2
billion. Our debt balance totaled $58.1 billion at December 31, 2021, down from $63.6 billion at December 31, 2020. We expect negative operating
cash flows in future quarters until deliveries begin to return to historical levels, and if the pace and scope of the recovery are worse than we currently
contemplate, we may need to obtain additional financing in order to fund our operations and obligations. If we were to need to obtain additional
financing, uncertainty related to COVID-19 and its impact on us and the aerospace industry, as well as continued uncertainty with respect to our
credit rating could limit our access to credit markets and we may have difficulty obtaining financing on terms acceptable to us or at all. In addition,
certain of our customers may also be unable to make timely payments to us. Factors that could limit our access to additional liquidity include further
disruptions in the global capital markets and/or additional declines in our financial performance, outlook or credit ratings. The occurrence of any or
all of these events could adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and/or meet outstanding debt obligations and contractual commitments.
In addition, further downgrades in our credit ratings could adversely affect our cost of funds and related margins, liquidity, competitive position and
access to capital markets, and a significant downgrade could have an adverse impact on our businesses.
Customer-related risks: Commercial air traffic has fallen dramatically due to the COVID-19 pandemic. This trend has impacted passenger traffic
most  severely.  Most  airlines  have  significantly  reduced  their  capacity,  and  many  could  implement  further  reductions.  Many  airlines  are  also
implementing significant reductions in staffing. These capacity changes are causing, and are expected to continue to cause, negative impacts to our
customers’ revenue, earnings, and cash flow, and in some cases may threaten the future viability of some of our customers, potentially causing
defaults within our customer financing portfolio, which was $1.8 billion as of December 31, 2021 and/or requiring us to remarket aircraft that have
already been produced and/or are currently in backlog. If we are unable to successfully remarket these aircraft and/or the narrow-body and wide-
body markets do not recover as soon as we are currently assuming, or if we are required to further reduce production rates and/or contract the
accounting quantity on any of our commercial programs, we could experience material reductions in earnings and/or be required to recognize a
reach-forward loss on one or more of our programs. For example, in the fourth quarter of 2020, we recognized a reach-forward loss on the 777X
program in part due to impacts related to the COVID-19 pandemic. Additionally, we may experience fewer new orders and increased cancellations
across all of our commercial airplane programs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated impacts on demand. Our customers may also
lack sufficient liquidity to purchase new aircraft due to impacts from the pandemic.
In  addition  to  the  near-term  impact,  there  is  risk  that  the  industry  implements  longer-term  strategies  involving  reduced  capacity,  shifting  route
patterns and mitigation strategies related to impacts from COVID-19 and the risk of future public health crises. In addition, airlines may experience
reduced demand due to reluctance by the flying public to travel as a result of travel restrictions and/or social distancing requirements.
As a result, there is significant uncertainty with respect to whether and at what point commercial air traffic capacity will return to and/or exceed pre-
COVID-19 levels. This uncertainty may have a significant impact on the demand for both single-aisle and wide-body commercial aircraft, as well as
for the services we provide to commercial airlines. In addition, a lengthy period of reduced industry-wide demand for commercial aircraft would put
additional  pressure  on  our  suppliers,  resulting  in  increased  procurement  costs  and/or  additional  supply  chain  disruption.  To  the  extent  that  the
COVID-19 pandemic
8

Table of Contents
or its aftermath further impacts demand for our products and services or impairs the viability of some of our customers and/or suppliers, our financial
position, results of operations and/or cash flows could be adversely affected, and those impacts could be material.
Other  risks: The  magnitude  and  duration  of  the  global  COVID-19  pandemic  is  uncertain  and  continues  to  adversely  affect  our  business  and
operating and financial results. For example, during the fourth quarter of 2020, due in part to the prolonged adverse impact of the pandemic on our
earnings, we recorded an increase of $2.5 billion to the valuation allowance associated with deferred income tax assets. The pandemic also is
expected  to  heighten  many  of  the  other  risks  described  below.  For  example,  the  COVID-19  pandemic  could  cause  and  continue  to  cause  an
increasingly competitive labor market due to a sustained labor shortage or increased turnover rates within our employee base. Further, the COVID-
19 pandemic may also affect our operating and financial results in a manner that is not presently known to us or that we currently do not expect to
present significant risks to our operations or financial results.
Risks Related to Our Business and Operations
We remain subject to a number of risks and uncertainties related to the 737 MAX. These risks include uncertainties regarding the timing
and  conditions  of  remaining  737  MAX  regulatory  approvals,  lower  than  planned  production  rates  and/or  delivery  rates,  additional
considerations to customers, increased supplier costs and supply chain health, changes to the assumptions and estimates made in our
financial  statements  regarding  the  737  program  and  potential  outcomes  of  737  MAX-related  legal  proceedings  and  government
investigations that remain outstanding.
On March 13, 2019, the FAA issued an order to suspend operations of all 737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. and by U.S. aircraft operators following two
fatal 737 MAX accidents. Non-U.S. civil aviation authorities issued directives to the same effect. Deliveries of the 737 MAX were suspended until
December 2020. The grounding reduced revenues, operating margins and cash flows, and will continue to do so until production rates return to pre-
grounding levels. While we have received regulatory approval to return the 737 MAX to service in most jurisdictions, we continue to work with certain
non-U.S. civil aviation authorities to complete remaining steps toward certification and readiness for return to service worldwide. Any delays in the
completion of the certification activities and/or the ramp-up of deliveries or other liabilities associated with the accidents or grounding could have a
material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows. In addition, multiple legal actions have been filed against us
related to the 737 MAX. We also are fully cooperating with U.S. government investigations related to the accidents and the 737 MAX, including an
ongoing investigation by the Securities and Exchange Commission. We also remain subject to compliance with a Deferred Prosecution Agreement
with the U.S. Department of Justice relating to the Department of Justice’s investigation into us regarding the evaluation of the 737 MAX airplane by
the FAA. We expensed $744 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to this agreement. Any further adverse impacts related to any such litigation
or investigations could have a further material impact on our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
During 2019, we announced plans to reduce, and ultimately to suspend 737 production. Impacts related to our suspension of 737 MAX production
from 2019 to 2020 significantly increased costs to produce aircraft included in the current accounting quantity and have resulted in reduced 737
program  and  overall  BCA  segment  operating  margins.  We  have  also  made  significant  assumptions  regarding  estimated  costs  expected  to  be
incurred  in  2022  that  should  be  included  in  program  inventory  and  those  estimated  costs  that  will  be  expensed  when  incurred  as  abnormal
production costs. If the completion of remaining certification activities and/or our ability to deliver 737 aircraft to customers is impaired, we will incur
significant  additional  costs  and/or  be  required  to  delay  the  planned  ramp-up  of  737  production.  These  delays  would  also  result  in  significant
additional disruption to the 737 production system and
9

Table of Contents
further  delay efforts  to  restore  and/or  implement  previously  planned increases  in the  737 production  rate.  Cash flows  continue to  be negatively
impacted by delayed payments from customers, higher costs and inventory levels, and payments made to customers in connection with disruption to
their operations. In addition, we have experienced claims and assertions from customers in connection with the grounding and associated delivery
delays, and recorded an estimate of potential concessions and other considerations to customers for these disruptions. As of December 31, 2021,
the  remaining  liability  associated  with  these  concessions  and  other  considerations  totaled  $2.9  billion,  of  which  $0.7  billion  remains  subject  to
negotiation.
Any further delays in regulatory approval of the 737 MAX in one or more jurisdictions, further disruptions to suppliers and/or the long-term health of
the  production  system,  supplier  claims  or  assertions,  or  changes  to  estimated  concessions  or  other  considerations  we  expect  to  provide  to
customers  could have a material  adverse  effect  on our  financial  position,  results  of  operations  and/or  cash  flows.  In  the  event  of  unanticipated
additional training requirements in one or more jurisdictions, delays in regulatory approval and/or delays in our ability to resume deliveries to one or
more  customers,  we  may  be  required  to  take  actions  with  longer-term  impact,  such  as  further  changes  to  our  production  plans,  employment
reductions and/or the expenditure of significant resources to support our supply chain and/or customers.
We have made significant estimates with respect to the 737 program regarding the number of units to be produced, the period during which those
units are likely to be produced, and the units’ expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and routine
warranty costs. We have made assumptions regarding outcomes of accident investigations and other government inquiries, timing of future 737
production rate increases, timing and sequence of future deliveries, supply chain health as we implement our production plans, as well as outcomes
of negotiations with customers. Any changes in these estimates and/or assumptions with respect to the 737 program could have a material impact
on our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
In addition to the impact of COVID-19 described above, our Commercial Airplanes and Global Services businesses depend heavily on
commercial airlines, and are subject to unique risks.
Market  conditions  have  a  significant  impact  on  demand  for  our  commercial  aircraft  and  related  services. The  commercial  aircraft  market  is
predominantly  driven  by  long-term  trends  in  airline  passenger  and  cargo  traffic.  The  principal  factors  underlying  long-term  traffic  growth  are
sustained economic growth and political stability both in developed and emerging markets. Demand for our commercial aircraft is further influenced
by airline profitability, availability of aircraft financing, world trade policies, government-to-government relations, technological advances, price and
other competitive factors, fuel prices, terrorism, epidemics and environmental regulations. Traditionally, the airline industry has been cyclical and
very competitive and has experienced significant profit swings and constant challenges to be more cost competitive. Significant deterioration in the
global economic environment, the airline industry generally or the financial stability of one or more of our major customers could result in fewer new
orders for aircraft or services, or could cause customers to seek to postpone or cancel contractual orders and/or payments to us, which could result
in lower  revenues,  profitability  and cash  flows  and  a  reduction  in  our  contractual  backlog.  In  addition,  because  our  commercial  aircraft  backlog
consists  of  aircraft  scheduled  for  delivery  over  a  period  of  several  years,  any  of  these  macroeconomic,  industry  or  customer  impacts  could
unexpectedly affect deliveries over a long period.
We  enter  into  firm  fixed-price  aircraft  sales  contracts  with  indexed  price  escalation  clauses,  which  could  subject  us  to  losses  if  we  have  cost
overruns or if increases in our costs exceed the applicable escalation rate. Commercial aircraft sales contracts are often entered into years before
the aircraft are delivered. In order to help account for economic fluctuations between the contract date and delivery date, aircraft pricing generally
consists of a fixed amount as modified by price escalation formulas
10

Table of Contents
derived from labor, commodity and other price indices. Our revenue estimates are based on current expectations with respect to these escalation
formulas, but the actual escalation amounts are outside of our control. Escalation factors can fluctuate significantly from period to period. Changes in
escalation amounts can significantly impact revenues and operating margins in our Commercial Airplanes business.
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from a limited number of commercial airlines. We can make no assurance that any customer will
exercise purchase options, fulfill existing purchase commitments or purchase additional products or services from us. In addition, fleet decisions,
airline consolidations or financial challenges involving any of our major commercial airline customers could significantly reduce our revenues and
limit our opportunity to generate profits from those customers.
Our  Commercial  Airplanes  business  depends  on  our  ability  to  maintain  a  healthy  production  system,  ensure  every  airplane  in  our
production system conforms to our exacting specification, achieve planned production rate targets, successfully develop new aircraft or
new derivative aircraft, and meet or exceed stringent performance and reliability standards.
The commercial aircraft business is extremely complex, involving extensive coordination and integration with U.S and non-U.S. suppliers, highly-
skilled labor from thousands of employees and other partners, and stringent regulatory requirements, including the risk of evolving standards for
commercial aircraft certification, and performance and reliability standards. The FAA has been working to implement safety reforms such as the
implementation of the 2018 FAA Reauthorization Act and the 2020 Aircraft Certification, Safety and Accountability Act, among them changing the
process for certification of commercial aircraft. Comparable agencies that regulate similar matters in other countries may adopt similar changes. To
the extent the FAA or other similar regulatory agencies outside the U.S. implement more stringent regulations, we may incur additional costs to
achieve compliance. In addition, the introduction of new aircraft programs and/or derivatives, such as the 777X, involves increased risks associated
with meeting development, testing, production and certification schedules. The 737 program experienced significant disruption due to the grounding
of the 737 MAX and associated suspension of commercial operations of the 737 MAX aircraft by civil aviation authorities around the globe. 737 MAX
deliveries resumed in late 2020 and early 2021 upon approval of the FAA and other non-U.S. civil aviation authorities. During 2020 and 2021, we
experienced  production  quality  issues,  including  in  our  supply  chain,  which  have  contributed  to  lower  787  deliveries,  including  a  pause  in  787
deliveries  since  May  2021.  During  2021,  this  resulted  in  reprioritizing  production  resources  to  support  inspections  and  rework.  We  continue  to
conduct inspections and rework on undelivered 787 aircraft and engage in detailed discussions with the FAA regarding required actions for resuming
delivery. A number of our customers may have contractual remedies, including compensation for late deliveries as well as rights to reject individual
airplane deliveries if the actual delivery date is significantly later than the contractual delivery date. The regulators will ultimately determine the timing
and  conditions  for  resuming  787  deliveries.  Delays  on  the  737  MAX,  777X  and  787  programs  have  resulted  in,  and  may  continue  to  result  in,
customers having the right to terminate orders and/or substitute orders for other Boeing aircraft.
We must minimize disruption caused by production changes, achieve operational stability and implement productivity improvements in order to meet
customer  demand  and  maintain  our  profitability. We  have  previously  announced  plans  to  adjust  production  rates  on  several  of  our  commercial
aircraft  programs.  During  2021,  we  reprioritized  production  resources  to  support  inspections  and  rework  on  undelivered  787  aircraft.  The  787
program is currently producing at very low rates and expects that to continue until deliveries resume. We are also continuing to implement changes
in the production process designed to ensure that newly-built airplanes meet our specifications and do not require further inspections and rework. In
addition, we continue to seek opportunities to reduce the costs of building our aircraft, including working with our suppliers to reduce supplier costs,
identifying and implementing productivity improvements and optimizing how we manage inventory. If production rate changes at any
11

Table of Contents
of our commercial aircraft assembly facilities are delayed or create significant disruption to our production system, or if our suppliers cannot timely
deliver components to us at the cost and rates necessary to achieve our targets, we may be unable to meet delivery schedules and/or the financial
performance of one or more of our programs may suffer.
Operational  challenges  impacting  the  production  system  for  one  or  more  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs  could  result  in  production  delays
and/or  failure  to  meet  customer  demand  for  new  aircraft,  either  of  which  would  negatively  impact  our  revenues  and  operating  margins. Our
commercial aircraft production system is extremely complex. Operational issues, including delays or defects in supplier components, failure to meet
internal  performance  plans,  or  delays  or  failures  to  achieve  required  regulatory  approval,  could  result  in  significant  out-of-sequence  work  and
increased production costs, as well as delayed deliveries to customers, impacts to aircraft performance and/or increased warranty or fleet support
costs. For example, in 2021, we performed additional inspections and associated rework on 787 aircraft in inventory and continued discussions with
the FAA regarding required actions to resume deliveries, resulting in additional costs and further delays in aircraft deliveries to customers.
If our commercial airplanes fail to satisfy performance and reliability requirements, we could face additional costs and/or lower revenues. Developing
and manufacturing commercial aircraft that meet or exceed our performance and reliability standards, as well as those of customers and regulatory
agencies, can be costly and technologically challenging. These challenges are particularly significant with newer aircraft programs. Any failure of any
Boeing aircraft to satisfy performance or reliability requirements could result in disruption to our operations, higher costs and/or lower revenues.
Changes in levels of U.S. government defense spending or overall acquisition priorities could negatively impact our financial position
and results of operations.
We derive a substantial portion of our revenue from the U.S. government, primarily from defense related programs with the U.S. DoD. Levels of U.S.
defense spending are very difficult to predict and may be impacted by numerous factors such as the evolving nature of the national security threat
environment, U.S. national security strategy, U.S. foreign policy, the domestic political environment, macroeconomic conditions and the ability of the
U.S. government to enact relevant legislation such as authorization and appropriations bills.
The timeliness of FY22 and future appropriations for government departments and agencies remains a recurrent risk. A lapse in appropriations for
government  departments  or  agencies  would  result  in  a  full  or  partial  government  shutdown,  which  could  impact  the  Company’s  operations.
Alternatively, Congress may fund government departments and agencies with one or more Continuing Resolutions; however, this would restrict the
execution of certain program activities and delay new programs or competitions. In addition, long-term uncertainty remains with respect to overall
levels  of  defense  spending  in  FY22  and  beyond,  and  it  is  likely  that  U.S.  government  discretionary  spending,  including  defense  spending,  will
continue to be subject to pressure.
There  continues  to  be  uncertainty  with  respect  to  future  acquisition  priorities  and  program-level  appropriations  for  the  U.S.  DoD  and  other
government  agencies  (including  NASA),  including  changes  to  national  security  and  defense  priorities,  and  tension  between  modernization
investments, sustainment investments, and investments in new technologies or emergent capabilities. Future investment priority changes or budget
cuts, including changes associated with the authorizations and appropriations process, could result in reductions, cancellations, and/or delays of
existing contracts or programs, or future program opportunities. Any of these impacts could have a material effect on the results of the Company’s
financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
In addition, as a result of the significant ongoing uncertainty with respect to both U.S. defense spending and the evolving nature of the national
security threat environment, we also expect the U.S. DoD to continue to emphasize affordability, innovation, cybersecurity and delivery of technical
data and
12

Table of Contents
software in its procurement processes. If we can no longer adjust successfully to these changing acquisition policies, our revenues and market
share could be impacted. Also, additional federal appropriations to cover the increased costs of federal contractors’ compliance with evolving U.S.
Government contractual requirements associated with COVID-19 mitigation are unlikely, reducing the U.S. Government’s buying power.
Our ability to deliver products and services that satisfy customer requirements is heavily dependent on the performance and financial
stability of our subcontractors and suppliers, as well as on the availability of raw materials and other components.
We  rely  on  other  companies,  including  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  subcontractors  and  suppliers,  to  provide  and  produce  raw  materials,  integrated
components and sub-assemblies, and production commodities and to perform some of the services that we provide to our customers. If one or more
of  our  suppliers  or  subcontractors  experiences  financial  difficulties,  delivery  delays  or  other  performance  problems,  we  may  be  unable  to  meet
commitments to our customers or incur additional costs. In addition, if one or more of the raw materials on which we depend (such as aluminum,
titanium or composites) becomes unavailable to us or our suppliers, or is available only at very high prices, we may be unable to deliver one or more
of our products in a timely fashion or at budgeted costs. In some instances, we depend upon a single source of supply. Any service disruption from
one of these suppliers, either due to circumstances beyond the supplier’s control, such as geopolitical developments, or as a result of performance
problems or financial difficulties, could have a material adverse effect on our ability to meet commitments to our customers or increase our operating
costs.
Competition within our markets and with respect to the products we sell may reduce our future contracts and sales.
The  markets  in  which  we  operate  are  highly  competitive  and  one  or  more  of  our  competitors  may  have  more  extensive  or  more  specialized
engineering, manufacturing and marketing capabilities than we do in some areas. In our Commercial Airplanes business, we anticipate increasing
competition among non-U.S. aircraft manufacturers of commercial jet aircraft. In our BDS business, we anticipate that the effects of defense industry
consolidation,  shifting  acquisition  and  budget  priorities,  and  continued  cost  pressure  at  our  U.S.  DoD  and  non-U.S.  customers  will  intensify
competition for many of our BDS products. Our BGS segment faces competition from many of the same strong U.S. and non-U.S. competitors
facing BCA and BDS. Furthermore, we are facing increased international competition and cross-border consolidation of competition. There can be
no assurance that we will be able to compete successfully against our current or future competitors or that the competitive pressures we face will not
result in reduced revenues and market share.
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from non-U.S. sales and are subject to the risks of doing business in other countries.
In 2021, non-U.S. customers, which includes foreign military sales (FMS), accounted for approximately 37% of our revenues. We expect that non-
U.S. sales will continue to account for a significant portion of our revenues for the foreseeable future. As a result, we are subject to risks of doing
business internationally, including:
•
changes in regulatory requirements or other executive branch actions, such as Executive Orders;
•
changes in the global trade environment, including disputes with authorities in non-U.S. jurisdictions, including international trade authorities,
that could impact sales and/or delivery of products and services outside the U.S. and/or impose costs on our customers in the form of tariffs,
duties or penalties attributable to the importation of Boeing products and services;
13

Table of Contents
•
U.S. and non-U.S. government policies, including requirements to expend a portion of program funds locally and governmental industrial
cooperation or participation requirements;
•
fluctuations in international currency exchange rates;
•
volatility in international political and economic environments and changes in non-U.S. national priorities and budgets, which can lead to
delays or fluctuations in orders;
•
the complexity and necessity of using non-U.S. representatives and consultants;
•
the uncertainty of the ability of non-U.S. customers to finance purchases, including the availability of financing from the Export-Import Bank
of the United States;
•
uncertainties and restrictions concerning the availability of funding credit or guarantees;
•
imposition of domestic and international taxes, export controls, tariffs, embargoes, sanctions and other trade restrictions;
•
the difficulty of management and operation of an enterprise spread over many countries;
•
compliance with a variety of non-U.S. laws, as well as U.S. laws affecting the activities of U.S. companies abroad; and
•
unforeseen developments and conditions, including terrorism, war, epidemics and international tensions and conflicts.
While the impact of these factors is difficult to predict, any one or more of these factors could adversely affect our operations in the future. For
example, since 2018, the U.S. and China have imposed tariffs on each other’s imports. China is a very significant market for commercial airplanes
and represents a significant component of our commercial airplanes backlog. Impacts from these or future potential tariffs, or deterioration in trade
relations between the U.S. and one or more other countries, could have a material adverse impact on our financial position, results of operations
and/or cash flows.
We use estimates in accounting for many contracts and programs. Changes in our estimates could adversely affect our future financial
results.
Contract and program accounting require judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating revenues and costs and making assumptions for schedule
and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of many of our contracts and programs, the estimation of total revenues and cost at completion is
complicated and subject to many variables. Assumptions have to be made regarding the length of time to complete the contract or program because
costs also include expected increases in wages and employee benefits, material prices and allocated fixed costs. Incentives or penalties related to
performance on contracts are considered in estimating sales and profit rates and are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess
anticipated performance. Supplier claims and assertions are also assessed and considered in estimating costs and profit rates. Estimates of future
award fees are also included in sales and profit rates.
With  respect  to  each  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs,  inventoriable  production  costs  (including  overhead),  program  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring costs and routine warranty costs are accumulated and charged as cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. A
program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for
delivery under existing and anticipated contracts limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates. To establish the relationship of
sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates of (a) the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period over
which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced and (c) the units’ expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other
non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total program. Several factors determine accounting quantity, including firm orders, letters of
intent from prospective customers and market studies. Changes to customer or model mix,
14

Table of Contents
production costs and rates,  learning curve, changes to price escalation indices, costs of derivative aircraft,  supplier performance,  customer  and
supplier negotiations/settlements, supplier claims and/or certification issues can impact these estimates. In addition, on development programs such
as the 777X, we are subject to risks with respect to the timing and conditions of aircraft certification, including potential gaps between when aircraft
are certified in various jurisdictions, changes in certification processes and our estimates with respect to timing of future certifications, which could
have  an  impact  on  overall  program  status.  Any  such  change  in  estimates  relating  to  program  accounting  may  adversely  affect  future  financial
performance.
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes described above, materially different sales and profit amounts could be
recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. Changes in underlying assumptions, circumstances or
estimates may adversely affect future period financial performance. For additional information on our accounting policies for recognizing sales and
profits, see our discussion under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis – Critical Accounting Policies & Estimates – Accounting for Long-term
Contracts/Program Accounting” on pages 51 – 54 and Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 64 – 77 of this Form 10-K.
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures/strategic alliances or divestitures.
As part of our business strategy, we may merge with or acquire businesses and/or form joint ventures and strategic alliances. Whether we realize
the anticipated benefits from these acquisitions and related activities depends, in part, upon our ability to integrate the operations of the acquired
business, the performance of the underlying product and service portfolio, and the performance of the management team and other personnel of the
acquired  operations.  Accordingly,  our  financial  results  could  be  adversely  affected  by  unanticipated  performance  issues,  legacy  liabilities,
transaction-related charges, amortization of expenses related to intangibles, charges for impairment of long-term assets, credit guarantees, partner
performance and indemnifications. Consolidations of joint ventures could also impact our reported results of operations or financial position. While
we believe that we have established appropriate and adequate procedures and processes to mitigate these risks, there is no assurance that these
transactions will be successful. We also may make strategic divestitures from time to time. These transactions may result in continued financial
involvement in the divested businesses, such as through guarantees or other financial arrangements, following the transaction. Nonperformance by
those divested businesses could affect our future financial results through additional payment obligations, higher costs or asset write-downs.
Risks Related to Our Contracts
We conduct a significant portion of our business pursuant to U.S. government contracts, which are subject to unique risks.
In 2021, 49% of our revenues were earned pursuant to U.S. government contracts, which include FMS through the U.S. government. Business
conducted pursuant to such contracts is subject to extensive procurement regulations and other unique risks.
Our sales to the U.S. government are subject to extensive procurement regulations, and changes to those regulations could increase our costs. New
procurement regulations, or changes to existing requirements, could increase our compliance costs or otherwise have a material impact on the
operating margins of our BDS and BGS businesses. These requirements may also result in withheld payments and/or reduced future business if we
fail to comply. For example, proposals to raise domestic content thresholds for our U.S. government contracts could have negative impacts on our
business. Compliance costs attributable to current and potential future procurement regulations such as these could negatively impact our financial
position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
15

Table of Contents
The U.S. government may modify, curtail or terminate one or more of our contracts. The U.S. government contracting party may modify, curtail or
terminate its contracts and subcontracts with us, without prior notice and either at its convenience or for default based on performance. In addition,
funding pursuant to our U.S. government contracts may be reduced or withheld as part of the U.S. Congressional appropriations process due to
fiscal constraints, changes in U.S. national security strategy and/or priorities or other reasons. Further uncertainty with respect to ongoing programs
could also result in the event that the U.S. government finances its operations through temporary funding measures such as “continuing resolutions”
rather than full-year appropriations. Any loss or anticipated loss or reduction of expected funding and/or modification, curtailment or termination of
one or more large programs could have a material adverse effect on our financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
We are subject to U.S. government inquiries and investigations, including periodic audits of costs that we determine are reimbursable under U.S.
government contracts. U.S. government agencies, including the Defense Contract Audit Agency and the Defense Contract Management Agency,
routinely  audit government  contractors.  These agencies review our performance  under contracts,  cost  structure  and compliance  with applicable
laws, regulations and standards, as well as the adequacy of and our compliance with our internal control systems and policies. Any costs found to
be misclassified or inaccurately allocated to a specific contract will be deemed non-reimbursable, and to the extent already reimbursed, must be
refunded.  Any  inadequacies  in  our  systems  and  policies  could  result  in  withholds  on  billed  receivables,  penalties  and  reduced  future  business.
Furthermore,  if  any  audit,  inquiry  or  investigation  uncovers  improper  or  illegal  activities,  we  could  be  subject  to  civil  and  criminal  penalties  and
administrative sanctions, including termination of contracts, forfeiture of profits, suspension of payments, fines and suspension or debarment from
doing business with the U.S. government. We also could suffer reputational harm if allegations of impropriety were made against us, even if such
allegations are later determined to be false.
We enter into fixed-price contracts which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns.
Our BDS and BGS defense businesses generated approximately 68% and 69% of their 2021 revenues from fixed-price contracts. While fixed-price
contracts enable us to benefit from performance improvements, cost reductions and efficiencies, they also subject us to the risk of reduced margins
or incurring losses if we are unable to achieve estimated costs and revenues. In addition, increased compliance costs and costs due to loss of
productivity due to COVID-19 may not be reimbursed. If our estimated costs exceed our estimated price, we recognize reach-forward losses which
can significantly affect our reported results. For example in the fourth quarter of 2021, BDS recorded additional losses of $402 million on the KC-46A
Tanker contract reflecting continued disruption in the factory and in the supply chain, including impacts of COVID-19, and an increase in costs to
complete the new Remote Vision System as the customer’s requirements definition has evolved. New programs could also have risk for reach-
forward loss upon contract award and during the period of contract performance. The long term nature of many of our contracts makes the process
of estimating costs and revenues on fixed-price contracts inherently risky. Fixed-price contracts often contain price incentives and penalties tied to
performance, which can be difficult to estimate and have significant impacts on margins. In addition, some of our contracts have specific provisions
relating to cost, schedule and performance.
Fixed-price  development  contracts  are  generally  subject  to  more  uncertainty  than  fixed-price  production  contracts.  Many  of  these  development
programs have highly complex designs. In addition, technical or quality issues that arise during development could lead to schedule delays and
higher costs to complete, which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. Examples of significant BDS
fixed-price  development  contracts  include  Commercial  Crew,  KC-46A  Tanker,  T-7A  Red  Hawk,  VC-25B  Presidential  Aircraft,  MQ-25,  and
commercial and military satellites.
16

Table of Contents
We enter into cost-type contracts, which also carry risks.
Our BDS and BGS defense businesses generated approximately 32% and 31% of their 2021 revenues from cost-type contracting arrangements.
Some of these are development programs that have complex design and technical challenges. These cost-type programs typically have award or
incentive fees that are subject to uncertainty and may be earned over extended periods. In these cases the associated financial risks are primarily in
reduced fees, lower profit rates or program cancellation if cost, schedule or technical performance  issues arise. Programs  whose contracts  are
primarily cost-type include Ground-based Midcourse Defense (GMD), Proprietary and SLS programs.
We enter into contracts that include in-orbit incentive payments that subject us to risks.
Contracts in the commercial satellite industry and certain government satellite contracts include in-orbit incentive payments. These in-orbit payments
may be paid over time after final satellite acceptance or paid in full prior to final satellite acceptance. In both cases, the in-orbit incentive payment is
at risk if the satellite does not perform to specifications for up to 15 years after acceptance. The net present value of in-orbit incentive fees we
ultimately  expect  to  realize  is  recognized  as  revenue  in  the  construction  period.  If  the  satellite  fails  to  meet  contractual  performance  criteria,
customers  will not  be obligated  to  continue  making  in-orbit  payments  and/or  we  may  be  required  to  provide  refunds  to  the  customer  and  incur
significant charges.
Risks Related to Cybersecurity and Business Disruptions
Unauthorized access to our, our customers’ and/or our suppliers’ information and systems could negatively impact our business.
We face certain security threats, including threats to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data and systems. We maintain an extensive
network of technical security controls, policy enforcement mechanisms, monitoring systems and management oversight in order to address these
threats.  While  these  measures  are  designed  to  prevent,  detect  and  respond  to  unauthorized  activity  in  our  systems,  certain  types  of  attacks,
including cyber-attacks, could result in significant financial or information losses and/or reputational harm. In addition, we manage information and
information technology systems for certain customers and/or suppliers. Many of these customers and/or suppliers face similar security threats. If we
cannot  prevent  the  unauthorized  access,  release  and/or  corruption  of  our  customers’  and/or  suppliers’  confidential,  classified  or  personally
identifiable information, our reputation could be damaged, and/or we could face financial losses.
Business disruptions could seriously affect our future sales and financial condition or increase our costs and expenses.
Our business may be impacted by disruptions including threats to physical security, information technology, or cyber-attacks or failures, damaging or
extreme weather (including effects of climate change), or other acts of nature and pandemics or other public health crises. Any of these disruptions
could  affect  our  internal  operations  or  our  suppliers’  operations  and  delay  delivery  of  products  and  services  to  our  customers.  Any  significant
production delays, or any destruction, manipulation or improper use of Boeing’s or our suppliers’ data, information systems or networks could impact
our sales, increase our expenses and/or have an adverse effect on the reputation of Boeing and of our products and services.
17

Table of Contents
Risks Related to Legal and Regulatory Matters
The  outcome  of  litigation  and  of  government  inquiries  and  investigations  involving  our  business  is  unpredictable  and  an  adverse
decision in any such matter could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.
We are involved in a number of litigation matters. These matters may divert financial and management resources that would otherwise be used to
benefit our operations. No assurances can be given that the results of these matters will be favorable to us. An adverse resolution of any of these
lawsuits, or future lawsuits, could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. In addition, we are subject to extensive
regulation  under  the  laws  of  the  United  States  and  its  various  states,  as  well  as  other  jurisdictions  in  which  we  operate.  As  a  result,  we  are
sometimes subject to government inquiries and investigations of our business due, among other things, to our business relationships with the U.S.
government, the heavily regulated nature of our industry, and in the case of environmental proceedings, our current or past ownership of certain
property.  Any  such  inquiry  or  investigation  could  potentially  result  in  an  adverse  ruling  against  us,  which  could  have  a  material  impact  on  our
financial position, results of operations and/or cash flows.
Our operations expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities.
We are subject to various U.S. federal, state, local and non-U.S. laws and regulations related to environmental protection, including the discharge,
treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. We could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs, fines
and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if we were to violate or become liable under
environmental laws or regulations. In some cases, we are subject to such costs due to environmental impacts attributable to our current or past
manufacturing operations or the operations of companies we have acquired. In other cases, we are subject to such costs due to an indemnification
agreement between us and a third party relating to such environmental liabilities. In all cases, our current liabilities and ongoing cost assessments
are based on current laws and regulations. New laws and regulations, more stringent enforcement of existing laws and regulations, the discovery of
previously unknown contamination or the imposition of new remediation requirements  could result in additional costs. For additional information
relating to environmental contingencies, see Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We may be adversely affected by global climate change or by legal, regulatory or market responses to such change.
Increasing stakeholder environmental, social and governance (ESG) expectations, physical and transition risks associated with climate change, and
emerging  ESG regulation and policy requirements  may  pose risk  to our  market  outlook,  brand  and reputation,  financial  outlook,  cost  of  capital,
global supply chain and production continuity, which may impact our ability to achieve long-term business objectives. Changes in environmental and
climate change laws or regulations could lead to additional operational restrictions and compliance requirements upon us or our products, require
new  or  additional  investment  in  product  designs,  result  in  carbon  offset  investments  or  otherwise  could  negatively  impact  our  business  and/or
competitive position. Increasing aircraft performance standards and requirements on manufacturing and product air pollutant emissions, especially
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, may result in increased costs or reputational risks and could limit our ability to manufacture and/or market certain
of our products at acceptable costs, or at all. Physical impacts of climate change, increasing global chemical restrictions and bans, and water and
waste requirements may drive increased costs to us and our suppliers and impact our production continuity and data facilities.
Finally, from time to time, in alignment with our sustainability priorities, we establish and publicly announce goals and commitments to improve our
environmental performance, such as our recent operational goals in areas of GHG emissions, energy, water and waste. If we fail to achieve or
18

Table of Contents
improperly  report  on  our  progress  toward  achieving  our  environmental  goals  and  commitments,  the  resulting  negative  publicity  could  adversely
affect our reputation and/or our access to capital.
Risks Related to Financing and Liquidity
We may be unable to obtain debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments at competitive rates, on commercially reasonable
terms or in sufficient amounts.
We depend, in part, upon the issuance of debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments. In addition, our debt balances have increased
significantly since 2019, driven primarily by impacts related to the 737 MAX grounding and the COVID-19 pandemic, and we expect to continue to
actively manage our liquidity. Our increased debt balance has also resulted in downgrades to our credit ratings. As of December 31, 2021, our debt
totaled  $58.1  billion  of  which  approximately  $11.4  billion  of  principal  payments  on  outstanding  debt  become  due  over  the  next  three  years.  In
addition, as of December 31, 2021, our airplane financing commitments totaled $12.9 billion. If we require additional funding in order to pay off
existing debt, address further impacts to our business related to the 737 MAX, COVID-19, 787 production issues or broader market developments,
fund  outstanding  financing  commitments  or  meet  other  business  requirements,  our  market  liquidity  may  not  be  sufficient.  These  risks  will  be
particularly acute if we are subject to further credit rating downgrades. A number of factors could cause us to incur increased borrowing costs and to
have greater difficulty accessing public and private markets for debt. These factors include disruptions or declines in the global capital markets
and/or a decline in our financial performance, outlook or credit ratings, including impacts described above related to the COVID-19 pandemic and/or
associated changes in demand for our products and services. The occurrence of any or all of these events may adversely affect our ability to fund
our operations and contractual or financing commitments.
Substantial pension and other postretirement benefit obligations have a material impact on our earnings, shareholders’ equity and cash
flows from operations, and could have significant adverse impacts in future periods.
Many of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Potential pension contributions include both mandatory amounts
required under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and discretionary contributions to improve the plans' funded status. The extent of
future  contributions  depends  heavily  on  market  factors  such  as  the  discount  rate  and  the  actual  return  on  plan  assets.  We  estimate  future
contributions to these plans using assumptions with respect to these and other items. Changes to those assumptions could have a significant effect
on future contributions as well as on our annual pension costs and/or result in a significant change to shareholders' equity. For U.S. government
contracts, we allocate pension costs to individual contracts based on U.S. Cost Accounting Standards which can also affect contract profitability. We
also  provide  other  postretirement  benefits  to  certain  of  our  employees,  consisting  principally  of  health  care  coverage  for  eligible  retirees  and
qualifying dependents. Our estimates of future costs associated with these benefits are also subject to assumptions, including estimates of the level
of  medical  cost  increases.  For  a  discussion  regarding  how  our  financial  statements  can  be  affected  by  pension  and  other  postretirement  plan
accounting policies, see “Management's Discussion and Analysis - Critical Accounting Policies & Estimates - Pension Plans” on pages 54 - 55 of
this Form 10-K. Although under Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States of America (GAAP) the timing of periodic pension
and other postretirement benefit expense and plan contributions are not directly related, the key economic factors that affect GAAP expense would
also likely affect the amount of cash or stock we would contribute to our plans.
Our insurance coverage may be inadequate to cover all significant risk exposures.
We  are  exposed  to  liabilities  that  are  unique  to  the  products  and  services  we  provide.  We  maintain  insurance  for  certain  risks  and,  in  some
circumstances, we may receive indemnification from the U.S.
19

Table of Contents
government. The amount of our insurance coverage may not cover all claims or liabilities, and we may be forced to bear substantial costs. For
example,  liabilities  arising  from  the  use  of  certain  of  our  products,  such  as  aircraft  technologies,  space  systems,  spacecraft,  satellites,  missile
systems, weapons, cybersecurity, border security systems, anti-terrorism technologies and/or air traffic management systems may not be insurable
on commercially reasonable terms. While some of these products are shielded from liability within the U.S. under the SAFETY Act provisions of the
2002 Homeland Security Act, no such protection is available outside the U.S., potentially resulting in significant liabilities. The amount of insurance
coverage we maintain may be inadequate to cover these or other claims or liabilities.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in certain types of Boeing aircraft,
which exposes us to concentration risks.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in distinct geographic regions. Our portfolio is
also concentrated by varying degrees across Boeing aircraft product types, most notably 717 and 747-8 aircraft, and among customers that we
believe have less than investment-grade credit. If one or more customers holding a significant portion of our portfolio assets experiences financial
difficulties or otherwise defaults on or does not renew its leases with us at their expiration, and we are unable to redeploy the aircraft on reasonable
terms, or if the types of aircraft that are concentrated in our portfolio suffer greater than expected declines in value, our financial position, results of
operations and/or cash flows could be materially adversely affected.
Risks Related to Labor
Some of our and our suppliers’ workforces are represented by labor unions, which may lead to work stoppages.
Approximately 47,000 employees, which constitute 33% of our total workforce, were union represented as of December 31, 2021. We experienced a
work stoppage in 2008 when a labor strike halted commercial aircraft and certain BDS program production. We may experience additional work
stoppages in the future, which could adversely affect our business. We cannot predict how stable our relationships, currently with 11 U.S. labor
organizations  and  12  non-U.S.  labor  organizations,  will  be  or  whether  we  will  be  able  to  meet  the  unions’  requirements  without  impacting  our
financial  condition.  The  unions  may  also  limit  our  flexibility  in  dealing  with  our  workforce.  Union  actions  at  suppliers  can  also  affect  us.  Work
stoppages and instability in our union relationships could delay the production and/or development of our products, which could strain relationships
with customers and cause a loss of revenues which would adversely affect our operations.
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
Not applicable
20

Table of Contents
Item 2. Properties
We  occupied  approximately  82  million  square  feet  of  floor  space  on  December  31,  2021  for  manufacturing,  warehousing,  engineering,
administration and other productive uses, of which approximately 93% was located in the United States. The following table provides a summary of
the floor space by business as of December 31, 2021:
(Square feet in thousands)
Owned
Leased
Government Owned
Total
Commercial Airplanes
39,166 
2,112 
41,278 
Defense, Space & Security
22,584 
5,970 
28,554 
Global Services
641 
7,261 
7,902 
Other
1,823 
2,246 
318 
4,387 
Total
64,214 
17,589 
318 
82,121 
Excludes rent-free space furnished by U.S. government landlord of 49 square feet.
Other includes sites used for BCC, common internal services and our Corporate Headquarters.
At December 31, 2021, we occupied in excess of 76 million square feet of floor space at the following major locations:
•
Commercial Airplanes – Greater Seattle, WA; Greater Charleston, SC; Greater Portland, OR; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Greater Salt Lake City,
UT; Australia and Canada
•
Defense, Space & Security – Greater St. Louis, MO; Greater Seattle, WA; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Philadelphia, PA; Mesa, AZ; Huntsville, AL;
Oklahoma City, OK; Heath, OH; Greater Washington, DC; Great Britain; Greater Portland, OR; Australia and Houston, TX
•
Global Services – San Antonio, TX; Greater Miami, FL; Dallas, TX; Germany; Jacksonville, FL; Great Britain and Greater Denver, CO
•
Other – Chicago, IL; Greater Los Angeles, CA ; Greater St. Louis, MO; and Greater Washington, DC.
Most runways and taxiways that we use are located on airport properties owned by others and are used jointly with others. Our rights to use such
facilities are provided for under long-term leases with municipal, county or other government authorities. In addition, the U.S. government furnishes
us certain office space, installations and equipment at U.S. government bases for use in connection with various contract activities.
To support business needs, property requirements are being evaluated to align with previously announced staffing reductions, utilization studies and
strategic growth investments to optimize footprint.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
Currently, we are involved in a number of legal proceedings. For a discussion of contingencies related to legal proceedings, see Note 21 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements, which is hereby incorporated by reference.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable
(1)
(2)
(1) 
(2) 
21

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The principal market for our common stock is the New York Stock Exchange where it trades under the symbol BA. As of January 24, 2022, there
were 95,533 shareholders of record.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The  following  table  provides  information  about  purchases  we  made  during  the  quarter  ended  December  31,  2021  of  equity  securities  that  are
registered by us pursuant to Section 12 of the Exchange Act:
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Total Number
of Shares
Purchased
Average 
Price Paid per 
Share
Total Number of 
Shares Purchased 
as Part of Publicly 
Announced Plans 
or Programs
Approximate Dollar
Value of Shares That May Yet
be Purchased Under the
Plans or Programs
10/1/2021 thru 10/31/2021
3,077
$223.99 
11/1/2021 thru 11/30/2021
3,940
212.15 
12/1/2021 thru 12/31/2021
80,937
206.62 
Total
87,954
$207.48 
A  total  of  87,954  shares  were  transferred  to  us  from  employees  in  satisfaction  of  minimum  tax  withholding  obligations  associated  with  the
vesting of restricted stock units during the period. We did not purchase any shares of our common stock in the open market pursuant to a
repurchase program.
On March 21, 2020, the Board of Directors terminated its prior authorization to repurchase shares of the Company's outstanding common stock.
Share repurchases under this plan had been suspended since April 2019.
Item 6. [Reserved]
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
22

Table of Contents
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Overview
We are a global market leader in the design, development, manufacture, sale, service and support of commercial jetliners, military aircraft, satellites,
missile defense, human space flight and launch systems and services. We are one of the two major manufacturers of 100+ seat airplanes for the
worldwide commercial  airline industry  and one of the largest  defense contractors  in the U.S.  While our principal operations are in the U.S.,  we
conduct operations in an expanding number of countries and rely on an extensive network of non-U.S. partners, key suppliers and subcontractors.
Our strategy is centered on successful execution in healthy core businesses – Commercial Airplanes (BCA), Defense, Space & Security (BDS) and
Global Services (BGS) – supplemented and supported by Boeing Capital (BCC). Taken together, these core businesses have historically generated
substantial earnings and cash flow that permit us to invest in new products and services. We focus on producing the products and providing the
services that the market demands, and continue to find new ways to improve efficiency and quality to provide a fair return for our shareholders. BCA
is committed to being the leader in commercial aviation by offering airplanes and services that deliver superior design, safety, efficiency and value to
customers  around  the  world.  BDS  integrates  its  resources  in  defense,  intelligence,  communications,  security,  space  and  services  to  deliver
capability-driven  solutions  to  customers  at  reduced  costs.  Our  BDS  strategy  is  to  leverage  our  core  businesses  to  capture  key  next-generation
programs while expanding our presence in adjacent and international markets, underscored by an intense focus on growth and productivity. BGS
provides  support  for  commercial  and  defense  through  innovative,  comprehensive  and  cost-competitive  product  and  service  solutions.  BCC
facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our Boeing customers.
Business Environment and Trends
The global outbreak of COVID-19, 787 production issues and associated rework, and the residual impacts of the 737 MAX grounding continued to
have significant adverse impacts on our business in 2021. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented shock to demand for air travel,
creating a tremendous challenge for our customers, our business and the entire commercial aerospace manufacturing and services sector. The
latest International Air Transport Association (IATA) release reported that passenger traffic in 2021 recovered to approximately 40% of 2019 levels,
as international markets saw continued reopening challenges. Additionally, global economic activity is improving, but continues to be impacted by
COVID-19, and governments continue to restrict travel to contain the spread of the virus. While recovery is accelerating, we continue to expect that
it will remain uneven as travel restrictions and varying regional travel protocols continue to impact air travel.
Generally, we continue to expect domestic travel to recover faster than international travel. As a result, we expect the narrow-body market to recover
faster  than  the  wide-body  market.  Also,  the  pace  of  the  commercial  market  recovery  will  be  heavily  dependent  on  COVID-19  infection  rates,
vaccination rates, and government travel and other restrictions on trade and commercial activity. Demand for dedicated freighters continues to be
strong, underpinned by a strong recovery in global trade and overall air cargo growth. Overall cargo capacity remains challenged given the large
impact that COVID-19 has had on international passenger operations, which also carry cargo.
23

Table of Contents
Airline financial performance, which also plays a role in the demand for new capacity, has been adversely impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
According  to  IATA,  net  losses  for  the  airline  industry  were  $138  billion  in  2020  and  are  expected  to  be  approximately  $52  billion  in  2021.  Our
customers are taking actions to combat the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic on the market by preserving liquidity. This comes in many forms,
such  as  deferrals  of  advances  and  other  payments  to  suppliers,  deferrals  of  deliveries,  reduced  spending  on  services  and,  in  some  cases,
cancellation of orders. While the outlook is improving and we have seen an increase in new orders in 2021, we continue to face a challenging
environment in the near- to medium-term as airlines have adjusted to reduced traffic, which in turn has resulted in lower demand for commercial
aerospace products and services. The current environment is also affecting the financial viability of some airlines.
We continue to expect commercial air travel to return to 2019 levels in 2023 to 2024. We expect it will take a few years beyond that for the industry
to return to long-term trend growth. To balance the supply and demand given the COVID-19 shock and to preserve our long-term potential and
competitiveness,  we  have  reduced  the  production  rates  of  several  of  our  BCA  programs.  These  rate  decisions  are  based  on  our  ongoing
assessments of the demand environment and availability of aircraft financing. There is significant uncertainty with respect to when commercial air
traffic levels will recover, and whether, and at what point, capacity will return to and/or exceed pre-COVID-19 levels. During the fourth quarter of
2020, we made adjustments to our estimates regarding timing of 777X entry into service and market demand. We continue to anticipate that the first
777X delivery will occur in late 2023. We will closely monitor the key factors that affect backlog and future demand for each of our commercial
aircraft programs, including customers’ evolving fleet plans, the wide-body replacement cycle and the cargo market. We will maintain a disciplined
rate management process and make adjustments as appropriate in the future. Notwithstanding the changes we have made to production rates, risk
remains that further reductions will be required. Additionally, if we are unable to make timely deliveries of the large number of aircraft in inventory as
of December 31, 2021, future revenues, earnings and cash flows will be adversely impacted.
Deliveries of the 737 MAX resumed in the fourth quarter of 2020, when the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) rescinded the order that grounded
737 MAX aircraft in the U.S. In addition, other non-U.S. civil aviation authorities, including the Brazilian National Civil Aviation Agency, Transport
Canada and the European Union Aviation Safety Agency have subsequently approved return of operations, allowing us to resume deliveries in
those jurisdictions. Over 185 countries have approved the resumption of 737 MAX operations. The Civil Aviation Administration of China issued an
airworthiness directive in the fourth quarter of 2021 outlining actions required for airlines to return to service. We expect 737 MAX deliveries to China
to resume in 2022, subject to final regulatory approvals, although risk remains around the timing and rate of those deliveries. Orders to suspend
operations of 737 MAX aircraft from non-U.S. civil aviation authorities are still in effect in a small number of countries.
Deliveries and production have also been impacted by production issues and associated rework. For example, deliveries of the 787 are currently
paused and the production rate has been reduced while we focus on rework of undelivered aircraft and continue to engage in detailed discussions
with  the  FAA  regarding  required  actions  for  resuming  deliveries.  Risk  remains  that  these  issues  may  continue  to  impact  the  timing  of  airplane
deliveries in inventory and/or our ability to achieve planned production rates. Revenues, earnings and cash flows will continue to be impacted until
we are able to resume timely deliveries.
24

Table of Contents
The long-term outlook for the industry remains positive due to the fundamental drivers of air travel demand: economic growth, increasing propensity
to travel due to increased trade, globalization and improved airline services driven by liberalization of air traffic rights between countries. The shock
from  COVID-19  has  reduced  the  near-  to  medium-term  demand,  but  our  Commercial  Market  Outlook  forecast  projects  a  4%  growth  rate  for
passenger and cargo traffic over a 20 year period. Based on long-term global economic growth projections of 2.7% average annual gross domestic
product  (GDP)  growth,  we  project  demand  for  approximately  43,610  new  airplanes  over  the  next  20  years.  The  industry  remains  vulnerable  to
exogenous developments including fuel price spikes, credit market shocks, acts of terrorism, natural disasters, conflicts, epidemics, pandemics and
increased global environmental regulations.
A Continuing Resolution (CR), enacted on December 3, 2021, continues funding for the federal government at FY21 appropriated levels through
February  18,  2022.  Congress  and  the  President  must  enact  either  full-year  FY22  appropriations  bills  or  an  additional  CR  to  fund  government
departments and agencies beyond February 18, 2022 or a government shutdown could result, which may impact the Company’s operations.
At BGS, while the outlook is improving, we are continuing to see a direct impact on our commercial supply chain business as fewer flights and more
aircraft parked result in a decreased demand for our parts and logistics offerings. Additionally, our commercial customers are curtailing discretionary
spending, such as modifications and upgrades, and focusing on required maintenance. Similar to BCA, we expect a multi-year recovery period for
the  commercial  services  business.  The  demand  outlook  for  our  government  services  business  remains  stable;  government  services  comprises
approximately half of BGS revenue, which is unchanged from pre-pandemic levels.
At  BDS,  we  continue  to  see  a  healthy  market  with  solid  demand  for  our  major  platforms  and  programs  both  domestically  and  internationally.
However, while we continue to experience near-term production disruptions and inefficiencies due to COVID-19 impacts, we saw improvements in
2021.
In  addition,  we  are  experiencing  some  supply  chain  shortages.  Our  suppliers  are  also  experiencing  liquidity  pressures  and  disruptions  to  their
operations as a result of COVID-19. We continue to monitor the health and stability of the supply chain as we ramp up production. These measures
and disruptions have reduced overall productivity and adversely impacted our financial position, results of operations and cash flows.
We  continue  to  transform  and  improve  our  business  processes.  These  activities  are  not  intended  to  constrain  our  capacity  but  to  enable  the
Company to emerge stronger and be more resilient when the market recovers. We expect that successful execution of these measures will improve
near-term liquidity and long-term cost competitiveness.
25

Table of Contents
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table summarizes key indicators of consolidated results of operations:
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenues
$62,286 
$58,158 
$76,559 
GAAP
Loss from operations
($2,902)
($12,767)
($1,975)
Operating margins
(4.7) %
(22.0) %
(2.6) %
Effective income tax rate
14.8 %
17.5 %
71.8 %
Net loss attributable to Boeing Shareholders
($4,202)
($11,873)
($636)
Diluted loss per share
($7.15)
($20.88)
($1.12)
Non-GAAP 
Core operating loss
($4,075)
($14,150)
($3,390)
Core operating margins
(6.5 %)
(24.3 %)
(4.4 %)
Core loss per share
($9.44)
($23.25)
($3.47)
These measures exclude certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. See pages 49 - 51 for important information
about these non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measures.
Revenues
The following table summarizes Revenues:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Commercial Airplanes
$19,493 
$16,162 
$32,255 
Defense, Space & Security
26,540 
26,257 
26,095 
Global Services
16,328 
15,543 
18,468 
Boeing Capital
272 
261 
244 
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(347)
(65)
(503)
Total
$62,286 
$58,158 
$76,559 
Revenues increased by $4,128 million in 2021 compared with 2020 driven by higher revenues at BCA, BDS and BGS. BCA revenues increased by
$3,331 million primarily driven by higher 737 MAX deliveries due to recertification and return to service in most jurisdictions and the absence of $498
million  of  737  MAX  customer  considerations  which  reduced  revenues  in  2020,  partially  offset  by  lower  787  deliveries  in  2021.  BDS  revenues
increased by $283 million primarily from higher revenue on the KC-46A Tanker program and lower charges in 2021. BGS revenues increased by
$785 million primarily due to higher commercial and government services volume.
Revenues decreased by $18,401 million in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to lower revenues in our commercial airplanes and commercial
services  businesses.  Revenues  for  each  of  our  segments  have  been  adversely  impacted  by  COVID-19.  BCA  revenues  decreased  by  $16,093
million due to lower deliveries driven by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, 787 production issues and the 737 MAX grounding, offset by lower
charges  related  to  estimated  potential  concessions  and  other  considerations  to  737  MAX  customers.  BDS  revenues  increased  by  $162  million
primarily due to higher fighter aircraft
(1)
(1)
26

Table of Contents
and other  volume,  partially  offset  by  the  impact  of  higher  unfavorable  cumulative  contract  catch-up  adjustments,  largely  due  to  KC-46A  Tanker
charges  in  2020.  BGS  revenues  decreased  by  $2,925  million  primarily  due  to  lower  commercial  services  revenue  driven  by  the  COVID-19
pandemic. The changes in Unallocated items, eliminations and other primarily reflect the timing of eliminations for intercompany aircraft deliveries,
as well as reserves related to cost accounting litigation recorded in 2019.
Revenues will continue to be significantly impacted until deliveries ramp up and the commercial airline industry recovers from the impacts of COVID-
19.
Loss From Operations
The following table summarizes Loss from operations:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Commercial Airplanes
($6,475)
($13,847)
($6,657)
Defense, Space & Security
1,544 
1,539 
2,615 
Global Services
2,017 
450 
2,697 
Boeing Capital
106 
63 
28 
Segment operating loss
(2,808)
(11,795)
(1,317)
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
882 
1,024 
1,071 
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
291 
359 
344 
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(1,267)
(2,355)
(2,073)
Loss from operations (GAAP)
($2,902)
($12,767)
($1,975)
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment *
(1,173)
(1,383)
(1,415)
Core operating loss (Non-GAAP) **
($4,075)
($14,150)
($3,390)
*    The FAS/CAS service cost adjustment represents the difference between the FAS pension and postretirement service costs calculated under
GAAP and costs allocated to the business segments.
**    Core operating earnings is a Non-GAAP measure that excludes the FAS/CAS service cost adjustment. See pages 49 - 51.
Loss from operations decreased by $9,865 million in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to lower losses at BCA and higher earnings at BGS.
BCA loss from operations decreased by $7,372 million primarily due to the absence of a $6,493 million reach-forward loss on the 777X program
recorded  in 2020, lower period expenses,  lower  737 MAX  customer  considerations  and higher 737 MAX  deliveries,  partially  offset  by a $3,460
million reach-forward loss on the 787 program in 2021. BGS earnings from operations increased by $1,567 million in 2021 compared with 2020
primarily due to charges incurred in 2020 as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as higher commercial services volume.
Loss from operations increased by $10,792 million in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to increased losses at BCA and decreased earnings at
BGS and BDS. BCA loss from operations increased by $7,190 million. The loss in 2020 primarily reflects a reach-forward loss recorded in the fourth
quarter of $6,493 million on the 777X program. BCA’s loss in 2020 also reflects the absence of MAX deliveries during the first three quarters of the
year,  lower  wide-body  deliveries  and  lower  program  margins  resulting  from  the  COVID-19  pandemic  and  787  production  issues,  abnormal
production costs, 737NG frame fitting component repair costs, severance costs and 737 MAX customer considerations.
The loss in 2019 primarily reflects the absence of 737 MAX deliveries in the second, third and fourth quarters and charges of $8,259 million for
estimated 737 MAX customer considerations. BDS earnings
27

Table of Contents
decreased by $1,076 million in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to higher unfavorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments, including
charges of $1,320 million on KC-46A Tanker and $168 million on VC-25B in 2020, partially offset by $489 million of charges on Commercial Crew in
2019. The lower earnings were also driven by lower gains on property sales compared to 2019. BGS earnings from operations decreased by $2,247
million in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to lower commercial services revenue, as well as asset impairments and severance costs resulting
from the COVID-19 market environment.
Lower commercial airplane deliveries and the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have a significant adverse impact on future earnings and margins
until deliveries ramp up and return to historical levels.
Core operating loss decreased by $10,075 million in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to lower losses at BCA and higher earnings at BGS, as
described above.
Core operating loss increased by $10,760 million in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to higher losses at BCA and lower earnings at BGS and
BDS.
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and Other The most significant items included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the
following table:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Share-based plans
($174)
($120)
($65)
Deferred compensation
(126)
(93)
(174)
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
(107)
(95)
(89)
Research and development expense, net
(184)
(240)
(401)
Customer financing impairment
(250)
Litigation
(109)
Eliminations and other unallocated items
(676)
(1,807)
(985)
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
($1,267)
($2,355)
($2,073)
Share-based plans expense increased by $54 million in 2021 and $55 million in 2020. The higher expense in 2021 was primarily related to a one-
time grant of restricted stock units (RSUs) to most employees in December 2020. The increase in 2020 was due to increased grants of RSUs and
other share-based compensation.
Deferred compensation expense increased by $33 million in 2021, primarily driven by changes in our stock price, and decreased by $81 million in
2020, primarily driven by changes in broad stock market conditions and our stock price.
Research  and  development  expense  decreased  by  $56  million  in  2021  and  $161  million  in  2020  primarily  due  to  decreases  in  enterprise
investments in product development.
In 2019, we recorded a $250 million charge related to the impairment of lease incentives with one customer that experienced liquidity issues and a
$109 million charge related to ongoing litigation associated with recoverable costs on U.S. government contracts.
Eliminations and other unallocated expense decreased by $1,131 million in 2021 and increased by $822 million in 2020 primarily due to earnings
charges of $744 million in the fourth quarter of 2020 in anticipation of the agreement between Boeing and the U.S. Department of Justice that was
finalized in January 2021 and higher income from operating investments in 2021. See Note 21.
28

Table of Contents
Net periodic pension benefit costs included in Loss from operations were as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
Pension
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Allocated to business segments
($885)
($1,027)
($1,384)
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
882 
1,024 
1,071 
Net periodic pension benefit cost included in Loss from operations
($3)
($3)
($313)
The pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment recognized in Loss from operations in 2021 decreased by $142 million compared with 2020 due to
reductions in allocated pension cost year over year. The pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment recognized in Loss from operations in 2020 was
largely consistent with 2019. Net periodic benefit cost included in Loss from operations in 2021 was largely consistent with 2020. The decrease in
net periodic benefit cost included in Loss from operations in 2020 was primarily due to prior year service cost that was included in earnings in 2019.
For additional discussion related to Postretirement Plans, see Note 16 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Other Earnings Items
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Loss from operations
($2,902)
($12,767)
($1,975)
Other income, net
551 
447 
438 
Interest and debt expense
(2,682)
(2,156)
(722)
Loss before income taxes
(5,033)
(14,476)
(2,259)
Income tax benefit
743 
2,535 
1,623 
Net loss from continuing operations
(4,290)
(11,941)
(636)
Less: net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
(88)
(68)
Net loss attributable to Boeing Shareholders
($4,202)
($11,873)
($636)
Non-operating pension income included in Other income, net was $528 million in 2021, $340 million in 2020 and $374 million in 2019. The increased
income in 2021 compared to 2020 was primarily due to lower interest cost and higher expected return on plan assets, partially offset by higher
amortization  of  net  actuarial  losses  and  higher  settlement  charges.  The  decreased  income  in  2020  compared  to  2019  was  due  to  higher
amortization of actuarial losses and lower asset returns, partially offset by lower interest cost.
Non-operating postretirement income included in Other income, net was $1 million in 2021, compared with expense of $16 million in 2020 and $107
million in 2019. The increased income in 2021 compared to 2020 was due to lower interest cost. The decreased expense in 2020 compared to 2019
was due to lower interest cost.
Interest and debt expense increased by $526 million in 2021 and increased by $1,434 million in 2020 as a result of higher average debt balances.
For additional discussion related to Income Taxes, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
29

Table of Contents
Total Costs and Expenses (“Cost of Sales”)
Cost of sales, for both products and services, consists primarily of raw materials, parts, sub-assemblies, labor, overhead and subcontracting costs.
Our  BCA  segment  predominantly  uses  program  accounting  to  account  for  cost  of  sales.  Under  program  accounting,  cost  of  sales  for  each
commercial airplane program equals the product of (i) revenue recognized in connection with customer deliveries and (ii) the estimated cost of sales
percentage  applicable to the total  remaining  program.  For long-term  contracts,  the amount  reported  as cost  of  sales  is recognized  as incurred.
Substantially all contracts at our BDS segment and certain contracts at our BGS segment are long-term contracts with the U.S. government and
other customers that generally extend over several years. Cost of sales for commercial spare parts is recorded at average cost.
The following table summarizes cost of sales:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31
2021
2020
Change
2020
2019
Change
Cost of sales
$59,269 
$63,843 
($4,574)
$63,843 
$72,093 
($8,250)
Cost of sales as a % of
Revenues
95.2 %
109.8 %
(14.6)%
109.8 %
94.2 %
15.6 %
Cost of sales decreased by $4,574 million in 2021 compared with 2020, primarily due to higher earnings charges at BCA, BDS and BGS in 2020,
partially offset by higher costs as a result of higher revenues in 2021 and the reach-forward loss on the 787 program. Cost of sales as a percentage
of Revenues decreased in 2021 compared to 2020 primarily due to higher earnings charges at BCA and BGS in 2020 and higher revenues in 2021.
Cost of sales decreased by $8,250 million in 2020 compared with 2019, primarily due to lower revenue in 2020, partially offset by higher charges in
2020 related to the 777X program, COVID-19 impacts, KC-46A Tanker program, abnormal production costs at BCA and severance costs. Cost of
sales as a percentage of Revenues increased in 2020 compared to 2019 primarily due to the reach-forward loss on the 777X program, impacts of
the 737 MAX grounding and the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as severance costs.
Research and Development The following table summarizes our Research and development expense:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Commercial Airplanes
$1,140 
$1,385 
$1,956 
Defense, Space & Security
818 
713 
741 
Global Services
107 
138 
121 
Other
184 
240 
401 
Total
$2,249 
$2,476 
$3,219 
Research and development expense decreased by $227 million in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to lower BCA and enterprise investments
in product development and lower spending on the 777X program.
Research and development expense decreased by $743 million in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily due to lower spending at BCA and at Boeing
NeXt on product development.
30

Table of Contents
Backlog
Our backlog at December 31 was as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
Commercial Airplanes
$296,882 
$281,588 
Defense, Space & Security
59,828 
60,847 
Global Services
20,496 
20,632 
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
293 
337 
Total Backlog
$377,499 
$363,404 
Contractual backlog
$356,362 
$339,309 
Unobligated backlog
21,137 
24,095 
Total Backlog
$377,499 
$363,404 
Contractual backlog of unfilled orders excludes purchase options, announced orders for which definitive contracts have not been executed, orders
where customers have the unilateral right to terminate, and unobligated U.S. and non-U.S. government contract funding. The increase in contractual
backlog during 2021 was primarily due to new orders, reclassifications from unobligated backlog related to BDS and BGS contracts, increases in
price escalation and reductions in the number of existing orders that in our assessment do not meet the accounting requirements of Accounting
Standards Codification (ASC) 606 for inclusion in backlog, partially offset by deliveries and cancellations. During 2021, we have had higher ASC 606
adjustments of 787 orders as a result of delivery delays related to inspections and rework. If 787 aircraft deliveries continue to be paused, we remain
unable to deliver 737 MAX aircraft in China for an extended period of time, and/or entry into service of the 777X, 737 MAX 7 and/or 737 MAX 10 is
further  delayed,  we  may  experience  additional  reductions  to  backlog  and/or  significant  order  cancellations.  Additionally,  we  may  continue  to
experience fewer new orders and increased cancellations across all of our commercial airplane programs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic
and associated impacts on demand.
Unobligated  backlog  includes  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  government  definitive  contracts  for  which  funding  has  not  been  authorized.  The  decrease  in
unobligated  backlog  in  2021  was  primarily  due  to  reclassifications  to  contractual  backlog  related  to  BDS  and  BGS  contracts,  partially  offset  by
contract awards.
Additional Considerations
Global Trade We continually monitor the global trade environment in response to geopolitical economic developments, as well as changes in tariffs,
trade agreements or sanctions that may impact the company.
The global economy continues to experience significant adverse impacts due to the COVID-19 pandemic, including a decline in overall trade in
general and in aerospace in particular. There is a great deal of uncertainty regarding the duration, scale and localization of these impacts to the
global economy and governments are enacting a wide range of responses to mitigate the unfolding economic impacts. We are closely monitoring
the  current  impact  and  potential  future  economic  consequences  of  COVID-19  to  the  global  economy,  the  aerospace  sector  and  our  Company.
These adverse economic impacts have resulted in fewer orders than previously anticipated for our commercial aircraft.
31

Table of Contents
The  current  state  of  U.S.-China  relations  remains  a  significant  watch  item.  China  is  a  very  significant  market  for  commercial  airplanes  and
represents a significant component of our commercial airplanes backlog. Since 2018, the U.S. and China imposed an escalating series of tariffs on
each other’s imports. Certain aircraft parts and components that Boeing procures are subject to these tariffs. The U.S. and China entered into a
Phase I agreement in January 2020. However, as of December 31, 2021, implementation of this agreement is incomplete and overall diplomatic
relations between the U.S. and China have deteriorated. We continue monitoring developments for potential adverse impacts to the Company.
Beginning in June 2018, the U.S. Government has imposed tariffs on steel and aluminum imports. In response to these tariffs, several major U.S.
trading  partners  have  imposed,  or  announced  their  intention  to  impose,  tariffs  on  U.S.  goods.  In  May  2019,  the  U.S.  Government,  Mexico  and
Canada reached an agreement to end the steel and aluminum tariffs between these countries. Implementation of the U.S./Mexico/Canada Free
Trade Agreement (USMCA) will also result in lower tariffs. In October 2021, the U.S. and European Union (EU) announced an agreement to ease
steel and aluminum tariffs. We continue to monitor the potential for any extra costs that may result from the remaining global tariffs.
The  current  status  of  U.S.-Russia  relations  is  creating  an  adverse  climate  for  our  business.  The  U.S.  Government  continues  to  impose  and/or
consider imposing sanctions on certain businesses and individuals in Russia. We continue to monitor and evaluate additional sanctions and export
restrictions  that may be imposed by the U.S. Government  and any responses from  Russia that could directly affect  our supply chain, business
partners or customers. We also continue to support the 737 MAX return to service in Russia.
The U.S. and EU have been engaged in two long-running disputes at the World Trade Organization (WTO) relating to large civil aircraft. As part of
those disputes, in October 2019, the WTO authorized the U.S. to impose approximately $7.50 billion in annual tariffs on EU products in connection
with the EU’s provision of eight instances of launch aid subsidies to Airbus. Following this authorization, the U.S. began to impose 15% tariffs on
new Airbus airplanes imported into the U.S. as well as fuselages that Airbus manufactures in Europe and imports into the U.S. In October 2020, the
WTO authorized the EU to impose approximately $3.99 billion in annual tariffs on U.S. products in connection with a tax incentive used by Boeing in
Washington state that has since been repealed. Shortly thereafter, the EU began to impose 15% tariffs on Boeing airplanes imported into the EU.
On June 15, 2021, the U.S. and EU announced that they had reached a cooperative framework to address the large civil aircraft disputes. As part of
the framework, among other items, both sides announced an intent to continue to suspend tariffs related to the disputes for five years. The U.S. and
U.K. announced a similar agreement on June 17, 2021.
Segment Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Commercial Airplanes
Business Environment and Trends
Airline Industry Environment See Overview to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations for a
discussion of the impacts of COVID-19 on the airline industry environment.
Industry Competitiveness The industry continues to adjust to the unprecedented COVID-19 shock and subsequent economic impact, government
restrictions and new regulations. The commercial airplane market and the airline industry both remain extremely competitive. While the impacts and
responses  have  varied  globally,  the  reduction  of  demand  and  disruption  in  production  has  adversely  impacted  most  manufacturers  in  the
commercial airplane industry.
32

Table of Contents
Continued access to global markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales potential and long-term investment returns. Approximately
80% of Commercial Airplanes’ total backlog, in dollar terms, is with non-U.S. airlines. We face aggressive international competitors who are intent on
increasing their market share. They offer competitive products and have access to most of the same customers and suppliers. The grounding of the
737  MAX  and  the  associated  suspension  of  737  MAX  deliveries  in  multiple  jurisdictions  significantly  reduced  our  market  share  with  respect  to
deliveries of single aisle aircraft in 2019, 2020 and 2021 and may provide competitors with an opportunity to obtain more orders and increase market
share. With government support, Airbus has historically invested heavily to create a family of products to compete with ours. After the acquisition of
a majority share of Bombardier’s C Series (now A220) in 2018, Airbus continues to expand in the 100-150 seat transcontinental  market. Other
competitors  are  also  in  different  phases  of  developing  commercial  jet  aircraft.  Some  of  these  competitors  have  historically  enjoyed  access  to
government-provided  financial  support,  including  “launch  aid,”  which  greatly  reduces  the  cost  and  commercial  risks  associated  with  airplane
development  activities.  This  has enabled the  development  of  airplanes  without  broad  commercial  viability;  others  to be brought  to market  more
quickly than otherwise possible; and many offered for sale below market-based prices. Competitors continue to make improvements in efficiency,
which may result in funding product development, gaining market share and improving earnings. This market environment has resulted in intense
pressures on pricing and other competitive factors, and we expect these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years.
We are focused on improving our products and services and continuing our business transformation efforts, which enhances our ability to compete
and  positions  us  for  market  recovery.  We  are  also  focused  on  taking  actions  to  ensure  that  Boeing  is  not  harmed  by  unfair  subsidization  of
competitors.
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenues
$19,493 
$16,162 
$32,255 
% of total company revenues
31 %
28 %
42 %
Loss from operations
($6,475)
($13,847)
($6,657)
Operating margins
(33.2)%
(85.7)%
(20.6)%
Research and development
$1,140 
$1,385 
$1,956 
Revenues
BCA revenues increased by $3,331 million in 2021 compared with 2020 primarily due to higher 737 MAX deliveries driven by recertification and
return to service in most jurisdictions and the absence of charges for 737 MAX customer considerations which reduced revenues in 2020, partially
offset by lower 787 deliveries in 2021.
BCA revenues decreased by $16,093 million in 2020 compared with 2019 due to lower deliveries primarily driven by the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic, 787 production issues and the 737 MAX grounding. This was partially offset by lower charges related to estimated potential concessions
and other considerations to 737 MAX customers of $498 million in 2020 compared with $8,259 million in 2019.
We resumed deliveries of 737 MAX aircraft in December 2020 following rescission by the FAA of its grounding order. As of December 31, 2021,
most non-U.S. jurisdictions have approved return to service of the 737 MAX. 787 deliveries have been paused since May 2021. Revenues will
continue to be impacted until deliveries of the 737 MAX ramp up, deliveries of the 787 resume and the commercial airline industry recovers from the
impacts of COVID-19.
33

Table of Contents
Commercial Airplanes deliveries as of December 31 were as follows:
737 *
747 
767 *
777 †
787 
Total
2021
Cumulative deliveries
7,745
1,567
1,238
1,677
1,006
Deliveries
263
(16)
7
32
(13)
24
14
340
2020
Cumulative deliveries
7,482
1,560
1,206
1,653
992
Deliveries
43
5
30
26
53
157
2019
Cumulative deliveries
7,439
1,555
1,176
1,627
939
Deliveries
127
7
43
45
158
380
* Intercompany deliveries identified by parentheses
† Aircraft accounted for as revenues by BCA and as operating leases in consolidation identified by parentheses
Loss From Operations
BCA loss from operations was $6,475 million in 2021 compared with $13,847 million in 2020. The 2021 loss includes a reach-forward loss on the
787 program of $3,460 million, abnormal production costs related to 737 MAX of $1,887 million, and abnormal production costs related to the 787
program of $468 million resulting from continued production issues, inspections and rework, partially offset by higher 737 MAX deliveries. The 2020
loss reflects the reach-forward loss on 777X of $6,493 million and additional drivers as noted in the paragraph below.
BCA loss from operations was $13,847 million in 2020 compared with $6,657 million in 2019. The 2020 loss reflects the reach-forward loss on 777X
of $6,493 million, lower deliveries and lower program margins resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic, $2,567 million of abnormal production costs
related to 737 MAX, $623 million of severance cost, $498 million of 737 MAX customer considerations, $336 million related to 737NG frame fitting
component  repair  costs  and $270 million  of  abnormal  production  costs  in the  first  half of  2020 from  the  temporary  suspension  of operations  in
response to COVID-19, partially offset by lower research and development spending. Lower 787 margins reflecting a reduction in the accounting
quantity in the first quarter of 2020 also contributed to lower earnings. The 2019 loss primarily reflects the absence of 737 MAX deliveries in the
second, third and fourth quarters of 2019 and charges of $8,259 million for estimated 737 MAX customer considerations.
Lower commercial airplane deliveries and the COVID-19 pandemic will continue to have a significant adverse impact on future earnings and margins
until deliveries ramp up and return to historical levels.
Backlog
Our total backlog represents the estimated transaction prices on unsatisfied and partially satisfied performance obligations to our customers where
we believe it is probable that we will collect the consideration due and where no contingencies remain before we and the customer are required to
perform. Backlog does not include prospective orders where customer controlled contingencies remain, such as the customer receiving approval
from its board of directors, shareholders or government or completing financing arrangements. All such contingencies must be satisfied or have
expired prior to recording a new firm order even if satisfying such conditions is highly certain. Backlog excludes options and BCC orders as well as
orders where customers have the unilateral right to terminate. A number of our customers may have contractual remedies, including rights to reject
individual airplane deliveries if the actual delivery date is significantly later than the contractual delivery date. We address customer
(14)
(11)
(19)
(23)
(2)
34

Table of Contents
claims and requests for other contractual relief as they arise. The value of orders in backlog is adjusted as changes to price and schedule are
agreed to with customers and is reported in accordance with the requirements of ASC 606.
BCA  total  backlog  of  $296,882  million  at  December  31,  2021  increased  from  $281,588  million  at  December  31,  2020,  reflecting  new  orders  in
excess of deliveries, increases in projected price escalation and decreases in the number of existing orders that in our assessment do not meet the
accounting requirements of ASC 606 for inclusion in backlog, partially offset by aircraft order cancellations. Aircraft order cancellations during the
year ended December 31, 2021 totaled $27,542 million and primarily relate to 737 MAX and 787 aircraft. The net ASC 606 adjustments decreased
for the year ended December 31, 2021, which resulted in an increase to backlog of $3,810 million primarily due to 777X aircraft, partially offset by
787  aircraft.  ASC  606  adjustments  include  consideration  of  aircraft  orders  where  a  customer  controlled  contingency  may  exist,  as  well  as  an
assessment of whether the customer is committed to perform or whether it is probable that the customer will pay the full amount of consideration
when it is due. If 787 aircraft deliveries continue to be paused, we are unable to ramp up deliveries of 737 MAX aircraft, and/or if entry into service of
the  777X,  737  MAX  7  and/or  737  MAX  10  is  further  delayed,  we  may  experience  additional  reductions  to  backlog  and/or  significant  order
cancellations.  Additionally,  we  may  continue  to  experience  fewer  new  orders  and  increased  cancellations  across  all  of  our  commercial  airplane
programs as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic and associated impacts on demand.
Accounting Quantity The accounting quantity is our estimate of the quantity of airplanes that  will be produced for delivery under existing and
anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue
and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. It is a key determinant of the gross margins we recognize on sales of individual airplanes throughout a
program’s  life.  Estimation  of  each  program’s  accounting  quantity  takes  into  account  several  factors  that  are  indicative  of  the  demand  for  that
program,  including  firm  orders,  letters  of  intent  from  prospective  customers  and  market  studies.  We  review  our  program  accounting  quantities
quarterly.
The accounting quantity for each program may include units that have been delivered, undelivered units under contract and units anticipated to be
under contract in the reasonable future (anticipated orders). In developing total program estimates, all of these items within the accounting quantity
must be considered.
35

Table of Contents
The following table provides details of the accounting quantities and firm orders by program as of December 31. Cumulative firm orders represent
the cumulative number of commercial jet aircraft deliveries plus undelivered firm orders. Firm orders include military derivative aircraft that are not
included in program accounting quantities. All revenues and costs associated with military derivative aircraft production are reported in the BDS
segment.
Program
737 
747 
767 
777 
777X
787 
†
2021
Program accounting quantities
10,400
1,574
1,243
1,750
350 
1,500
Undelivered units under firm orders
3,414
6
108
58
253
411
(14)
Cumulative firm orders
11,159
1,573
1,346
1,735
253
1,417
2020
Program accounting quantities
10,000
1,574
1,207
1,700
350
1,500
Undelivered units under firm orders
3,282
8
75
41
191
458
(22)
Cumulative firm orders
10,764
1,568
1,281
1,694
191
1,450
2019
Program accounting quantities
10,400
1,574
1,195
1,690
**
1,600
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,398
17
94
68
309
520
(29)
Cumulative firm orders
11,837
1,572
1,270
1,695
309
1,459
† Aircraft ordered by BCC are identified in parentheses.
** See 777 and 777X Programs for discussion of the 777X accounting quantity.
Program Highlights
737 Program The accounting quantity for the 737 program increased by 400 units during 2021 due to the program's normal progress of obtaining
additional orders and delivering airplanes. See further discussion of the 737 MAX in Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
747 Program We are currently producing at a rate of 0.5 aircraft per month. We expect to complete production of the 747 in the second half of 2022.
We believe that ending production of the 747 will not have a material impact on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
767 Program The accounting quantity for the 767 program increased by 36 units during 2021 due to the program's normal progress of obtaining
additional orders and delivering airplanes. The 767 assembly line includes the commercial program and a derivative to support the tanker program.
The commercial program has near break-even gross margins. We are currently producing at a rate of 3 aircraft per month.
777 and 777X Programs The accounting quantity for the 777 program increased by 50 units during 2021 due to the program’s normal progress of
obtaining additional orders and delivering airplanes. The production rate for the combined 777/777X program is expected to increase from 2 per
month to 3 per month in 2022.
In 2013, we launched the 777X-8 and 777X-9, which feature new composite wings, new engines and folding wing-tips. The first flight of the 777X
was completed during the first quarter of 2020. In 2021, we began offering the 777X freighter to customers and expect to receive initial orders in
2022.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we revised the estimated first delivery date of the 777X to late 2023 and recorded a $6.5 billion reach-forward loss
on the 777X program. The revised schedule and reach-
36

Table of Contents
forward loss reflected a number of factors, including an updated assessment of global certification requirements informed by continued discussions
with regulators and a management decision in the fourth quarter of 2020 to make modifications to the aircraft’s design, an updated assessment of
COVID-19  impacts  on  market  demand  and  discussions  with  our  customers  with  respect  to  aircraft  delivery  timing.  These  factors  resulted  in
adjustments to production rates and the program accounting quantity, increased change incorporation costs, and associated customer and supply
chain impacts. The initial accounting quantity of 350 airplanes established in the fourth quarter of 2020 consists of 777X passenger airplanes and
remained unchanged during 2021.
We are working towards reaching Type Inspection Authorization (TIA) which will enable us to begin FAA certification flight testing. The timing of TIA
and certification  will ultimately  be  determined  by  the  regulators,  and  further  determinations  with  respect  to  anticipated  certification  requirements
could result in additional delays in entry into service and/or additional cost increases.
We continue to anticipate that the first 777X delivery will occur in late 2023. The 777X program has near break-even gross margins at December 31,
2021. The level of profitability on the 777X program will be subject to a number of factors. These factors include continued market uncertainty, the
impacts of COVID-19 on our production system as well as impacts on our supply chain and customers, customer negotiations, further production
rate adjustments for the 777X or other commercial aircraft programs, contraction of the accounting quantity and potential risks associated with the
testing program and the timing of aircraft certification. One or more of these factors could result in additional reach-forward losses on the 777X
program in future periods.
787  Program During  2020,  we  experienced  significant  reductions  in  deliveries  due  to  the  impacts  of  COVID-19  on  our  customers  as  well  as
production issues and associated rework. During 2021 we delivered 14 aircraft between March 2021 and May 2021 prior to deliveries being paused
in May 2021. Deliveries remain paused.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020 we had approximately 110 and 80 aircraft in inventory. We have identified production quality issues, including in
our supply chain, which have contributed to the pause in deliveries. In July 2021, we announced that we were reprioritizing production resources to
support inspections and rework. We continue to conduct inspections and rework on undelivered aircraft and engage in detailed discussions with the
FAA regarding required actions for resuming delivery of the 787. We are currently producing at very low rates and expect that to continue until
deliveries  resume,  gradually  returning  to  5  per  month  over  time.  In  the  third  quarter  of  2021,  we  determined  that  in  the  current  environment
production rates below 5 per month represent abnormally low production rates and result in abnormal production costs, and that inspections and
rework costs on inventoried aircraft are excessive and should also be accounted for as abnormal production costs that are required to be expensed
as incurred. In the fourth quarter of 2021, we determined that the ongoing rework, as well as our ongoing discussions with the FAA in anticipation of
resumption  of  deliveries,  will  result  in lower  production  rates  longer  than  previously  expected.  As  a  result  of  these  impacts,  we  expect  to  incur
approximately $2 billion of abnormal production costs on a cumulative basis with most being incurred by the end of 2023. We continue to work with
customers and suppliers regarding timing of future deliveries and production rate changes. We are also continuing to implement changes in the
production process designed to ensure that newly-built airplanes meet our specifications and do not require further inspections and rework. During
the first quarter of 2021, we consolidated 787 production in South Carolina, in line with our previous assumptions, which did not have a significant
financial impact on the program.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we recorded a loss of $3.5 billion on the program primarily due to the additional rework, as well as other actions
required to resume 787 deliveries, taking longer than
37

Table of Contents
expected. These impacts have resulted in longer than expected delivery delays and associated customer considerations.
The  timing  of  the  resumption  of  deliveries  and  future  production  rates  will  depend  upon  rework,  ongoing  customer  and  supplier  engagement,
production  stability  and  our  activities  with  the  FAA.  China  is  a  significant  market  for  the  787  program,  and  if  the  program  is  unable  to  obtain
additional orders from  China in future  quarters,  we may be required  to further  adjust production  rate assumptions.  If we are required to further
reduce the accounting quantity and/or production rates, experience further delivery delays or experience other factors that result in lower margins,
the program could record additional losses and higher abnormal production costs in future periods.
Fleet Support We provide the operators of our commercial airplanes with assistance and services to facilitate efficient and safe airplane operation.
Collectively known as fleet support services, these activities and services begin prior to airplane delivery and continue throughout the operational life
of  the  airplane.  They  include  flight  and  maintenance  training,  field  service  support,  engineering  services,  information  services  and  systems  and
technical  data  and  documents.  The  costs  for  fleet  support  are  expensed  as  incurred  and  have  historically  been  approximately  1%  of  total
consolidated costs of products and services.
Program  Development The  following  chart  summarizes  the  time  horizon  between  go-ahead  and  planned  initial  delivery  for  major  Commercial
Airplanes derivatives and programs.
Go-ahead and Initial Delivery
737 MAX 7
2011
2022
737 MAX 10
2017
2023
777X
2013
2023
Reflects models in development during 2021
The development schedules shown above are subject to a number of uncertainties, including changes in certification requirements. The timing of
certifications will ultimately be determined by the regulators.
Additional Considerations
The  development  and  ongoing  production  of  commercial  aircraft  is  extremely  complex,  involving  extensive  coordination  and  integration  with
suppliers and highly-skilled labor from employees and other partners. Meeting or exceeding our performance and reliability standards, as well as
those of customers and regulators, can be costly and technologically challenging, such as the 787 production issues and associated rework. In
addition,  the  introduction  of  new  aircraft  and  derivatives,  such  as  the  777X  and  737  MAX  derivatives,  involves  increased  risks  associated  with
meeting  development,  production  and  certification  schedules.  These  challenges  include  increased  global  regulatory  scrutiny  of  all  development
aircraft in the wake of the 737 MAX accidents. As a result, our ability to deliver aircraft on time, satisfy performance and reliability standards and
achieve or maintain, as applicable, program profitability is subject to significant risks. Factors that could result in lower margins (or a material charge
if  an  airplane  program  has  or  is  determined  to  have  reach-forward  losses)  include  the  following:  changes  to  the  program  accounting  quantity,
customer and model mix, production costs and rates, changes to price escalation factors due to changes in the inflation rate or other economic
indicators, performance or reliability issues involving completed aircraft, capital expenditures and other costs associated with increasing or adding
new  production  capacity,  learning  curve,  additional  change  incorporation,  achieving  anticipated  cost  reductions,  the  addition  of  regulatory
requirements in connection with certification in one or more jurisdictions, flight test and certification schedules, costs, schedule and demand for new
airplanes and derivatives and status of customer claims, supplier claims or assertions and other contractual negotiations. While we believe the cost
and revenue estimates
38

Table of Contents
incorporated in the consolidated financial statements are appropriate, the technical complexity of our airplane programs creates financial risk as
additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be extended, which could trigger termination provisions, order
cancellations or other financially significant exposure.
Defense, Space & Security
Business Environment and Trends
United States Government Defense Environment Overview
In May 2021, the U.S. government released the President’s budget request for fiscal year 2022 (FY22), which included $715 billion in funding for the
United States Department of Defense (U.S. DoD), $25 billion in funding for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and $19
billion for the FAA. While the President’s budget request for FY22 includes funding for a majority of Boeing’s programs, it did not include funding for
F/A-18 Super Hornet, P-8 Poseidon and CH-47F Block II production aircraft. While there is continued congressional support for F/A-18 and CH-47F
Block II production aircraft for FY22, there is ongoing uncertainty with respect to these and other program-level appropriations for FY22 and future
fiscal years. These programs also continue to pursue non-U.S. sales opportunities.
In December 2021, Congress passed and the President signed the National Defense Authorization Act for FY22, which authorizes a U.S. DoD
budget $25 billion higher than the budget request. A CR, enacted on December 3, 2021, continues funding for the federal government at FY21
appropriated levels through February 18, 2022. Congress and the President must enact either full-year FY22 appropriations bills or an additional CR
to  fund  government  departments  and  agencies  beyond  February  18,  2022  or  a  government  shutdown  could  result,  which  may  impact  the
Company’s operations. Alternatively, Congress may continue to fund the federal government through one or more additional CRs, however, this
would continue to restrict the execution of certain program activities and delay new programs or competitions.
Accordingly,  there  continues  to  be  uncertainty  with  respect  to  program-level  appropriations  for  the  U.S.  DoD  and  other  government  agencies,
including NASA, for FY22 and beyond. Future budget cuts or investment priority changes, including changes associated with the authorizations and
appropriations process, could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could have a
material effect on our results of operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
Non-U.S. Defense Environment Overview The non-U.S. market continues to be driven by complex and evolving security challenges and the need
to modernize aging equipment and inventories. BDS expects that it will continue to have a wide range of opportunities across Asia, Europe and the
Middle East given the diverse regional threats. At the end of 2021, 33% of BDS backlog was attributable to non-U.S. customers.
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenues
$26,540 
$26,257 
$26,095 
% of total company revenues
43 %
45 %
34 %
Earnings from operations
$1,544 
$1,539 
$2,615 
Operating margins
5.8 %
5.9 %
10.0 %
39

Table of Contents
Since  our  operating  cycle  is  long-term  and  involves  many  different  types  of  development  and  production  contracts  with  varying  delivery  and
milestone schedules, the operating results of a particular period may not be indicative of future operating results. In addition, depending on the
customer and their funding sources, our orders might be structured as annual follow-on contracts, or as one large multi-year order or long-term
award.  As  a  result,  period-to-period  comparisons  of  backlog  are  not  necessarily  indicative  of  future  workloads.  The  following  discussions  of
comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context.
Deliveries of units for new-build production aircraft, including remanufactures and modifications were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
F/A-18 Models
21 
20 
23 
F-15 Models
16 
4 
11 
C-17 Globemaster III
1 
CH-47 Chinook (New)
15 
27 
13 
CH-47 Chinook (Renewed)
5 
3 
22 
AH-64 Apache (New)
27 
19 
37 
AH-64 Apache (Remanufactured)
56 
52 
74 
KC-46 Tanker
13 
14 
28 
P-8 Models
16 
15 
18 
C-40A
2 
Total
169 
154 
229 
Revenues
BDS revenues in 2021 increased by $283 million compared with 2020 primarily due to higher revenue on the KC-46A Tanker program due to new
orders for 27 aircraft received during the first quarter of 2021 and lower charges in 2021. This was partially offset by lower revenues on rotorcraft
programs, Commercial Crew and VC-25B. Cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2021 were $56 million less unfavorable than the prior year,
largely due to the lower charges described below.
BDS revenues in 2020 increased by $162 million compared with 2019 reflecting higher revenues from fighter aircraft, Space Launch System, B-52
upgrades, proprietary and MQ-25, partially offset by reduced volume in missile defense. These net increases were offset by the unfavorable impact
of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments, which were $312 million higher than the comparable period in the prior year, largely due to the KC-46A
Tanker charges during 2020.
Earnings From Operations
BDS  earnings  from  operations  in  2021  increased  by  $5  million  compared  with  2020  primarily  due  to  less  unfavorable  impacts  from  cumulative
contract catch-up adjustments, which improved $219 million from the prior year, largely due to lower KC-46A Tanker charges in 2021 compared to
2020 and other charges in development programs described below. The favorable change in cumulative contract catch-up adjustments was offset
primarily by lower volume and mix on rotorcraft programs and lower equity earnings for United Launch Alliance (ULA).
During the fourth quarter of 2021, BDS increased the reach-forward loss on the KC-46A Tanker program by $402 million primarily due to continued
disruption in the factory and in the supply chain, including impacts of COVID-19, and an increase in costs to complete the new Remote Vision
System as the customer’s requirements definition has evolved. In 2020, we recorded an additional reach-forward loss of $1,320 million on the KC-
46A Tanker program reflecting $551 million of costs associated
40

Table of Contents
with the agreement signed in April 2020 with the U.S. Air Force to develop and integrate the new Remote Vision System, and costs for production
inefficiencies including impacts of COVID-19 disruption.
During  the  third  quarter  of  2021,  we  increased  the  reach-forward  loss  on  Commercial  Crew  by  $185  million  driven  by  the  delay  in  the  second
uncrewed Orbital Flight Test now anticipated in 2022 and the latest assessment of remaining work.
During the first quarter of 2021, we increased the reach-forward loss on VC-25B by $318 million, which was largely due to COVID-19 impacts and
performance issues at a key supplier. The $168 million reach-forward loss in the first quarter of 2020 on VC-25B was associated with engineering
inefficiencies from the COVID-19 environment.
BDS earnings  from  operations  in 2020 decreased  by $1,076 million  compared  with  2019 primarily  due to  the  unfavorable  impact  of  cumulative
contract catch-up adjustments, which were $828 million higher than the prior year, largely due to higher charges in 2020 of $1,320 million on KC-
46A Tanker and $168 million on VC-25B, offset by $489 million in charges on Commercial Crew in 2019. The lower earnings in 2020 also reflect
lower gains on property sales compared to the same period in 2019. These current period decreases were partially offset by the volume increases
described above.
BDS earnings from operations includes our share of income or loss from equity method investments of $53 million, $141 million and $128 million
primarily from our ULA and non-U.S. joint ventures in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Backlog
Total backlog of $59,828 million at December 31, 2021 was $1,019 million lower than December 31, 2020 due to the timing of awards and revenue
recognized.
Additional Considerations
Our BDS business includes a variety of development programs which have complex design and technical challenges. Many of these programs have
cost-type  contracting  arrangements.  In  these  cases,  the  associated  financial  risks  are  primarily  in  reduced  fees,  lower  profit  rates  or  program
cancellation  if  cost,  schedule  or  technical  performance  issues  arise.  Examples  of  these  programs  include  Ground-based  Midcourse  Defense,
Proprietary and Space Launch System programs.
Some of our development programs are contracted on a fixed-price basis, and BDS customers are increasingly seeking fixed-price proposals for
new programs. Examples of significant fixed-price development programs include Commercial Crew, KC-46A Tanker, MQ-25, T-7A Red Hawk, VC-
25B, and commercial and military satellites. A number of our ongoing fixed-price development programs have reach-forward losses. New programs
could also have risk for reach-forward loss upon contract award and during the period of contract performance. Many development programs have
highly complex designs. As technical or quality issues arise during development, we may experience schedule delays and cost impacts, which could
increase  our  estimated  cost  to  perform  the  work  or  reduce  our  estimated  price,  either  of  which  could  result  in  a  material  charge  or  otherwise
adversely affect our financial condition. These programs are ongoing, and while we believe the cost and fee estimates incorporated in the financial
statements are appropriate, the technical complexity of these programs creates financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary
or scheduled delivery dates could be extended, which could trigger termination provisions, the loss of satellite in-orbit incentive payments or other
financially significant exposure. Risk remains that we may be required to record additional reach-forward losses in future periods.
41

Table of Contents
Global Services
Business Environment and Trends
The aerospace markets we serve include parts distribution, logistics and other inventory services; maintenance, engineering and upgrades; training
and professional services; and information services. Prior to COVID-19, we had expected the market to grow by around 3.5% annually, however, the
pandemic is having a direct impact on our commercial services business. See Overview to Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial
Condition and Results of Operations for a discussion of the impacts of COVID-19 on the airline industry environment.
Over the long-term, as the size of the worldwide commercial airline fleet continues to grow, so does demand for aftermarket services designed to
increase efficiency and extend the economic lives of airplanes. Airlines are using data analytics to plan flight operations and predictive maintenance
to improve their productivity and efficiency. Airlines continue to look for opportunities to reduce the size and cost of their spare parts inventory,
frequently outsourcing spares management to third parties.
The demand outlook for our government services business has remained stable in 2021. Government services market segments are growing on
pace with related fleets, but vary based on the utilization and age of the aircraft. The U.S. government services market is the single largest individual
market, comprising over 50 percent of the government services markets served. Over the next decade, we expect U.S. growth to remain flat and
non-U.S. fleets, led by Middle East and Asia Pacific customers, to add rotorcraft and commercial derivative aircraft at the fastest rates. We expect
less than 20 percent  of the worldwide fleet  of military  aircraft  to be retired  and replaced over the next ten years,  driving increased  demand for
services to maintain aging aircraft and enhance aircraft capability.
BGS’ major customer, the U.S. government, remains subject to the spending limits and uncertainty described on page 39, which could restrict the
execution of certain program activities and delay new programs or competitions.
Industry Competitiveness Aviation services is a competitive market with many domestic and international competitors. This market environment
has resulted in intense pressures on pricing, and we expect these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years. Continued access to global
markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales growth potential and long-term investment returns.
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenues
$16,328 
$15,543 
$18,468 
% of total company revenues
26 %
27 %
24 %
Earnings from operations
$2,017 
$450 
$2,697 
Operating margins
12.4 %
2.9 %
14.6 %
Revenues
BGS  revenues  in  2021  increased  by  $785  million  compared  with  2020  due  to  higher  commercial  and  government  services  volume.  While
commercial  services  volume  is  recovering,  it  remains  below  pre-pandemic  levels.  The  net  favorable  impact  of  cumulative  contract  catch-up
adjustments in 2021 was $37 million lower than the comparable period in the prior year. We expect the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic to
continue to have an adverse impact on BGS commercial revenues in future quarters until the commercial airline industry environment fully recovers.
42

Table of Contents
BGS  revenues  in  2020  decreased  by  $2,925  million  compared  with  2019  due  to  lower  commercial  services  revenue  driven  by  impacts  of  the
COVID-19 pandemic. The favorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2020 was $101 million lower than the comparable period
in the prior year.
Earnings From Operations
BGS earnings from operations in 2021 increased by $1,567 million compared with 2020, primarily due to charges incurred in 2020 driven by impacts
of  the  COVID-19  pandemic  as  well  as  higher  commercial  services  volume  in  2021,  partially  offset  by  an  inventory  write-down  of  $220  million
recognized in the fourth quarter of 2021 driven by revised cost estimates on certain customer contracts. Charges in 2020 included $531 million of
inventory write-downs, $178 million of related impairments of distribution rights primarily driven by airlines’ decisions to retire certain aircraft, $398
million for higher expected credit losses primarily driven by customer liquidity issues, $115 million of contract termination and facility impairment
charges, and $72 million of severance costs. The net favorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2021 was $98 million lower
than the prior year.
BGS earnings from operations in 2020 decreased by $2,247 million compared with 2019, primarily due to lower commercial services revenue as well
as the 2020 earnings charges described in the previous paragraph. The favorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments in 2020 was
consistent with the prior year.
Backlog
BGS total backlog of $20,496 million at December 31, 2021 decreased by 1% from $20,632 million at December 31, 2020, primarily due to revenue
recognized on contracts awarded in prior years.
Boeing Capital
Business Environment and Trends
BCC’s gross customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2021 totaled $1,734 million. A substantial portion of BCC’s portfolio is
composed of customers that have less than investment-grade credit. BCC’s portfolio is also concentrated by varying degrees across Boeing aircraft
product types, most notably 717 and 747-8 aircraft.
BCC provided customer financing of $14 million during 2020 and none during 2021. While we may be required to fund a number of new aircraft
deliveries in 2021 and/or provide refinancing for existing bridge debt, we expect alternative financing will be available at reasonable prices from
broad and globally diverse sources.
Aircraft values and lease rates are impacted by the number and type of aircraft that are currently out of service. Approximately 5,300 western-built
commercial jet aircraft (20.5% of current world fleet) were parked at the end of 2021, including both in-production and out-of-production aircraft
types.  Of  these  parked  aircraft,  a  larger  portion  are  expected  to  be  retired  compared  to  the  pre-COVID-19  period,  which  directly  impacts  the
Company  in  terms  of  number  of  new  aircraft  deliveries  and  financing  opportunities,  the  ability  of  existing  customers  to  meet  current  payment
obligations and the value of aircraft in its portfolio. We continue to work closely with our customers to mitigate the risk. At the end of 2020 and 2019,
29.4% and 8.5% of the western-built commercial jet aircraft were parked. Aircraft valuations could decline if significant numbers of additional aircraft,
particularly  types  with  relatively  few  operators,  are  placed  out  of  service.  See  Overview  to  Management’s  Discussion  and  Analysis  of  Financial
Condition and Results of Operations for a discussion of the impacts of COVID-19 on the airline industry environment.
43

Table of Contents
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenues
$272 
$261 
$244 
Earnings from operations
$106 
$63 
$28 
Operating margins
39 %
24 %
11 %
Revenues
BCC segment revenues consist principally of lease income from equipment under operating lease, interest income from financing receivables and
notes, and other income. BCC’s revenues in 2021 increased by $11 million compared with 2020, and revenues in 2020 increased by $17 million
compared with 2019 primarily due to gains on re-lease of assets, partially offset by portfolio run-off.
Earnings From Operations
BCC’s earnings from operations are presented net of interest expense, provision for (recovery of) losses, asset impairment expense, depreciation
on leased equipment and other operating expenses. Earnings from operations in 2021 increased by $43 million compared with 2020 primarily due to
higher revenues, lower provision for losses, and lower interest and asset impairment expenses. Earnings from operations in 2020 increased by $35
million compared with 2019 primarily due to higher revenues, lower asset impairment expenses and lower interest expenses.
Financial Position
The following table presents selected financial data for BCC as of December 31:
(Dollars in millions)
2021
2020
Customer financing and investment portfolio, net
$1,720 
$1,961 
Other assets, primarily cash and short-term investments
462 
402 
Total assets
$2,182 
$2,363 
Other liabilities, primarily income taxes
$347 
$392 
Debt, including intercompany loans
1,525 
1,640 
Equity
310 
331 
Total liabilities and equity
$2,182 
$2,363 
Debt-to-equity ratio
4.9-to-1
5-to-1
BCC’s customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2021 decreased from December 31, 2020, primarily due to $241 million of note
payoffs and portfolio run-off.
BCC enters into certain transactions with other Boeing segments, reflected in Unallocated items, eliminations and other, in the form of intercompany
guarantees and other subsidies that mitigate the effects of certain credit quality or asset impairment issues on the BCC segment.
44

Table of Contents
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Net loss
($4,290)
($11,941)
($636)
Non-cash items
7,851 
10,866 
2,819 
Changes in assets and liabilities
(6,977)
(17,335)
(4,629)
Net cash used by operating activities
(3,416)
(18,410)
(2,446)
Net cash provided/(used) by investing activities
9,324 
(18,366)
(1,530)
Net cash (used)/provided by financing activities
(5,600)
34,955 
5,739 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(39)
85 
(5)
Net increase/(decrease) in cash & cash equivalents, including restricted
269 
(1,736)
1,758 
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at beginning of year
7,835 
9,571 
7,813 
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at end of year
$8,104 
$7,835 
$9,571 
Operating Activities Net cash used by operating activities was $3.4 billion during 2021, compared with $18.4 billion during 2020 and $2.4 billion
during 2019. The reduction in cash used by operating activities in 2021 compared with 2020 is primarily driven by lower net loss and improved
changes in assets and liabilities. Non-cash items in 2021 include the $3.5 billion reach-forward loss on the 787 program which was recorded as a
reduction to inventory, as well as $1.2 billion of treasury shares issued to fund Company contributions to the 401(k) plan and $0.8 billion of share-
based plans expense reflecting a one-time stock grant to most employees in lieu of 2021 salary increases. The changes in assets and liabilities
reflect the significant increase in commercial airplane inventory in 2020 driven by lower deliveries due to the COVID-19 pandemic and the 737 MAX
grounding. In 2021, inventory growth slowed as the continued buildup of 787 aircraft caused by production issues and 777X inventory growth was
partially offset by a decrease in 737 MAX inventory following the resumption of deliveries. Compensation payments to 737 MAX customers totaled
$2.5 billion and $2.2 billion in 2021 and 2020. In the first quarter of 2021, we paid $0.7 billion consistent with the terms of the Deferred Prosecution
Agreement between Boeing and the U.S. Department of Justice. Additionally, in 2021, we received income tax refunds of $1.7 billion. Cash provided
by Advances and progress billings was $2.5 billion in 2021, as compared with Cash used by Advances and progress billings of $1.1 billion in 2020.
The  pause  in  787  deliveries  and  the  residual  impacts  of  the  737  MAX  grounding  are  expected  to  continue  to  have  a  significant  impact  on  our
operating cash flows until 787 deliveries resume and 737 MAX deliveries ramp up.
The decrease in operating cash flows in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily driven by our net loss in 2020 and changes in assets and liabilities,
partially offset by an increase in non-cash items. Non-cash items include the $6.5 billion reach-forward loss on the 777X program in 2020, which
was recorded  as a reduction  to inventory.  The year-over-year  increase  in non-cash  items  also reflects  higher inventory  write-downs  and higher
allowances for expected credit losses in 2020. The changes in assets and liabilities reflect increases in commercial airplane inventory due to the
large number of undelivered aircraft in 2019 resulting from the 737 MAX grounding, and in 2020 due to the 737 MAX grounding, 787 production
issues and COVID-19 impacts. Cash used by Advances and progress billings was $1.1 billion in 2020, as compared with $0.7 billion provided by
Advances  and progress  billings in 2019.  The changes  in assets  and liabilities  in 2020 also reflect  lower  accounts  payable due to reductions  in
commercial purchases from suppliers and lower supply chain financing. Compensation payments to 737 MAX customers totaled $2.2 billion during
2020 and $1.2 billion during 2019. The accrued liability
45

Table of Contents
for 737 MAX customer considerations at December 31, 2019 resulted in a $7.4 billion favorable change to assets and liabilities in 2019.
Payables to suppliers who elected to participate in supply chain financing programs declined by $1.5 billion and $1.9 billion for the years ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020, and increased by $2.6 billion in 2019. Supply chain financing is not material to our overall liquidity. The declines for
the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were primarily due to reductions in commercial purchases from suppliers. The increase for the year
ended  December  31,  2019  reflects  a  combination  of  higher  purchases,  an  extension  of  payment  terms  with  certain  suppliers  and  increased
utilization of our supply chain financing programs.
Investing Activities Cash provided by investing activities during 2021 was $9.3 billion, compared with cash used by investing activities of $18.4
billion and $1.5 billion during 2020 and 2019. The increase in cash inflows in 2021 compared to 2020 is primarily due to $27.1 billion of higher net
proceeds from investments. The increase in cash outflows in 2020 compared to 2019 is primarily due to $17.4 billion of higher net contributions to
investments. Net proceeds from investments were $9.8 billion in 2021, compared with net contributions to investments of $17.3 billion in 2020 and
net proceeds from investments of $0.1 billion in 2019. Capital expenditures totaled $1.0 billion in 2021, compared with $1.3 billion in 2020 and $1.8
billion  in  2019.  We  reduced  our  capital  expenditures  in  2021  and  2020  as  we  managed  our  liquidity  throughout  the  pandemic  and  737  MAX
grounding. We expect capital expenditures in 2022 to be higher than in 2021.
Financing Activities Cash used by financing activities was $5.6 billion during 2021, compared with cash provided by financing activities of $35.0
billion  during  2020  and  $5.7  billion  in  2019.  The  decrease  of  $40.6  billion  compared  with  2020  primarily  reflects  net  debt  repayments  in  2021
compared with net borrowings in 2020. The increase of $29.3 billion in 2020 compared with 2019 primarily reflects higher net borrowings, lower
share repurchases and lower dividend payments, which reflects the Company’s decision in March 2020 to suspend the declaration or payment of
dividends  until  further  notice.  During  the  twelve  months  ended  December  31,  2021,  debt  repayments  net  of  new  borrowings  were  $5.6  billion,
primarily due to $13.8 billion of repayments of our two-year delayed draw term loan credit agreement, partially offset by $9.8 billion of fixed rate
senior notes issued in the first quarter of 2021. During the twelve months ended December 31, 2020, new borrowings net of repayments were $36.3
billion, primarily due to $29.9 billion of fixed rate senior notes issued in 2020 and $13.8 billion of new borrowings under a two-year delayed draw
term  loan  agreement  entered  into  in  the  first  quarter  of  2020.  During  the  twelve  months  ended  December  31,  2019,  new  borrowings  net  of
repayments were $13.2 billion, primarily due to the issuance of $10.5 billion of fixed rate senior notes in 2019. For further discussion see Liquidity
Matters in Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020 debt balances totaled $58.1 billion and $63.6 billion, of which $1.3 billion and $1.7 billion were classified as short-
term. This included $1.5 billion and $1.6 billion of debt attributable to BCC at December 31, 2021 and 2020, of which $0.3 billion and $0.9 billion
were classified as short-term.
During the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, we did not repurchase any shares through our open market share repurchase program
compared to repurchases of 6.9 million shares in 2019 totaling $2.7 billion. Share repurchases under this plan have been suspended since April
2019. In March 2020, the Board of Directors terminated its prior authorization to repurchase shares of the Company's outstanding common stock.
We had 0.3 million, 0.6 million and 0.6 million shares transferred to us from employee tax withholdings in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. During
the  year  ended  December  31,  2021,  we  paid  no  dividends,  compared  with  $1.2  billion  and  $4.6  billion  in  2020  and  2019.  In  March  2020,  the
Company announced that our dividend will be suspended until further notice.
46

Table of Contents
Capital Resources The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic, 787 production issues and associated rework, and residual impacts of the 737 MAX
grounding are having a significant negative impact on our liquidity and ongoing operations and creating significant uncertainty. We have and are
continuing to take significant actions to manage and preserve our liquidity. For further discussion see Liquidity Matters in Note 1 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
The following table summarizes certain cash requirements for known contractual and other obligations as of December 31, 2021, and the estimated
timing thereof. See Note 12 for future operating lease payments.
(Dollars in millions)
Current
Long-term
Total
Long-term debt (including current portion)
$1,300 
$57,389 
$58,689 
Interest on debt
2,365 
33,658 
36,023 
Pension and other postretirement
594 
4,100 
4,694 
Purchase obligations
53,041 
53,702 
106,743 
737 MAX customer concessions and consideration
800 
200 
1,000 
For further discussion, see Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
We  expect  to  be  able  to  fund  our  cash  requirements  through  cash  and  short-term  investments  and  cash  provided  by  operations,  as  well  as
continued access to capital markets. At December 31, 2021, we had $8.1 billion of cash, $8.2 billion of short-term investments, and $14.7 billion of
unused borrowing capacity on revolving credit line agreements. We anticipate that these revolving credit lines will remain undrawn and primarily
serve as backup liquidity to support our general corporate borrowing needs. Of the $14.7 billion of unused borrowing capacity, $6.3 billion expires in
October 2022, $5.3 billion expires in March 2023 and $3.2 billion expires in October 2024.
Our debt balances have increased significantly since 2019, and we are continuing to actively manage our liquidity. In 2021, we repaid $13.8 billion
that was outstanding under our two-year delayed draw term loan credit agreement that had a final maturity date of February 6, 2022.
Our increased debt balance resulted in downgrades to our credit ratings in 2020, and our ratings remained unchanged in 2021. We expect to be
able to access capital markets when we require additional funding in order to pay off existing debt, address further impacts to our business related to
market developments, fund outstanding financing commitments or meet other business requirements. A number of factors could cause us to incur
increased borrowing costs and to have greater difficulty accessing public and private markets for debt. These factors include disruptions or declines
in the global capital markets and/or a decline in our financial performance, outlook or credit ratings, including impacts described above related to the
COVID-19 pandemic and/or associated changes in demand for our products and services. These risks will be particularly acute if we are subject to
further credit rating downgrades. The occurrence of any or all of these events may adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and financing or
contractual commitments.
Any future borrowings may affect our credit ratings and are subject to various debt covenants. At December 31, 2021, we were in compliance with
the  covenants  for  our  debt  and  credit  facilities.  The  most  restrictive  covenants  include  a  limitation  on  mortgage  debt  and  sale  and  leaseback
transactions as a percentage of consolidated net tangible assets (as defined in the credit agreements) and a limitation on consolidated debt as a
percentage  of total  capital  (as defined in the credit  agreements).  When  considering  debt covenants,  we continue  to  have substantial  borrowing
capacity.
(1)
(1)    
47

Table of Contents
Pension  and  Other  Postretirement  Benefits Pension  cash  requirements  are  based  on  an  estimate  of  our  minimum  funding  requirements,
pursuant to Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) regulations, although we may make additional discretionary contributions. Estimates
of other postretirement benefits are based on both our estimated future benefit payments and the estimated contributions to plans that are funded
through trusts.
At  December  31,  2021  and  2020,  our  pension  plans  were  $7.8  billion  and  $13.7  billion  underfunded  as  measured  under  Generally  Accepted
Accounting Principles in the United States of America (GAAP). On an ERISA basis our plans are more than 100% funded at December 31, 2021.
We do not expect to make significant contributions to our pension plans in 2022. We may be required to make higher contributions to our pension
plans in future years.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, we contributed $3 billion of our common stock to our pension fund. In the fourth quarter of 2020, we also began using
our common stock in lieu of cash to fund Company contributions to our 401(k) plans for the foreseeable future. Under this approach, common stock
is contributed to our 401(k) plans following each pay period. We expect this measure to further enable the Company to conserve cash. We have
retained an independent fiduciary to manage and liquidate stock contributed to these plans at its discretion.
Purchase Obligations Purchase obligations represent contractual agreements to purchase goods or services that are legally binding; specify a
fixed,  minimum  or  range  of  quantities;  specify  a  fixed,  minimum,  variable  or  indexed  price  provision;  and  specify  approximate  timing  of  the
transaction. Purchase obligations include amounts recorded as well as amounts that are not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial
Position.
Purchase  obligations  not  recorded  on  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position  include  agreements  for  inventory  procurement,  tooling
costs,  electricity  and  natural  gas  contracts,  property,  plant  and  equipment,  customer  financing  equipment  and  other  miscellaneous  production
related obligations. The most significant obligation relates to inventory procurement contracts. We have entered into certain significant inventory
procurement contracts that specify determinable prices and quantities, and long-term delivery timeframes. In addition, we purchase raw materials on
behalf of our suppliers. These agreements require suppliers and vendors to be prepared to build and deliver items in sufficient time to meet our
production schedules. The need for such arrangements with suppliers and vendors arises from the extended production planning horizon for many
of our products. A significant portion of these inventory commitments is supported by firm contracts with customers and/or has historically resulted in
settlement through reimbursement from customers for penalty payments to the supplier should the customer not take delivery. These amounts are
also  included  in  our  forecasts  of  costs  for  program  and  contract  accounting.  Some  inventory  procurement  contracts  may  include  escalation
adjustments. In these limited cases, we have included our best estimate of the effect of the escalation adjustment in the amounts disclosed in the
table above.
Purchase obligations recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position primarily include accounts payable and certain other current
and long-term liabilities including accrued compensation.
We have entered into various industrial participation agreements with certain customers outside of the U.S. to facilitate economic flow back and/or
technology or skills transfer to their businesses or government agencies as the result of their procurement of goods and/or services from us. These
commitments may be satisfied by our local operations there, placement of direct work or vendor orders for supplies, opportunities to bid on supply
contracts, transfer of technology or other forms of assistance. However, in certain cases, our commitments may be satisfied through other parties
(such as our vendors) who purchase supplies from our non-U.S. customers. In certain cases, penalties could be imposed if we do not meet our
industrial  participation  commitments.  During  2021,  we  incurred  no  such  penalties.  As  of  December  31,  2021,  we  have  outstanding  industrial
participation agreements
48

Table of Contents
totaling $25.5 billion that extend through 2034. Purchase order commitments  associated with industrial participation agreements are included in
purchase obligations in the table above. To be eligible for such a purchase order commitment from us, a non-U.S. supplier must have sufficient
capability to meet our requirements and must be competitive in cost, quality and schedule.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements We are a party to certain off-balance sheet arrangements including certain guarantees. For discussion of these
arrangements, see Note 14 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our commercial commitments outstanding as of December 31, 2021.
(Dollars in millions)
Total Amounts 
Committed/Maximum 
Amount of Loss
Less than 
1 year
1-3 
years
4-5 
years
After 5 
years
Standby letters of credit and surety bonds
$3,634 
$1,969 
$1,451 
$60 
$154 
Commercial aircraft financing commitments
12,905 
2,034 
6,094 
2,904 
1,873 
Total commercial commitments
$16,539 
$4,003 
$7,545 
$2,964 
$2,027 
Commercial  aircraft  financing  commitments  include  commitments  to  provide  financing  related  to  aircraft  on  order,  under  option  for  deliveries  or
proposed as part of sales campaigns or refinancing with respect to delivered aircraft, based on estimated earliest potential funding dates. Customer
financing commitments totaled $12.9 billion and $11.5 billion at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The increase relates to new financing commitments.
We anticipate that we will not be required to fund a significant portion of our financing commitments as we continue to work with third party financiers
to  provide  alternative  financing  to  customers.  Historically,  we  have  not  been  required  to  fund  significant  amounts  of  outstanding  commitments.
However,  there  can  be  no  assurances  that  we  will  not  be  required  to  fund  greater  amounts  than  historically  required.  See  Note  13  to  our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contingent Obligations
We have significant contingent obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business, which include the following:
Legal Various  legal  proceedings,  claims  and  investigations  are  pending  against  us.  Legal  contingencies  are  discussed  in  Note  21  to  our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental Remediation We are  involved with various  environmental  remediation  activities  and have recorded  a liability of  $605 million at
December 31, 2021. For additional information, see Note 13 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Measures
Core Operating Earnings, Core Operating Margin and Core Earnings Per Share
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with GAAP which we supplement with certain non-GAAP financial information.
These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a substitute for the related GAAP measures, and other companies may
define such measures differently. We encourage investors to review our financial statements and publicly-filed reports in their entirety and not to rely
on any single financial measure. Core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share exclude the FAS/CAS service cost
adjustment. The FAS/
49

Table of Contents
CAS service cost adjustment represents the difference between the Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) pension and postretirement service costs
calculated under GAAP and costs allocated to the business segments. Core earnings per share excludes both the FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
and non-operating pension and postretirement expenses. Non-operating pension and postretirement expenses represent the components of net
periodic benefit costs other than service cost. Pension costs, comprising service and prior service costs computed in accordance with GAAP are
allocated to BCA and certain BGS businesses supporting commercial customers. Pension costs allocated to BDS and BGS businesses supporting
government  customers  are  computed  in  accordance  with  U.S.  Government  Cost  Accounting  Standards  (CAS),  which  employ  different  actuarial
assumptions  and  accounting  conventions  than  GAAP.  CAS  costs  are  allocable  to  government  contracts.  Other  postretirement  benefit  costs  are
allocated to all business segments based on CAS, which is generally based on benefits paid.
The Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustments recognized in Loss from operations were benefits of $882 million in 2021, $1,024 million in 2020
and $1,071 million in 2019. The lower benefits in 2021 were primarily due to reductions in allocated pension cost year over year. The non-operating
pension expense included in Other income, net was a benefit of $528 million in 2021, $340 million in 2020 and $374 million in 2019. The higher
benefits  in  2021  were  primarily  due  to  lower  interest  cost  and  higher  expected  return  on  plan  assets,  partially  offset  by  higher  amortization  of
actuarial losses and higher settlement charges. The benefits in 2020 and 2019 reflect expected returns in excess of interest cost and amortization of
actuarial losses.
For further discussion of pension and other postretirement costs, see the Management’s Discussion and Analysis on page 29 of this Form 10-K and
see Note 22 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Management uses core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per
share for purposes of evaluating and forecasting underlying business performance. Management believes these core earnings measures provide
investors additional insights into operational performance as unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit cost primarily represent costs
driven by market factors and costs not allocable to U.S. government contracts.
50

Table of Contents
Reconciliation of GAAP Measures to Non-GAAP Measures
The table below reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share with
the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures of earnings from operations, operating margins and diluted earnings per share.
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenues
$62,286 
$58,158 
$76,559 
Loss from operations, as reported
($2,902)
($12,767)
($1,975)
Operating margins
(4.7)%
(22.0)%
(2.6)%
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
($882)
($1,024)
($1,071)
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
(291)
(359)
(344)
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
($1,173)
($1,383)
($1,415)
Core operating loss (non-GAAP)
($4,075)
($14,150)
($3,390)
Core operating margins (non-GAAP)
(6.5)%
(24.3)%
(4.4)%
Diluted loss per share, as reported
($7.15)
($20.88)
($1.12)
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
(1.50)
(1.80)
(1.89)
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
(0.49)
(0.63)
(0.61)
Non-operating pension expense
(0.91)
(0.60)
(0.66)
Non-operating postretirement expense
0.03 
0.19 
Provision for deferred income taxes on adjustments 
0.61 
0.63 
0.62 
Core loss per share (non-GAAP)
($9.44)
($23.25)
($3.47)
Weighted average diluted shares (in millions)
588.0 
569.0 
566.0 
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment represents the difference between the FAS pension and postretirement service costs calculated under GAAP
and costs allocated to the business segments. This adjustment is excluded from Core operating loss (non-GAAP).
Non-operating  pension and postretirement  expenses represent  the  components  of net periodic  benefit  costs  other than  service  cost.  These
expenses are included in Other income, net and are excluded from Core loss per share (non-GAAP).
The income tax impact is calculated using the U.S. corporate statutory tax rate.
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(1)
(2)
(2)
(3)
(1)
(2)
(3)
51

Table of Contents
Critical Accounting Policies & Estimates
Accounting for Long-term Contracts
Substantially all contracts at BDS and certain contracts at BGS are long-term contracts. Our long-term contracts typically represent a single distinct
performance obligation due to the highly interdependent and interrelated nature of the underlying goods and/or services and the significant service
of integration that we provide.
Accounting for long-term contracts involves a judgmental process of estimating the total sales, costs, and profit for each performance obligation.
Cost of sales is recognized as incurred, and revenue is determined by adding a proportionate amount of the estimated profit to the amount reported
as cost of sales.
Due to the size, duration and nature of many of our long-term contracts, the estimation of total sales and costs through completion is complicated
and subject to many variables. Total sales estimates are based on negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions regarding
contract  options,  change  orders,  incentive  and  award  provisions  associated  with  technical  performance,  and  price  adjustment  clauses  (such  as
inflation or index-based clauses). The majority of these long-term contracts are with the U.S. government where the price is generally based on
estimated  cost to produce the product  or service  plus profit.  Federal Acquisition  Regulations provide guidance on the types of cost that will be
reimbursed  in establishing  contract  price.  Total  cost  estimates  are  largely  based  on  negotiated  or  estimated  purchase  contract  terms,  historical
performance trends, business base and other economic projections. Factors that influence these estimates include inflationary trends, technical and
schedule risk, internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, COVID-19 disruptions, asset utilization and anticipated
labor agreements.
Revenue and cost estimates for all significant long-term contract performance obligations are reviewed and reassessed quarterly. Changes in these
estimates could result in recognition of cumulative catch-up adjustments to the performance obligation’s inception to date revenues, cost of sales
and profit in the period in which such changes are made. Changes in revenue and cost estimates could also result in a reach-forward loss or an
adjustment to a reach-forward loss which would be recorded immediately in earnings. For the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, net
unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments across all long-term contracts increased loss from operations by $880 million, $942 million and $111
million, respectively. The cumulative catch-up adjustments in 2021 were primarily due to losses recognized on the KC-46A Tanker, VC-25B and
Commercial  Crew  programs.  These  are  all  fixed-price  development  programs,  and  there  is  ongoing  risk  that  similar  losses  may  have  to  be
recognized in future periods on these and/or other programs.
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is likely that materially different earnings could be recorded if we
used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. Changes in underlying assumptions/estimates, supplier performance,
or circumstances may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods. If the combined gross margins for our profitable long-
term contracts had been estimated to be higher or lower by 1% during 2021, it would have increased or decreased pre-tax income for the year by
approximately $300 million.
Program Accounting
Program  accounting  requires  the  demonstrated  ability  to  reliably  estimate  revenues,  costs  and  gross  profit  margin  for  the  defined  program
accounting quantity. A program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-
term production effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to
make reasonably dependable estimates.
52

Table of Contents
Factors that must be estimated include program accounting quantity, sales price, labor and employee benefit costs, material costs, procured part
costs, major component costs, overhead costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and warranty costs. Estimation of the accounting
quantity for each program takes into account several factors that are indicative of the demand for the particular program, such as firm orders, letters
of intent from prospective customers and market studies. Total estimated program sales are determined by estimating the model mix and sales price
for all unsold units within the accounting quantity, added together with the sales prices for all undelivered units under contract. The sales prices for
all undelivered units within the accounting quantity include an escalation adjustment for inflation that is updated quarterly. Cost estimates are based
largely on negotiated and anticipated contracts with suppliers, historical performance trends, and business base and other economic projections.
Factors that influence these estimates include production rates, internal and subcontractor performance trends, customer and/or supplier claims or
assertions, asset utilization, anticipated labor agreements, COVID-19 disruptions, and inflationary or deflationary trends.
To ensure reliability in our estimates, we employ a rigorous estimating process that is reviewed and updated on a quarterly basis. This includes
reassessing  the  accounting  quantity.  Changes  in  estimates  of  program  gross  profit  margins  are  normally  recognized  on  a  prospective  basis;
however, when estimated costs to complete a program plus costs already included in inventory exceed estimated revenues from the program, a loss
is recorded in the current period. Reductions to the estimated loss are included in the gross profit margin for undelivered units in the accounting
quantity whereas increases to the estimated loss are recorded as an earnings charge in the period in which the loss is determined.
The 747, 767 and 777X programs have near break-even margins, and the 787 program has zero margin at December 31, 2021. Adverse changes
to the revenue and/or cost estimates for these programs could result in additional earnings charges in future periods.
777X Program During the fourth quarter of 2020, we revised the estimated first delivery date of the 777X to late 2023 and recorded a $6.5 billion
reach-forward  loss  on  the  777X  program.  The  revised  schedule  and  reach-forward  loss  reflected  a  number  of  factors,  including  an  updated
assessment of global certification requirements informed by continued discussions with regulators and a management decision in the fourth quarter
of 2020 to make modifications to the aircraft’s design, an updated assessment of COVID-19 impacts on market demand and discussions with our
customers with respect to aircraft delivery timing. These factors resulted in adjustments to production rates and the program accounting quantity,
increased  change  incorporation  costs,  and  associated  customer  and  supply  chain  impacts.  The  initial  accounting  quantity  of  350  airplanes
established in the fourth quarter of 2020 consists of 777X passenger airplanes and remained unchanged during 2021.
We are working towards reaching TIA which will enable us to begin FAA certification flight testing. The timing of TIA and certification will ultimately
be determined by the regulators, and further determinations with respect to anticipated certification requirements could result in additional delays in
entry into service and/or additional cost increases.
We continue to anticipate that the first 777X delivery will occur in late 2023. The 777X program has near break-even gross margins at December 31,
2021. The level of profitability on the 777X program will be subject to a number of factors. These factors include continued market uncertainty, the
impacts of COVID-19 on our production system as well as impacts on our supply chain and customers, customer negotiations, further production
rate adjustments for the 777X or other commercial aircraft programs, contraction of the accounting quantity and potential risks associated with the
testing program and the timing of aircraft certification. One or more of these factors could result in additional reach-forward losses on the 777X
program in future periods, which may be material.
53

Table of Contents
787 Program The 787 program’s production issues and delivery pause result in significant uncertainties regarding the revenue and cost estimates
for the 787 program. Deliveries have remained paused since May 2021. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we recorded a loss of $3.5 billion on the
program primarily due to rework driving longer delivery delays than were previously expected and associated customer considerations. The estimate
of  customer  considerations  is  based  on  a  number  of  factors,  including  our  current  assumptions  regarding  timing  of  FAA  approval  enabling
resumption  of  deliveries,  estimated  timing  of  completion  of  inspections  and  rework  to  enable  deliveries  in  future  periods,  estimated  timing  of
production rate increases as well as customer and market assessments. We continue to conduct inspections and rework and engage in detailed
discussions  with  the  FAA  regarding  required  actions  for  resuming  delivery  of  the  787.  Our  program  revenue  and  cost  estimates  reflect  the
assumption that production rates will remain very low until deliveries resume, gradually returning to 5 per month over time. We have also assumed
lower  forecasted  revenues  due  to  delayed  deliveries.  Our  program  assumptions  reflect  our  current  best  estimate.  However,  if  the  program
experiences further delivery delays or other factors such as additional inspections or rework that result in lower revenue or higher cost estimates, we
could record additional losses in future periods, which may be material.
Goodwill Impairments
We test goodwill for impairment by performing a qualitative assessment or quantitative test. If we choose to perform a qualitative assessment, we
evaluate economic, industry and company-specific factors as an initial step in assessing the fair value of the reporting unit. If we determine it is more
likely  than  not  that  the  carrying  value  of  the  net  assets  is  more  than  the  fair  value  of  the  reporting  unit,  then  a  quantitative  test  is  performed;
otherwise, no further testing is required. For reporting units where the quantitative test is used, we compare the carrying value of net assets to the
estimated fair value of the reporting unit. If the fair value is determined to be less than carrying value, the shortfall up to the carrying value of the
goodwill represents the amount of goodwill impairment.
We generally estimate the fair values of our reporting units using a combination of discounted cash flows and market-based valuation methodologies
such as comparable public company trading values. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of future sales, operating costs
and changes in working capital. These forecasts reflect existing firm orders, expected future orders, expected production rates and delivery profiles,
contracts with suppliers, labor agreements and general market conditions. Changes in these forecasts could significantly change the amount of
impairment recorded, if any. The cash flow forecasts are adjusted by an appropriate discount rate derived from our market capitalization plus a
suitable control premium at the date of evaluation. Therefore, changes in the stock price may also affect the amount of impairment recorded, if any.
We completed our annual assessment of goodwill as of April 1, 2021 and determined that there was no impairment of goodwill. As of December 31,
2021, we estimated  that  the fair  value of each reporting  unit  significantly  exceeded its  corresponding  carrying  value.  Changes in our forecasts,
discount rates or decreases in the value of our common stock could cause book values to exceed their fair values which may result in goodwill
impairment charges in future periods.
Pension Plans
Many  of  our  employees  have  earned  benefits  under  defined  benefit  pension  plans.  Nonunion  and  the  majority  of  union  employees  that  had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. Additional union
employees transitioned to company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plans effective January 1, 2019. Accounting rules require an
annual measurement of our projected obligation and plan assets. These measurements are based upon several assumptions, including the discount
rate and the expected long-term rate of asset return. Future changes in assumptions or differences between actual and expected
54

Table of Contents
outcomes can significantly affect our future annual expense, projected benefit obligation and Shareholders’ equity.
The projected benefit obligation is sensitive to discount rates. The projected benefit obligation would decrease by $2,240 million or increase by
$2,530  million  if  the  discount  rate  increased  or  decreased  by  25  basis  points.  A  25  basis  point  change  in  the  discount  rate  would  not  have  a
significant impact on pension cost. However, net periodic pension cost is sensitive to changes in the expected long-term rate of asset return. A
decrease or increase of 25 basis points in the expected long-term rate of asset return would have increased or decreased 2021 net periodic pension
cost by $155 million. See Note 16 of the Notes to our Consolidated Financial Statements, which includes the discount rate and expected long-term
rate of asset return assumptions for the last three years.
Deferred Income Taxes – Valuation Allowance
The Company has deferred income tax assets of $11,258 million at December 31, 2021 that can be used in future years to offset taxable income
and reduce income taxes payable. The Company has deferred income tax liabilities of $8,976 million at December 31, 2021 that will partially offset
deferred income tax assets and result in higher taxable income in future years and increase income taxes payable. Tax law determines whether
future reversals of temporary differences will result in taxable and deductible amounts that offset each other in future years. The particular years in
which temporary differences result in taxable or deductible amounts generally are determined by the timing of the recovery of the related asset or
settlement of the related liability.
On a quarterly basis, we assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets against future sources of taxable income and
reduce the carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not
(defined as a likelihood of more than 50%) that all or a portion of such assets will not be realized.
This assessment takes into account both positive and negative evidence. A recent history of financial reporting losses is heavily weighted as a
source of objectively verifiable negative evidence. Due to our recent history of losses, we determined we could not include future projected earnings
in our analysis. Rather, we use systematic and logical methods to estimate when deferred tax liabilities will reverse and generate taxable income
and  when  deferred  tax  assets  will  reverse  and  generate  tax  deductions.  The  selection  of  methodologies  and  assessment  of  when  temporary
differences will result in taxable or deductible amounts involves significant management judgment and is inherently complex and subjective. We
believe that the methodologies we use are reasonable and can be replicated on a consistent basis in future periods.
Deferred tax liabilities represent the assumed source of future taxable income and the majority are assumed to generate taxable amounts during the
next five years. Deferred tax assets include amounts related to pension and other postretirement benefits that are assumed to generate significant
deductible amounts beyond five years. The Company’s valuation allowance of $2,423 million at December 31, 2021 primarily relates to pension and
other postretirement benefit obligation deferred tax assets that are assumed to reverse beyond the period in which reversals of deferred tax liabilities
are assumed to occur. During 2021, the Company decreased the valuation allowance by $671 primarily due to favorable pension remeasurement.
Until the Company generates sustained levels of profitability, additional valuation allowances may have to be recorded with corresponding adverse
impacts on earnings and/or other comprehensive income.
For additional information regarding income taxes, see Note 4 of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
55

Table of Contents
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Interest Rate Risk
We have financial instruments that are subject to interest rate risk, principally fixed- and floating-rate debt obligations, and customer financing assets
and  liabilities.  The  investors  in  our  fixed-rate  debt  obligations  do  not  generally  have  the  right  to  demand  we  pay  off  these  obligations  prior  to
maturity.  Therefore,  exposure  to  interest  rate  risk  is  not  believed  to  be  material  for  our  fixed-rate  debt.  In  2021,  we  repaid  the  $13.8  billion
outstanding under our two-year floating-rate delayed draw term loan credit agreement. As a result, as of December 31, 2021, we do not have any
significant  floating-rate  debt  obligations.  Historically,  we  have  not  experienced  material  gains  or  losses  on  our  customer  financing  assets  and
liabilities due to interest rate changes.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
We are subject to foreign currency exchange rate risk relating to receipts from customers and payments to suppliers in foreign currencies. We use
foreign  currency  forward  contracts  to  hedge  the  price  risk  associated  with  firmly  committed  and  forecasted  foreign  denominated  payments  and
receipts  related  to  our  ongoing  business.  Foreign  currency  forward  contracts  are  sensitive  to  changes  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  At
December  31,  2021,  a  10%  increase  or  decrease  in  the  exchange  rate  in  our  portfolio  of  foreign  currency  contracts  would  have  increased  or
decreased our unrealized losses by $241 million. Consistent with the use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of exchange rate fluctuations,
such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions
being hedged. When taken together, these forward currency contracts and the offsetting underlying commitments do not create material market risk.
Commodity Price Risk
We are subject to commodity price risk relating to commodity purchase contracts for items used in production that are subject to changes in the
market  price.  We  use  commodity  swaps  and  commodity  purchase  contracts  to  hedge  against  these  potentially  unfavorable  price  changes.  Our
commodity  purchase  contracts  and  derivatives  are  both  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  market  price.  At  December  31,  2021,  a  10%  increase  or
decrease in the market price in our commodity derivatives would have increased or decreased our unrealized losses by $46 million. Consistent with
the use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of market price fluctuations, such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding
gains or losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions being hedged. When taken together, these commodity purchase
contracts and the offsetting swaps do not create material market risk.
56

Table of Contents
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Index to the Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations
58
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
59
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
60
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
61
Consolidated Statements of Equity
62
Summary of Business Segment Data
63
Note 1 - Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
64
Note 2 - Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
77
Note 3 - Earnings Per Share
78
Note 4 - Income Taxes
80
Note 5 - Accounts Receivable
84
Note 6 - Allowance for Losses on Financial Assets
84
Note 7 - Inventories
85
Note 8 - Contracts with Customers
86
Note 9 - Customer Financing
87
Note 10 - Property, Plant and Equipment
89
Note 11 - Investments
90
Note 12 - Leases
90
Note 13 - Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
92
Note 14 - Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
97
Note 15 - Debt
98
Note 16 - Postretirement Plans
99
Note 17 - Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
108
Note 18 - Shareholders’ Equity
112
Note 19 - Derivative Financial Instruments
113
Note 20 - Fair Value Measurements
115
Note 21 - Legal Proceedings
117
Note 22 - Segment and Revenue Information
118
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
124
57

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Sales of products
$51,386 
$47,142 
$66,094 
Sales of services
10,900 
11,016 
10,465 
Total revenues
62,286 
58,158 
76,559 
Cost of products
(49,954)
(54,568)
(62,877)
Cost of services
(9,283)
(9,232)
(9,154)
Boeing Capital interest expense
(32)
(43)
(62)
Total costs and expenses
(59,269)
(63,843)
(72,093)
3,017 
(5,685)
4,466 
Income/(loss) from operating investments, net
210 
9 
(4)
General and administrative expense
(4,157)
(4,817)
(3,909)
Research and development expense, net
(2,249)
(2,476)
(3,219)
Gain on dispositions, net
277 
202 
691 
Loss from operations
(2,902)
(12,767)
(1,975)
Other income, net
551 
447 
438 
Interest and debt expense
(2,682)
(2,156)
(722)
Loss before income taxes
(5,033)
(14,476)
(2,259)
Income tax benefit
743 
2,535 
1,623 
Net loss
(4,290)
(11,941)
(636)
Less: net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
(88)
(68)
Net loss attributable to Boeing Shareholders
($4,202)
($11,873)
($636)
Basic loss per share
($7.15)
($20.88)
($1.12)
Diluted loss per share
($7.15)
($20.88)
($1.12)
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 64 – 123.
58

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021 
2020 
2019 
Net loss
($4,290)
($11,941)
($636)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax:
Currency translation adjustments
(75)
98 
(27)
Unrealized gain on certain investments, net of tax of $0, $0 and $0
1 
Derivative instruments:
Unrealized gain/(loss) arising during period, net of tax of ($16), ($4) and $13
55 
14 
(48)
Reclassification adjustment for (gain)/loss included in net earnings, net of tax of $2, ($7) and
($7)
(6)
27 
26 
Total unrealized gain/(loss) on derivative instruments, net of tax
49 
41 
(22)
Defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits:
Net actuarial gain/(loss) arising during the period, net of tax of ($32), $111 and $405
4,262 
(1,956)
(1,413)
Amortization of actuarial losses included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of ($8), ($52)
and ($133)
1,155 
917 
464 
Settlements included in net income, net of tax of ($2), $0 and $0
191 
5 
Amortization of prior service credits included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of $1, $6
and $25
(114)
(112)
(89)
Prior service cost/(credit) arising during the period, net of tax of $0, ($2) and $0
27 
(1)
Pension and postretirement benefit related to our equity method investments, net of tax of
($2), $0 and ($5)
6 
17 
Total defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits, net of tax
5,500 
(1,119)
(1,022)
Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax
5,474 
(980)
(1,070)
Comprehensive loss related to noncontrolling interests
(41)
Comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax
1,184 
(12,921)
(1,747)
Less: Comprehensive loss related to noncontrolling interest
(88)
(68)
(41)
Comprehensive income/(loss) attributable to Boeing Shareholders, net of tax
$1,272 
($12,853)
($1,706)
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 64 – 123.
59

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
December 31,
2021
2020
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$8,052 
$7,752 
Short-term and other investments
8,192 
17,838 
Accounts receivable, net
2,641 
1,955 
Unbilled receivables, net
8,620 
7,995 
Current portion of customer financing, net
117 
101 
Inventories
78,823 
81,715 
Other current assets, net
2,221 
4,286 
Total current assets
108,666 
121,642 
Customer financing, net
1,695 
1,936 
Property, plant and equipment, net
10,918 
11,820 
Goodwill
8,068 
8,081 
Acquired intangible assets, net
2,562 
2,843 
Deferred income taxes
77 
86 
Investments
975 
1,016 
Other assets, net of accumulated amortization of $975 and $729
5,591 
4,712 
Total assets
$138,552 
$152,136 
Liabilities and equity
Accounts payable
$9,261 
$12,928 
Accrued liabilities
18,455 
22,171 
Advances and progress billings
52,980 
50,488 
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt
1,296 
1,693 
Total current liabilities
81,992 
87,280 
Deferred income taxes
218 
1,010 
Accrued retiree health care
3,528 
4,137 
Accrued pension plan liability, net
9,104 
14,408 
Other long-term liabilities
1,750 
1,486 
Long-term debt
56,806 
61,890 
Total liabilities
153,398 
170,211 
Shareholders’ equity:
Common stock, par value $5.00 – 1,200,000,000 shares authorized; 1,012,261,159 shares issued
5,061 
5,061 
Additional paid-in capital
9,052 
7,787 
Treasury stock, at cost
(51,861)
(52,641)
Retained earnings
34,408 
38,610 
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(11,659)
(17,133)
Total shareholders’ deficit
(14,999)
(18,316)
Noncontrolling interests
153 
241 
Total equity
(14,846)
(18,075)
Total liabilities and equity
$138,552 
$152,136 
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 64 – 123.
60

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Dollars in millions)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Cash flows – operating activities:
Net loss
($4,290)
($11,941)
($636)
Adjustments to reconcile net loss to net cash used by operating activities:
Non-cash items –
Share-based plans expense
833 
250 
212 
Treasury shares issued for 401(k) contribution
1,233 
195 
Depreciation and amortization
2,144 
2,246 
2,271 
Investment/asset impairment charges, net
98 
410 
443 
Customer financing valuation adjustments
12 
250 
Gain on dispositions, net
(277)
(202)
(691)
787 and 777X reach-forward losses
3,460 
6,493 
Other charges and credits, net
360 
1,462 
334 
Changes in assets and liabilities –
Accounts receivable
(713)
909 
603 
Unbilled receivables
(586)
919 
982 
Advances and progress billings
2,505 
(1,060)
737 
Inventories
(1,127)
(11,002)
(12,391)
Other current assets
345 
372 
(682)
Accounts payable
(3,783)
(5,363)
1,600 
Accrued liabilities
(3,687)
1,074 
7,781 
Income taxes receivable, payable and deferred
733 
(2,576)
(2,476)
Other long-term liabilities
(206)
(222)
(621)
Pension and other postretirement plans
(972)
(794)
(777)
Customer financing, net
210 
173 
419 
Other
304 
235 
196 
Net cash used by operating activities
(3,416)
(18,410)
(2,446)
Cash flows – investing activities:
Payments to acquire property, plant and equipment
(980)
(1,303)
(1,834)
Proceeds from disposals of property, plant and equipment
529 
296 
334 
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(6)
(455)
Proceeds from dispositions
464 
Contributions to investments
(35,713)
(37,616)
(1,658)
Proceeds from investments
45,489 
20,275 
1,759 
Purchase of distribution rights
(127)
Other
5 
(18)
(13)
Net cash provided/(used) by investing activities
9,324 
(18,366)
(1,530)
Cash flows – financing activities:
New borrowings
9,795 
47,248 
25,389 
Debt repayments
(15,371)
(10,998)
(12,171)
Contributions from noncontrolling interests
7 
Stock options exercised
42 
36 
58 
Employee taxes on certain share-based payment arrangements
(66)
(173)
(248)
Common shares repurchased
(2,651)
Dividends paid
(1,158)
(4,630)
Other
(15)
Net cash (used)/provided by financing activities
(5,600)
34,955 
5,739 
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(39)
85 
(5)
Net increase/(decrease) in cash & cash equivalents, including restricted
269 
(1,736)
1,758 
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at beginning of year
7,835 
9,571 
7,813 
Cash & cash equivalents, including restricted, at end of year
8,104 
7,835 
9,571 
Less restricted cash & cash equivalents, included in Investments
52 
83 
86 
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$8,052 
$7,752 
$9,485 
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 64 – 123.

61

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Equity
 
Boeing shareholders
 
 
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Common 
Stock
Additional 
Paid-In 
Capital
Treasury 
Stock
Retained 
Earnings
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Loss
Non- 
controlling 
Interest
Total
Balance at January 1, 2019
$5,061 
$6,768 
($52,348)
$55,941 
($15,083)
$71 
$410 
Net loss
(636)
(41)
(677)
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $298
(1,070)
(1,070)
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
245 
(33)
212 
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(47)
104 
57 
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(221)
(19)
(240)
Common shares repurchased
(2,651)
(2,651)
Cash dividends declared ($8.22 per share)
(4,628)
(4,628)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
287 
287 
Balance at December 31, 2019
$5,061 
$6,745 
($54,914)
$50,644 
($16,153)
$317 
($8,300)
Impact of ASU 2016-13
(162)
(162)
Balance at January 1, 2020
$5,061 
$6,745 
($54,914)
$50,482 
($16,153)
$317 
($8,462)
Net loss
(11,873)
(68)
(11,941)
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $52
(980)
(980)
Share-based compensation
250 
250 
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(26)
63 
37 
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(214)
47 
(167)
Treasury shares contributed to pension plans
952 
2,048 
3,000 
Treasury shares issued for 401(k) contribution
80 
115 
195 
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(8)
(8)
Other
1 
1 
Balance at December 31, 2020
$5,061 
$7,787 
($52,641)
$38,610 
($17,133)
$241 
($18,075)
Net loss
(4,202)
(88)
(4,290)
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of ($57)
5,474 
5,474 
Share-based compensation
833 
833 
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(28)
70 
42 
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(98)
35 
(63)
Treasury shares issued for 401(k) contribution
558 
675 
1,233 
Balance at December 31, 2021
$5,061 
$9,052 
($51,861)
$34,408 
($11,659)
$153 
($14,846)
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 64 – 123.
62

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Summary of Business Segment Data
(Dollars in millions)
 
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenues:
Commercial Airplanes
$19,493 
$16,162 
$32,255 
Defense, Space & Security
26,540 
26,257 
26,095 
Global Services
16,328 
15,543 
18,468 
Boeing Capital
272 
261 
244 
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(347)
(65)
(503)
Total revenues
$62,286 
$58,158 
$76,559 
Earnings/(loss) from operations:
Commercial Airplanes
($6,475)
($13,847)
($6,657)
Defense, Space & Security
1,544 
1,539 
2,615 
Global Services
2,017 
450 
2,697 
Boeing Capital
106 
63 
28 
Segment operating loss
(2,808)
(11,795)
(1,317)
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(1,267)
(2,355)
(2,073)
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
1,173 
1,383 
1,415 
Loss from operations
(2,902)
(12,767)
(1,975)
Other income, net
551 
447 
438 
Interest and debt expense
(2,682)
(2,156)
(722)
Loss before income taxes
(5,033)
(14,476)
(2,259)
Income tax benefit
743 
2,535 
1,623 
Net loss
(4,290)
(11,941)
(636)
Less: net loss attributable to noncontrolling interest
(88)
(68)
Net loss attributable to Boeing Shareholders
($4,202)
($11,873)
($636)
This information is an integral part of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 22 for further segment results.
63

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019
(Dollars in millions, except otherwise stated)
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The Boeing Company (herein referred to as
“Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us” or “our”). These statements include the accounts of all majority-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities
that are required to be consolidated. All significant intercompany accounts and transactions have been eliminated. As described in Note 22, we
operate in four reportable segments: Commercial Airplanes (BCA), Defense, Space & Security (BDS), Global Services (BGS) and Boeing Capital
(BCC).
Liquidity Matters
The global outbreak of COVID-19, 787 production issues and associated rework, and the residual impacts of the 737 MAX grounding continue to
have significant adverse impacts on our business and are expected to continue to negatively impact revenue, earnings and operating cash flow in
future quarters. The COVID-19 pandemic has caused an unprecedented shock to demand for air travel, creating a tremendous challenge for our
customers, our business and the entire commercial aerospace manufacturing and services sector. We continue to expect commercial air travel to
return to 2019 levels in 2023 to 2024. We expect it will take a few years beyond that for the industry to return to long-term trend growth. There is
significant uncertainty with respect to when commercial air traffic levels will recover, and whether, and at what point capacity will return to and/or
exceed pre-COVID-19 levels.
During 2021, net cash used by operating activities was $3.4 billion. Our operating cash flows continue to be impacted by lower commercial airplane
deliveries and concessions paid to 737 MAX customers. We expect negative operating cash flows until commercial deliveries ramp up. In 2021, we
issued $9.8 billion of fixed rate senior notes that mature between 2023 and 2026. We used the net proceeds of these note issuances to repay the
$13.8 billion outstanding under our two-year delayed draw term loan credit agreement. In 2021, we also repaid $1.5 billion of term notes. As a result,
our cash and short-term investment balance was $16.2 billion and our debt balance was $58.1 billion at December 31, 2021. In addition, we have
term notes of $1.2 billion maturing in 2022.
As of December 31, 2021, our unused borrowing capacity on revolving credit agreements is $14.7 billion. We anticipate that these revolving credit
lines will remain undrawn and primarily serve as backup liquidity to support our general corporate borrowing needs. Our borrowing capacity includes
a $3.1 billion 364-day revolving credit facility, which is set to expire in October 2022. See Note 15.
In 2021, our short-term and long-term credit ratings by the major credit rating agencies remained unchanged from 2020. There is risk for further
downgrades.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, trade payables included $2.3 billion and $3.8 billion payable to suppliers who have elected to participate in supply
chain financing programs. While access to supply chain financing has been reduced due to our current credit ratings and debt levels, we do not
believe that these or future changes in the availability of supply chain financing will have a significant impact on our liquidity.
In addition to our debt issuances, we have taken a number of actions to improve liquidity. During 2020, our Board of Directors terminated its prior
authorization to repurchase shares of the Company’s outstanding common stock and suspended the declaration and/or payment of dividends until
further
64

Table of Contents
notice. We have also reduced production rates in our commercial business to reflect the impact of COVID-19 on the industry. We rationalized our
workforce  through  a  combination  of  voluntary  and  involuntary  layoffs  and  natural  turnover.  In  the  fourth  quarter  of  2020,  we  began  using  our
common stock in lieu of cash to fund Company contributions to our 401(k) plans. In December 2020, we awarded most of our employees a one-time
stock grant that will vest in three years in lieu of merit pay increases. We have reduced discretionary spending, including reducing or deferring
research and development and capital expenditures. We expect these actions to further enable the Company to conserve cash.
We are also working with our customers and supply chain to accelerate receipts and conserve cash. For example, the United States Department of
Defense (U.S. DoD) has taken steps to work with its industry partners to increase liquidity in the form of increased progress payment rates and
reductions in withholds among other initiatives. In addition, the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security (CARES) Act included a five-year net
operating loss carryback provision which enabled us to benefit from certain 2020 losses and resulted in tax refunds of $1.7 billion in 2021.
We  continue  to  transform  and  improve  our  business  processes.  These  activities  are  not  intended  to  constrain  our  capacity  but  to  enable  the
Company to emerge stronger and be more resilient when the market recovers.
Based  on  our  current  best  estimates  of  market  demand,  planned  production  rates,  timing  of  cash  receipts  and  expenditures,  our  ability  to
successfully implement further actions to improve liquidity as well as our ability to access additional liquidity, if needed, we believe it is probable that
we will be able to fund our operations for the foreseeable future.
Use of Estimates
The preparation of financial statements in conformity with U.S. generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) requires management to make
estimates and assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and liabilities and disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at the date of
the financial statements and the reported amounts of revenues and expenses during the reporting period. We believe that the accounting estimates
and assumptions are appropriate, however, given the increased uncertainties surrounding the severity and duration of the impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic actual results could differ from those estimates.
Operating Cycle
For classification of certain current assets and liabilities, we use the duration of the related contract or program as our operating cycle, which is
generally longer than one year.
Revenue and Related Cost Recognition
Commercial aircraft contracts The majority of our BCA segment revenue is derived from commercial aircraft contracts. For each contract, we
determine the transaction price based on the consideration expected to be received. We allocate the transaction price to each commercial aircraft
performance  obligation  based  on  relative  standalone  selling  prices  adjusted  by  an  escalation  formula  as  specified  in  the  customer  agreement.
Revenue is recognized for each commercial aircraft performance obligation at the point in time when the aircraft is completed and accepted by the
customer. We use program accounting to determine the amount reported as cost of sales.
In certain situations, where an aircraft is still in our possession, and title and risk of loss has passed to the customer (known as a bill-and-hold
arrangement), revenue will be recognized when all specific requirements for transfer of control under a bill-and-hold arrangement have been met.
65

Table of Contents
Payments for commercial aircraft sales are received in accordance with the customer agreement, which generally includes a deposit upon order and
additional payments in accordance with a payment schedule, with the balance being due immediately prior to or at aircraft delivery. Advances and
progress  billings  (contract  liabilities)  are  normal  and  customary  for  commercial  aircraft  contracts  and  not  considered  a  significant  financing
component as they are intended to protect us from the other party failing to adequately complete some or all of its obligations under the contract.
Long-term contracts Substantially all contracts at BDS and certain contracts at BGS are long-term contracts with the U.S. government and other
customers that generally extend over several years. Products sales under long-term contracts primarily include fighter jets, rotorcraft, cybersecurity
products,  surveillance  suites,  advanced  weapons,  missile  defense,  military  derivative  aircraft,  satellite  systems  and  modification  of  commercial
passenger aircraft to cargo freighters. Services sales under long-term contracts primarily include support and maintenance agreements associated
with our commercial and defense products and space travel on Commercial Crew.
For each long-term contract, we determine the transaction price based on the consideration expected to be received. We allocate the transaction
price to each distinct performance obligation to deliver a good or service, or a collection of goods and/or services, based on the relative standalone
selling prices. A long-term contract will typically represent a single distinct performance obligation due to the highly interdependent and interrelated
nature of the underlying goods and/or services and the significant service of integration that we provide. While the scope and price on certain long-
term contracts may be modified over their life, the transaction price is based on current rights and obligations under the contract and does not
include potential modifications until they are agreed upon with the customer. When applicable, a cumulative adjustment or separate recognition for
the additional scope and price may result. Long-term contracts can be negotiated with a fixed price or a price in which we are reimbursed for costs
incurred  plus  an  agreed  upon  profit.  The  Federal  Acquisition  Regulations  provide  guidance  on  the  types  of  cost  that  will  be  reimbursed  in
establishing the price for contracts with the U.S. government. Certain long-term contracts include in the transaction price variable consideration,
such as incentive and award fees, if specified targets are achieved. The amount included in the transaction price represents the expected value,
based on a weighted probability, or the most likely amount.
Long-term contract revenue is recognized over the contract term (over time) as the work progresses, either as products are produced or as services
are rendered. We generally recognize revenue over time as we perform on long-term contracts because of continuous transfer of control to the
customer. For U.S. government contracts, this continuous transfer of control to the customer is supported by clauses in the contract that allow the
customer to unilaterally terminate the contract for convenience, pay us for costs incurred plus a reasonable profit and take control of any work in
process.  Similarly,  for  non-U.S.  government  contracts,  the  customer  typically  controls  the  work  in  process  as  evidenced  either  by  contractual
termination clauses or by our rights to payment of the transaction price associated with work performed to date on products or services that do not
have an alternative use to the Company.
The accounting for long-term contracts involves a judgmental process of estimating total sales, costs and profit for each performance obligation.
Cost of sales is recognized as incurred. The amount reported as revenues is determined by adding a proportionate amount of the estimated profit to
the  amount  reported  as  cost  of  sales.  Recognizing  revenue  as  costs  are  incurred  provides  an  objective  measure  of  progress  on  the  long-term
contract and thereby best depicts the extent of transfer of control to the customer.
For long-term contracts for which revenue is recognized over time, changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effect on operating
income are recognized  using a cumulative catch-up adjustment  which recognizes in the current  period the cumulative effect of the changes on
current and prior periods based on a long-term contract’s percentage-of-completion. When the current estimates of
66

Table of Contents
total sales and costs for a long-term contract indicate a loss, a provision for the entire reach-forward loss on the long-term contract is recognized.
Net cumulative catch-up adjustments to prior years' revenue and earnings, including certain reach-forward losses, across all long-term contracts
were as follows:
2021
2020
2019
Increase/(Decrease) to Revenue
($379)
($359)
$54 
Increase to Loss from operations
($880)
($942)
($111)
Decrease to Diluted EPS
($1.28)
($1.37)
($0.06)
Significant adjustments during the three years ended December 31, 2021 included losses on KC-46A Tanker, Commercial Crew and VC-25B.
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process, changes in underlying assumptions/estimates, supplier performance or circumstances
may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods.
Payments under long-term  contracts  may be received before or after revenue is recognized. The U.S. government  customer typically withholds
payment of a small portion of the contract price until contract completion. Therefore, long-term contracts typically generate Unbilled receivables
(contract assets) but may generate Advances and progress billings (contract liabilities). Long-term contract Unbilled receivables and Advances and
progress billings are not considered a significant financing component because they are intended to protect either the customer or the Company in
the event that some or all of the obligations under the contract are not completed.
Commercial  spare  parts  contracts Certain  contracts  at  our  BGS  segment  include  sales  of  commercial  spare  parts.  For  each  contract,  we
determine the transaction price based on the consideration expected to be received. The spare parts have discrete unit prices that represent fair
value. We generally consider each spare part to be a separate performance obligation. Revenue is recognized for each commercial spare part
performance obligation at the point in time of delivery to the customer. We may provide our customers with a right to return a commercial spare part
where a customer may receive a full or partial refund, a credit applied to amounts owed, a different product in exchange, or any combination of
these items. We consider the potential for customer returns in the estimated transaction price. The amount reported as cost of sales is recorded at
average cost. Payments for commercial spare parts sales are typically received shortly after delivery.
Other service revenue contracts Certain contracts at our BGS segment are for sales of services to commercial customers including maintenance,
training, data analytics and information-based services. We recognize revenue for these service performance obligations over time as the services
are rendered. The method of measuring progress (such as straight-line or billable amount) varies depending upon which method best depicts the
transfer of control to the customer based on the type of service performed. Cost of sales is recorded as incurred.
Concession  Sharing  Arrangements We  account  for  sales  concessions  to  our  customers  in  consideration  of  their  purchase  of  products  and
services as a reduction of the transaction price and the revenue that is recognized for the related performance obligations. The sales concessions
incurred may be partially reimbursed by certain suppliers in accordance with concession sharing arrangements. We record these reimbursements,
which are presumed to represent reductions in the price of the vendor’s products or services, as a reduction in Cost of products.
Unbilled Receivables and Advances and Progress Billings Unbilled receivables (contract assets) arise when the Company recognizes revenue
for amounts which cannot yet be billed under terms of the
67

Table of Contents
contract  with  the  customer.  Advances  and  progress  billings  (contract  liabilities)  arise  when  the  Company  receives  payments  from  customers  in
advance of recognizing revenue. The amount of Unbilled receivables or Advances and progress billings is determined for each contract.
Financial Services Revenue We record financial services revenue associated with sales-type/finance leases, operating leases and loans in Sales
of  services  on  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations.  For  sales-type  leases,  we  recognize  revenue  if  collection  of  the  lease  payments  is
probable.  For  sales-type  and  finance  leases,  we  record  customer  financing  receivables  at  lease  inception.  A  customer  financing  receivable  is
recorded at the aggregate of future minimum lease payments,  estimated residual value of the leased equipment, and any deferred incremental
direct costs less unearned income. Income is recognized over the life of the lease to approximate a level rate of return on the net investment. For
notes receivable, notes are recorded as customer financing receivables net of any unamortized discounts and deferred incremental direct costs.
Interest income and amortization of any discounts are recorded ratably over the related term of the note.
Income  recognition  is  generally  suspended  for  customer  financing  receivables  that  are  uncollectible. We determine  that  a  customer  financing
receivable is uncollectible when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due according to
the original contractual terms. We determine a customer financing receivable is past due when cash has not been received upon the due date
specified in the contract.
We evaluate the collectability of customer financing receivables at commencement and on a recurring basis. If a customer financing receivable is
determined to be uncollectible, the customer is categorized as non-accrual status. When a customer is in non-accrual status at commencement,
sales-type lease revenue is deferred until substantially all cash has been received or the customer is removed from non-accrual status. If we have a
direct finance lease and/or a note receivable with a customer that is in non-accrual status, or a sales-type lease with a customer that changes to
non-accrual  status  after  commencement,  we  recognize  contractual  interest  income  as  payments  are  received  to  the  extent  there  is  sufficient
collateral and payments exceed past due principal payments.
Residual values, which are reviewed periodically, represent the estimated amount we expect to receive at lease termination from the disposition of
the leased equipment. Actual residual values realized could differ from these estimates. Declines in estimated residual value that are deemed other-
than-temporary are recognized in the period in which the declines occur.
For operating leases, revenue on leased aircraft and equipment is recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Operating lease
assets, included in Customer financing, net, are recorded at cost and depreciated to an estimated residual value using the straight-line method over
the  period  that  we  project  we  will  hold  the  asset.  We  periodically  review  our  estimates  of  residual  value  and  recognize  forecasted  changes  by
prospectively adjusting depreciation expense.
Reinsurance  Revenue Our  wholly-owned  insurance  subsidiary,  Astro  Ltd.,  participates  in  a  reinsurance  pool  for  workers’  compensation.  The
member agreements and practices of the reinsurance pool minimize any participating members’ individual risk. Reinsurance revenues were $126,
$129 and $151 during 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Reinsurance costs related to premiums and claims paid to the reinsurance pool were
$129,  $136  and  $150  during  2021,  2020  and  2019,  respectively.  Revenues  and  costs  are  presented  net  in  Cost  of  sales  in  the  Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
Fleet Support
We  provide  assistance  and  support  to  facilitate  efficient  and  safe  aircraft  operation  to  the  operators  of  all  our  commercial  airplane  models.
Collectively known as fleet support, these activities and support services include flight and maintenance training, field service support, engineering
support, and
68

Table of Contents
technical  data  and  documents.  Fleet  support  activity  begins  prior  to  aircraft  delivery  as  the  customer  receives  training,  manuals,  and  technical
consulting support. This activity continues throughout the aircraft’s operational life. Services provided after delivery include field service support,
consulting on maintenance, repair and operational issues brought forth by the customer or regulators, updating manuals and engineering data, and
the  issuance  of  service  bulletins  that  impact  the  entire  model’s  fleet.  Field  service  support  involves  our  personnel  located  at  customer  facilities
providing and coordinating fleet support activities and requests. The costs for fleet support are expensed as incurred as Cost of services.
Research and Development
Research  and  development  includes  costs  incurred  for  experimentation,  design  and  testing,  as  well  as  bid  and  proposal  efforts  related  to
government  products  and  services,  which  are  expensed  as  incurred  unless  the  costs  are  related  to  certain  contractual  arrangements  with
customers. Costs that are incurred pursuant to such contractual arrangements are recorded over the period that revenue is recognized, consistent
with our long-term contract accounting policy. We have certain research and development arrangements that meet the requirement for best efforts
research  and  development  accounting.  Accordingly,  the  amounts  funded  by  the  customer  are  recognized  as  an  offset  to  our  research  and
development expense rather than as contract revenues. Research and development expense included bid and proposal costs of $213, $224 and
$214 in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Share-Based Compensation
We provide various forms of share-based compensation to our employees. For awards settled in shares, we measure compensation expense based
on the grant-date fair value net of estimated forfeitures.  For awards settled in cash, or that may be settled in cash, we measure compensation
expense based on the fair value at each reporting date net of estimated forfeitures. The expense is recognized over the requisite service period,
which is generally the vesting period of the award.
Income Taxes
Provisions for U.S. federal, state and local, and non-U.S. income taxes are calculated on reported Loss before income taxes based on current tax
law and also include, in the current period, the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in determining deferred tax
assets and liabilities. Such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable because certain items of income and expense are
recognized in different time periods for financial reporting purposes than for income tax purposes. Significant judgment is required in determining
income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions.
The accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax
positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured for
financial statement purposes and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax
positions  changes,  the  change  in estimate  is  recorded  in  the  period  in  which  the  determination  is  made.  Tax-related  interest  and  penalties  are
classified as a component of Income tax benefit.
We also assess the likelihood that we will be able to recover our deferred tax assets against future sources of taxable income and reduce the
carrying amounts of deferred tax assets by recording a valuation allowance if, based on the available evidence, it is more likely than not that all or a
portion of such assets will not be realized. Changes in our estimates and judgments regarding realization of deferred tax assets may result in an
increase or decrease to our tax expense and/or other comprehensive income, which would be recorded in the period in which the change occurs.
69

Table of Contents
Postretirement Plans
Many  of  our  employees  have  earned  benefits  under  defined  benefit  pension  plans.  Nonunion  and  the  majority  of  union  employees  that  had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. Additional union
employees transitioned to company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plans effective January 1, 2019. We also provide postretirement
benefit plans other than pensions, consisting principally of health care coverage to eligible retirees and qualifying dependents. Benefits under the
pension and other postretirement benefit plans are generally based on age at retirement and years of service and, for some pension plans, benefits
are also based on the employee’s annual earnings. The net periodic cost of our pension and other postretirement plans is determined using the
projected unit credit method and several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, the long-term rate of asset return
and medical trend (rate  of growth for medical costs).  A portion  of the service  cost  component of net periodic pension and other postretirement
income or expense is not recognized in net earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to production as product costs and reflected in
inventory at the end of a reporting period. Actuarial gains and losses, which occur when actual experience differs from actuarial assumptions, are
reflected in Shareholders’ equity (net of taxes). If actuarial gains and losses exceed ten percent of the greater of plan assets or plan liabilities, we
amortize them over the average expected future lifetime of participants. The funded status of our pension and postretirement plans is reflected on
the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
Postemployment Plans
We record a liability for postemployment benefits, such as severance or job training, when payment is probable, the amount is reasonably estimable,
and the obligation relates to rights that have vested or accumulated.
Environmental Remediation
We  are  subject  to  federal  and  state  requirements  for  protection  of  the  environment,  including  those  for  discharge  of  hazardous  materials  and
remediation  of  contaminated  sites.  We  routinely  assess,  based  on  in-depth  studies,  expert  analyses  and  legal  reviews,  our  contingencies,
obligations  and  commitments  for  remediation  of  contaminated  sites,  including  assessments  of  ranges  and  probabilities  of  recoveries  from  other
responsible parties and/or insurance carriers. Our policy is to accrue and charge to current expense identified exposures related to environmental
remediation sites when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. The amount of the liability is
based on our best estimate or the low end of a range of reasonably possible exposure for investigation, cleanup and monitoring costs to be incurred.
Estimated remediation costs are not discounted to present value as the timing of payments cannot be reasonably estimated. We may be able to
recover  a  portion  of  the  remediation  costs  from  insurers  or  other  third  parties.  Such  recoveries  are  recorded  when  realization  of  the  claim  for
recovery is deemed probable.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of highly liquid instruments, such as commercial paper, time deposits, and other money market instruments,
which have original maturities of three months or less. We aggregate our cash balances by bank where conditions for right of set-off are met, and
reclassify any negative balances, consisting mainly of uncleared checks, to Accounts payable. Negative balances reclassified to Accounts payable
were $47 and $74 at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Inventories
Inventoried  costs  on  commercial  aircraft  programs  and  long-term  contracts  include  direct  engineering,  production  and  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring costs, and applicable overhead, which includes fringe
70

Table of Contents
benefits, production related indirect and plant management salaries and plant services, not in excess of estimated net realizable value. To the extent
a material amount of such costs are related to an abnormal event or are fixed costs not appropriately attributable to our programs or contracts, they
are expensed in the current period rather than inventoried. Inventoried costs include amounts relating to programs and contracts with long-term
production cycles, a portion of which is not expected to be realized within one year. Included in inventory for federal government contracts is an
allocation of allowable costs related to manufacturing process reengineering.
Commercial aircraft programs inventory includes deferred production costs and supplier advances. Deferred production costs represent actual costs
incurred for production of early units that exceed the estimated average cost of all units in the program accounting quantity. Higher production costs
are experienced at the beginning of a new or derivative airplane program. Units produced early in a program require substantially more effort (labor
and  other  resources)  than  units  produced  later  in  a  program  because  of  volume  efficiencies  and  the  effects  of  learning.  We  expect  that  these
deferred costs will be fully recovered when all units included in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries is
below the estimated average cost of all units in the program. Supplier advances represent payments for parts we have contracted to receive from
suppliers in the future. As parts are received, supplier advances are amortized to work in process.
The determination of net realizable value of long-term contract costs is based upon quarterly reviews that estimate costs to be incurred to complete
all contract requirements. When actual contract costs and the estimate to complete exceed total estimated contract revenues, a loss provision is
recorded. The determination of net realizable value of commercial aircraft program costs is based upon quarterly program reviews that estimate
revenue  and  cost  to  be  incurred  to  complete  the  program  accounting  quantity.  When  estimated  costs  to  complete  exceed  estimated  program
revenues to go, a program loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the accounting quantity.
Used aircraft purchased by the Commercial Airplanes segment and general stock materials are stated at cost not in excess of net realizable value.
See ‘Aircraft Valuation’ within this Note for a discussion of our valuation of used aircraft. Spare parts inventory is stated at lower of average unit cost
or net realizable value. We review our commercial spare parts and general stock materials quarterly to identify impaired inventory, including excess
or obsolete inventory, based on historical sales trends, expected production usage, and the size and age of the aircraft fleet using the part. Impaired
inventories are charged to Cost of products in the period the impairment occurs.
Included in inventory for commercial aircraft programs are amounts paid or credited in cash, or other consideration to certain airline customers, that
are referred to as early issue sales consideration. Early issue sales consideration is recognized as a reduction to revenue when the delivery of the
aircraft under contract occurs. If an airline customer does not perform and take delivery of the contracted aircraft, we believe that we would have the
ability to recover amounts paid. However, to the extent early issue sales consideration exceeds advances and is not considered to be otherwise
recoverable, it would be written off in the current period.
Precontract Costs
We may, from time to time, incur costs in excess of the amounts required for existing contracts. If we determine the costs are probable of recovery
from  future  orders,  then  we  capitalize  the  precontract  costs  we  incur,  excluding  start-up  costs  which  are  expensed  as  incurred.  Capitalized
precontract  costs  are  included  in  Inventories  in  the  accompanying  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position.  Should  future  orders  not
materialize or we determine the costs are no longer probable of recovery, the capitalized costs would be written off.
71

Table of Contents
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property,  plant  and  equipment  are  recorded  at  cost,  including  applicable  construction-period  interest,  less  accumulated  depreciation  and  are
depreciated principally over the following estimated useful lives: new buildings and land improvements, from 10 to 40 years; and new machinery and
equipment, from 4 to 20 years. The principal methods of depreciation are as follows: buildings and land improvements, 150% declining balance; and
machinery and equipment, sum-of-the-years’ digits. Capitalized internal use software is included in Other assets and amortized using the straight
line method over 5 years. Capitalized software as a service is included in Other assets and amortized using the straight line method over the term of
the hosting arrangement, which is typically no greater than 10 years. We periodically evaluate the appropriateness of remaining depreciable lives
assigned to long-lived assets, including assets that may be subject to a management plan for disposition.
Long-lived  assets  held  for  sale  are  stated  at  the  lower  of  cost  or  fair  value  less  cost  to  sell.  Long-lived  assets  held  for  use  are  subject  to  an
impairment assessment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying
value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between
the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
Leases We determine if an arrangement is, or contains, a lease at the inception date. Operating leases are included in Other assets, with the
related  liabilities  included  in  Accrued  liabilities  and  Other  long-term  liabilities.  Assets  under  finance  leases,  which  primarily  represent  computer
equipment, are included in Property, plant and equipment, net, with the related liabilities included in Short-term debt and current portion of long-term
debt and Long-term debt on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
Operating lease assets represent our right to use an underlying asset for the lease term and lease liabilities represent our obligation to make lease
payments arising from the lease. Operating lease assets and liabilities are recognized at the lease commencement date based on the estimated
present value of lease payments over the lease term. We use our estimated incremental borrowing rate in determining the present value of lease
payments. Variable components of the lease payments such as fair market value adjustments, utilities and maintenance costs are expensed as
incurred and not included in determining the present value. Our lease terms include options to extend or terminate the lease when it is reasonably
certain that we will exercise that option. Lease expense is recognized on a straight-line basis over the lease term.
We have real property lease agreements with lease and non-lease components which are accounted for as a single lease component.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We record all known asset retirement obligations for which the liability’s fair value can be reasonably estimated, including certain asbestos removal,
asset decommissioning and contractual lease restoration obligations. Recorded amounts are not material.
We also have known conditional asset retirement  obligations, such as certain asbestos remediation and asset decommissioning activities to be
performed in the future, that are not reasonably estimable due to insufficient information about the timing and method of settlement of the obligation.
Accordingly, these obligations have not been recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements. A liability for these obligations will be recorded in
the period when sufficient information regarding timing and method of settlement becomes available to make a reasonable estimate of the liability’s
fair value. In addition, there may be conditional asset retirement obligations that we have not yet discovered (e.g. asbestos may exist in certain
buildings but we have not become aware of it through the normal course of
72

Table of Contents
business), and therefore, these obligations also have not been included in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangibles
Goodwill and other acquired intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually and when an event
occurs or circumstances change such that it is more likely than not that an impairment may exist. Our annual testing date is April 1.
We  test  goodwill  for  impairment  by  performing  a  qualitative  assessment  or  using  a  quantitative  test.  If  we  choose  to  perform  a  qualitative
assessment and determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related operations, the
quantitative test is then performed; otherwise, no further testing is required. For operations where the quantitative test is used, we compare the
carrying value of net assets to the estimated fair value of the related operations. If the fair value is determined to be less than carrying value, the
shortfall up to the carrying value of the goodwill represents the amount of goodwill impairment.
Indefinite-lived  intangibles  consist  of  a  brand  and  trade  name  and  in-process  research  and  development  (IPR&D)  acquired  in  business
combinations. IPR&D is initially capitalized at fair value as an intangible asset with an indefinite life and assessed for impairment thereafter. IPR&D
is reclassified to finite-lived acquired intangible assets when a project is completed and then amortized on a straight-line basis over the asset’s
estimated useful life. We test these intangibles for impairment by comparing the carrying values to current projections of related discounted cash
flows. Any excess carrying value over the amount of discounted cash flows represents the amount of the impairment.
Our finite-lived acquired intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows: developed technology,
from 4 to 14 years; product know-how, from 6 to 30 years; customer base, from 3 to 17 years; distribution rights, from 3 to 27 years; and other, from
1 to 32 years. We evaluate the potential impairment of finite-lived acquired intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of
the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
Investments
Time deposits are held-to-maturity investments that are carried at cost.
Available-for-sale  debt securities  include commercial  paper,  U.S. government  agency securities  and corporate  debt securities.  Available-for-sale
debt  securities  are  recorded  at  fair  value,  and  unrealized  gains  and  losses  are  recorded,  net  of  tax,  as  a  component  of  accumulated  other
comprehensive income. Realized gains and losses on available-for-sale debt securities are recognized based on the specific identification method.
Available-for-sale debt securities are assessed for impairment quarterly.
The equity method of accounting is used to account for investments for which we have the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control,
over an investee. Significant influence is generally deemed to exist if we have an ownership interest in the voting stock of an investee of between
20% and 50%. The cumulative earnings approach is used for cash flow classification of distributions received from equity method investments.
Other  Equity  investments  are  recorded  at  fair  value,  with  gains  and  losses  recorded  through  net  earnings.  Equity  investments  without  readily
determinable  fair  value  are  measured  at  cost,  less  impairments,  plus  or  minus  observable  price  changes.  Equity  investments  without  readily
determinable fair value are assessed for impairment quarterly.
73

Table of Contents
We  classify  investment  income  and  loss  on  our  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations  based  on  whether  the  investment  is  operating  or  non-
operating in nature. Operating investments align strategically and are integrated with our operations. Earnings from operating investments, including
our share of income or loss from equity method investments, dividend income from other equity investments, and any impairments or gain/loss on
the disposition of these investments, are recorded in Income from operating investments, net. Non-operating investments are those we hold for non-
strategic purposes. Earnings from non-operating investments, including interest and dividends on marketable securities, and any impairments or
gain/loss on the disposition of these investments are recorded in Other income/(loss), net.
Derivatives
All derivative instruments are recognized in the financial statements and measured at fair value regardless of the purpose or intent of holding them.
We use derivative instruments to principally manage a variety of market risks. For our cash flow hedges, the derivative’s gain or loss is initially
reported  in  comprehensive  income  and  is  subsequently  reclassified  into  earnings  in  the  same  period(s)  during  which  the  hedged  forecasted
transaction affects earnings. We have agreements to purchase and sell aluminum to address long-term strategic sourcing objectives and non-U.S.
business requirements. These agreements are derivatives for accounting purposes but are not designated for hedge accounting treatment. We also
hold certain derivative instruments for economic purposes that are not designated for hedge accounting treatment. For these aluminum agreements
and  for  other  derivative  instruments  not  designated  for  hedge  accounting  treatment,  the  changes  in  their  fair  value  are  recorded  in  earnings
immediately.
Allowances for Losses on Certain Financial Assets
We establish allowances for credit losses on accounts receivable, unbilled receivables, customer financing receivables and certain other financial
assets. The adequacy of these allowances is assessed quarterly through consideration of factors such as customer credit ratings, bankruptcy filings,
published or estimated credit default rates, age of the receivable, expected loss rates and collateral exposures. We determine the creditworthiness
of our customers by assigning internal credit ratings based upon publicly available information and information obtained directly from the customers.
Our rating categories are comparable to those used by major credit rating agencies.
Aircraft Valuation
Used aircraft under trade-in commitments and aircraft under repurchase commitments In conjunction with signing a definitive agreement for
the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain customers that give them the right to trade in used
aircraft at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. Additionally, we have entered into contingent repurchase commitments with certain
customers wherein we agree to repurchase the Sale Aircraft at a specified price, generally 10 to 15 years after delivery of the Sale Aircraft. Our
repurchase of the Sale Aircraft is contingent upon a future, mutually acceptable agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft. If we execute an
agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft,  and if the customer  exercises its right to sell the Sale Aircraft  to us, a contingent repurchase
commitment would become a trade-in commitment. Our historical experience is that contingent repurchase commitments infrequently become trade-
in commitments.
74

Table of Contents
Exposure related to trade-in commitments may take the form of:
(1) adjustments to revenue for the difference between the contractual trade-in price in the definitive agreement and our best estimate of the
fair value of the trade-in aircraft as of the date of such agreement, which would be recognized upon delivery of the Sale Aircraft, and/or
(2) charges  to  cost  of  products  for  adverse  changes  in  the  fair  value  of  trade-in  aircraft  that  occur  subsequent  to  signing  of  a  definitive
agreement for Sale Aircraft but prior to the purchase of the used trade-in aircraft. Estimates based on current aircraft values would be
included in Accrued liabilities.
The fair value of trade-in aircraft is determined using aircraft-specific data such as model, age and condition, market conditions for specific aircraft
and  similar  models,  and  multiple  valuation  sources.  This  process  uses  our  assessment  of  the  market  for  each  trade-in  aircraft,  which  in  most
instances begins years before the return of the aircraft. There are several possible markets in which we continually pursue opportunities to place
used aircraft. These markets include, but are not limited to, the resale market, which could potentially include the cost of long-term storage; the
leasing  market,  with  the  potential  for  refurbishment  costs  to  meet  the  leasing  customer’s  requirements;  or  the  scrap  market.  Trade-in  aircraft
valuation varies significantly depending on which market we determine is most likely for each aircraft. On a quarterly basis, we update our valuation
analysis based on the actual activities associated with placing each aircraft into a market or using current published third-party aircraft valuations
based on the type and age of the aircraft, adjusted for individual attributes and known conditions.
Used aircraft acquired by the Commercial Airplanes segment are included in Inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value as it is our intent
to sell these assets. To mitigate costs and enhance marketability, aircraft may be placed on operating lease. While on operating lease, the assets
are included in Customer financing.
Customer financing Customer financing includes operating lease equipment, notes receivable and sales-type/finance leases. Sales-type/finance
leases are treated as receivables, and allowances for losses are established as necessary. Customer financing is collateralized by security in the
related asset.
We assess the fair value of equipment under operating leases, assets held for sale or re-lease, and collateral underlying receivables to determine if
their fair values are less than the related customer financing assets’ carrying values. Differences between carrying values and fair values of sales-
type/finance leases and notes and other receivables, as determined by collateral value, are considered in determining the allowance for losses on
receivables.
We use a median calculated from published collateral values from multiple third-party aircraft value publications based on the type and age of the
aircraft to determine the fair value of aircraft. Under certain circumstances, we apply judgment based on the attributes of the specific aircraft or
equipment,  usually  when  the  features  or  use  of  the  aircraft  vary  significantly  from  the  more  generic  aircraft  attributes  covered  by  outside
publications.
Impairment review for assets under operating leases and held for sale or re-lease We evaluate for impairment assets under operating lease or
assets held for sale or re-lease when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the expected undiscounted cash flow from the asset may be
less than the carrying value. We use various assumptions when determining the expected undiscounted cash flow, including our intentions for how
long we will hold an asset subject to operating lease before it is sold, the expected future lease rates, lease terms, residual value of the asset,
periods in which the asset may be held in preparation for a follow-on lease, maintenance costs, remarketing costs and the remaining
75

Table of Contents
economic life of the asset. We record assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value less costs to sell.
When we determine that impairment is indicated for an asset, the amount of impairment expense recorded is the excess of the carrying value over
the fair value of the asset.
Allowance  for  losses  on  customer  financing  receivables We  record  the  estimated  allowance  for  potential  losses  on  customer  financing
receivables in a valuation account. The four primary factors influencing the level of our allowance for losses on customer financing receivables are
collateral values, internal customer credit ratings, default rates and expected loss rate.
We  review  the  adequacy  of  the  allowance  for  losses  by  assessing  the  collateral  exposure,  the  applicable  default  rate  and  expected  loss  rate.
Collateral exposure for a particular receivable is the excess of the carrying value of the receivable over the fair value of the related collateral. A
receivable with an estimated fair value in excess of the carrying value is considered to have no collateral exposure. The applicable default rate is
determined using two components: internal customer credit ratings and weighted average remaining contract term. We assign internal credit ratings
for all customers and determine the creditworthiness of each customer based upon publicly available information and information obtained directly
from our customers. Our rating categories are comparable to those used by the major credit rating agencies. We apply an expected loss rate, based
on publicly available information, to the applicable default rate.
We have entered into agreements with certain customers that would entitle us to look beyond the specific collateral underlying the receivable for
purposes of determining the collateral exposure as described above. Should the proceeds from the sale of the underlying collateral asset resulting
from a default condition be insufficient to cover the carrying value of our receivable (creating a shortfall condition), these agreements would, for
example, permit us to take the actions necessary to sell or retain certain other assets in which the customer has an equity interest and use the
proceeds to cover the shortfall.
Each quarter we review the assigned internal customer  credit ratings, published historical credit default rates for different  rating categories and
multiple  third-party  aircraft  value  publications  as  a  basis  to  validate  the  reasonableness  of  the  allowance  for  losses  on  customer  financing
receivables. There can be no assurance that actual results will not differ from estimates or that the consideration of these factors in the future will not
result in an increase or decrease to the allowance for losses on customer financing receivables.
Warranties
In conjunction with certain product sales, we provide warranties that cover factors such as non-conformance to specifications and defects in material
and design. The majority of our warranties are issued by our BCA segment. Generally, aircraft sales are accompanied by a 3 to 4-year standard
warranty  for  systems,  accessories,  equipment,  parts,  and  software  manufactured  by  us  or  manufactured  to  certain  standards  under  our
authorization.  These  warranties  are  included  in  the  programs’  estimate  at  completion.  On  occasion  we  have  made  commitments  beyond  the
standard warranty obligation to correct fleet-wide major issues of a particular model, resulting in additional accrued warranty expense. Warranties
issued by our BDS segment principally relate to sales of military aircraft and weapons systems. These sales are generally accompanied by a six
month  to two-year  warranty  period  and  cover  systems,  accessories,  equipment,  parts  and  software  manufactured  by  us  to  certain  contractual
specifications. Estimated costs related to standard warranties are recorded in the period in which the related product delivery occurs. The warranty
liability recorded at each balance sheet date reflects the estimated number of months of warranty coverage outstanding for products delivered times
the average of historical monthly warranty payments, as well as additional amounts for
76

Table of Contents
certain major warranty issues that exceed a normal claims level. Estimated costs of these additional warranty issues are considered changes to the
initial liability estimate.
We  provide  guarantees  to  certain  commercial  airplane  customers  which  include  compensation  provisions  for  failure  to  meet  specified  aircraft
performance targets. We account for these performance guarantees as warranties. The estimated liability for these warranties is based on known
and anticipated operational characteristics and forecasted customer operation of the aircraft relative to contractually specified performance targets,
and anticipated settlements when contractual remedies are not specified. Estimated payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue at delivery of
the related  aircraft.  We have agreements  that  require  certain  suppliers  to compensate  us for  amounts  paid to  customers  for  failure  of  supplied
equipment to meet specified performance targets. Claims against suppliers under these agreements are included in Inventories and recorded as a
reduction  in  Cost  of  products  at  delivery  of  the  related  aircraft.  These  performance  warranties  and  claims  against  suppliers  are  included  in  the
programs’ estimate at completion.
Supplier Penalties
We record an accrual for supplier penalties when an event occurs that makes it probable that a supplier penalty will be incurred and the amount is
reasonably estimable. Until an event occurs, we fully anticipate accepting all products procured under production-related contracts.
Guarantees
We record a liability in Accrued liabilities for the fair value of guarantees. For credit guarantees, the liability is equal to the present value of the
expected loss. We determine the expected loss by multiplying the creditor’s default rate by the guarantee amount reduced by the expected recovery,
if applicable. At inception of a guarantee, and adjusted each quarter, we also recognize a liability for the expected contingent loss.
Note 2 – Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
Changes in the carrying amount of goodwill for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 were as follows:
Commercial 
Airplanes
Defense, Space &
Security
Global Services
Other
Total
Balance at December 31, 2019
$1,313 
$3,219 
$3,441 
$87 
$8,060 
Goodwill adjustments
3 
5 
13 
21 
Balance at December 31, 2020
$1,316 
$3,224 
$3,454 
$87 
$8,081 
Goodwill adjustments
(11)
(2)
(13)
Balance at December 31, 2021
$1,316 
$3,224 
$3,443 
$85 
$8,068 
77

Table of Contents
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, we had indefinite-lived intangible assets with carrying amounts of $197 relating to trade names. During 2019,
we recorded an impairment of $293 within Cost of Sales, as a result of our decision to retire the Aviall brand and trade name. As of December 31,
2021 and 2020, we had an indefinite-lived intangible asset with a carrying amount of $202 related to in process research and development for a
next-generation air vehicle.
The gross carrying amounts and accumulated amortization of our acquired finite-lived intangible assets were as follows at December 31:
2021
2020
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Gross 
Carrying 
Amount
Accumulated 
Amortization
Distribution rights
$2,554 
$1,321 
$2,812 
$1,427 
Product know-how
553 
413 
553 
384 
Customer base
1,360 
721 
1,373 
672 
Developed technology
626 
526 
626 
502 
Other
301 
250 
303 
238 
Total
$5,394 
$3,231 
$5,667 
$3,223 
During 2020, we recorded impairments of $178 within Cost of Sales related to our distribution rights, primarily driven by airlines' decisions to retire
certain aircraft. Amortization expense for acquired finite-lived intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $284 and
$317. Estimated amortization expense for the five succeeding years is as follows:
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Estimated amortization expense
$245 
$236 
$221 
$195 
$192 
Note 3 – Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share are computed using the two-class method, which is an earnings allocation method that determines earnings
per  share  for  common  shares  and  participating  securities.  The  undistributed  earnings  are  allocated  between  common  shares  and  participating
securities as if all earnings had been distributed during the period. Participating securities and common shares have equal rights to undistributed
earnings.
Basic  earnings  per  share  is  calculated  by  taking  net  earnings,  less  earnings  available  to  participating  securities,  divided  by  the  basic  weighted
average common shares outstanding.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated by taking net earnings, less earnings available to participating securities, divided by the diluted weighted
average common shares outstanding.
78

Table of Contents
The elements used in the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share were as follows:
(In millions - except per share amounts)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Net loss attributable to Boeing Shareholders
($4,202)
($11,873)
($636)
Less: earnings available to participating securities
Net loss available to common shareholders
($4,202)
($11,873)
($636)
Basic
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
588.0 
569.0 
566.0 
Less: participating securities
0.4 
0.4 
0.6 
Basic weighted average common shares outstanding
587.6 
568.6 
565.4 
Diluted
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
588.0 
569.0 
566.0 
Dilutive potential common shares
Diluted weighted average shares outstanding
588.0 
569.0 
566.0 
Less: participating securities
0.4 
0.4 
0.6 
Diluted weighted average common shares outstanding
587.6 
568.6 
565.4 
Net loss per share:
Basic
($7.15)
($20.88)
($1.12)
Diluted
(7.15)
(20.88)
(1.12)
Diluted  loss  per  share  includes  any  dilutive  impact  of  stock  options,  restricted  stock  units,  performance-based  restricted  stock  units  and
performance awards.
Participating securities include certain instruments in our deferred compensation plan.
As a result of incurring a net loss for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, potential common shares of 2.6 million, 1.6 million and
4.1 million, respectively, were excluded from diluted loss per share because the effect would have been antidilutive. In addition, the following table
includes the number of shares that may be dilutive potential common shares in the future. These shares were not included in the computation of
diluted loss per share because the effect was either antidilutive or the performance condition was not met.
(Shares in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Performance awards
2.9 
5.7 
2.8 
Performance-based restricted stock units
0.8 
1.3 
0.6 
Restricted stock units
0.4 
1.0 
Stock options
0.3 
(2)
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
79

Table of Contents
Note 4 – Income Taxes
The components of Loss before income taxes were:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
U.S.
($5,475)
($14,882)
($2,792)
Non-U.S.
442 
406 
533 
Total
($5,033)
($14,476)
($2,259)
Income tax benefit consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Current tax (benefit)/expense
U.S. federal
($89)
($3,968)
($308)
Non-U.S.
147 
148 
169 
U.S. state
42 
21 
(161)
Total current
100 
(3,799)
(300)
Deferred tax (benefit)/expense
U.S. federal
(855)
652 
(953)
Non-U.S.
(12)
(3)
U.S. state
24 
612 
(367)
Total deferred
(843)
1,264 
(1,323)
Total income tax (benefit)/expense
($743)
($2,535)
($1,623)
Net income tax (refunds)/payments were ($1,480), $37 and $837 in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
80

Table of Contents
The following is a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory tax to actual income tax (benefit)/expense:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Amount
Rate
Amount
Rate
Amount
Rate
U.S. federal statutory tax
($1,057)
21.0 %
($3,039)
21.0 %
($474)
21.0 %
Valuation allowance
512 
(10.2)
2,603 
(18.0)
25 
(1.1)
Research and development credits
(189)
3.8 
(284)
2.0 
(382)
16.9 
State income tax provision, net of effects on U.S.
federal tax
(94)
1.9 
(168)
1.2 
(45)
2.0 
Tax on non-U.S. activities
47 
(0.9)
7 
(0.1)
20 
(0.9)
Impact of CARES Act 
3 
(0.1)
(1,175)
8.1 
Other provision adjustments
41 
(0.9)
234 
(1.7)
66 
(3.0)
Excess tax benefits
(6)
0.1 
(82)
0.6 
(180)
8.0 
Audit settlements
(587)
4.1 
(371)
16.4 
Foreign derived intangible income
(31)
0.2 
(229)
10.1 
Tax deductible dividends
(13)
0.1 
(53)
2.4 
Income tax (benefit)/expense
($743)
14.7 %
($2,535)
17.5 %
($1,623)
71.8 %
    On March 27, 2020, the CARES Act was enacted, which includes a five year net operating loss (NOL) carryback provision which enabled us to
benefit from the 2020 U.S. federal tax NOL at the former federal tax rate of 35%. In 2021 and 2020, we recorded tax expense of $3 and tax
benefits of $1,175 related to the NOL carryback provision.
    In 2021, 2020 and 2019, we recorded excess tax benefits related to employee share-based payments of $6, $82 and $180, respectively.
    In the fourth quarter of 2020, we recorded a tax benefit of $587 related to the settlement of the 2015-2017 federal tax audit. In the fourth quarter
of 2019, we recorded a tax benefit of $371 related to the settlement of state tax audits spanning 15 tax years.
In 2020 and 2019, we recorded tax benefits related to foreign derived intangible income of $31 and $229, respectively which effectively apply a
lower U.S. tax rate to intangible income derived from serving non-U.S. markets.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)    
81

Table of Contents
Significant components of our deferred tax assets/(liabilities) at December 31 were as follows:
2021
2020
Inventory and long-term contract methods of income recognition
($3,827)
($4,313)
Pension benefits
1,739 
3,029 
Fixed assets, intangibles and goodwill
(1,657)
(1,645)
Federal net operating loss, credit, interest and other carryovers
1,522 
317 
Other employee benefits
991 
957 
State net operating loss, credit, interest and other carryovers
929 
777 
Other postretirement benefit obligations
913 
1,023 
Accrued expenses and reserves
763 
808 
737 MAX customer concessions and other considerations
682 
1,253 
Other
227 
(36)
Gross deferred tax assets/(liabilities) before valuation allowance
$2,282 
$2,170 
Valuation allowance
(2,423)
(3,094)
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) after valuation allowance
($141)
($924)
Of the deferred tax asset for federal net operating loss, credit, interest and other carryovers, $536 expires on or before December 31, 2041 and
$986 may be carried over indefinitely.
Of the deferred tax asset for state net operating loss, credit, interest and other carryovers, $453 expires on or before December 31, 2041 and
$476 may be carried over indefinitely.
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities) at December 31 were as follows:
2021
2020
Deferred tax assets
$11,258 
$11,600 
Deferred tax liabilities
(8,976)
(9,430)
Valuation allowance
(2,423)
(3,094)
Net deferred tax assets/(liabilities)
($141)
($924)
The Company’s deferred income tax assets of $11,258 can be used in future years to offset taxable income and reduce income taxes payable. The
Company’s deferred income tax liabilities of $8,976 will partially offset deferred income tax assets and result in higher taxable income in future years
and  increase  income  taxes  payable.  Tax  law  determines  whether  future  reversals  of  temporary  differences  will  result  in  taxable  and  deductible
amounts that offset each other in future years. The particular years in which temporary differences result in taxable or deductible amounts generally
are determined by the timing of the recovery of the related asset or settlement of the related liability. The deferred income tax assets and liabilities
relate primarily to U.S. federal and state tax jurisdictions. From a U.S. federal tax perspective, the Company generated a tax NOL in 2020 that was
carried back to prior years when the tax rate was 35% due to the CARES Act benefit as described above. The Company generated tax NOL and
interest carryovers in 2021 that can be carried forward indefinitely and federal research and development credits that can be carried forward 20
years.
In the fourth quarter of 2020 and throughout 2021, the Company was in a three-year cumulative pre-tax loss position. We also normalized earnings
and  other  comprehensive  income  (OCI)  for  certain  non-recurring  items  and  reached  a  normalized  three-year  cumulative  loss  position  in  2021.
Adjustments  to  normalize  earnings  included  non-recurring  items  for  certain  737  MAX  expenses,  an  agreement  with  the  Department  of  Justice,
severance costs and remeasurement gains and losses from the annual
(1)
(2)
(1)     
(2)     
82

Table of Contents
remeasurement of pension and other postretirement benefit obligations. For purposes of assessing the recoverability of deferred tax assets, the
Company determined that it could not include future projected earnings in the analysis due to recent history of losses.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the Company has recorded valuation allowances of $2,423 and $3,094 primarily for certain federal deferred tax
assets, as well as for certain federal and state net operating loss and tax credit carryforwards. To measure the valuation allowance, the Company
estimated in what year each of its deferred tax assets and liabilities would reverse using systematic and logical methods to estimate the reversal
patterns. Based on these methods, deferred tax liabilities are assumed to reverse and generate taxable income over the next 5 to 10 years while
deferred tax assets related to pension and other postretirement benefit obligations are assumed to reverse and generate tax deductions over the
next 15 to 20 years. The valuation allowance primarily results from not having sufficient income from deferred tax liability reversals in the appropriate
future periods to support the realization of deferred tax assets.
During 2021, the Company decreased the valuation allowance by $671. This reflects a tax benefit of $1,206 included in OCI primarily due to the net
actuarial  gains  that  resulted  from  the  annual  remeasurement  of  pension  assets  and  liabilities.  This  was  partially  offset  by  tax  expense  of  $512
recorded in continuing operations and an increase of $23 related to the associated federal benefit of state impacts.
Until the Company generates sustained levels of profitability, additional valuation allowances may have to be recorded with corresponding adverse
impacts on earnings and/or OCI.
The Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) one-time repatriation tax and Global Intangible Low Tax Income liabilities effectively taxed the undistributed
earnings previously deferred from U.S. income taxes. We have not provided for deferred income taxes on the undistributed earnings from certain
non-U.S. subsidiaries because such earnings are considered to be indefinitely reinvested. If such earnings were to be distributed,  any deferred
income taxes would not be significant.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the amounts accrued for the payment of income tax-related interest and penalties included in the Consolidated
Statements  of  Financial  Position  were  not  significant.  The  amounts  of  interest  included  in  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations  were  not
significant for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
2021
2020
2019
Unrecognized tax benefits – January 1
$966 
$1,476 
$2,412 
Gross increases – tax positions in prior periods
64 
44 
100 
Gross decreases – tax positions in prior periods
(245)
(581)
(1,418)
Gross increases – current period tax positions
73 
136 
344 
Gross decreases – current period tax positions
(1)
Settlements
(109)
39 
Statute Lapse
Unrecognized tax benefits – December 31
$858 
$966 
$1,476 
As of December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits include $790, $734 and $1,287, respectively, that would
affect the effective tax rate, if recognized. As of December 31, 2021, these amounts are primarily associated with the amount of research tax credits
claimed and various other matters.
83

Table of Contents
Federal income tax audits have been settled for all years prior to 2018. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) began the 2018-2019 federal tax audit in
the  first  quarter  of  2021  and  recently  added  tax  year  2020  to  the  audit.  We  are  also  subject  to  examination  in  major  state  and  international
jurisdictions for the 2008-2020 tax years. We believe appropriate provisions for all outstanding tax issues have been made for all jurisdictions and all
open years.
Note 5 – Accounts Receivable, net
Accounts receivable at December 31 consisted of the following:
2021
2020
U.S. government contracts
$1,180 
$811 
Commercial Airplanes
279 
17 
Global Services
1,456 
1,437 
Defense, Space, & Security
111 
120 
Other
5 
14 
Less valuation allowance
(390)
(444)
Total
$2,641 
$1,955 
Includes foreign military sales through the U.S. government
Excludes U.S. government contracts
Note 6 – Allowances for Losses on Financial Assets
The change in allowances for expected credit losses for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 consisted of the following:
Accounts
receivable
Unbilled
receivables
Other Current
Assets
Customer
financing Other Assets
Total
Balance at January 1, 2020
($138)
($81)
($38)
($5)
($75)
($337)
Changes in estimates
(314)
(48)
(34)
(12)
(66)
(474)
Write-offs
8 
8 
Recoveries
1 
1 
Balance at December 31, 2020
(444)
(129)
(72)
(17)
(140)
(802)
Balance at January 1, 2021
(444)
(129)
(72)
(17)
(140)
(802)
Changes in estimates
(24)
(11)
6 
(1)
(59)
(89)
Write-offs
77 
49 
4 
13 
143 
Recoveries
1 
1 
Balance at December 31, 2021
($390)
($91)
($62)
($18)
($186)
($747)
(1)
(2)
(2)
(1)
(2)
84

Table of Contents
Note 7 – Inventories
Inventories at December 31 consisted of the following:
2021
2020
Long-term contracts in progress
$872 
$823 
Commercial aircraft programs
68,106 
70,153 
Commercial spare parts, used aircraft, general stock materials and other
9,845 
10,739 
Total
$78,823 
$81,715 
Commercial spare parts, used aircraft, general stock materials and other includes capitalized precontract costs of $648 at December 31, 2021 and
$733 at December 31, 2020 primarily related to KC-46A Tanker and Commercial Crew. See Note 13.
Commercial Aircraft Programs
The decrease in commercial aircraft programs inventory during 2021 reflects lower 737 MAX inventory due to resumption of deliveries and a reach-
forward loss on the 787 program. These decreases were partially offset by a continued buildup of 787 aircraft, as well as growth in 777X inventory.
Commercial aircraft programs inventory includes approximately 335 737 MAX aircraft and 110 787 aircraft at December 31, 2021 as compared with
425 737 MAX aircraft and 80 787 aircraft at December 31, 2020.
A  number  of  customers  have  requested  to  defer  deliveries  or  to  cancel  orders.  We  are  currently  remarketing  certain  aircraft  and  may  have  to
remarket additional aircraft in future periods. If we are unable to successfully remarket the aircraft, determine further production rate reductions are
necessary, and/or contract the program accounting quantities, future earnings may be reduced and/or additional reach-forward losses may have to
be recorded.
At  December  31,  2021  and  2020,  commercial  aircraft  programs  inventory  included  the  following  amounts  related  to  the  737  program:  deferred
production costs of $1,296 and $2,159 and unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs of $617 and $480. At December 31, 2021, $1,906 of
737 deferred production costs, unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs are expected to be recovered from units included in the program
accounting quantity that have firm orders, and $7 is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent
expected future orders.
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 777X program: $3,363 and
$1,727 of work in process and $3,521 and $3,295 of unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, we determined that estimated costs to complete the 777X program plus costs already included in 777X inventory
exceed estimated revenues from the program. The resulting reach-forward loss of $6,493 was recorded as a reduction to deferred production costs.
As a result, 777X deferred production costs were immaterial at December 31, 2020 and remain immaterial at December 31, 2021. The level of
profitability on the 777X program will be subject to a number of factors. These factors include continued market uncertainty, the impacts of COVID-
19 on our production  system  as well as impacts on our supply chain and customers,  further  production  rate  adjustments  for  the 777X or other
commercial aircraft programs, any contraction of the accounting quantity and potential risks associated with the testing program and the timing of
aircraft certification. One or more of these factors could result in additional reach-forward losses on the 777X program in future periods.
During the fourth quarter of 2021, we determined that estimated costs to complete the 787 program plus costs already included in 787 inventory
exceed estimated revenues from the program. The resulting reach-forward loss of $3,460 was recorded as a reduction to deferred production costs.
At
85

Table of Contents
December  31,  2021  and  2020,  commercial  aircraft  programs  inventory  included  the  following  amounts  related  to  the  787  program:  deferred
production costs of $11,693 and $14,976, $1,907 and $1,865 of supplier advances, and $1,815 and $1,863 of unamortized tooling and other non-
recurring costs. At December 31, 2021, $9,024 of 787 deferred production costs, unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs are expected to
be recovered  from  units  included in the program  accounting  quantity  that  have firm  orders,  and $4,484  is  expected  to  be recovered  from  units
included in the program accounting quantity that represent expected future orders.
Commercial  aircraft  programs  inventory  included  amounts  credited  in  cash  or  other  consideration  (early  issue  sales  consideration)  to  airline
customers totaling $3,290 and $2,992 at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Note 8 – Contracts with Customers
Unbilled receivables increased from $7,995 at December 31, 2020 to $8,620 at December 31, 2021, primarily driven by revenue recognized at BDS
and BGS in excess of billings.
Advances and progress billings increased from $50,488 at December 31, 2020 to $52,980 at December 31, 2021, primarily driven by advances on
orders received at BDS, BCA and BGS, partially offset by revenue recognized and the return of customer advances at BCA.
Revenues recognized for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 from amounts recorded as Advances and progress billings at the beginning
of each year were $11,336 and $10,360.
The following table summarizes our contract assets under long-term contracts that were unbillable or related to outstanding claims as of December
31:
Unbilled
Claims
2021
2020
2021
2020
Current
$5,870 
$5,628 
$4 
Expected to be collected after one year
2,841 
2,496 
11 
$18 
Less valuation allowance
(91)
(129)
Total
$8,620 
$7,995 
$15 
$18 
Unbilled receivables related to commercial customer incentives expected to be collected after one year were $131 and $178 at December 31, 2021
and 2020. Unbilled receivables related to claims are items that we believe are earned, but are subject to uncertainty concerning their determination
or ultimate realization.
86

Table of Contents
Note 9 – Customer Financing
Customer financing primarily relates to our BCC segment. Financing arrangements typically range in terms from 1 to 12 years and may include
options to extend or terminate the lease. Certain leases include provisions to allow the lessee to purchase the underlying aircraft at a specified price.
Customer financing consisted of the following at December 31:
2021
2020
Financing receivables:
Investment in sales-type/finance leases
$944 
$919 
Notes
412 
420 
Total financing receivables
1,356 
1,339 
Less allowance for losses on receivables
(18)
(17)
Financing receivables, net
1,338 
1,322 
Operating lease equipment, at cost, less accumulated depreciation of $58 and $209
474 
715 
Total
$1,812 
$2,037 
The components of investment in sales-type/finance leases at December 31 were as follows:
2021
2020
Minimum lease payments receivable
$1,099 
$756 
Estimated residual value of leased assets
110 
299 
Unearned income
(265)
(136)
Total
$944 
$919 
At December 31, 2021 and 2020, $378 and $380 were determined to be uncollectible financing receivables and placed on non-accrual status. We
recorded  no  allowance  for  losses  on  these  uncollectible  financing  receivables  as  the  collateral  values  exceeded  the  carrying  values  of  the
receivables. Customer financing interest income received for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 was $18 and $34.
There were no past due customer financing receivables as of December 31, 2021.
87

Table of Contents
Our financing receivable balances at December 31 by internal credit rating category and year of origination consisted of the following:
Rating categories
Current
2020
2019
2018
2017
Prior
Total
BBB
$108 
$108 
BB
$235 
$120 
$42 
$13 
126 
536 
B
76 
$49 
142 
267 
CCC
7 
26 
235 
177 
445 
Total carrying value of financing receivables
$311 
$127 
$68 
$13 
$284 
$553 
$1,356 
At December 31, 2021, our allowance for losses related to receivables with ratings of CCC, B, BB and BBB. We applied default rates that averaged
24.2%, 5.5%, 2.6% and 0.2%, respectively, to the exposure associated with those receivables.
Customer Financing Exposure
The majority of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated in the following aircraft models at December 31:
2021
2020
717 Aircraft ($62 and $98 accounted for as operating leases)
$603 
$637 
747-8 Aircraft ($0 and $121 accounted for as operating leases)
435 
480 
737 Aircraft ($145 and $214 accounted for as operating leases)
163 
235 
777 Aircraft ($225 and $216 accounted for as operating leases)
233 
225 
MD-80 Aircraft (Accounted for as sales-type finance leases)
142 
167 
757 Aircraft ($0 and $4 accounted for as operating leases)
126 
147 
747-400 Aircraft ($1 and $19 accounted for as operating leases)
50 
71 
Operating lease equipment primarily includes large commercial jet aircraft.
Impairment charges related to customer financing operating lease assets for the years ended December 31 were as follows:
2021
2020
2019
Boeing Capital
$23 
$32 
$53 
Other Boeing
8 
(8)
217 
Total
$31 
$24 
$270 
Lease income recorded in Revenue on the Consolidated Statements of Operations for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 included $54
and $57 from sales-type/finance leases, and $68 and $118 from operating leases. Profit at the commencement of sales-type leases was recorded in
revenue for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020 in the amount of $78 and $26.
88

Table of Contents
As  of  December  31,  2021,  undiscounted  cash  flows  for  notes  receivable,  sales-type/finance  and  operating  leases  over  the  next  five  years  and
thereafter are as follows:
Notes receivable
Sales-type/finance
leases
Operating leases
Year 1
$194 
$201 
$66 
Year 2
34 
180 
55 
Year 3
18 
171 
39 
Year 4
19 
141 
18 
Year 5
21 
127 
15 
Thereafter
126 
279 
37 
Total financing receipts
412 
1,099 
230 
Less imputed interest
(265)
Estimated unguaranteed residual values
110 
Total
$412 
$944 
$230 
At December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020, unguaranteed residual values were $110 and $299. Guaranteed residual values at December 31,
2021 were not significant.
Note 10 – Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment at December 31 consisted of the following:
2021
2020
Land
$377 
$512 
Buildings and land improvements
14,152 
14,415 
Machinery and equipment
15,692 
16,060 
Construction in progress
1,235 
1,340 
Gross property, plant and equipment
31,456 
32,327 
Less accumulated depreciation
(20,538)
(20,507)
Total
$10,918 
$11,820 
Depreciation expense was $1,488, $1,533 and $1,567 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. Interest capitalized
during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 totaled $76, $81 and $83, respectively.
During 2021 and 2020, we acquired $46 and $47 of property, plant and equipment through non-cash investing and financing transactions. Accounts
payable related to purchases of property, plant and equipment were $295 and $182 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
89

Table of Contents
Note 11 – Investments
Our investments, which are recorded in Short-term and other investments or Investments, consisted of the following at December 31:
2021  
2020
Equity method investments 
$930 
$936 
Time deposits
7,676 
17,154 
Available for sale debt instruments
464 
596 
Equity and other investments
45 
85 
Restricted cash & cash equivalents 
52 
83 
Total
$9,167 
$18,854 
Dividends received were $77 and $149 during 2021 and 2020. Retained earnings at December 31, 2021 include undistributed earnings from our
equity method investments of $136. During the third quarter of 2021, Boeing and AE Industrial Partners announced a strategic partnership to
establish a dedicated aerospace venture fund. This transaction resulted in the deconsolidation of HorizonX and generated a gain of $117 which
is included in Income from operating investments, net.
Reflects amounts restricted in support of our property sales, workers’ compensation programs and insurance premiums.
Allowance for losses on available for sale debt instruments are assessed quarterly. All instruments are considered investment grade and, as such,
we have not recognized an allowance for credit losses as of December 31, 2021.
Equity Method Investments
Our equity method investments consisted of the following as of December 31:
Segment
Ownership Percentages
Investment Balance
2021  
2020
United Launch Alliance
BDS
50%
$617 
$735 
Other
BCA, BDS, BGS and Other
313 
201 
Total equity method investments
$930 
$936 
Note 12 – Leases
Our operating  lease assets  primarily  represent  manufacturing  and research  and development  facilities,  warehouses  and offices.  Total operating
lease expense was $380 and $360 for the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020, of which $73 and $71 was attributable to variable lease
expenses.
For  the  years  ended  December  31,  2021  and  2020,  cash  payments  against  operating  lease  liabilities  totaled  $301  and  $299  and  non-cash
transactions totaled $443 and $371 to recognize operating assets and liabilities for new leases.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
90

Table of Contents
Supplemental Consolidated Statement of Financial Position information related to leases consisted of the following at December 31:
2021
2020
Operating leases:
Operating lease right-of-use assets
$1,437
$1,252
Current portion of lease liabilities
268
268
Non-current portion of lease liabilities
1,271
1,084
Total operating lease liabilities
$1,539
$1,352
Weighted average remaining lease term (years)
13
9
Weighted average discount rate
3.82%
3.43%
Maturities of operating lease liabilities for the next five years are as follows:
Operating leases
2022
$301 
2023
253 
2024
190 
2025
154 
2026
134 
Thereafter
1,083 
Total lease payments
2,115 
Less imputed interest
(576)
Total
$1,539 
As of December 31, 2021, we have entered into leases that have not yet commenced of $265, for a maintenance, repair and overhaul hangar and a
paint hangar that will support military aircraft programs. These leases will commence between 2022 and 2023 with lease terms of 7 years to 25
years.
91

Table of Contents
Note 13 – Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
Accrued Liabilities
Accrued liabilities at December 31 consisted of the following:
2021
2020
Accrued compensation and employee benefit costs
$6,573 
$7,121 
737 MAX customer concessions and other considerations
2,940 
5,537 
Department of Justice agreement liability
744 
Environmental
605 
565 
Product warranties
1,900 
1,527 
Forward loss recognition
2,014 
1,913 
Income taxes payable
5 
43 
Current portion of lease liabilities
268 
268 
Other
4,150 
4,453 
Total
$18,455 
$22,171 
737 MAX Grounding
In  2019,  following  two  fatal  737  MAX  accidents,  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA)  and  non-U.S.  civil  aviation  authorities  issued  orders
suspending commercial operations of 737 MAX aircraft. Deliveries of the 737 MAX were suspended following these orders. Deliveries in the U.S.
resumed in late 2020 following rescission by the FAA of its grounding order. In addition, several other non-U.S. civil aviation authorities, including the
Brazilian National Civil Aviation Agency, Transport Canada, and the European Union Aviation Safety Agency have subsequently approved return of
operations, allowing us to resume deliveries in those jurisdictions. The Civil Aviation Administration of China issued an airworthiness directive in the
fourth quarter of 2021 outlining actions required for airlines to return to service. We expect 737 MAX deliveries to China to resume in 2022, subject
to final regulatory approvals, although risk remains around the timing and rate of those deliveries. Over 185 countries have approved the resumption
of 737 MAX operations. The 737 MAX remains grounded in a small number of non-U.S. jurisdictions.
We have gradually increased production rates in 2020 and 2021 and continue to expect to increase the production rate to 31 per month by early
2022, as well as implement further gradual production rate increases in subsequent periods based on market demand and supply chain capacity.
We produced at abnormally low production rates in 2020 and 2021 and expensed abnormal production costs of $1,887 and $2,567 during the years
ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. We do not expect the remaining abnormal costs related to the 737 MAX to be significant and expect most of
the remainder to be incurred in early 2022.
In 2021, we delivered 245 aircraft. We have approximately 335 airplanes in inventory as of December 31, 2021 and we anticipate delivering most of
these aircraft by the end of 2023. We continue to work with customers who have requested to defer deliveries or to cancel orders for 737 MAX
aircraft, and we are remarketing and/or delaying deliveries of certain aircraft included within inventory. In the event that we are unable to resume
aircraft  deliveries  in  China  and/or  ramp  up  deliveries  consistent  with  our  assumptions,  our  expectation  of  delivery  timing  and  our  expectation
regarding future gradual production rate increases could be impacted.
92

Table of Contents
We have also recorded additional expenses of $175, $416, and $328 due to the 737 MAX grounding during 2021, 2020, and 2019, respectively. The
expenses include costs related to storage, inventory impairment, pilot training, and software updates.
The following table summarizes changes in the 737 MAX customer concessions and other considerations liability during 2021 and 2020.
2021
2020
Beginning balance – January 1
$5,537 
$7,389 
Reductions for payments made
(2,535)
(2,188)
Reductions for concessions and other in-kind considerations
(48)
(162)
Changes in estimates
(14)
498 
Ending balance – December 31
$2,940 
$5,537 
The  liability  balance  of  $2.9  billion  at  December  31,  2021  includes  $2.2  billion  of  contracted  customer  concessions  and  other  liabilities  and
$0.7  billion  that  remains  subject  to  negotiation  with  customers.  The  contracted  amount  includes  $1.0  billion  expected  to  be  liquidated  by  lower
customer delivery payments, $1.0 billion expected to be paid in cash and $0.2 billion in other concessions. Of the cash payments to customers, we
expect to pay $0.8 billion in 2022. The type of consideration to be provided for the remaining $0.7 billion will depend on the outcomes of negotiations
with customers.
Environmental
The following table summarizes environmental remediation activity during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
2021
2020
Beginning balance – January 1
$565 
$570 
Reductions for payments made
(59)
(42)
Changes in estimates
99 
37 
Ending balance – December 31
$605 
$565 
The liabilities recorded represent our best estimate or the low end of a range of reasonably possible costs expected to be incurred to remediate
sites, including operation and maintenance over periods of up to 30 years. It is reasonably possible that we may incur charges that exceed these
recorded amounts because of regulatory agency orders and directives, changes in laws and/or regulations, higher than expected costs and/or the
discovery of new or additional contamination. As part of our estimating process, we develop a range of reasonably possible alternate scenarios that
includes the high end of a range of reasonably possible cost estimates for all remediation sites for which we have sufficient information based on our
experience  and  existing  laws  and  regulations.  There  are  some  potential  remediation  obligations  where  the  costs  of  remediation  cannot  be
reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, the high end of the estimated range of reasonably possible remediation costs exceeded our
recorded liabilities by $1,094 and 1,095.
93

Table of Contents
Product Warranties
The following table summarizes product warranty activity recorded during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020.
2021
2020
Beginning balance – January 1
$1,527 
$1,267 
Additions for current year deliveries
116 
65 
Reductions for payments made
(241)
(260)
Changes in estimates
498 
455 
Ending balance – December 31
$1,900 
$1,527 
The increase in the product warranty reserve during the year ended December 31, 2020 is primarily driven by charges related to “pickle forks” on
737NG  aircraft.  During  2019,  we  detected  cracks  in  the  "pickle  forks",  a  frame  fitting  component  of  the  structure  connecting  the  wings  to  the
fuselages  of  737NG  aircraft.  We  notified  the  FAA,  which  issued  a  directive  requiring  that  certain  737NG  airplanes  be  inspected.  In  2019,  we
estimated the number of aircraft that would have to be repaired in the future and provisioned for the estimated costs of completing the repairs.
During the first quarter of 2020, we recognized charges of $336 based on revised engineering and fleet utilization estimates as well as updated
repair cost estimates. We cannot estimate a range of reasonably possible losses, if any, in excess of amounts recognized due to the ongoing nature
of the inspections and repairs and pending the completion of investigations into the cause of the condition.
Commercial Aircraft Commitments
In conjunction with signing definitive agreements for the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain
customers that give them the right to trade in used aircraft  at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. The probability that trade-in
commitments will be exercised is determined by using both quantitative information from valuation sources and qualitative information from other
sources. The probability of exercise is assessed quarterly, or as events trigger a change, and takes into consideration the current economic and
airline industry environments. Trade-in commitments, which can be terminated by mutual consent with the customer, may be exercised only during
the period specified in the agreement and require advance notice by the customer.
Trade-in commitment agreements at December 31, 2021 have expiration dates from 2022 through 2028. At December 31, 2021 and 2020, total
contractual  trade-in  commitments  were  $612  and  $950.  As  of  December  31,  2021  and  2020,  we  estimated  that  it  was  probable  we  would  be
obligated to perform on certain of these commitments with net amounts payable to customers totaling $283 and $599, and the fair value of the
related trade-in aircraft was $283 and $580.
94

Table of Contents
Financing Commitments
Financing commitments related to aircraft on order, including options and those proposed in sales campaigns, and refinancing of delivered aircraft,
totaled  $12,905  and  $11,512  as  of  December  31,  2021  and  2020.  The  estimated  earliest  potential  funding  dates  for  these  commitments  as  of
December 31, 2021 are as follows:
Total
2022
$2,034 
2023
3,604 
2024
2,490 
2025
2,105 
2026
799 
Thereafter
1,873 
$12,905 
As of December 31, 2021, all of these financing commitments relate to customers we believe have less than investment-grade credit. We have
concluded that no reserve for future potential losses is required for these financing commitments based upon the terms, such as collateralization
and interest rates, under which funding would be provided.
Funding Commitments
We have commitments to make additional capital contributions of $248 to joint ventures over the next six years.
Standby Letters of Credit and Surety Bonds
We  have  entered  into  standby  letters  of  credit  and  surety  bonds  with  financial  institutions  primarily  relating  to  the  guarantee  of  our  future
performance  on  certain  contracts.  Contingent  liabilities  on  outstanding  letters  of  credit  agreements  and  surety  bonds  aggregated  approximately
$3,634 and $4,238 as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Company Owned Life Insurance
McDonnell Douglas Corporation insured its executives with Company Owned Life Insurance (COLI), which are life insurance policies with a cash
surrender value. Although we do not use COLI currently, these obligations from the merger with McDonnell Douglas are still a commitment at this
time. We have loans in place to cover costs paid or incurred to carry the underlying life insurance policies. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the
cash  surrender  value  was  $374  and  $395  and  the  total  loans  were  $360  and  $382.  As  we  have  the  right  to  offset  the  loans  against  the  cash
surrender value of the policies, we present the net asset in Other assets on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31,
2021 and 2020.
BDS Fixed-Price Development Contracts
We  have  recorded  earnings  charges  for  losses  on  a  number  of  fixed-price  development  contracts.  Fixed-price  development  work  is  inherently
uncertain  and  subject  to  significant  variability  in  estimates  of  the  cost  and  time  required  to  complete  the  work.  The  operational  and  technical
complexities of these contracts create financial risk, which could trigger additional earnings charges, termination provisions, order cancellations or
other financially significant exposure.
95

Table of Contents
KC-46A Tanker
In  2011,  we  were  awarded  a  contract  from  the  U.S.  Air  Force  (USAF)  to  design,  develop,  manufacture  and  deliver  four  next  generation  aerial
refueling  tankers.  This  Engineering,  Manufacturing  and  Development  (EMD)  contract  is  a  fixed-price  incentive  fee  contract  and  involves  highly
complex designs and systems integration. Since 2016, the USAF has authorized seven low rate initial production (LRIP) lots for a total of 94 aircraft.
The EMD contract and authorized LRIP lots are valued at approximately $19 billion as of December 31, 2021.
At December 31, 2021, we had approximately $243 of capitalized precontract costs and $409 of potential termination liabilities to suppliers.
Recoverable Costs on Government Contracts
Our final incurred costs for each year are subject to audit and review for allowability by the U.S. government, which can result in payment demands
related to costs they believe should be disallowed. We work with the U.S. government to assess the merits of claims and where appropriate reserve
for amounts disputed. If we are unable to satisfactorily resolve disputed costs, we could be required to record an earnings charge and/or provide
refunds to the U.S. government.
Severance
The following table summarizes changes in the severance liability during 2021 and 2020:
2021
2020
Beginning balance – January 1
$283 
Initial liability recorded in the second quarter of 2020
$652 
Reductions for payments made
(90)
(658)
Changes in estimates
(182)
289 
Ending balance – December 31
$11 
$283 
During 2020, the Company recorded severance costs for approximately 26,000 employees expected to leave the Company through a combination
of voluntary and involuntary terminations. The severance packages are consistent with the Company’s ongoing compensation and benefits plans.
During the first quarter of 2021, we reduced the estimated number of employees expected to leave the Company through voluntary and involuntary
terminations to approximately 23,000. During the second quarter of 2021, we further reduced the estimated number of employees expected to leave
the company through voluntary and involuntary terminations to approximately 19,000. As of December 31, 2021, our severance liability primarily
relates to remaining severance payments to terminated employees.
96

Table of Contents
Note 14 – Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
We enter into arrangements with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business, primarily in the form of guarantees.
The  following  table  provides  quantitative  data  regarding  our  third  party  guarantees.  The  maximum  potential  payments  represent  a  “worst-case
scenario” and do not necessarily reflect amounts that we expect to pay. Estimated proceeds from collateral and recourse represent the anticipated
values  of  assets  we  could  liquidate  or  receive  from  other  parties  to  offset  our  payments  under  guarantees.  The  carrying  amount  of  liabilities
represents the amount included in Accrued liabilities.
Maximum 
Potential 
Payments
Estimated 
Proceeds from 
Collateral/ 
Recourse
Carrying 
Amount of 
Liabilities
December 31,
2021
2020
2021
2020
2021
2020
Contingent repurchase commitments
$548 
$1,452 
$548 
$1,452 
Credit guarantees
90 
90 
28 
28 
$24 
$24 
Contingent Repurchase Commitments The commercial aircraft repurchase price specified in contingent repurchase commitments is generally
lower than the expected fair value at the specified repurchase date. Estimated proceeds from collateral/recourse in the table above represent the
lower of the contracted repurchase price or the expected fair value of each aircraft at the specified repurchase date.
Credit Guarantees We have issued credit guarantees where we are obligated to make payments to a guaranteed party in the event that the original
lessee or debtor does not make payments or perform certain specified services. Generally, these guarantees have been extended on behalf of
guaranteed parties with less than investment-grade  credit and are collateralized by certain assets. Current outstanding credit guarantees expire
through 2036.
Industrial Revenue Bonds Industrial Revenue Bonds (IRB) issued by St. Louis County were used to finance the purchase and/or construction of
real and personal property  at our St. Louis site.  Tax benefits  associated  with IRBs include a twelve-year  property tax abatement  and sales tax
exemption from St. Louis County. We record these properties on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. We have also purchased the
IRBs and therefore are the bondholders as well as the borrower/lessee of the properties purchased with the IRB proceeds. The liabilities and IRB
assets are equal and are reported net in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, the assets and
liabilities associated with the IRBs were $271.
Other Indemnifications In conjunction with our sales of Electron Dynamic Devices, Inc. and Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power businesses and our
BCA facilities in Wichita, Kansas and Tulsa and McAlester, Oklahoma, we agreed to indemnify, for an indefinite period, the buyers for costs relating
to pre-closing environmental conditions and certain other items. We are unable to assess the potential number of future claims that may be asserted
under these indemnifications, nor the amounts thereof (if any). As a result, we cannot estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments
under these indemnities and therefore, no liability has been recorded. To the extent that claims have been made under these indemnities and/or are
probable and reasonably estimable, liabilities associated with these indemnities are included in the environmental liability disclosure in Note 13.
97

Table of Contents
Note 15 – Debt
In the first quarter of 2021, we issued $9,825 of fixed rate senior notes consisting of $1,325 due February 4, 2023 that bear an annual interest rate of
1.167%, $3,000 due February 4, 2024 that bear an annual interest rate of 1.433%, and $5,500 due February 4, 2026 that bear an annual interest
rate  of  2.196%.  The  notes  are  unsecured  senior  obligations  and  rank  equally  in  right  of  payment  with  our  existing  and  future  unsecured  and
unsubordinated indebtedness. The net proceeds of the issuance totaled $9,780, after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering
expenses.  We  used  the  net  proceeds  of  these  note  issuances  to  repay  $9,825  outstanding  under  our  two-year  delayed  draw  term  loan  credit
agreement in the first quarter of 2021, and we repaid the remaining $4,000 in the fourth quarter of 2021.
Interest  incurred,  including  amounts  capitalized,  was  $2,790,  $2,280  and  $867  for  the  years  ended  December  31,  2021,  2020  and  2019,
respectively. Interest expense recorded by BCC is reflected as Boeing Capital interest expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations.
Total Company interest payments were $2,583, $1,925 and $973 for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
In the first quarter of 2021, we entered into a $5,280 two-year revolving credit agreement. As of December 31, 2021, we had $14,740 currently
available under credit line agreements, of which $3,060 is a 364-day revolving credit facility expiring in October 2022, $3,200 expires in October
2022, $5,280 expires in March 2023 and $3,200 expires in October 2024. The 364-day credit facility has a one-year term out option which allows us
to  extend  the  maturity  of  any  borrowings  one  year  beyond  the  aforementioned  expiration  date.  We  continue  to  be  in  full  compliance  with  all
covenants contained in our debt or credit facility agreements.
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2021
2020
Unsecured debt
$1,155 
$1,448 
Finance lease obligations
61 
65 
Other notes
80 
180 
Total
$1,296 
$1,693 
98

Table of Contents
Debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2021
2020
Unsecured debt
Variable rate: Eurodollar plus 0.75% - 1.25% due 2022
$13,819 
1.17% - 2.50% due through 2026
$12,404 
3,656 
2.60% - 3.20% due through 2030
7,001 
6,989 
3.25% - 3.90% due through 2059
9,570 
9,555 
3.95% - 5.15% due through 2059
13,993 
13,917 
5.71% - 6.63% due through 2060
13,008 
13,005 
6.88% - 8.75% due through 2043
1,853 
2,252 
Other debt and notes
Finance lease obligations due through 2044
180 
203 
Other notes
93 
187 
Total debt
$58,102 
$63,583 
Total debt at December 31 is attributable to:
2021
2020
BCC
$1,525 
$1,640 
Other Boeing
56,577 
61,943 
Total debt
$58,102 
$63,583 
Scheduled principal payments for debt and minimum finance lease obligations for the next five years are as follows:
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Debt
$1,236 
$5,101 
$5,066 
$4,302 
$7,952 
Minimum finance lease obligations
$64 
$43 
$25 
$14 
$6 
Note 16 – Postretirement Plans
Many  of  our  employees  have  earned  benefits  under  defined  benefit  pension  plans.  Nonunion  and  the  majority  of  union  employees  that  had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. Additional union
employees transitioned to company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plans effective January 1, 2019.
We fund our major pension plans through trusts. Pension assets are placed in trust solely for the benefit of the plans’ participants and are structured
to maintain liquidity that is sufficient to pay benefit obligations as well as to keep pace over the long-term with the growth of obligations for future
benefit payments.
We also have other postretirement benefits (OPB) other than pensions which consist principally of health care coverage for eligible retirees and
qualifying dependents, and to a lesser extent, life insurance to certain groups of retirees. Retiree health care is provided principally until age 65 for
approximately three-fourths of those participants who are eligible for health care coverage. Certain employee groups, including employees covered
by most United Auto Workers bargaining agreements, are provided lifetime health care coverage. The funded status of the plans is measured as the
99

Table of Contents
difference between the plan assets at fair value and the projected benefit obligation (PBO). We have recognized the aggregate of all overfunded
plans in Other assets and the aggregate of all underfunded plans in either Accrued retiree health care or Accrued pension plan liability, net. The
portion of the amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits included in the PBO exceeds the fair value of plan assets, payable in the next
12 months, is reflected in Accrued liabilities.
The components of net periodic benefit (income)/cost were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
2021
2020
2019
Service cost
$3 
$3 
$2 
$87 
$89 
$77 
Interest cost
1,988 
2,455 
2,925 
97 
130 
196 
Expected return on plan assets
(3,848)
(3,756)
(3,863)
(7)
(9)
(8)
Amortization of prior service credits
(80)
(80)
(79)
(35)
(38)
(35)
Recognized net actuarial loss/(gain)
1,219 
1,032 
643 
(56)
(63)
(46)
Settlement/curtailment loss/(gain)
193 
9 
(4)
Net periodic benefit (income)/cost
($525)
($337)
($372)
$86 
$105 
$184 
Net periodic benefit cost included in Loss from
operations
$3 
$3 
$313 
$90 
$91 
$88 
Net periodic benefit (income)/cost included in Other income,
net
(528)
(340)
(374)
(1)
16 
107 
Net periodic benefit (income)/cost included in Loss
before income taxes
($525)
($337)
($61)
$89 
$107 
$195 
In  2021,  we  recorded  a  $193  settlement  charge  in  Other  income,  net  and  remeasured  assets  and  benefit  obligations  related  to  three  of  the
Company’s pension plans.
The  following  tables  show  changes  in  the  benefit  obligation,  plan  assets  and  funded  status  of  both  pensions  and  OPB  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2021 and 2020. Benefit obligation balances presented below reflect the PBO for our pension plans and accumulated postretirement
benefit obligations (APBO) for our OPB plans.
100

Table of Contents
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2021
2020
2021
2020
Change in benefit obligation
Beginning balance
$82,415 
$77,645 
$4,693 
$5,080 
Service cost
3 
3 
87 
89 
Interest cost
1,988 
2,455 
97 
130 
Amendments
(29)
Actuarial (gain)/loss
(3,249)
7,759 
(401)
(218)
Settlement/other
(870)
(68)
55 
Gross benefits paid
(4,653)
(5,386)
(411)
(450)
Subsidies
26 
36 
Exchange rate adjustment
1 
7 
1 
Ending balance
$75,635 
$82,415 
$4,092 
$4,693 
Change in plan assets
Beginning balance at fair value
$68,696 
$61,711 
$160 
$149 
Actual return on plan assets
4,477 
9,275 
21 
21 
Company contribution
11 
3,013 
Plan participants’ contributions
6 
6 
Settlement payments
(870)
(68)
Benefits paid
(4,502)
(5,241)
(15)
(16)
Exchange rate adjustment
1 
6 
Ending balance at fair value
$67,813 
$68,696 
$172 
$160 
Amounts recognized in statement of financial position at December 31
consist of:
Other assets
$1,426 
$837 
Accrued liabilities
(144)
(148)
($392)
($396)
Accrued retiree health care
(3,528)
(4,137)
Accrued pension plan liability, net
(9,104)
(14,408)
Net amount recognized
($7,822)
($13,719)
($3,920)
($4,533)
Amounts recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss at December 31 were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2021
2020
2021
2020
Net actuarial loss/(gain)
$19,031 
$24,324 
($1,092)
($735)
Prior service credits
(1,306)
(1,387)
(76)
(110)
Total recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss
$17,725 
$22,937 
($1,168)
($845)
101

Table of Contents
The accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) for all pension plans was $74,199 and $80,694 at December 31, 2021 and 2020. Key information for our
plans with ABO and PBO in excess of plan assets as of December 31 was as follows:
2021
2020
Accumulated benefit obligation
$66,406 
$74,337 
Fair value of plan assets
58,593 
61,502 
2021
2020
Projected benefit obligation
$67,841 
$76,057 
Fair value of plan assets
58,593 
61,502 
Assumptions
The following assumptions, which are the weighted average for all plans, are used to calculate the benefit obligation at December 31 of each year
and the net periodic benefit cost for the subsequent year.
December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Discount rate:
Pension
2.80 %
2.50 %
3.30 %
Other postretirement benefits
2.50 %
2.00 %
3.00 %
Expected return on plan assets
6.30 %
6.50 %
6.80 %
Rate of compensation increase
4.30 %
4.30 %
4.30 %
Interest crediting rates for cash balance plans
5.00 %
5.00 %
5.15 %
The discount rate for each plan is determined based on the plans’ expected future benefit payments using a yield curve developed from high quality
bonds that are rated as Aa or better by at least half of the four rating agencies utilized as of the measurement date. The yield curve is fitted to yields
developed from bonds at various maturity points. Bonds with the ten percent highest and the ten percent lowest yields are omitted. The present
value of each plan’s benefits is calculated by applying the discount rates to projected benefit cash flows.
The pension fund’s expected return on plan assets assumption is derived from a review of actual historical returns achieved by the pension trust and
anticipated future long-term performance of individual asset classes. While consideration is given to historical returns, the assumption represents a
long-term,  prospective  return.  The  expected  return  on  plan  assets  component  of  the  net  periodic  benefit  cost  for  the  upcoming  plan  year  is
determined based on the expected return on plan assets assumption and the market-related value of plan assets (MRVA). Since our adoption of the
accounting standard for pensions in 1987, we have determined the MRVA based on a five-year moving average of plan assets. As of December 31,
2021, the MRVA was approximately $4,773 less than the fair market value of assets.
Assumed health care cost trend rates were as follows:
December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Health care cost trend rate assumed next year
4.50 %
4.50 %
5.00 %
Ultimate trend rate
4.50 %
4.50 %
4.50 %
Year that trend reached ultimate rate
2021
2021
2021
102

Table of Contents
Plan Assets
Investment Strategy The overall objective of our pension assets is to earn a rate of return over time to satisfy the benefit obligations of the pension
plans and to maintain sufficient liquidity to pay benefits and address other cash requirements of the pension fund. Specific investment objectives for
our  long-term  investment  strategy  include  reducing  the  volatility  of  pension  assets  relative  to  pension  liabilities,  achieving  a  competitive  total
investment return, achieving diversification between and within asset classes and managing other risks. Investment objectives for each asset class
are determined based on specific risks and investment opportunities identified.
We periodically update our long-term, strategic asset allocations. We use various analytics to determine the optimal asset mix and consider plan
liability characteristics, liquidity characteristics, funding requirements, expected rates of return and the distribution of returns. A key element of our
strategy is to de-risk the plan as the funded status of the plan increases. During 2021, as the funded status of the plans increased, certain assets
were  reallocated  to  fixed  income.  The  changes  in  the  asset  allocation  are  reflected  in  the  asset  allocation  table  below.  We  identify  investment
benchmarks to evaluate performance for the asset classes in the strategic asset allocation that are market-based and investable where possible.
Actual allocations to each asset class vary from target allocations due to periodic investment strategy changes, market value fluctuations, the length
of time it takes to fully implement investment allocation positions, and the timing of benefit payments and contributions. Short-term investments and
exchange-traded derivatives are used to rebalance the actual asset allocation to the target asset allocation. The asset allocation is monitored and
rebalanced frequently. The actual and target allocations by asset class for the pension assets at December 31 were as follows:
Actual Allocations
Target Allocations
Asset Class
2021
2020
2021
2020
Fixed income
61 %
49 %
63 %
49 %
Global equity
16 
30 
20 
29 
Private equity
8 
6 
4 
5 
Real estate and real assets
8 
7 
7 
9 
Hedge funds
7 
8 
6 
8 
Total
100 %
100 %
100 %
100 %
Fixed income securities are invested primarily in a diversified portfolio of long duration instruments as well as Emerging Market, Structured, High
Yield and Private Debt. Global equity securities are invested in a diversified portfolio of U.S. and non-U.S. companies, across various industries and
market capitalizations.
Private equity investment vehicles are primarily limited partnerships (LPs) that mainly invest in U.S. and non-U.S. leveraged buyout, venture capital,
growth and special situation strategies. Real estate and real assets include global private investments that may be held through investments in a
limited partnership (LP) or other fund structures and publicly traded investments (such as Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) in the case of real
estate). Real estate includes, but is not limited to, investments in office, retail, apartment and industrial properties. Real assets include, but are not
limited to, investments in natural resources (such as energy, farmland and timber), commodities and infrastructure.
Hedge fund investments seek to capitalize on inefficiencies identified across and within different asset classes or markets. Hedge fund strategy
types include, but are not limited to, directional, event driven, relative value and long-short.
103

Table of Contents
Investment managers are retained for explicit investment roles specified by contractual investment guidelines. Certain investment managers are
authorized to use derivatives, such as equity or bond futures, swaps, options and currency futures or forwards. Derivatives are used to achieve the
desired  market  exposure  of  a  security  or  an  index,  transfer  value-added  performance  between  asset  classes,  achieve  the  desired  currency
exposure, adjust portfolio duration or rebalance the total portfolio to the target asset allocation.
As  a  percentage  of  total  pension  assets,  derivative  net  notional  amounts  were  33.4%  and  8.3%  for  fixed  income,  including  to-be-announced
mortgage-backed securities and treasury forwards, and (5.4%) and 0.4% for global equity and commodities at December 31, 2021 and 2020.
In November 2020, the Company contributed $3,000 of our common stock to the pension fund. An independent fiduciary was retained to manage
and liquidate the stock over time at its discretion. Plan assets included $1,883 and $3,298 of our common stock as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
Risk Management In managing the pension assets, we review and manage risk associated with funded status risk, interest rate risk, market risk,
counterparty risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. Liability matching and asset class diversification are central to our risk management approach
and  are  integral  to  the  overall  investment  strategy.  Further,  asset  classes  are  constructed  to  achieve  diversification  by  investment  strategy,  by
investment manager, by industry or sector and by holding. Investment manager guidelines for publicly traded assets are specified and are monitored
regularly  through  the  custodian.  Credit  parameters  for  counterparties  have  been  established  for  managers  permitted  to  trade  over-the-counter
derivatives.  Valuation  is  governed  through  several  types  of  procedures,  including  reviews  of  manager  valuation  policies,  custodian  valuation
processes, pricing vendor practices, pricing reconciliation and periodic, security-specific valuation testing.
Fair Value Measurements The following table presents our plan assets using the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2021 and 2020. The fair
value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined based on
quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs and Level 3
includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs.
104

Table of Contents
December 31, 2021
December 31, 2020
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Fixed income securities:
Corporate
$20,573 
$20,520 
$53 
$20,841 
$20,801 
$40 
U.S. government and agencies
11,285 
11,285 
5,170 
5,168 
2 
Mortgage backed and asset backed
777 
675 
102 
786 
666 
120 
Municipal
1,064 
1,035 
29 
1,176 
1,104 
72 
Sovereign
1,135 
1,126 
9 
1,040 
1,038 
2 
Other
3 
$3 
19 
$18 
1 
Derivatives:
Assets
62 
62 
6 
6 
Liabilities
(48)
(48)
(17)
(17)
Cash equivalents and other short-term
investments
448 
448 
1,081 
1,081 
Equity securities:
U.S. common and preferred stock
4,463 
4,463 
5,013 
5,013 
Non-U.S. common and preferred stock
3,345 
3,340 
5 
5,577 
5,575 
2 
Boeing company stock
1,883 
1,883 
3,298 
3,298 
Derivatives:
Assets
1 
1 
10 
10 
Liabilities
(1)
(1)
(9)
(9)
Private equity
Real estate and real assets:
Real estate
413 
413 
351 
351 
Real assets
784 
749 
35 
786 
723 
61 
2 
Derivatives:
Assets
8 
8 
6 
6 
Liabilities
(2)
(2)
(2)
(2)
Total
$46,193 
$10,851 
$35,144 
$198 
$45,132 
$14,978 
$29,914 
$240 
Fixed income common/collective/pooled funds
$1,712 
$2,345 
Fixed income other
747 
604 
Equity common/collective/ pooled funds
4,561 
6,947 
Private equity
5,100 
4,013 
Real estate and real assets
3,952 
3,359 
Hedge funds
4,717 
5,745 
Total investments measured at NAV as a
practical expedient
$20,789 
$23,013 
Cash
$520 
$267 
Receivables
454 
992 
Payables
(143)
(708)  
 
 
Total
$67,813 
$68,696 
Fixed  income  securities  are  primarily  valued  upon  a  market  approach,  using  matrix  pricing  and  considering  a  security’s  relationship  to  other
securities for which quoted prices in an active market may be available, or an income approach, converting future cash flows to a single present
value amount.
105

Table of Contents
Inputs used in developing fair value estimates include reported trades, broker quotes, benchmark yields and base spreads.
Common/collective/pooled  funds  are  typically  common  or  collective  trusts  valued  at  their  net  asset  values  (NAVs)  that  are  calculated  by  the
investment manager or sponsor of the fund and have daily or monthly liquidity. Derivatives included in the table above are over-the-counter and are
primarily valued using an income approach with inputs that include benchmark yields, swap curves, cash flow analysis, rating agency data and
interdealer broker rates. Exchange-traded derivative positions are reported in accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled
daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Cash equivalents and other short-term investments (which are used to pay benefits) are held in a separate account which consists of a commingled
fund (with daily liquidity) and separately held short-term securities and cash equivalents. All of the investments in this cash vehicle are valued daily
using  a  market  approach  with  inputs  that  include  quoted  market  prices  for  similar  instruments.  In  the  event  a  market  price  is  not  available  for
instruments  with an original maturity  of one year or less,  amortized  cost  is used as a proxy  for fair value. Common  and preferred  stock  equity
securities are primarily valued using a market approach based on the quoted market prices of identical instruments.
Private  equity  and  private  debt  NAV  valuations  are  based  on  the  valuation  of  the  underlying  investments,  which  include  inputs  such  as  cost,
operating results, discounted future cash flows and market based comparable data. For those investments reported on a one-quarter lagged basis
(primarily LPs) we use NAVs, adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events.
Real estate and real asset NAVs are based on the valuation of the underlying investments, which include inputs such as cost, discounted future
cash flows, independent appraisals and market based comparable data. For those investments reported on a one-quarter lagged basis (primarily
LPs),  NAVs  are  adjusted  for  subsequent  cash  flows  and  significant  events.  Publicly  traded  REITs  and  infrastructure  stocks  are  valued  using  a
market  approach  based  on  quoted  market  prices  of  identical  instruments.  Exchange-traded  commodities  futures  positions  are  reported  in
accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Hedge  fund  NAVs  are  generally  based  on  the  valuation  of  the  underlying  investments.  This  is  primarily  done  by  applying  a  market  or  income
valuation methodology depending on the specific type of security or instrument held.
Investments in private equity, private debt, real estate, real assets and hedge funds are primarily calculated and reported by the General Partner,
fund manager or third party administrator. Additionally, some investments in fixed income and equity are made via commingled vehicles and are
valued in a similar fashion. Pension assets invested in commingled and limited partnership structures rely on the NAV of these investments as the
practical expedient for the valuations.
106

Table of Contents
The following tables present a reconciliation of Level 3 assets held during the years ended December 31, 2021 and 2020. Transfers into and out of
Level 3 are reported at the beginning-of-year values.
January 1 
2021 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized
Gains/(Losses)
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Into/(Out of) Level
3
December 31 
2021 Balance
Fixed income securities:
Corporate
$40 
($1)
$5 
$9 
$53 
 U.S. government and 
    agencies
2 
(2)
Mortgage backed and
   asset backed
120 
(17)
(1)
102 
Municipal
72 
7 
(50)
29 
Sovereign
2 
(8)
15 
9 
Equity securities:
Non-U.S. common and 
   preferred stock
2 
2 
(3)
4 
5 
Real assets
2 
(2)
Total
$240 
($7)
$5 
($40)
$198 
January 1 
2020 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized
Gains/(Losses)
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Into/(Out of) Level
3
December 31 
2020 Balance
Fixed income securities:
  Corporate
$5 
$1 
$18 
$16 
$40 
U.S. government and agencies
2 
2 
Mortgage backed and asset
backed
461 
(1)
(93)
(247)
120 
Municipal
3 
2 
67 
72 
Sovereign
(1)
2 
1 
2 
Equity securities:
Non-U.S. common and preferred
stock
2 
2 
Real assets
4 
(2)
2 
Total
$472 
$2 
($71)
($163)
$240 
For the year ended December 31, 2021, the changes in unrealized gains/(losses) for Level 3 assets still held at December 31, 2021 were ($1) for
mortgage  backed  and  asset  backed  fixed  income  securities  and  ($8)  for  sovereign. For  the  year  ended  December  31,  2020,  the  changes  in
unrealized gains/(losses) for Level 3 assets still held at December 31, 2020 were $2 for corporate, $1 for mortgage backed and asset backed fixed
income securities, $3 for municipal bonds and ($1) for sovereign.
OPB Plan Assets The majority of OPB plan assets are invested in a balanced index fund which is comprised of approximately 60% equities and
40% debt securities. The index fund is valued using a
107

Table of Contents
market approach based on the quoted market price of an identical instrument (Level 1). The expected rate of return on these assets does not have a
material effect on the net periodic benefit cost.
Cash Flows
Contributions Required pension contributions under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA), as well as rules governing funding of
our non-US pension plans, are not expected to be significant in 2022. During the fourth quarter of 2020, we contributed $3,000 in common stock to
the pension fund. We do not expect to make discretionary contributions to our pension plans in 2022.
Estimated Future Benefit Payments The table below reflects the total pension benefits expected to be paid from the plans or from our assets,
including both our share of the benefit cost and the participants’ share of the cost, which is funded by participant contributions. OPB payments
reflect our portion only.
Year(s)
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027-2031
Pensions
$4,839 
$4,723 
$4,657 
$4,578 
$4,481 
$20,713 
Other postretirement benefits:
Gross benefits paid
450 
425 
404 
380 
356 
1,385 
Subsidies
(29)
(29)
(29)
(27)
(27)
(124)
Net other postretirement benefits
$421 
$396 
$375 
$353 
$329 
$1,261 
Termination Provisions
Certain of the pension plans provide that, in the event there is a change in control of the Company which is not approved by the Board of Directors
and the plans are terminated within five years thereafter, the assets in the plan first will be used to provide the level of retirement benefits required
by ERISA, and then any surplus will be used to fund a trust to continue present and future payments under the postretirement medical and life
insurance benefits in our group insurance benefit programs.
Should we terminate certain pension plans under conditions in which the plan’s assets exceed that plan’s obligations, the U.S. government will be
entitled to a fair allocation of any of the plan’s assets based on plan contributions that were reimbursed under U.S. government contracts.
Defined Contribution Plans
We provide certain defined contribution plans to all eligible employees. The principal plans are the Company-sponsored 401(k) plans. The expense
for these defined contribution plans was $1,268, $1,351 and $1,533 in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Note 17 – Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
Share-Based Compensation
Our 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated, permits awards of incentive and non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights,
restricted stock or units, performance shares, performance restricted stock or units, performance units and other stock and cash-based awards to
our employees, officers, directors, consultants, and independent contractors. The aggregate number of shares of our stock authorized for issuance
under the plan is 87,000,000.
Shares issued as a result of stock option exercises or conversion of stock unit awards will be funded out of treasury shares, except to the extent
there are insufficient treasury shares, in which case new shares will be issued. We believe we currently have adequate treasury shares to satisfy
these issuances during 2022.
108

Table of Contents
Share-based  plans  expense  is  primarily  included  in  Total  costs  and  expenses  and  General  and  administrative  expense,  as  well  as  a  portion
allocated to production as inventoried costs. The share-based plans expense and related income tax benefit were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Recognized in Loss from operations
$667 
$243 
$217 
Recognized in Inventories
$173 
Income tax benefit
$148 
$53 
$47 
Stock Options
On February 17, 2021, we granted 342,986 premium-priced stock options to our executive officers as part of our long-term incentive program. These
stock options have an exercise price equal to 120% of the fair market value of our stock on the date of grant. The stock options are scheduled to
vest and become exercisable three years after the grant date and expire ten years after the grant date. If an executive terminates employment
because of retirement, layoff, disability or death, the executive (or beneficiary) may receive some or all of their stock options depending on certain
age and service conditions. The fair value of the stock options granted was $74.63 per unit and was estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation
model using the following assumptions: expected life 6.6 years, expected volatility 37.8%, risk free interest rate 1.3% and no expected dividend
yield. During 2021, we also granted 148,322 stock options to certain executives to encourage retention or to award various achievements, of which
40,322 had an exercise price equal to 120% of the fair market value of our stock on the date of grant, and the remaining 108,000 had an exercise
price equal to the fair market value on the date of grant. These stock options are scheduled to vest and become exercisable three years after the
grant date and expire ten years after the grant date. The grant date fair market value of these awards was not significant.
Options granted through January 2014 had an exercise price equal to the fair market value of our stock on the date of grant and expire 10 years
after the date of grant. These stock options vested over a period of three years and were fully vested as of December 31, 2017.
Stock option activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 is as follows:
Shares
Weighted Average
Exercise Price Per
Share
Weighted Average
Remaining Contractual Life
(Years)
Aggregate Intrinsic
Value
Number of shares under option:
Outstanding at beginning of year
1,860,520
$75.71 
Granted
491,308
250.80 
Exercised
(570,862)
73.93 
Expired
(26,663)
75.13 
Forfeited
(44,924)
258.83 
Outstanding at end of year
1,709,379
$121.83 
3.1
$158 
Exercisable at end of year
1,262,995
$76.53 
0.8
$158 
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 was $84, $90 and $279, with a related tax
benefit of $19, $32 and $61, respectively. At December 31, 2021, there was $19 of total unrecognized compensation cost related to options which is
expected
109

Table of Contents
to be recognized over a weighted average period of 2.5 years. No options vested during the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019.
Restricted Stock Units
In February 2021, 2020 and 2019, we granted to our executives 980,077, 325,108 and 233,582 restricted stock units (RSUs) as part of our long-
term incentive program with grant date fair values of $215.70, $319.04 and $428.22 per unit, respectively. During 2021, we also granted 47,430
RSUs as part of this long-term incentive program. The RSUs granted under this program will generally vest and settle in common stock (on a one-
for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. If an executive terminates employment because of retirement, layoff, disability or death, the
employee (or beneficiary) may receive a proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service period or all of their stock
units depending on certain age and service conditions. In all other cases, the RSUs will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate. These
RSUs are labeled executive long-term incentive program in the table below.
In December 2020, we granted to our employees (excluding executives and certain union-represented employees), a one-time grant of 5,163,425
RSUs with a grant date fair value of $233.00 per unit. The RSUs granted under this program will vest and settle in common stock (on a one-for-one
basis)  on  the  third  anniversary  of  the  grant  date.  If  an  employee  terminates  employment  because  of  retirement,  layoff,  disability  or  death,  the
employee (or beneficiary) may receive a proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service period. In all other cases,
the RSUs will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate. These RSUs are labeled employee long-term incentive program in the table
below.
In addition to RSUs awarded under our long-term incentive programs, we grant RSUs to certain executives and employees to encourage retention
or to reward various achievements. These RSUs are labeled other RSUs in the table below.
The fair values of all RSUs are estimated using the average of the high and low stock prices on the date of grant.
RSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
Executive Long-Term
Incentive Program
Employee Long-Term
Incentive Program
Other
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
1,423,601 
5,163,425 
749,319 
Granted
1,027,507 
216,782 
Forfeited
(205,400)
(378,881)
(33,563)
Distributed
(196,013)
(3,820)
(233,672)
Outstanding at end of year
2,049,695 
4,780,724 
698,866 
Undistributed vested units
344,125 
985,427 
16,212 
Unrecognized compensation cost
$258 
$573 
$67 
Weighted average remaining amortization period (years)
1.9
1.9
1.9
110

Table of Contents
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units
Performance-Based  Restricted  Stock  Units  (PBRSUs)  are  stock  units  that  pay  out  based  on  the  Company’s  total  shareholder  return  (TSR)  as
compared to a group of peer companies over a three-year period. The award payout can range from 0% to 200% of the initial PBRSU grant. The
PBRSUs granted under this program will vest at the payout amount and settle in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of
the  grant  date.  If  an  executive  terminates  employment  because  of  retirement,  layoff,  disability  or  death,  the  employee  (or  beneficiary)  remains
eligible under the award and, if the award is earned, will receive a proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service
period. In all other cases, the PBRSUs will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate.
In February 2020 and 2019, we granted to our executives 290,202 and 214,651 PBRSUs as part of our long-term incentive program. Compensation
expense for the award is recognized over the three-year performance period based upon the grant date fair value. The grant date fair values were
estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation model with the assumptions presented below. The model includes no expected dividend yield as the units
earn dividend equivalents.
Grant Year
Grant Date
Performance Period
Expected Volatility Risk Free Interest Rate Grant Date Fair Value
2020
2/24/2020
3 years
27.04 %
1.21 %
$357.38 
2019
2/25/2019
3 years
23.88 %
2.46 %
466.04 
PBRSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2021 was as follows:
Executive Long-Term Incentive
Program
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
621,559 
Performance based adjustment
(203,331)
Forfeited
(34,827)
Outstanding at end of year
383,401 
Unrecognized compensation cost
$36 
Weighted average remaining amortization period (years)
1.1
Represents net number of units adjusted at vesting based on TSR for units granted in 2018.
Performance Awards
During 2020 and 2019, we granted Performance Awards to our executives, which are cash units that pay out based on the achievement of long-term
financial goals at the end of a three-year period. Each unit has an initial value of $100 dollars. The amount payable at the end of the three-year
performance  period  may  be  anywhere  from  $0  to  $200  dollars  per  unit  for  the  2019  Performance  Awards  and  $0  to  $150  dollars  for  2020
Performance  Awards,  depending  on  the  Company’s  performance  against  plan  for  a  three-year  period.  The  Compensation  Committee  has  the
discretion to pay these awards in cash, stock or a combination of both after the three-year performance period. Compensation expense, based on
the estimated performance payout, is recognized ratably over the performance period.
The minimum payout amount is $0, and the maximum amount we could be required to pay out for the 2020 and 2019 Performance Awards is $253
and $323.
(1)
(1)    
111

Table of Contents
Deferred Compensation
The Company has deferred compensation plans which permit certain employees and executives to defer a portion of their salary, bonus, certain
other incentive awards and retirement contributions. Participants can diversify these amounts among 23 investment funds including a Boeing stock
unit account.
Total expense related to deferred compensation was $126, $93 and $174 in 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively. As of December 31, 2021 and
2020, the deferred compensation liability which is being marked to market was $1,703 and $1,718.
Note 18 – Shareholders’ Equity
On  December  17,  2018,  the  Board  approved  a  repurchase  plan  for  up  to  $20,000  of  common  stock.  In  March  2020,  the  Board  of  Directors
terminated its prior authorization to repurchase shares under this plan.
As of December 31, 2021 and 2020, there were 1,200,000,000 shares of common stock and 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized. No
preferred stock has been issued.
Changes in Share Balances
The following table shows changes in each class of shares:
Common 
Stock
Treasury 
Stock
Balance at January 1, 2019
1,012,261,159 
444,619,970 
Issued
(2,797,002)
Acquired
7,529,437 
Balance at December 31, 2019
1,012,261,159 
449,352,405 
Issued
(19,986,868)
Acquired
575,484 
Balance at December 31, 2020
1,012,261,159 
429,941,021 
Issued
(6,904,556)
Acquired
307,242 
Balance at December 31, 2021
1,012,261,159 
423,343,707 
112

Table of Contents
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss
Changes in Accumulated other comprehensive loss (AOCI) by component for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 were as follows:
Currency
Translation
Adjustments
Unrealized Gains
and Losses on
Certain
Investments
Unrealized Gains
and Losses on
Derivative
Instruments
Defined Benefit Pension
Plans & Other
Postretirement Benefits
Total 
Balance at January 1, 2019
($101)
($62)
($14,920)
($15,083)
Other comprehensive (loss)/income before
reclassifications
(27)
$1 
(48)
(1,397)
(1,471)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
26 
375 
401 
Net current period Other comprehensive (loss)/income
(27)
1 
(22)
(1,022)
(1,070)
Balance at December 31, 2019
($128)
$1 
($84)
($15,942)
($16,153)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) before
reclassifications
98 
14 
(1,929)
(1,817)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
27 
810 
837 
Net current period Other comprehensive income/(loss)
98 
41 
(1,119)
(980)
Balance at December 31, 2020
($30)
$1 
($43)
($17,061)
($17,133)
Other comprehensive (loss)/income before
reclassifications
(75)
55 
4,268 
4,248 
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
(6)
1,232 
1,226 
Net current period Other comprehensive (loss)/income
(75)
49 
5,500 
5,474 
Balance at December 31, 2021
($105)
$1 
$6 
($11,561)
($11,659)
Net of tax.
Primarily relates to remeasurement of assets and benefit obligations related to the Company's pension and other postretirement benefit plans
resulting in an actuarial gain/(loss) of $4,262, ($1,956) and ($1,413) (net of tax of ($32), $111 and $405) for the years ended December 31,
2021, 2020 and 2019. See Note 16.
Primarily relates to amortization of actuarial losses for the years ended December 31, 2021, 2020 and 2019 totaling $1,155, $917 and $464 (net
of tax of ($8), ($52) and ($133)), respectively. These are included in the net periodic pension cost. See Note 16.
Note 19 – Derivative Financial Instruments
Cash Flow Hedges
Our cash flow hedges include foreign currency forward contracts, commodity swaps and commodity purchase contracts. We use foreign currency
forward  contracts  to  manage  currency  risk  associated  with  certain  transactions,  specifically  forecasted  sales  and  purchases  made  in  foreign
currencies.  Our  foreign  currency  contracts  hedge  forecasted  transactions  through  2031.  We  use  commodity  derivatives,  such  as  fixed-price
purchase  commitments  and  swaps  to  hedge  against  potentially  unfavorable  price  changes  for  commodities  used  in  production.  Our  commodity
contracts hedge forecasted transactions through 2029.
Derivative Instruments Not Receiving Hedge Accounting Treatment
We  have  entered  into  agreements  to  purchase  and  sell  aluminum  to  address  long-term  strategic  sourcing  objectives  and  non-U.S.  business
requirements. These agreements are derivative instruments
(1)
(2)
(3)
(2)
(3)
(2)
(3)
(1)    
(2)    
(3)    
113

Table of Contents
for accounting purposes. The quantities of aluminum in these agreements offset and are priced at prevailing market prices. We also hold certain
foreign currency forward contracts and commodity swaps which do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
Notional Amounts and Fair Values
The notional amounts and fair values of derivative instruments in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31 were as
follows:
Notional
 amounts
Other assets
Accrued 
liabilities
2021
2020
2021
2020
2021
2020
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange contracts
$2,630 
$2,594 
$30 
$81 
($52)
($24)
Commodity contracts
500 
404 
88 
4 
(18)
(43)
Derivatives not receiving hedge accounting treatment:
Foreign exchange contracts
361 
769 
2 
22 
(3)
(16)
Commodity contracts
760 
904 
8
(7)
(17)
Total derivatives
$4,251 
$4,671 
128 
107 
(80)
(100)
Netting arrangements
(30)
(31)
30 
31 
Net recorded balance
$98 
$76 
($50)
($69)
Notional amounts represent the gross contract/notional amount of the derivatives outstanding.
Gains/(losses)  associated  with  our  hedging  transactions  and  forward  points  recognized  in  Other  comprehensive  income  are  presented  in  the
following table:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
Recognized in Other comprehensive income, net of taxes:
Foreign exchange contracts
($47)
$44 
Commodity contracts
102 
(30)
Gains/(losses) associated with our hedging transactions and forward points reclassified from AOCI to earnings are presented in the following table:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
Foreign exchange contracts
Revenues
($3)
Costs and expenses
$13 
(14)
General and administrative
8 
(6)
Commodity contracts
Costs and expenses
($18)
($10)
General and administrative expense
5 
(1)
Gains/(losses) related to undesignated derivatives on foreign exchange and commodity cash flow hedging transactions recognized in Other income,
net were insignificant for the years ended December 31, 2021 and December 31, 2020.
(1)
(1)
114

Table of Contents
Based  on  our  portfolio  of  cash  flow  hedges,  we  expect  to  reclassify  gains  of  $22  (pre-tax)  out  of  Accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss  into
earnings during the next 12 months.
We have derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features. For foreign exchange contracts with original maturities of at least five
years,  our  derivative  counterparties  could  require  settlement  if  we  default  on  our  five-year  credit  facility.  For  certain  commodity  contracts,  our
counterparties could require collateral posted in an amount determined by our credit ratings. The fair value of foreign exchange and commodity
contracts that have credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position at December 31, 2021 was $7. At December 31, 2021,
there was no collateral posted related to our derivatives.
Note 20 – Fair Value Measurements
The fair value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined
based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs, and
Level 3 includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs. The following table presents our assets and liabilities that are measured
at fair value on a recurring basis and are categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
December 31, 2021
December 31, 2020
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Assets
Money market funds
$1,370 
$1,370 
$2,230 
$2,230 
Available-for-sale debt investments:
Commercial paper
225 
$225 
149 
$149 
Corporate notes
262 
262 
333 
333 
U.S. government agencies
1 
1 
114 
114 
Other equity investments
20 
20 
54 
54 
Derivatives
98 
98 
76 
76 
Total assets
$1,976 
$1,390 
$586 
$2,956 
$2,284 
$672 
Liabilities
Derivatives
($50)
($50)
($69)
($69)
Total liabilities
($50)
($50)
($69)
($69)
Money market funds, available-for-sale debt investments and equity securities are valued using a market approach based on the quoted market
prices or broker/dealer quotes of identical or comparable instruments.
Derivatives include foreign currency and commodity contracts. Our foreign currency forward contracts are valued using an income approach based
on the present value of the forward rate less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. Commodity derivatives are valued using an income
approach based on the present value of the commodity index prices less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount.
115

Table of Contents
Certain  assets  have  been  measured  at  fair  value  on  a  nonrecurring  basis  using  significant  unobservable  inputs  (Level  3).  The  following  table
presents the nonrecurring losses recognized for the years ended December 31 due to long-lived asset impairment, and the fair value and asset
classification of the related assets as of the impairment date:
2021
2020
Fair Value
Total Losses
Fair Value
Total Losses
Investments
($8)
$22 
($81)
Customer financing assets
$110 
(31)
105 
(24)
Other assets and Acquired intangible assets
1 
(9)
298 
(221)
Property, plant and equipment
9 
(50)
79 
(84)
Total
$120 
($98)
$504 
($410)
Investments, Property, plant and equipment, Other assets and Acquired intangible assets were primarily valued using an income approach based on
the discounted cash flows associated with the underlying assets. The fair value of the impaired customer financing assets includes operating lease
equipment and investments in sales type-leases/finance leases and is derived by calculating a median collateral value from a consistent group of
third party aircraft value publications. The values provided by the third party aircraft publications are derived from their knowledge of market trades
and other market factors. Management reviews the publications quarterly to assess the continued appropriateness and consistency with market
trends. Under certain circumstances, we adjust values based on the attributes and condition of the specific aircraft or equipment, usually when the
features or use of the aircraft vary significantly from the more generic aircraft attributes covered by third party publications, or on the expected net
sales price for the aircraft.
For Level 3 assets that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis during the year ended December 31, 2021, the following table presents
the fair value of those assets as of the measurement date, valuation techniques and related unobservable inputs of those assets.
Fair 
Value
Valuation 
Technique(s)
Unobservable Input
Range 
Median or Average
Customer financing assets
$110
Market approach
Aircraft value publications
$88 - $125
Median $119
Aircraft condition
adjustments
($12) - $3
Net ($9)
The range represents the sum of the highest and lowest values for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, according to the third party
aircraft valuation publications that we use in our valuation process.
The negative amount represents the sum, for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, of all downward adjustments based on consideration
of individual aircraft attributes and condition. The positive amount represents the sum of all such upward adjustments.
(1)
(2)
(1)
(2)
116

Table of Contents
Fair Value Disclosures
The  fair  values  and  related  carrying  values  of  financial  instruments  that  are  not  required  to  be  remeasured  at  fair  value  on  the  Consolidated
Statements of Financial Position at December 31 were as follows:
December 31, 2021
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Notes receivable, net
$412 
$485 
$485 
Liabilities
Debt, excluding finance lease obligations
(57,921)
(65,724)
(65,724)
December 31, 2020
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Notes receivable, net
$420 
$488 
$488 
Liabilities
Debt, excluding finance lease obligations
(63,380)
(72,357)
(72,342)
($15)
The fair values of notes receivable are estimated with discounted cash flow analysis using interest rates currently offered on loans with similar terms
to borrowers of similar credit quality. The fair value of our debt that is traded in the secondary market is classified as Level 2 and is based on current
market yields. For our debt that is not traded in the secondary market, the fair value is classified as Level 2 and is based on our indicative borrowing
cost derived from dealer quotes or discounted cash flows. The fair values of our debt classified as Level 3 are based on discounted cash flow
models using the implied yield from similar securities. With regard to other financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, it is not practicable to
estimate the fair value of our indemnifications and financing commitments because the amount and timing of those arrangements are uncertain.
Items not included in the above disclosures include cash, restricted cash, time deposits and other deposits, commercial paper, money market funds,
Accounts receivable, Unbilled receivables, Other current assets, Accounts payable and long-term payables. The carrying values of those items, as
reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position, approximate their fair value at December 31, 2021 and 2020. The fair value of assets
and liabilities whose carrying value approximates fair value is determined using Level 2 inputs, with the exception of cash (Level 1).
Note 21 – Legal Proceedings
Various legal proceedings, claims and investigations related to products, contracts, employment and other matters are pending against us.
In addition, we are subject to various U.S. government inquiries and investigations from which civil, criminal or administrative proceedings could
result or have resulted in the past. Such proceedings involve or could involve claims by the government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble
damages, restitution and/or forfeitures. Under government regulations, a company, or one or more of its operating divisions or subdivisions, can also
be suspended or debarred from government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of investigations. Except as described
below, we believe,
117

Table of Contents
based upon current information,  that the outcome of any such legal proceeding, claim, or government dispute and investigation will not have a
material effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows. Where it is reasonably possible that we will incur losses in excess of
recorded amounts in connection with any of the matters set forth below, we will disclose either the amount or range of reasonably possible losses in
excess of such amounts or, where no such amount or range can be reasonably estimated, the reasons why no such estimate can be made.
Multiple legal actions have been filed against us as a result of the October 29, 2018 accident of Lion Air Flight 610 and the March 10, 2019 accident
of Ethiopian Airlines Flight 302. During the fourth quarter of 2021, we entered into a proposed settlement with plaintiffs in a shareholder derivative
lawsuit. Under the proposed settlement, which is subject to court approval, the Company would receive monetary payments of approximately $237,
before attorneys’ fees, and commit to making certain governance changes. Further, we are subject to, and cooperating with, ongoing governmental
and regulatory investigations and inquiries relating to the accidents and the 737 MAX. Among these is an ongoing investigation by the Securities and
Exchange Commission, the outcome of which may be material. Other than with respect to the agreement described below with the U.S. Department
of Justice entered in 2021, we cannot reasonably estimate a range of loss, if any, not covered by available insurance that may result given the
current status of the pending lawsuits, investigations and inquiries related to the 737 MAX.
On  January  6,  2021,  we  entered  into  a  Deferred  Prosecution  Agreement  with  the  U.S.  Department  of  Justice  that  resolves  the  Department  of
Justice’s previously disclosed investigation into us regarding the evaluation of the 737 MAX airplane by the Federal Aviation Administration. Under
the  terms  of  the  Deferred  Prosecution  Agreement,  we  agreed  to  the  filing  of  a  criminal  information  charging  the  Company  with  one  count  of
conspiracy to defraud the United States, based on the conduct of two former 737 MAX program technical pilots; the criminal information will be
dismissed after three years, provided that we comply with our obligations under the agreement. The Deferred Prosecution Agreement requires that
we make payments totaling $2,510, which consist of (a) a $244 criminal monetary penalty; (b) $500 in additional compensation to the heirs and/or
beneficiaries  of  those  who  died  in  the  Lion  Air  Flight  610  and  Ethiopian  Airlines  Flight  302  accidents;  and  (c)  $1,770  to  the  Company’s  airline
customers for harm incurred as a result of the grounding of the 737 MAX, offset in part by payments already made and the remainder satisfied
through payments to be made prior to the termination of the Deferred Prosecution Agreement. The agreement also requires that we review our
compliance program and undertake continuous improvement efforts with respect to it, and implement enhanced compliance reporting and internal
controls mechanisms. We expensed $744 in the fourth quarter of 2020 related to this agreement. During the first quarter, consistent with the terms
of the Deferred Prosecution Agreement, the monetary penalty was paid, and the $500 compensation amount was transferred to a fund established
to benefit the heirs and/or beneficiaries of the victims of the 737 MAX accidents. In addition, the $1,770 amount related to the Company’s airline
customers was included in amounts reserved in prior quarters for 737 MAX customer considerations.
During 2019, we entered into agreements with Embraer S.A. (Embraer) to establish joint ventures that included the commercial aircraft and services
operations of Embraer, of which we were expected to acquire an 80 percent ownership stake for $4,200, as well as a joint venture to promote and
develop new markets for the C-390 Millennium. In 2020, we exercised our contractual right to terminate these agreements based on Embraer’s
failure  to  meet  certain  required  closing  conditions.  Embraer  has  disputed  our  right  to  terminate  the  agreements,  and  the  dispute  is  currently  in
arbitration. We cannot reasonably estimate a range of loss, if any, that may result from the arbitration.
Note 22 – Segment and Revenue Information
Our  primary  profitability  measurements  to  review  a segment’s  operating  results  are  Earnings/(loss)  from  operations  and  operating  margins.  We
operate in four reportable segments: BCA, BDS, BGS and BCC.
118

Table of Contents
All  other  activities  fall  within  Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other.  See  page 63 for  the  Summary  of  Business  Segment  Data,  which  is  an
integral part of this note.
BCA  develops,  produces  and  markets  commercial  jet  aircraft  principally  to  the  commercial  airline  industry  worldwide.  Revenue  on  commercial
aircraft contracts is recognized at the point in time when an aircraft is completed and accepted by the customer.
BDS engages in the research, development, production and modification of the following products and related services: manned and unmanned
military  aircraft  and  weapons  systems,  surveillance  and  engagement,  strategic  defense  and  intelligence  systems,  satellite  systems  and  space
exploration. BDS revenue is generally recognized over the contract term (over time) as costs are incurred.
BGS  provides  parts,  maintenance,  modifications,  logistics  support,  training,  data  analytics  and  information-based  services  to  commercial  and
government customers worldwide. BGS segment revenue and costs include certain products and services provided to other segments. Revenue on
commercial spare parts contracts is recognized at the point in time when a spare part is delivered to the customer. Revenue on other contracts is
generally recognized over the contract term (over time) as costs are incurred.
BCC facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our customers.
While our principal operations are in the United States, Canada and Australia, some key suppliers and subcontractors are located in Europe and
Japan. Revenues, including foreign military sales, are reported by customer location and consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Europe
$8,967 
$7,961 
$10,366 
Asia
5,845 
5,931 
16,346 
Middle East
4,653 
5,308 
9,272 
Canada
969 
1,302 
2,019 
Oceania
1,147 
832 
2,006 
Africa
239 
114 
1,113 
Latin America, Caribbean and other
1,376 
229 
1,015 
Total non-U.S. revenues
23,196 
21,677 
42,137 
United States
39,076 
36,979 
42,681 
Estimated potential concessions and other considerations to 737 MAX customers,
net
14 
(498)
(8,259)
Total revenues
$62,286 
$58,158 
$76,559 
Net of insurance recoveries
Revenues  from  the  U.S.  government  (including  foreign  military  sales  through  the  U.S.  government),  primarily  recorded  at  BDS  and  BGS,
represented  49%,  51%  and  39%  of  consolidated  revenues  for  2021,  2020  and  2019,  respectively.  Approximately  4%  of  operating  assets  were
located outside the United States as of December 31, 2021 and 2020.
The following tables present BCA, BDS and BGS revenues from contracts with customers disaggregated in a number of ways, such as geographic
location, contract type and the method of revenue recognition. We believe these best depict how the nature, amount, timing and uncertainty of our
revenues and cash flows are affected by economic factors.
(1)
(1)
 
119

Table of Contents
BCA revenues by customer location consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenue from contracts with customers:
Europe
$4,334 
$3,872 
$5,829 
Middle East
1,098 
1,647 
5,761 
Asia
2,792 
2,679 
12,446 
Other
1,681 
513 
3,450 
Total non-U.S. revenues
9,905 
8,711 
27,486 
United States
9,472 
7,899 
12,676 
Estimated potential concessions and other considerations to 737 MAX
customers, net
14 
(498)
(8,259)
Total revenues from contracts with customers
19,391 
16,112 
31,903 
Intersegment revenues, eliminated on consolidation
102 
50 
352 
Total segment revenues
$19,493 
$16,162 
$32,255 
Revenue recognized on fixed-price contracts
100 %
100 %
100 %
Revenue recognized at a point in time
100 %
100 %
100 %
Net of insurance recoveries
BDS revenues on contracts with customers, based on the customer's location, consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenue from contracts with customers:
U.S. customers
$19,869 
$19,662 
$19,465 
Non-U.S. customers
6,671 
6,595 
6,630 
Total segment revenue from contracts with customers
$26,540 
$26,257 
$26,095 
Revenue recognized over time
99 %
98 %
98 %
Revenue recognized on fixed-price contracts
68 %
69 %
70 %
Revenue from the U.S. government
89 %
89 %
89 %
Includes revenues earned from foreign military sales through the U.S. government.
(1)
(1)
 
(1)
(1)
(1)
120

Table of Contents
BGS revenues consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Revenue from contracts with customers:
Commercial
$7,527 
$6,936 
$10,167 
Government
8,553 
8,368 
8,107 
Total revenues from contracts with customers
16,080 
15,304 
18,274 
Intersegment revenues eliminated on consolidation
248 
239 
194 
Total segment revenues
$16,328 
$15,543 
$18,468 
Revenue recognized at a point in time
45 %
47 %
55 %
Revenue recognized on fixed-price contracts
86 %
87 %
90 %
Revenue from the U.S. government
40 %
41 %
34 %
Includes revenues earned from foreign military sales through the U.S. government.
Earnings in Equity Method Investments
Our share of income or loss from equity method investments was $40, $86 and $90, primarily in our BDS segment, for the years ended December
31, 2021, 2020 and 2019, respectively.
Backlog
Our total backlog includes contracts that we and our customers are committed to perform. The value in backlog represents the estimated transaction
prices on performance obligations to our customers for which work remains to be performed. Backlog is converted into revenue, primarily based on
the cost incurred or at delivery and acceptance of products, depending on the applicable revenue recognition model.
Our backlog at December 31, 2021 was $377,499. We expect approximately 17% to be converted to revenue through 2022 and approximately 74%
through 2025, with the remainder thereafter. There is significant uncertainty regarding the timing of when backlog will convert into revenue due to
787 production issues and associated rework, timing of 737 MAX delivery resumption in China, timing of entry into service of the 777X, 737 MAX 7
and/or 737 MAX 10, and COVID-19 impacts.
(1)
(1)
121

Table of Contents
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and other
Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  include  common  internal  services  that  support  Boeing’s  global  business  operations,  intercompany
guarantees provided to BCC and eliminations of certain sales between segments. Such sales include airplanes accounted for as operating leases
and considered transferred  to the BCC segment.  We generally allocate costs to business segments based on the U.S.  federal cost accounting
standards. Components of Unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the following table.
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Share-based plans
($174)
($120)
($65)
Deferred compensation
(126)
(93)
(174)
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
(107)
(95)
(89)
Research and development expense, net
(184)
(240)
(401)
Customer financing impairment
(250)
Litigation
(109)
Eliminations and other unallocated items
(676)
(1,807)
(985)
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
($1,267)
($2,355)
($2,073)
Pension FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
$882 
$1,024 
$1,071 
Postretirement FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
291 
359 
344 
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment
$1,173 
$1,383 
$1,415 
Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Expense
Pension costs, comprising GAAP service and prior service costs, are allocated to BCA and the commercial operations at BGS. Pension costs are
allocated to BDS and BGS businesses supporting government customers using U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS), which employ
different actuarial assumptions and accounting conventions than GAAP. These costs are allocable to government contracts. Other postretirement
benefit  costs  are  allocated  to  business  segments  based  on  CAS,  which  is  generally  based  on  benefits  paid.  FAS/CAS  service  cost  adjustment
represents the difference between the Financial Accounting Standards (FAS) pension and postretirement service costs calculated under GAAP and
costs allocated to the business segments. Non-operating pension and postretirement expenses represent the components of net periodic benefit
costs other than service cost. These expenses are included in Other income, net.
122

Table of Contents
Assets
Segment assets are summarized in the table below.
December 31,
2021
2020
Commercial Airplanes
$75,863 
$77,973 
Defense, Space & Security
14,974 
14,256 
Global Services
16,397 
17,399 
Boeing Capital
1,735 
1,978 
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
29,583 
40,530 
Total
$138,552 
$152,136 
Assets included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other primarily consist of Cash and cash equivalents, Short-term and other investments, tax
assets,  capitalized  interest,  assets  managed  centrally  on  behalf  of  the  four  principal  business  segments  and  intercompany  eliminations.  From
December 31, 2020 to December 31, 2021, assets in Unallocated items, eliminations and other decreased primarily due to reductions in short-term
and other investment balances.
Capital Expenditures
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Commercial Airplanes
$177 
$322 
$433 
Defense, Space & Security
199 
172 
189 
Global Services
94 
127 
218 
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
510 
682 
994 
Total
$980 
$1,303 
$1,834 
Capital  expenditures  for  Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  relate  primarily  to  assets  managed  centrally  on  behalf  of  the  four  principal
business segments.
Depreciation and Amortization
Years ended December 31,
2021
2020
2019
Commercial Airplanes
$535 
$559 
$580 
Defense, Space & Security 
233 
251 
256 
Global Services
414 
408 
424 
Boeing Capital Corporation
59 
66 
64 
Centrally Managed Assets
903 
962 
947 
Total
$2,144 
$2,246 
$2,271 
Amounts shown in the table represent depreciation and amortization expense recorded by the individual business segments. Depreciation and
amortization  for centrally managed assets are included in segment operating earnings based on usage and occupancy. In 2021, $668 was
included in the primary business segments, of which $386, $222 and $60 was included in BCA, BDS and BGS, respectively. In 2020, $689 was
included in the primary business segments, of which $397, $236 and $56 was included in BCA, BDS and BGS, respectively. In 2019, $717 was
included in the primary business segments, of which $407, $257 and $53 was included in BCA, BDS and BGS, respectively.
 (1)
(1)
123

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of The Boeing Company
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the "Company") as of
December 31, 2021 and 2020, the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows, for each of the
three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, and the related notes (collectively referred to as the "financial statements"). In our opinion, the
financial statements present fairly, in all material respects, the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2021 and 2020, and the results
of its operations and its cash flows for each of the three years in the period ended December 31, 2021, in conformity with accounting principles
generally accepted in the United States of America.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
Company's  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of  December  31,  2021,  based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  —  Integrated
Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated January 31, 2022,
expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company's internal control over financial reporting.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements  are  the responsibility  of the  Company's  management.  Our  responsibility  is to  express  an opinion on the  Company's
financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with
respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included
performing  procedures  to  assess  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  financial  statements,  whether  due  to  error  or  fraud,  and  performing
procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well
as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Critical Audit Matters
The critical audit matters communicated below are matters arising from the current-period audit of the financial statements that were communicated
or required to be communicated to the audit committee and that (1) relate to accounts or disclosures that are material to the financial statements and
(2) involved our especially challenging, subjective, or complex judgments. The communication of critical audit matters does not alter in any way our
opinion  on  the  financial  statements,  taken  as  a  whole,  and  we  are  not,  by  communicating  the  critical  audit  matters  below,  providing  separate
opinions on the critical audit matters or on the accounts or disclosures to which they relate.
124

Table of Contents
Cost Estimates for Fixed-Price Development Contracts – Refer to Notes 1 and 13 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
As  more  fully  described  in  Notes  1  and  13  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements,  the  Company  recognizes  revenue  over  time  for  long-term
contracts as goods are produced or services are rendered. The Company uses costs incurred as the method for determining progress, and revenue
is recognized based on costs incurred to date plus an estimate of margin at completion. The process of estimating margin at completion involves
estimating the costs to complete production of goods or rendering of services and comparing those costs to the estimated final revenue amount.
Fixed-price development contracts are inherently uncertain in that revenue is fixed while the estimates of costs required to complete these contracts
are  subject  to  significant  variability.  Due  to  the  technical  performance  requirements  in  many  of  these  contracts,  changes  to  cost  and  revenue
estimates could occur, resulting in lower margins or material reach-forward losses.
Given the complexity of certain of the Company’s fixed-price development contracts, including the KC-46A Tanker, Commercial Crew, and United
States Air Force VC-25B Presidential Aircraft contracts, the limited amount of historical data available in certain instances and significant judgments
necessary to estimate future costs at completion, auditing these estimates involved extensive audit effort and a high degree of auditor judgment and
required audit professionals with specialized industry experience.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures related to the cost estimates for the KC-46A Tanker, Commercial Crew, and United States Air Force VC-25B Presidential
Aircraft fixed-price development contracts included the following, among others:
•
We evaluated the appropriateness and consistency of management’s methods used in developing its estimates.
•
We evaluated the reasonableness of judgments made and significant assumptions used by management relating to key cost and schedule
estimates, including the range and probability of reasonable outcomes, and the appropriateness of the timing of changes to key estimates.
•
We performed inquiries of the Company’s project managers and others directly involved with the contracts to evaluate management’s ability
to achieve the key cost and schedule estimates, as well as evaluate project status and project challenges which may affect total estimated
costs to complete. We also observed the project work site when key estimates related to tangible or physical progress of the project.
•
We  tested  the  accuracy  and  completeness  of  the  key  data  used  in  developing  estimates.  We  developed  independent  expectations  of
reasonable outcomes using, in part, the program’s data and compared our expectations to management’s estimates.
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls over the review of judgments made and significant assumptions used to develop key estimates,
including controls over the key data used in developing the estimates and the mathematical extrapolation of such data.
•
We performed retrospective reviews, comparing actual performance to estimated performance and the related financial statement impact,
including the appropriateness of the timing of changes to key estimates, when evaluating the thoroughness and precision of management’s
estimation process and effectiveness of related internal controls.
125

Table of Contents
Program Accounting Estimates for the 777X Program – Refer to Notes 1 and 7 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
The introduction of new aircraft programs involves increased risk associated with meeting development, certification and production schedules. The
Company uses program accounting in order to compute cost of sales and margin for each commercial airplane sold. The use of program accounting
requires  estimating  and  demonstrating  customer  demand  for  the  number  of  units  included  in  the  program  (program  accounting  quantity)  and
estimating the sales and costs over the expected life of each program. In particular, estimating the initial program accounting quantity and revenue
for unsold units within the program accounting quantity involves measurement uncertainty resulting in a range of reasonable outcomes. Additionally,
the level of effort to meet regulatory requirements and achieve certification may be challenging to predict, resulting in delays in the timing of entry
into service and corresponding increases in estimated costs. Changes to the program accounting quantity or revenue and cost estimates could
occur,  resulting  in  lower  margins  or  material  reach-forward  losses.  Auditing  the  estimated  revenues  and  costs  for  the  777X  program  involved
extensive audit effort  and required audit professionals  with specialized industry experience given the high degree of complexity and subjectivity
related to management’s estimates.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures over the estimated revenues and costs for the anticipated 777X program accounting quantity included the following, among
others:
•
We inquired of the Company’s management, including individuals responsible for sales and pricing, to evaluate the status of current sales
campaigns, short and long-term market demand, and status of negotiations with individual customers.
•
We compared management’s estimate of market demand to external industry sources of expected demand.
•
We evaluated the appropriateness and consistency of management’s methods and significant assumptions used in developing its estimates
related to the initial program accounting quantity and revenue for unsold units.
•
We  evaluated  management’s  ability  to  estimate  program  revenue  by  comparison  to  historical  estimates  and  actual  results  on  similar
programs.
•
We evaluated the appropriateness and consistency of management’s methods used in developing its cost estimates.
•
We performed inquiries of those directly involved with the certification of the aircraft to evaluate project status and challenges which may
affect total estimated costs to achieve certification of the aircraft.
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls including those over the key data used in developing the estimates, the mathematical extrapolation
of such data, and management’s judgment regarding the range of reasonable outcomes relating to the specific estimates.
126

Table of Contents
Program Accounting Revenue Estimates for the 787 Program — Refer to Notes 1, 7, and 22 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
Production quality issues for the 787 Program have resulted in increased risk associated with forecasted revenue estimates primarily due to the
difficulty in assessing the timeline for restarting 787 deliveries. The Company uses program accounting in order to compute cost of sales and margin
for each commercial airplane sold. The use of program accounting requires estimating the revenue expected to be earned upon delivery of the
aircraft included in the program’s accounting quantity. The timing of the Federal Aviation Administration's (“FAA”) approval to resume deliveries, the
impact to the delivery schedule from delayed deliveries, and the value of the consideration expected to be provided to customers for delivery delays
are  key  factors  that  affect  estimated  revenue.  There  is  increased  estimation  uncertainty  related  to  the  revenue  forecasts  of  aircraft  which  have
reached  or  are  expected  to  reach  a  delivery  delay  period  that  provides  the  customer  with  a  contractual  termination  right.  Due  to  continued
uncertainty in the expected FAA approval date to resume 787 aircraft deliveries, there is significant judgment in determining which aircraft will reach
these contractual termination rights. Changes to the expected delivery resumption date could have a flowthrough impact and result in additional
consideration to customers. This could result in lower margins or further material reach-forward losses. Auditing the estimated revenues for the 787
program involved extensive audit effort and required professionals with specialized industry experience given the high degree of complexity and
subjectivity related to management’s estimates.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures over the estimated revenues for the 787 program included the following, among others:
•
We inquired of the Company’s management, including individuals responsible for engineering and production operations, to assess whether
the  estimated  FAA  approval  and  delivery  resumption  date  represent  management’s  best  estimates  based  on  the  status  of  the  rework
activity.
•
We  inquired  of  the  Company’s  management,  including  the  individuals  communicating  with  the  FAA,  to  assess  if  there  is  contradictory
information to that assumed by management related to the estimated timeline for rework completion or getting FAA approval to resume
deliveries.
•
We evaluated the appropriateness and consistency of management’s method for developing the deliveries schedule assumptions.
•
We  inquired  of  the  Company’s  management,  including  individuals  responsible  for  sales  and  pricing,  to  evaluate  the  status  of  current
contracts with customers and expected consideration to be provided to customers.
•
We evaluated the appropriateness and consistency of management’s methods and significant assumptions used in developing its estimates
related to forecasted revenue for aircraft which have or are expected to have delivery delays.
•
We tested the effectiveness of controls including those over the key data used in developing the estimates, the mathematical extrapolation
of such data, and management’s judgment regarding the range of reasonable outcomes relating to the specific estimates.
127

Table of Contents
Liabilities related to the 737 MAX Grounding – Refer to Note 13 to the financial statements
Critical Audit Matter Description
In 2019, following two fatal 737 MAX accidents, the FAA and non-U.S. civil aviation authorities issued orders suspending commercial operations of
737 MAX aircraft (the “737 MAX Grounding”). Deliveries resumed in the U.S. in late 2020 following rescission by the FAA of its grounding order.
During 2019, the Company recorded an initial liability in connection with estimated payments, concessions and other in-kind consideration it intends
to  provide  to  customers  for  disruptions  related  to  the  737  MAX  Grounding  and  associated  delivery  delays.  This  liability  totaled  $2.9  billion  at
December 31, 2021 and is reflected in the financial statements in Accrued liabilities. Of the $2.9 billion, $2.2 billion has been contractually agreed to
with customers. The liability represents the Company’s best estimate of future concessions and other consideration to its customers. To the extent
not contractually agreed upon, the estimate is based on individual negotiations with customers and the substance of such negotiations.
The subjectivity of the estimate of approximately $0.7 billion relating to consideration that has not yet been contractually agreed to with customers
involved extensive audit effort and a high degree of auditor judgment and required audit professionals with specialized industry experience.
How the Critical Audit Matter Was Addressed in the Audit
Our audit procedures associated with liabilities related to the 737 MAX Grounding included the following, among others:
•
We inquired of management to understand developments with the 737 MAX Grounding, including the status of consideration negotiations
with individual customers.
•
We obtained written representations from management concerning its intent to provide consideration to customers and the extent of that
consideration.
•
We evaluated the significant assumptions used by management to estimate the liability for customer consideration, and, where possible, we
corroborated the significant assumptions with management outside of the accounting and finance organizations.
•
We reviewed the terms of customer contracts and correspondence with customers concerning potential consideration as a result of the 737
MAX Grounding.
•
We evaluated the terms of settlement agreements with customers for the allocation of value provided between consideration as a result of
the 737 MAX Grounding and for consideration related to the impact of current economic conditions resulting from COVID-19.
•
We evaluated delivery documents for 737 MAX deliveries for incremental value provided at delivery as potential consideration as a result of
the 737 MAX Grounding.
•
We read minutes of meetings of the Board of Directors and its committees for evidence of unrecorded loss contingencies.
•
We evaluated the Company’s disclosures for consistency with our knowledge of matters related to the 737 MAX Grounding.
128

Table of Contents
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
January 31, 2022
We have served as the Company's auditor since at least 1934; however, an earlier year could not be reliably determined.
129

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of The Boeing Company
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2021,
based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control — Integrated  Framework  (2013 )  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the
Treadway Commission (COSO). In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting
as of December 31, 2021, based on criteria established in Internal Control — Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
consolidated  financial  statements  as  of  and  for  the  year  ended  December  31,  2021  of  the  Company,  and  our  report  dated  January  31,  2022
expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  maintaining  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  and  for  its  assessment  of  the
effectiveness  of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial
Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal
securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the
design  and  operating  effectiveness  of  internal  control  based  on  the  assessed  risk,  and  performing  such  other  procedures  as  we  considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or  disposition  of  the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements.
130

Table of Contents
Because  of  its  inherent  limitations,  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  may  not  prevent  or  detect  misstatements.  Also,  projections  of  any
evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that controls may become inadequate because of changes in conditions, or that
the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
January 31, 2022
131

Table of Contents
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
(a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures.
Our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2021 and have
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in the reports that we
file or submit under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and forms and is accumulated and communicated to our management, including the Chief Executive
Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
(b) Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.
Our  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  as  such  term  is  defined  in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f). Our management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based
on  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission.  Based  on  this  evaluation  under  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework,  our  management  concluded  that  our
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2021.
Our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2021, has been audited by Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included in Item 8 of this report and is incorporated by reference herein.
(c) Changes in Internal Controls Over Financial Reporting.
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2021 that have materially affected or
are reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
132

Table of Contents
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Our executive officers and their ages as of January 31, 2022, are as follows:
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Bertrand-Marc Allen 
48
Chief  Strategy  Officer  and  Senior  Vice  President,  Strategy  and  Corporate  Development  since
October  2020.  Mr.  Allen  previously  served  as  Senior  Vice  President  and  President,  Embraer
Partnership  and  Group  Operations  from  April  2019  to  October  2020,  Senior  Vice  President  and
President,  Boeing  International  from  February  2015  to  April  2019;  President  of  Boeing  Capital
Corporation  from  March  2014  to  February  2015;  Corporate  Vice  President,  Boeing  International
and Chairman and President of Boeing (China) Co., Ltd. from March 2011 to March 2014; and Vice
President,  Global  Law  Affairs  from  May  2007  to  March  2011.  Mr.  Allen  serves  on  the  board  of
directors of Procter & Gamble Co.
Michael A. Arthur
71
Senior Vice President and President, Boeing International since April 2019. Mr. Arthur previously
served as President of Boeing Europe from March 2016 to April 2019 and as Managing Director of
Boeing United Kingdom and Ireland from September 2014 to April 2019.
David L. Calhoun
64
President and Chief Executive Officer since January 2020 and a member of the Board of Directors
since June 2009. Previously, Mr. Calhoun served as Senior Managing Director & Head of Private
Equity Portfolio Operations at The Blackstone Group from January 2014 to January 2020. Prior to
that, Mr. Calhoun served as Chairman of the Board of Nielsen Holdings plc from January 2014 to
January 2016, as Chief Executive Officer of Nielsen Holdings plc from May 2010 to January 2014,
and as Chairman of the Executive Board and Chief Executive Officer of The Nielsen Company B.V.
from  August  2006  to  January  2014.  Prior  to  joining  Nielsen,  he  served  as  Vice  Chairman  of
General Electric Company and President and Chief Executive Officer of GE Infrastructure. During
his 26-year tenure at GE, he ran multiple business units including GE Transportation, GE Aircraft
Engines, GE Employers Reinsurance Corporation, GE Lighting and GE Transportation Systems.
Mr. Calhoun also serves on the board of directors of Caterpillar Inc.
Leanne G. Caret
55
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Defense,  Space  &
Security since March 2016. Ms. Caret joined Boeing in 1988, and her previous positions include
President of Global Services & Support from February 2015 to March 2016; Chief Financial Officer
and  Vice  President,  Finance,  for  BDS  from  March  2014  to  February  2015;  Vice  President  and
General  Manager,  Vertical  Lift  from  November  2012  to  February  2014;  and  Vice  President  and
Program Manager, Chinook from November 2009 to October 2012. Ms. Caret serves on the board
of directors of Deere & Company.
133

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Theodore Colbert III
48
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Global  Services  since
October  2019.  Mr.  Colbert  previously  served  as  Chief  Information  Officer  and  Senior  Vice
President,  Information  Technology  &  Data  Analytics  from  April  2016  to  October  2019;  Chief
Information  Officer and Vice President of Information  Technology from November 2013 to April
2016; Vice President of Information Technology Infrastructure from December 2011 to November
2013; and Vice President of IT Business Systems from September 2010 to December 2011. Mr.
Colbert serves on the board of directors of Archer-Daniels-Midland Company.
Michael D’Ambrose
64
Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  and  Executive  Vice  President,  Human  Resources  since  June
2021.  Prior  to  joining  Boeing  in  July  2020  as  Executive  Vice  Present,  Human  Resources,  Mr.
D'Ambrose  served  as  Senior  Vice  President  and  Chief  Human  Resources  Officer  for  Archer-
Daniels-Midland Company from October 2006 to June 2020. Previously, he served in a series of
executive-level business and human resources positions, including chief human resources officer
at Citigroup, First Data Corporation and Toys 'R' Us, Inc.
Edward L. Dandridge
57
Chief Communications Officer and Senior Vice President, Communications since June 2021. Prior
to joining Boeing in September 2020 as Senior Vice President, Communications, Mr. Dandridge
served  as  Global  Chief  Marketing  and  Communications  Officer  of  AIG  General  Insurance  from
April  2018  to  September  2020;  Chief  Marketing  and  Communications  Officer  of  Marsh  &
McLennan Companies from March 2014 to April 2018; and Chief Marketing Officer of Collective
from February 2013 to February 2014.
Stanley A. Deal
57
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Commercial  Airplanes
since October 2019. Mr. Deal joined Boeing in 1986, and his previous positions include Executive
Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Global  Services  from  November
2016 to October 2019; Senior Vice President of Commercial Aviation Services from March 2014 to
November  2016;  Vice  President  and  General  Manager  of  Supply  Chain  Management  and
Operations for Commercial Airplanes from September 2011 to February 2014; Vice President of
Supplier  Management  from  February  2010  to  August  2011;  and  Vice  President  of  Asia  Pacific
Sales from December 2006 to January 2010.
Susan Doniz
52
Chief  Information  Officer  and  Senior  Vice  President,  Information  Technology  &  Data  Analytics
since May 2020. Prior to joining Boeing, Ms. Doniz served as Global Chief Information Officer of
Qantas Airways Limited from January 2017 to April 2020; as strategic advisor to the Global CEO
of  SAP  SE  on  transformation  and  technology  issues  in  support  of  customers  from  September
2015 to January 2017; and Global Product, Digital Strategy and Chief Information Officer of AIMIA
Inc. from June 2011 to January 2015.
134

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Brett C. Gerry
50
Chief Legal Officer and Executive Vice President, Global Compliance since May 2020. Mr. Gerry
previously  served  as  Senior  Vice  President  and  General  Counsel  from  May  2019  to  May  2020
President of Boeing Japan from February 2016 to May 2019; Vice President and General Counsel,
Boeing Commercial Airplanes from March 2009 to March 2016; and Chief Counsel, Network and
Space Systems from September 2008 to March 2009.
Gregory L. Hyslop
63
Chief  Engineer  and  Executive  Vice  President,  Engineering,  Test  &  Technology  since  December
2020.  Dr.  Hyslop's  previous  positions  include  Chief  Engineer  and  Senior  Vice  President,
Engineering,  Test  & Technology  from  August  2019 to  December  2020;  Chief  Technology  Officer
and Senior Vice President, Engineering, Test & Technology from March 2016 to August 2019; Vice
President and General Manager of Boeing Research and Technology from February 2013 to March
2016;  and Vice  President  and  General  Manager  of  Boeing  Strategic  Missile  & Defense  Systems
from March 2009 to February 2013.
Ziad S. Ojakli
55
Executive Vice President, Government Operations since October 2021. Prior to joining Boeing, Mr.
Ojakli served as a managing partner and Senior Vice President of Global Government Affairs at
SoftBank Group Corp. from August 2018 to September 2020. Prior to that, he served as Group Vice
President, Government & Community Relations at Ford Motor Company from January 2004 to July
2018.
Brian J. West
52
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer since August 2021. Prior to joining Boeing, Mr.
West  served  as  Chief  Financial  Officer  of  Refinitiv  Holdings  (a  London  Stock  Exchange  Group
business and provider of financial markets data and infrastructure) from November 2018 to June
2021. Prior to that, he served as Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President of Operations
of  Oscar  Insurance  Corporation  from  January  2016  to  October  2018.  Mr.  West  served  as  Chief
Operating  Officer  of  Nielsen  Holdings  plc  from  March  2014  to  December  2015  and  as  Chief
Financial Officer of Nielsen Holdings plc (or its predecessor) from February 2007 to March 2014.
Prior  to  joining  Nielsen,  Mr.  West  was  employed  by  the  General  Electric  Company  as  the  Chief
Financial Officer of its GE Aviation division from June 2005 to February 2007 and Chief Financial
Officer of its GE Aviation Services division from March 2004 to June 2005. Prior to that, Mr. West
held  several  senior  financial  positions  across  General  Electric  Company  businesses,  including
Plastics, NBC, Energy and Transportation.
Information relating to our directors and nominees will be included under the caption “Election of Directors” in our proxy statement involving the
election of directors, which will be filed with the SEC no later than 120 days after December 31, 2021 and is incorporated by reference herein.
Information required by Items 405, 407(d)(4) and 407(d)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Stock Ownership Information” and
“Board Committees” in the 2022 Proxy Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Codes of Ethics. We have adopted (1) The Boeing Company Code of Ethical Business Conduct for the Board of Directors; (2) The Boeing Company
Code of Conduct for Finance Employees which is
135

Table of Contents
applicable to our Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Controller and all finance employees; and (3) The Boeing Code of
Conduct that applies to all employees, including our CEO (collectively, the Codes of Conduct). The Codes of Conduct are posted on our website,
www.boeing.com/company/general-info/corporate-governance.page, and printed copies may be obtained, without charge, by contacting the Office
of Internal Governance, The Boeing Company, 100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, IL 60606. We intend to disclose promptly on our website any
amendments to, or waivers of, the Codes of Conduct covering our CEO, CFO and/or Controller.
No family relationships exist among any of the executive officers, directors or director nominees.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The  information  required  by  Item  402  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  captions  “Compensation  Discussion  and  Analysis,”
“Compensation  of  Executive  Officers”  and  “Compensation  of  Directors”  in  the  2022  Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is  incorporated  by
reference herein. The information required by Item 407(e)(4) and 407(e)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Compensation
Committee  Interlocks  and  Insider  Participation”  and  “Compensation  Committee  Report”  in  the  2022  Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is
incorporated by reference herein.
136

Table of Contents
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The  information  required  by  Item  403  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Stock  Ownership  Information”  in  the  2022  Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
Our equity compensation plans approved by our shareholders provide for the issuance of common stock to officers and other employees, directors
and consultants. The following table sets forth information regarding outstanding options and units, and shares available for future issuance under
these plans as of December 31, 2021:
Plan Category
Number of shares 
to be issued upon exercise of
outstanding 
options and units
Weighted-average 
exercise price of 
outstanding 
options
Number of securities 
remaining available for 
future issuance under 
equity compensation 
plans (excluding 
shares reflected 
in column (a))
(a)
(b)
(c)
Equity compensation plans approved by
shareholders
Stock options
1,709,379 
$121.83 
Deferred compensation
1,075,168 
Other stock units
8,296,087 
Equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders
None
None
None
Total
11,080,634 
$121.83 
7,922,062 
Includes 766,802 shares issuable in respect of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units subject to the satisfaction of performance criteria and
assumes payout at maximum levels.
Excludes the potential Performance Awards which the Compensation Committee has the discretion to pay in cash, stock or a combination of
both after the three-year performance periods which end in 2022 and 2023.
For further information, see Note 17 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The  information  required  by  Item  404  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Related  Person  Transactions”  in  the  2022  Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
The information required by Item 407(a) of Regulation S-K will be included under the caption “Director Independence” in the 2022 Proxy Statement,
and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
(1)
(2)
(1)    
(2)    
137

Table of Contents
Item 14. Principal Accountant Fees and Services
Information about aggregate fees billed to us by our principal accountant, Deloitte & Touche LLP (PCAOB ID No. 34) will be included under the
caption “Independent Auditor Fees” in the 2022 Proxy Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a) List of documents filed as part of this report:
1.
Financial Statements
Our consolidated financial statements are as set forth under Item 8 of this report on Form 10-K.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules
All  schedules  are  omitted  because  they  are  not  applicable,  not  required  or  the  information  is  included  in  the  consolidated  financial
statements.
3.
Exhibits
3.1
Amended and Restated Certificate of Incorporation of The Boeing Company dated May 5, 2006 (Exhibit 3.1 to the Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K dated May 1, 2006)
3.2
By-Laws  of The Boeing Company,  as amended and restated  effective  August  31, 2021 (Exhibit  3.2  to the  Company's  Current
Report on Form 8-K dated September 1, 2021)
4.1
Description of The Boeing Company Securities Registered under Section 12 of the Exchange Act (Exhibit 4.1 to the Company’s
Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2019)
10.1
364-Day Credit Agreement, dated as of October 25, 2021, among The Boeing Company, for itself and on behalf of its Subsidiaries,
as a Borrower, the Lenders party hereto, Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent
and  Citibank,  N.A.  and  JPMorgan  Chase  Bank  N.A.,  as  joint  lead  arrangers  and  joint  book  managers  (Exhibit  10.1  to  the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 25, 2021)
10.2
Two-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of March 19, 2021, among The Boeing Company, as Borrower, the Lenders party thereto,
Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as syndication agent, Bank of America, N.A. and Wells Fargo
Bank, National Association, as documentation agents, and Citibank N.A., JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., BofA Securities, Inc. and
Wells Fargo Securities, LLC, as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company's Current Report on
Form 8-K dated March 19, 2021)
10.3
Five-Year  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  October  30,  2019,  among  The  Boeing  Company,  for  itself  and  on  behalf  of  its
Subsidiaries, as a Borrower, the Lenders party hereto, Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
syndication agent and Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers (Exhibit
10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 30, 2019
138

Table of Contents
10.4
Three-Year  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  October  30,  2019,  among  The  Boeing  Company,  for  itself  and  on  behalf  of  its
Subsidiaries, as a Borrower, the Lenders party hereto, Citibank, N.A., as administrative agent, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as
syndication agent and Citibank N.A. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A., as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers (Exhibit
10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 30, 2019)
10.5
Term Loan Credit Agreement, dated as of February 6, 2020 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K dated
February 6, 2020)
10.6
Joint Venture Master Agreement, dated as of May 2, 2005, by and among Lockheed Martin Corporation, The Boeing Company
and United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. (Exhibit (10)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2005)
10.7
Delta  Inventory  Supply  Agreement,  dated  as  of  December  1,  2006,  by  and  between  United  Launch  Alliance,  L.L.C.  and  The
Boeing Company (Exhibit (10)(vi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2006)
10.8
Deferred Prosecution Agreement dated January 6, 2021 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
January 6, 2021)
10.9
Summary of Non employee Director Compensation (Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31,
2019)*
10.10
Deferred Compensation Plan for Directors of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2008 (Exhibit
10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007)*
10.11
The Boeing Company Annual Incentive Plan, as amended and restated February 24, 2020 (formerly known as the Incentive
Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries) (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended March 31, 2020)*
10.12
The Boeing Company 1997 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended effective May 1, 2000 and further amended effective January 1,
2008 (Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007)*
10.13
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated as of January 1,
2016 (Exhibit (10)(xvi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015)*
10.14
The Boeing Company Executive Supplemental Savings Plan, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2022*
10.15
The Boeing Company Executive Layoff Benefits Plan, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2017 (Exhibit (10)(xviii) to the
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016)*
10.16
The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated effective December 9, 2021*
10.17
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Grant Notice of Terms (Exhibit (10)(xvii)(b) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2010)*
10.18
Form of U.S. Notice of Terms of Non-Qualified Stock Option (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2021)*
10.19
Form of International Notice of Terms of Non-Qualified Stock Option (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended
March 31, 2021)*
139

Table of Contents
10.20
Form of U.S. Notice of Terms of Non-Qualified Stock Option for CEO (Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended
March 31, 2021)*
10.21
Form of U.S. Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2021)*
10.22
Form of International Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March
31, 2021)*
10.23
Form of U.S. Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2021)*
10.24
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Cash-based Award (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
June 29, 2021)*
10.25
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
dated June 29, 2021)*
10.26
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Non-Qualified Stock Option (Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
dated June 29, 2021)*
10.27
Form of Notice of Terms of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended
March 31, 2018)*
10.28
Form of Performance Award Notice (Exhibit 10.3 of the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018)*
10.29
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2018)*
10.30
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March
31, 2018)*
10.31
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K
dated June 25, 2017)*
10.32
Form of Notice of Terms of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended March 31, 2020)*
10.33
Form of Performance Award Notice (Exhibit 10.4 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2020)*
10.34
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2020)*
10.35
Form of International Notice of Terms of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.6 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for
the quarter ended March 31, 2020)*
10.36
Form of International Performance Award Notice (Exhibit 10.7 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31,
2020)*
10.37
Form of International Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.8 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended
March 31, 2020)*
10.38
Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units, dated February 24, 2020 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company's Current Report
on Form 8-K dated February 23, 2020)*
10.39
Notice of Terms of Supplemental Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units, dated February 24, 2020 (Exhibit 10.2 to the
Company's Current Report on Form 8-K dated February 23, 2020)*
10.40
Form of International Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the
quarter ended June 30, 2020)*
140

Table of Contents
10.41
Employment Agreement between Boeing Canada Operations LTD and Susan Doniz (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Form 10-Q
for the quarter ended June 30, 2020)*
21
List of Company Subsidiaries
23
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
31.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
31.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
32.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
32.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002
99.1
Commercial  Program  Method  of  Accounting  (Exhibit  (99)(i)  to  the  Company’s  Form  10-K  for  the  year  ended  December  31,
1997)
101.SCH
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.DEF
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
101.LAB
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
101.PRE
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
104
Cover Page Interactive Data File - the cover page XBRL tags are embedded within the Inline XBRL document contained in
Exhibit 101
* Management contract or compensatory plan
In accordance with Item 601(b)(4)(iii)(A) of Regulation S-K, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the
Company are not filed herewith. Pursuant to this regulation, we hereby agree to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the SEC upon request.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
None.
141

Table of Contents
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on January 31, 2022.
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Registrant)
By:  
/s/ Carol J. Hibbard
 
Carol J. Hibbard – Senior Vice President and Controller
142

Table of Contents
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities indicated on January 31, 2022.
/s/ David L. Calhoun
/s/ Akhil Johri
David L. Calhoun – President and Chief Executive Officer
Akhil Johri – Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Brian J. West
/s/ David L. Joyce
Brian J. West – Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
David L. Joyce – Director
(Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ Carol J. Hibbard
/s/ Lawrence W. Kellner
Carol J. Hibbard – Senior Vice President and Controller
Lawrence W. Kellner – Chair of the Board
(Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ Robert A. Bradway
/s/ Steven M. Mollenkopf
Robert A. Bradway – Director
Steven M. Mollenkopf – Director
/s/ Lynne M. Doughtie
/s/ John M. Richardson
Lynne M. Doughtie – Director
John M. Richardson – Director
/s/ Lynn J. Good
/s/ Ronald A. Williams
Lynn J. Good – Director
Ronald A. Williams – Director
/s/ Stayce D. Harris
Stayce D. Harris – Director
143

THIS DOCUMENT CONSTITUTES PART OF A PROSPECTUS COVERING SECURITIES THAT HAVE BEEN REGISTERED UNDER THE SECURITIES
ACT OF 1933, AS AMENDED.
Exhibit 10.14
THE BOEING COMPANY
EXECUTIVE SUPPLEMENTAL SAVINGS PLAN
AS AMENDED AND RESTATED
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2022

TABLE OF CONTENTS
Article IIntroduction
1
Article IIDefinitions
3
2.1Account
3
2.2Administrator
3
2.3Affiliate or Subsidiary
3
2.4Authorized Period of Absence
3
2.5Base Pay
3
2.6Base Pay Deferrals
4
2.7Base Pay Rate
4
2.8Beneficiary
4
2.9Board of Directors
4
2.10Boeing 401(k)
4
2.11BSS Plan
4
2.12Cash Incentive
5
2.13Cash Incentive Deferrals
5
2.14Code
5
2.15Company
5
2.16Company Contributions
5
2.17Company Non-Elective Contributions
6
2.18Compensation
6
2.19Compensation Committee
6
2.20Contribution Credit
6
2.21Controlled Group
6
2.22DC SERP Contributions
6
2.23Deferral Election
6
2.24DCP
7
2.25DCP Deferrals
7
2.26DCP Matching Contributions
7
2.27E-Series Payroll
7
2.28Earnings Credits
7
2.29Election Period
7
2.30Eligibility Determination Date
7
2.31Eligible Employee
7
2.32Employee
8
2.33Extra Deferrals
8
2.34Executive SSP+ Company Contributions
8
2.35Incentive Matching Contributions
8
2.36Newly Eligible
8
2.37Participant
9
2.38Participant Deferrals
9
i

2.39Performance Awards
9
2.40Plan
9
2.41Plan Year
9
2.42PVP
9
2.43Restoration Deferrals
9
2.44Restoration Matching Contributions
9
2.45Restoration SSP+ Company Contributions
9
2.46Restoration True-Up Contributions
10
2.47Separation from Service
10
2.48Service
10
2.49Specified Employee
10
2.50Unforeseeable Emergency
10
2.51Vested Performance Award Deferrals
10
Article IIIParticipant Deferrals
11
3.1Annual Participation and Deferrals – Eligibility
11
3.2Mid-Year Participation– Eligibility
12
3.3Deferral Elections
12
3.4Cancellation of Deferral Election Due to Unforeseeable Emergency
14
3.5Crediting of Deferrals to Account
14
Article IVCompany Contributions
15
4.1Restoration Matching Contributions
15
4.2Restoration True-Up Contributions
15
4.3Incentive Matching Contributions
16
4.4Company Non-Elective Contributions (Component of the Executive Benefit)
16
4.5DC SERP Contributions (Component of the Executive Benefit)
17
Article VVesting and Forfeiture Rules
21
5.1Vesting
21
5.2Extra Deferral Vesting
21
5.3Restoration Vesting
21
5.4Executive Benefit Vesting
21
5.5Executive SSP+ Company Contribution Forfeiture Rules
21
5.6DC SERP Vesting
23
5.7DC SERP Forfeiture Rules
26
Article VIDistributions
28
6.1Form and Timing of Distribution
28
6.2Death Benefits
32
6.3Rehires and Authorized Periods of Absence/Reduced Level of Services
33
Article VIIAccounts
36
7.1Participant Accounts
36
7.2Earnings Credits
36
7.3Investment Election Changes and Restrictions
38
ii

7.4Missing Participants and Improper Credits
38
Article VIIIAdministration
39
8.1Plan Administration
39
8.2Claims Procedure
39
Article IXAmendment and Termination
40
Article XMiscellaneous
41
10.1No Employment Rights
41
10.2Anti-Assignment
41
10.3Unfunded Status of Plan
41
10.4Delays or Acceleration in Payment
41
10.5Involuntary Inclusion in Income
41
10.6Compliance with Code Section 409A
42
10.7Construction
42
10.8Legal Action
42
10.9Tax Withholding
42
10.10Liability for Benefit Payments
42
10.11Recovery of Plan Overpayments
43
10.12Notice
43
APPENDIX A List of Excluded Entities
A-1
APPENDIX B Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company
B-1
iii

ARTICLE I
Introduction
Plan Overview
The Boeing Company Executive Supplemental Savings Plan provides four separate components:
(i)
Extra Deferrals, the purpose of which is to provide a means by which eligible employees may defer payment of their
base salaries and awards made under eligible incentive compensation plans (a traditional deferred compensation
benefit);
(ii)
the Restoration Benefit, the purpose of which is to restore the benefits of eligible employees under The Boeing
Company 401(k) Retirement Plan (“Boeing 401(k),” previously named The Boeing Company Voluntary Investment
Plan), to the extent that these qualified plan benefits are limited by Code sections 415 and 401(a)(17);
(iii)
Executive Benefit, which includes Company Non-Elective Contributions, DC SERP Contributions, and historic
Executive SSP+ Company Contributions; and
(iv)
DCP Accounts, which are the recordkeeping accounts established for Participants who participated in the Deferred
Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, which was frozen December 31, 2018 and merged into
this Plan effective January 1, 2022.
Plan History
The Plan (originally named, the Supplemental Benefit Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company) (the “Plan”) was originally
established effective January 1, 1978, by The Boeing Company.
The Plan has been amended and restated from time to time since its original effective date, including on January 1, 2008, to comply
with section 409A of the Code.
As of January 1, 2022, the Plan is amended and restated to (A) reflect the merger of the Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees
of The Boeing Company with and into the Plan, (B) eliminate Restoration SSP+ Company Contributions and Executive SSP+
Company Contributions, (C) add a new Restoration True-Up Contribution, Incentive Matching Contribution and Company Non-
Elective Contribution, (D) simplify the mid-year enrollment provisions in the Participant Deferral component of the Plan, and (E)
make certain other changes.
Plan Status
The Plan is a nonqualified deferred compensation plan subject to Code section 409A. It is also intended that the Plan shall be, in
part, an excess benefit plan as defined in section 3(36) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended
(ERISA), to the extent benefits are paid in excess of the limits imposed by Code section 415. To the extent any part of the Plan is not
an excess benefit plan, it is intended that the Plan is an unfunded plan maintained primarily
1

for the purpose of providing deferred compensation to a select group of management or highly compensated employees under
sections 201(2), 301(a)(3), and 401(a)(1) of ERISA.
2

ARTICLE II 
Definitions
2.1
Account
“Account” means the recordkeeping account established for each Participant, for purposes of accounting for the allocations
made hereunder and the Earnings Credits thereon. Each Account will consist of the following sub-accounts, to the extent
applicable, and the Earnings Credits thereon:
(a)
the Restoration Account (consisting of Restoration Deferrals, Restoration Matching Contributions, Restoration True-
Up Contributions, and for periods prior to January 1, 2022, Restoration SSP+ Company Contributions);
(b)
the Extra Deferral Account (consisting of Extra Deferrals, Cash Incentive Deferrals, Incentive Matching
Contributions, and Vested Performance Award Deferrals);
(c)
the Executive Benefit Account (consisting of Company Non-Elective Contributions, DC SERP Contributions and for
periods prior to January 1, 2022, the Executive SSP+ Company Contributions); and
(d)
the DCP Account (consisting of DCP Deferrals and DCP Match made to the DCP prior to January 1, 2019).
2.2
Administrator
“Administrator” means the Employee Benefit Plans Committee of The Boeing Company.
2.3
Affiliate or Subsidiary
“Affiliate” or “Subsidiary” means a member of a controlled group of corporations (as defined in Code section 1563(a),
determined without regard to Code sections 1563(a)(4) and (e)(3)(c)), a group of trades or businesses (whether incorporated
or not) which are under common control within the meaning of Code section 414(c), or an affiliated service group (as defined
in Code sections 414(m) or 414(o)), in each case of which The Boeing Company is a part.
2.4
Authorized Period of Absence
“Authorized Period of Absence” means a leave of absence approved by the Company.
2.5
Base Pay
“Base Pay” means an Employee’s base pay (salary) from the Company. For clarity, this is the same as an Employee’s
“Compensation” as such term is defined under the Boeing 401(k), but determined (A) without regard to the limitation on
such compensation under Code section 401(a)(17) and (B) prior to any deferrals of compensation made hereunder.
3

Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, Base Pay does not include amounts earned while an Employee is
represented by a union with a collective bargaining agreement covering such Employee that does not provide for
participation in the Plan.
In no event will Base Pay include payments under any incentive compensation or performance award plan, without regard to
whether they are included in the definition of “Compensation” under the Boeing 401(k).
2.6
Base Pay Deferrals
“Base Pay Deferrals” means deferrals of Base Pay that are made pursuant to Section 3.1(A).
2.7
Base Pay Rate
“Base Pay Rate” means an Employee’s annual rate of Base Pay.
2.8
Beneficiary
“Beneficiary” means the person or persons designated by a Participant to receive distributions from the Plan upon the
Participant’s death, in accordance with the rules established by the Administrator. If no effective designation is on file, then
the Beneficiary shall be the person or persons designated by a Participant under the Boeing 401(k) to receive any benefit
payable from the Boeing 401(k) upon the death of the Participant. If no effective designation is on file under this Plan or the
Boeing 401(k), or if the designated beneficiary does not survive the Participant, then the default beneficiary rules stated in
the Boeing 401(k) will apply to determine the Beneficiary under the Plan. A Beneficiary may disclaim his or her benefit in
accordance with the rules established by the Administrator, and in the case of an effective disclaimer, the Participant’s
designation of such individual will be treated as ineffective and the rules described above for an ineffective beneficiary
designation will apply.
2.9
Board of Directors
“Board of Directors” means the board of directors of The Boeing Company.
2.10
Boeing 401(k)
“Boeing 401(k)” means the Boeing 401(k) Retirement Plan, as amended.
2.11
BSS Plan
“BSS Plan” means the BSS Retirement Plan, as amended.
4

2.12
Cash Incentive
“Cash Incentive” means the amount awarded to the Participant under The Boeing Company Elected Officer Annual Incentive
Plan or the Incentive Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries, as applicable.
Cash Incentive deferred by the Participant under Article III will be deemed to have been paid as if those amounts had not
been deferred, for purposes of calculating Company Non-Elective Contributions under Article IV.
Cash Incentive that is paid after a Participant’s termination of employment from the Controlled Group will remain subject to
the Participant’s deferral election under Article III, but will not be counted for purposes of calculating the Company Non-
Elective Contribution under Article IV.
2.13
Cash Incentive Deferrals
“Cash Incentive Deferrals” means deferrals of Cash Incentive that are made pursuant to Section 3.1(A).
2.14
Code
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended. Any reference to a specific provision of the Code includes
any successor provision thereto and the regulations and rulings promulgated thereunder.
2.15
Company
“Company” means The Boeing Company, its successors in interest, and any Affiliate or Subsidiary that has adopted this Plan
with the consent of The Boeing Company. An Affiliate or Subsidiary is deemed to have adopted this Plan, and The Boeing
Company is deemed to have consented to such adoption, if the Affiliate or Subsidiary (a) participates in the Boeing 401(k)
and (b) is not an excluded employer for purposes of this Plan. A list of excluded employers, as updated from time to time, is
attached hereto as Appendix A.
2.16
Company Contributions
“Company Contributions” mean Restoration Matching Contributions, Restoration True-Up Contributions, Company Non-
Elective Contributions, Incentive Matching Contributions, and DC SERP Contributions. For periods prior to January 1, 2022,
Company Contributions also included Restoration SSP+ Company Contributions and Executive SSP+ Company
Contributions.
5

2.17
Company Non-Elective Contributions
“Company Non-Elective Contributions” mean the contributions allocated pursuant to Section 4.4.
2.18
Compensation
“Compensation” means a Participant’s Base Pay, Cash Incentive, and Performance Awards.
2.19
Compensation Committee
“Compensation Committee” means the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors.
2.20
Contribution Credit
“Contribution Credit” means the applicable percentage used to compute an eligible Participant’s DC SERP Contributions
under Section 4.5.
2.21
Controlled Group
“Controlled Group” means the Company and any Affiliate or Subsidiary.
2.22
DC SERP Contributions
“DC SERP Contributions” means the contributions allocated pursuant to Section 4.5.
2.23
Deferral Election
“Deferral Election” means the elections made by an Eligible Employee to defer a portion of his or her eligible Compensation
in accordance with Article III, including any Restoration Deferral Election and any Extra Deferral Election.
6

2.24
DCP
“DCP” means the Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, which was merged into this Plan
effective January 1, 2022.
2.25
DCP Deferrals
“DCP Deferrals” mean the portion of a Participant’s Base Pay, Cash Incentive, or Performance Awards, if any, that he or she
elected to defer on a pre-tax basis under the DCP prior to January 1, 2019.
2.26
DCP Matching Contributions
“DCP Matching Contributions” mean the matching contributions that were previously made under the DCP.
2.27
E-Series Payroll
“E-Series Payroll” means the executive designation of level E-1 to E-5 at the Company.
2.28
Earnings Credits
“Earnings Credits” means the adjustment to a Participant’s Account under Section 7.2, which may be positive or negative.
2.29
Election Period
“Election Period” means the period or periods established by the Administrator during which an eligible Employee may
submit Deferral Elections, all in accordance with such timing and other requirements as the Administrator may establish and,
in all cases, the applicable rules under Code section 409A. In no event will (a) an annual Election Period expire later than
December 31 of the Plan Year in which the election is made and/or (b) a mid-year Election Period be more than thirty (30)
days after the Employee first becomes eligible to participate in the Plan.
2.30
Eligibility Determination Date
“Eligibility Determination Date” means (a) for purposes of Section 3.1, with respect to any Plan Year, the November 1 of the
preceding Plan Year (or, effective on and after November 1, 2021, such other date as determined by the Administrator with
respect to any Employee(s); provided that such determination complies with the requirements of section 409A of the Code),
and (b) for purposes of the definition of “Newly Eligible,” the date an Eligible Employee is hired or rehired into the status of
an Eligible Employee.
2.31
Eligible Employee
“Eligible Employee” means, with respect to any Plan Year (or portion of a Plan Year, in the case of a mid-year enrollment) if
applicable, an individual who is an Employee and is paid on a U.S. dollar-based payroll as of the Eligibility Determination
Date, and who has satisfied any additional requirements to make Extra Deferrals under Section 3.1(A) or 3.2, to make
Restoration Deferrals under Section 3.1(B) or 3.2, to receive allocations of Restoration Matching Contributions under
Section 4.1, to receive allocations of Restoration True-Up Contributions under Section 4.2, to receive allocations of Incentive
Matching Contributions under Section 4.3, to receive allocations of Company Non-
7

Elective Contributions under Section 4.4, and/or to receive allocations of DC SERP Contributions under Section 4.5, in each
case, if any and to the extent applicable.
Notwithstanding the foregoing or anything herein: (i) an Employee is an Eligible Employee only if the Employee is eligible
for the Boeing 401(k), and is not eligible for The Boeing Company Supplemental Savings Plan and (ii) an Employee shall
not be considered an Eligible Employee hereunder if the Administrator has excluded his or her employer from participation
in the Plan. A list of excluded employers, as updated from time to time, is attached hereto as Appendix A.
2.32
Employee
“Employee” means any person who is employed by any member of the Controlled Group, is designated as a common law
employee on such member’s payroll, and is assigned by such member to the E-Series Payroll.
2.33
Extra Deferrals
“Extra Deferrals” means any Base Pay Deferral, Cash Incentive Deferral or Vested Performance Award Deferral that a
Participant elects to defer on a pre-tax basis in accordance with Section 3.1(A) and, to the extent applicable, Section 3.2(A).
2.34
Executive SSP+ Company Contributions
“Executive SSP+ Company Contributions” means the historic Executive SSP+ Company Contributions that were credited to
a Participant’s Account with respect to periods prior to January 1, 2022.
2.35
Incentive Matching Contributions
“Incentive Matching Contributions” mean the contributions allocated pursuant to Section 4.3.
2.36
Newly Eligible
“Newly Eligible” means an individual who (i) is hired or rehired as an Employee, (ii) was not eligible to participate in the
Plan or in a deferred compensation plan that is aggregated with the Plan under the aggregation rules of section 409A of the
Code (including The Boeing Company Supplemental Savings Plan), other than the crediting of earnings, within the 24-month
period immediately preceding the Eligibility Determination Date (or, has taken a full distribution of his or her interest in such
plan), and (iii) is paid on a U.S. dollar-based payroll as of the Eligibility Determination Date.
8

2.37
Participant
“Participant” means an Eligible Employee who has elected to defer Compensation or who is eligible to receive a Company
Contribution hereunder, or for purposes of Articles V through X, an Employee or former Employee who has amounts
credited to his or her Account.
2.38
Participant Deferrals
“Participant Deferrals” mean Extra Deferrals and Restoration Deferrals.
2.39
Performance Awards
“Performance Awards” means any award designated as such under The Boeing Company’s 2003 Incentive Stock Plan and
any successor or other long-term incentive plan that may be maintained by the Company from time to time.
2.40
Plan
“Plan” means The Boeing Company Executive Supplemental Savings Plan as herein set forth, together with any amendments
that may be adopted from time to time.
2.41
Plan Year
“Plan Year” means the calendar year.
2.42
PVP
“PVP” means The Pension Value Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended.
2.43
Restoration Deferrals
“Restoration Deferrals” means the portion of a Participant’s Compensation, if any, that he or she elects to defer on a pre-tax
basis under this Plan in accordance with Section 3.1(B) and, to the extent applicable, Section 3.2.
2.44
Restoration Matching Contributions
“Restoration Matching Contributions” means the amount credited to a Participant’s Account under Section 4.1.
2.45
Restoration SSP+ Company Contributions
“Restoration SSP+ Company Contributions” means the historic Restoration SSP+ Company Contributions that were credited
to a Participant’s Account with respect to periods prior to January 1, 2022.
9

2.46
Restoration True-Up Contributions
“Restoration True-Up Contributions” means the contributions allocated pursuant to Section 4.2.
2.47
Separation from Service
“Separation from Service” or “Separates from Service” means an Employee’s death, retirement or termination of
employment from the Controlled Group within the meaning of Code section 409A. For purposes of determining whether a
Separation from Service has occurred, Affiliates and Subsidiaries are defined by using the language “at least 80 percent” to
define the controlled group under Code section 1563(a) in lieu of the 50 percent default rule stated in Treasury Regulation
section 1.409A-1(h)(3).
A Separation from Service is deemed to include a reasonably anticipated permanent reduction in the level of services
performed by an Employee to less than 50 percent of the average level of services performed by the Employee during the
immediately preceding 36-month period.
2.48
Service
“Service” means the Participant’s years of service with the Controlled Group, determined in the same manner as the service
time calculation under the Boeing Service Awards Program procedure, in completed whole years.
2.49
Specified Employee
“Specified Employee” means an Employee who is a “specified employee” within the meaning of Code section 409A.
Specified Employee status is determined on the last day of the prior Plan Year, to take effect as of April 1 of the Plan Year
for a 12-month period. Notwithstanding the foregoing, Specified Employees shall be determined by including the employees
who are reasonably determined to be the 75 top-paid officers of the Controlled Group as of the determination date, rather
than the 50 top-paid officers as provided under Code section 416(i)(1)(A), to the extent permitted under Code section 409A.
2.50
Unforeseeable Emergency
“Unforeseeable Emergency” means “unforeseeable emergency” within the meaning of Code section 409A, as determined by
the Administrator.
2.51
Vested Performance Award Deferrals
“Vested Performance Award Deferrals” means deferrals of Performance Awards under Section 3.1(A).
10

ARTICLE III 
Participant Deferrals 
3.1
Annual Participation and Deferrals – Eligibility
The Plan provides Eligible Employees with two ways to defer Compensation on a pre-tax basis– the Extra Deferral
component and the Restoration Deferral component. Only Eligible Employees will be permitted to participate.
Elections to take effect with respect to a full Plan Year will generally be made during the annual Election Period.
(A)
Extra Deferral Component
An individual is an Eligible Employee for purposes of making an Extra Deferral Election for a Plan Year if he or she is an
Employee paid on a U.S. dollar-based payroll as of the Eligibility Determination Date.
In any Extra Deferral Election, an Eligible Employee may defer up to a maximum of: (i) in the case of Base Pay Deferrals,
50% of his or her Base Pay payable in the Plan Year to which the Deferral Election applies, (ii) in the case of Cash Incentive
Deferrals, 100% of his or her Cash Incentive earned in the Plan Year to which the Deferral Election applies (even if payable
in a subsequent Plan Year), and/or (iii) in the case of Vested Performance Award Deferrals, 100% of his or her Performance
Awards granted in the Plan Year to which the Deferral Election applies, which grant generally covers the next three (3) Plan
Years (even if payable in a subsequent Plan Year). For clarity, Extra Deferrals will be made without regard to the Code
section 401(a)(17) and 415(c) limitations.
Extra Deferrals will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date the Compensation would otherwise be payable, or as
soon thereafter as administratively feasible.
(B)
Restoration Deferral Component
In any Restoration Deferral Election, an Eligible Employee may elect a deferral percentage up to the maximum percentage of
his or her Base Pay that the Employee can elect to contribute on a pre-tax, after-tax and/or Roth basis under the Boeing
401(k). Restoration Deferrals will be made from the Eligible Employee’s Base Pay only after either: (1) Base Pay for the
applicable Plan Year reaches the limitation under Code section 401(a)(17), as indexed, for such Plan Year or (2) the
Participant’s annual additions under the Boeing 401(k) for the applicable Plan Year reach the dollar limitation of Code
section 415(c), as indexed.
Restoration Deferrals will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date the Compensation would otherwise be payable,
or as soon thereafter as administratively feasible.
11

3.2
Mid-Year Participation– Eligibility
To the extent permitted by and in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Administrator, an Employee who is Newly
Eligible during a Plan Year may elect (A) Extra Deferrals up to a maximum of 50% of the Base Pay earned and payable in
each full regular pay period commencing after the end of the Election Period (or such other date determined by the
Administrator in accordance with Code Section 409A) for the remainder of the applicable Plan Year, (B) Restoration
Deferrals (if the Eligible Employee satisfies the criteria of this Section) and (C) the form and time of distribution of the
Account with respect to such Plan Year, as permitted by Section 6.1. Such mid-year elections will be made during the mid-
year Election Period. Different mid-year election rules applied with respect to Plan Years prior to January 1, 2022. Mid-year
elections cannot be made for Cash Incentive Deferrals or Vested Performance Award Deferrals.
In any mid-year Restoration Deferral election, an Eligible Employee will be permitted to make a Restoration Deferral
election with respect to Base Pay earned and payable in each full regular pay period commencing after the end of the
Election Period for the remainder of such Plan Year up to the maximum percentage of his or her Base Pay that the Employee
can elect to contribute on a pre-tax, after-tax and/or Roth basis under the Boeing 401(k) for such period. Restoration
Deferrals will be made from the Eligible Employee’s Base Pay only after either: (1) Base Pay for the applicable Plan Year
reaches the limitation under Code section 401(a)(17), as indexed, for such Plan Year or (2) the Participant’s annual additions
under the Boeing 401(k) for the applicable Plan Year reach the dollar limitation of Code section 415(c), as indexed.
3.3
Deferral Elections
An Eligible Employee may elect to defer a percentage of his or her eligible Compensation for a Plan Year (or portion of a
Plan Year in the case of a mid-year enrollment) on a pre-tax basis by executing and delivering one or more timely Deferral
Election(s) in accordance with the provisions of this Section 3.3. The type and amount of eligible Compensation that may be
deferred is described in Section 3.1 (for annual deferrals) and Section 3.2 (for mid-year deferrals).
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, to the extent any Eligible Employee had in effect an active (A) Restoration
Deferral Election under this Plan immediately prior to its amendment and restatement as of January 1, 2019 and does not
timely change such Restoration Deferral Election with respect to the Plan Year beginning on January 1, 2019, such Eligible
Employee shall be deemed to have continued such active Restoration Deferral Election with respect to the Plan Year
beginning on January 1, 2019 and (except as otherwise provided below for Employees who cease to be Eligible Employees)
future Plan Years on an “evergreen basis” unless and until such Eligible Employee changes such Restoration Deferral
Election in accordance with this Section 3.3; or (B) election to defer compensation under the DCP immediately prior to that
plan’s amendment and restatement as of January 1, 2019 and fails either to make a timely Extra Deferral Election or to
indicate affirmatively that he or she does not wish to make an Extra Deferral Election with respect to the Plan Year beginning
on January 1, 2019, such Eligible Employee shall be deemed to have made an Extra Deferral Election identical to such
election to defer compensation under the DCP with respect to the Plan Year beginning on January 1, 2019 and (except as
otherwise provided below for Employees who cease to be Eligible Employees) future Plan Years on an “evergreen basis”
unless and until such Eligible Employee changes such Extra Deferral Election in accordance with this Section 3.3.
12

(A)
Deferral Elections
An Eligible Employee’s Deferral Election(s) must be made in accordance with rules established by the Administrator.
An Eligible Employee may make separate Extra Deferral Elections with respect to Base Pay, Cash Incentive and
Performance Awards and/or a separate Restoration Deferral Election with respect to Base Pay, each to the extent
described in Section 3.1 or 3.2, as applicable.
Eligible Employees may make new Deferral Elections for each succeeding Plan Year. An Eligible Employee’s
Deferral Election will be “evergreen” – it will carry-over from Plan Year to Plan Year (or from a partial Plan Year to
the subsequent Plan Year in the case of a mid-year enrollment) unless it is changed or cancelled in accordance with
rules established by the Administrator or as otherwise provided in this Plan.
In the case of an Employee who ceases to be an Eligible Employee during the Plan Year (e.g., due to a reclassification
as other than E-Series Payroll or Separation from Service) the Employee’s Deferral Election(s) shall remain in effect
with respect to the Plan Year in which the Employee ceases to be an Eligible Employee, but will automatically be
cancelled with respect to future Deferrals (i.e., Deferrals with respect to subsequent Plan Years).
(B)
Distribution Elections
Deferral Elections will include an option to elect the form and timing of distribution with regard to the Participant
Deferrals, as described in Article VI, as applicable.
Any election made as to the form and timing of distribution with respect to Restoration Deferrals will apply to the
Participant’s entire Restoration Account.
(C)
Timing and Irrevocability of Elections
In general, the Deferral Election must be filed during the applicable Election Period.
Deferral Elections with respect to a full Plan Year will generally become irrevocable as of the end of the Election
Period. Deferral Elections with respect to a mid-year participation will become irrevocable as of the last day of the
mid-year Election Period.
Once Deferral Elections become irrevocable they generally may not be modified with respect to the Plan Year, and
the Compensation, to which they apply. Likewise, an Employee who makes a Restoration Deferral Election will be
subject to restrictions on mid-year contribution election changes under the Boeing 401(k), in accordance with the
terms of the Boeing 401(k).
See Section 3.4 for a limited exception to the general rule on the irrevocability of Deferral Elections, in the event of
Unforeseeable Emergency.
13

(D)
No Mid-Year Elections
Except as provided in this Article III, an Employee who becomes Newly Eligible during a Plan Year (including as a
result of a salary increase) will not be eligible to make Participant Deferrals during such Plan Year.
3.4
Cancellation of Deferral Election Due to Unforeseeable Emergency
Notwithstanding the irrevocability rule described in Section 3.3, a Participant will be permitted to cancel an existing Deferral
Election with regard to a Plan Year during that Plan Year, if the Participant incurs an Unforeseeable Emergency, as
determined by the Administrator.
If a Participant has elected and received a distribution due to an Unforeseeable Emergency under Section 6.1(I), the
Participant will be deemed to have elected to cancel his or her Deferral Election(s) that relate to Base Pay for the remainder
of the applicable Plan Year.
3.5
Crediting of Deferrals to Account
In all cases, Participant Deferrals will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date the Compensation would otherwise
have been payable, or as soon thereafter as administratively feasible.
14

ARTICLE IV 
Company Contributions
4.1
Restoration Matching Contributions
A Participant who defers Base Pay pursuant to a Restoration Deferral Election under Section 3.3 will be credited with a
Restoration Matching Contribution from the Company related to such Restoration Deferrals. This Restoration Matching
Contribution will equal a percentage (determined based on the matching contribution formula applicable to the Participant
under the Boeing 401(k) for the Plan Year) of the Participant’s Restoration Deferrals for the Plan Year.
Restoration Matching Contributions under this Plan apply only to Participant Deferrals of Base Pay made pursuant to a
Restoration Deferral Election. Restoration Matching Contributions will not be made with respect to Participant Deferrals of
Base Pay made pursuant to an Extra Deferral Election.
An Eligible Employee must make a timely Restoration Deferral Election, as described in Section 3.3, to become eligible to
participate in the Restoration Matching Contribution component of the Plan. Distribution elections are discussed in Article
VI.
Restoration Matching Contributions will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date that the underlying Restoration
Deferrals are credited to the Participant’s Account.
4.2
Restoration True-Up Contributions
The Company may choose to make a Restoration True-Up Contribution to this Plan on behalf of certain Eligible Employees.
The Restoration True-Up Contribution, if any, will be equal to the portion of the matching contribution true-up that would
have been made to the Boeing 401(k) for the Eligible Employee but for the limitations imposed by Code section 415(c), as
determined by the Committee in its sole discretion; provided that no Company Non-Elective Contribution will be made if the
Employee terminates from employment prior to the last business day of the Plan Year for any reason other than retirement
(for this purpose, after attaining age 55 with 10 years of service or after attaining age 62 with 1 year of service), disability
(for this purpose, meaning the Eligible Employee is determined to be disabled by the Social Security Administration), layoff,
or death.
An Eligible Employee for purposes of this Section 4.2 need not make (or be eligible to make) a timely Restoration Deferral
Election for a Plan Year in order to receive an allocation of Restoration True-Up Contributions for such Plan Year. Available
distribution elections are discussed in Article VI.
The Restoration True-Up Contribution, if any, will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date that true-up
contributions are made to the Boeing 401(k), or as soon as thereafter administratively feasible.
15

4.3
Incentive Matching Contributions
Subject to the conditions of this Section 4.3, a Participant who makes Cash Incentive Deferrals under Section 3.3 will be
credited with an Incentive Matching Contribution from the Company related to such Cash Incentive Deferrals. This Incentive
Matching Contribution will equal a percentage (determined based on the matching contribution formula applicable to the
Participant under the Boeing 401(k) for the Plan Year) of the Participant’s Cash Incentive Deferrals for the Plan Year.
An Eligible Employee must make a timely Cash Incentive Deferral Election, as described in Section 3.3, to become eligible
for the related Incentive Matching Contributions. Distribution elections are discussed in Article VI.
Incentive Matching Contributions will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date that the underlying Cash Incentive
Deferrals are credited to the Participant’s Account.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, no Incentive Matching Contribution will be made with respect to any Cash Incentive
Deferrals that are paid (or, but for the Participant’s Cash Incentive Deferral election, would be paid) after the date the
Participant terminates from employment.
4.4
Company Non-Elective Contributions (Component of the Executive Benefit)
The Company may make a Company Non-Elective Contribution to this Plan with respect to a Plan Year on behalf of certain
Eligible Employees; provided that no Company Non-Elective Contribution will be made if the Employee terminates from
employment prior to the last business day of the Plan Year for any reason other than retirement (for this purpose, after
attaining age 55 with 10 years of service or after attaining age 62 with 1 year of service), disability (for this purpose, meaning
the Eligible Employee is determined to be disabled by the Social Security Administration), layoff, or death.
The Company Non-Elective Contribution for a Plan Year will equal a percentage of the eligible Participant’s Compensation
paid by the Company during the applicable pay periods within such Plan Year. This percentage will be equal to the Company
discretionary non-elective contribution percentage for which the Participant is eligible for such pay period under the Boeing
401(k).
An Eligible Employee for purposes of this Section 4.4 need not make (or be eligible to make) deferrals to the Plan in order to
receive an allocation of Company Non-Elective Contributions for such Plan Year. Available distribution elections are
discussed in Article VI.
A Company Non-Elective Contribution will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date the related Company 401(k)
Non-Elective Contribution is made to the Boeing 401(k), or as soon thereafter as administratively feasible.
16

4.5
DC SERP Contributions (Component of the Executive Benefit)
(A)
Eligibility
An Employee is eligible to receive DC SERP Contributions with respect to a Plan Year for so long as he or she satisfies the
conditions in either (i) or (ii) below. Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, no DC SERP Contributions will be
made for: (i) any elected officer on or after January 1, 2020, or (ii) any Employee who is hired or promoted onto the E-Series
Payroll on or after January 1, 2020.
(i)
Hired Between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2019
An Employee satisfies the conditions in this subsection (i) if:
(a)
The Employee was hired on or after January 1, 2009, but before January 1, 2020,
(b)
The Employee is on the E-Series Payroll in level E-1, E-2, or E-3, and was on the E-Series Payroll (in
any level E-1 through E-5) as of December 31, 2019,
(c)
The Employee is not an elected officer of the Company, and
(d)
The Employee is ineligible to accrue benefits under any defined benefit plan maintained by the
Controlled Group.
(ii)
Hired Before January 1, 2009
An Employee satisfies the conditions in this subsection (ii) if:
(a)
The Employee was hired before January 1, 2009,
(b)
The Employee was on the E-series Payroll (in any level E-1 through E-5) as of December 31, 2019,
and
(c)
The Employee is not an elected officer of the Company.
For purposes of determining eligibility for the DC SERP, the term “hired” generally refers to an Employee’s most recent date
of hire or rehire with the Company, except as provided below, regardless of the date on which the Employee joins the E-
Series Payroll.
For this purpose:
(a)
Approved Leaves of Absence. A return to the Controlled Group directly from an approved leave of
absence, without incurring a termination of employment, is not considered a rehire.
For this purpose, an Employee’s period of employment with ULA or USA will be considered an
approved leave of absence, to the extent that the Employee first transferred directly from the
Controlled Group to ULA or USA and subsequently transferred directly from ULA or USA back to the
Controlled Group.
17

(b)
Transfers. A transfer of employment among members of the Controlled Group, without interruption, is
not considered a rehire and, accordingly, the most recent date of hire or rehire for purposes of
determining such a transferred Employee’s eligibility would be the Employee’s most recent date of
hire or rehire with the Company’s controlled group member from which the Employee transferred.
(c)
Layoffs. A rehire to the Controlled Group following a termination of employment due to layoff
generally will not be treated as a rehire, if rehire occurs within six years of the layoff event. However,
a laid off Employee who commences a retirement benefit during this six year period will be treated as
a rehire if he or she later rehires to the Controlled Group.
An individual who became a “group-acquired employee” after September 30, 2008 and before January
1, 2009 will be deemed to have been hired on or after January 1, 2009, for purposes of determining
eligibility to receive a contribution for periods on and after January 1, 2009. No contribution will be
paid prior to January 1, 2009. For this purpose, a “group-acquired employee” refers to an employee of
the Company who became such as an immediate or ultimate result of a merger to which the Company
was a party, or of the acquisition by the Company of all or part of the assets, businesses or capital
stock of another corporation or firm.
(B)
DC SERP Participation
An Eligible Employee will be a Participant in the DC SERP for the period(s), if any, that the Employee satisfies the
eligibility conditions in Section 4.5(A).
(C)
DC SERP Contributions
Each Participant eligible for DC SERP Contributions shall be entitled to contributions under this Plan as described below.
(i)
Payroll Contributions
Contributions will be credited to the Participant’s Account on the date the Base Pay and Cash Incentive otherwise
would be payable, or as soon thereafter as administratively feasible.
(a)
Hired Between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2019
A Participant described in Section 4.5(A)(i) (Hired Between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2019) will
receive a DC SERP contribution equal to a Contribution Credit times the sum of the Participant’s Base Pay
and Cash Incentive, for each applicable pay period. The Contribution Credit for a pay period is determined by
the Participant’s level as of such pay period as follows:
(1) 2%, for a Participant at level E-2 through E-3.
18

(2) 4%, for a Participant at level E-1.
If a Participant changes levels during a pay period, the Participant’s level as in effect on the last day of the pay
period will apply. For purposes of calculating the DC SERP contribution, a Participant’s Base Pay and Cash
Incentive will be counted solely to the extent that (1) the Participant is on the E-Series Payroll during the
applicable pay period or (2) such Cash Incentive is paid after a Participant’s termination of employment from
the Controlled Group but on or before such Participant receives his or her final regular paycheck.
(b)
Hired Before January 1, 2009
A Participant described in Section 4.5(A)(ii) (Hired Before January 1, 2009) will receive a DC SERP
contribution equal to a Contribution Credit times the sum of the Participant’s Base Pay and Cash Incentive,
for each applicable pay period. For purposes of calculating the DC SERP contribution, a Participant’s Base
Pay and Cash Incentive will be counted solely to the extent that (1) the Participant is on the E-Series Payroll
during the applicable pay period or (2) such Cash Incentive is paid after a Participant’s termination of
employment from the Controlled Group but on or before such Participant receives his or her final regular
paycheck.
The Contribution Credit will equal the sum of (i) and, if applicable, (ii):
(1) 5%
(2) For a Participant who has attained age 55 (or will attain age 55 by the end of a Plan Year), 0.5% times
the Participant’s whole years of Benefit Service (as defined under the PVP and/or BSS Plan, as
applicable, and determined as of January 1, 2016), subject to the limitation herein. The supplemental
percentage credited under this subsection (ii) will be contributed for a period not to exceed seven
years. This seven-year period will commence on January 1, 2016 (or on January 1 of the year in which
the Participant attains age 55, or on the date of promotion to the E-Series Payroll, whichever is latest)
and will be measured in the aggregate over a Participant’s lifetime (i.e., regardless of whether the
Participant has multiple periods of employment with the Controlled Group).
19

(ii)
One-Time Contribution
An Employee who satisfies the requirements described in Section 4.5(A)(i) (Hired Between January 1, 2009 and
December 31, 2019), and who is first promoted to a level of E-1 through E-3 (from a position at a level of E-4 or E-5)
during the Plan Year, will receive a one-time additional contribution equal to the product of (a), (b) and (c) below.
(a)
2%
(b)
The sum of:
(1) the Participant’s Base Pay Rate in effect immediately following the promotion, and
(2) his or her Cash Incentive target percentage multiplied by the Base Pay Rate, both as in effect
immediately following the promotion.
(c)
The Participant’s whole years of Service as of the date of first promotion to a level of E-1 through E-3
(from a position at a level of E-4 or E-5); provided that, for such purpose, a Participant’s years of
Service will be limited to Service earned since his or her most recent hire date.
This amount will be credited to the Participant’s Account as of the date of first promotion to a level of E-1 through E-
3, or as soon thereafter as administratively feasible.
A Participant who has received a one-time contribution under this Section upon promotion to a level of E-1 through
E-3 will be ineligible for any further contributions under this subsection (C)(ii).
20

ARTICLE V 
Vesting and Forfeiture Rules
5.1
Vesting
This Article V describes the vesting and forfeiture rules applicable to certain benefits under the Plan. In addition to the rules
set forth in this Article V, see Section 7.4 regarding missing participants and improper credits, Section 10.2 regarding anti-
assignment, Section 10.3 regarding the unfunded nature of this Plan, and Appendix B for forfeiture rules applicable to the
DCP Account.
5.2
Extra Deferral Vesting
A Participant’s interest in his or her Extra Deferral Account will be 100% vested at all times.
5.3
Restoration Vesting
A Participant’s interest in his or her Restoration Account will be 100% vested at all times.
5.4
Executive Benefit Vesting
Subject to Section 5.5 and Section 5.6, a Participant’s interest in his or her Executive Benefit Account will be 100% vested at
all times.
5.5
Executive SSP+ Company Contribution Forfeiture Rules
The Administrator may determine, in its sole discretion, that a Participant will forfeit any part or all of the portion of his or
her legacy Executive SSP+ Company Contribution Account that is attributable to Executive SSP+ Company Contributions
made on and after January 1, 2017, if any of the following circumstances occur while employed by the Controlled Group or
within five (5) years after termination of such employment:
(A)
The Participant is convicted of a felony involving theft, fraud, embezzlement, or other similar unlawful acts against the
Controlled Group or against the Controlled Group’s interests. For purposes of this Plan, “other similar unlawful acts
against the Controlled Group or against the Controlled Group’s interests” shall include any other unlawful act
(i) committed against the Controlled Group, or the interests of the Controlled Group, including, but not limited to, a
governmental agency or instrumentality which conducts business with the Controlled Group, or a customer of the
Controlled Group, or (ii) affecting the Controlled Group or the interests of the Controlled Group, in such a manner that
is determined to be detrimental to, prejudicial to or in conflict with the Controlled Group or the interests of the
Controlled Group, as determined by the Administrator in its sole discretion.
(B)
The Participant, directly or indirectly, engages in any activity, whether individually or as an employee, consultant or
otherwise, which the Administrator determines, in its sole discretion, to be an activity in which the Participant is
“engaging in competition” with any significant aspect of Controlled Group business. For purposes of this Plan,
“engaging in competition” shall include but is not limited to representing, providing services to, or being an employee
of or associated in a business capacity with, any person or entity that is engaged, directly or indirectly, in competition
with any Controlled Group business or that takes a position adverse
21

to any Controlled Group business, regardless of the position or duties the Participant takes, in such a manner that is
determined to be detrimental to, prejudicial to or in conflict with the interests of the Controlled Group, all as
determined by the Administrator in its sole discretion.
(C)
The Participant, without the advance approval of The Boeing Company’s Senior Vice President of Human Resources
(or successor position thereto), induces or attempts to induce, directly or indirectly, any of the Controlled Group’s
employees, representatives or consultants to terminate, discontinue or cease working with or for the Controlled Group,
or to breach any contract with the Controlled Group, in order to work with or for, or enter into a contract with, the
Participant or any third party.
(D)
The Participant disparages or otherwise makes any statements about the Controlled Group, its products, or its
employees that could be in any way viewed as negative or critical. Nothing in this paragraph will apply to legally
protected communications to government agencies or statements made in the course of sworn testimony in
administrative, judicial, or arbitral proceedings.
(E)
The Participant uses or discloses proprietary or confidential information, including but not limited to trade secrets, of
the Controlled Group. Nothing in this paragraph will apply to legally protected communications to government
agencies or statements made in the course of sworn testimony in administrative, judicial, or arbitral proceedings.
To the extent the Participant has already received or commenced payment of such portion of his or her Executive SSP+
Company Contribution Account, the Administrator will be entitled to pursue any and all legal and equitable relief against the
Participant to enforce the forfeiture of and recover the amount distributed from such Executive SSP+ Company Contribution
Account. The forfeiture provisions will continue to apply unless and to the extent modified by a court of competent
jurisdiction. However, if any portion of these forfeiture provisions is held by such a court to be unenforceable, these
provisions shall be deemed amended to limit their scope to the broadest scope that such authority determines is enforceable,
and as so amended shall continue in effect.
In addition, the Administrator will, in all appropriate circumstances, require reimbursement of any Executive SSP+ Company
Contribution Account attributable to Executive SSP+ Company Contributions made on and after January 1, 2017, which are
attributable to an incentive award that the Controlled Group seeks to recover under the clawback provision of any plan
providing Cash Incentive.
22

5.6
DC SERP Vesting
No payments shall be made from a Participant’s DC SERP Account except to the extent such Participant is vested in his or
her DC SERP Account.
(A)
General DC SERP Vesting Rule for Participants Hired Between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2019
A Participant described in Section 4.5(A)(i) (Hired Between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2019) will vest 100%
in his or her DC SERP Account component(s) covered under this subsection (A) on the date the Participant satisfies
the conditions in any of (i), (ii) or (iii) below.
(i)
The Participant has been on the E-Series Payroll at a level of E-1 through E-3 for a period of 36 consecutive
months. (For Participants with prior periods of employment, a period of consecutive months before January 1,
2009 on the E-Series Payroll at a level of E-1 through E-3 will be counted for purposes of determining
whether this 36 consecutive month requirement has been satisfied.)
(ii)
The Participant dies while an Employee.
(iii)
The Participant is laid off from a position at level E-1 through E-3 and is eligible for benefits under The
Boeing Company Executive Layoff Benefits Plan.
See subsection  (C) below for additional vesting rules for these Participants based on age and Service.
(B)
General DC SERP Vesting Rule for Participants Hired Before January 1, 2009
A Participant described in Section 4.5(A)(ii) (Hired Before January 1, 2009) will vest 100% in his or her DC SERP
Account component covered under this subsection (B) on the date the Participant satisfies the conditions in any of (i),
(ii) or (iii) below.
(i)
The Participant has been on the E-Series Payroll for a period of 36 consecutive months. For a Participant on
the E-Series Payroll as of January 1, 2016, a period of consecutive months before January 1, 2016 on the E-
Series Payroll will be counted for purposes of determining whether this 36 consecutive month requirement has
been satisfied.
(ii)
The Participant is fully vested under the PVP and/or BSS Plan, as applicable, and dies while an Employee
before his or her DC SERP Account commences payment under this Plan.
(iii)
The Participant is laid off from an E-Series position and is eligible for benefits under The Boeing Company
Executive Layoff Benefits Plan.
23

(C)
Special Vesting Rules for Participants Hired Between January 1, 2009 and December 31, 2019 with 55/10 or 62/1
Special vesting rules apply for a Participant described in Section 4.5(A)(i) (Hired Between January 1, 2009 and
December 31, 2019) who has attained either (i) or (ii) while employed by the Controlled Group.
(i)
Age 55 with 10 years of Service, or
(ii)
Age 62 with one year of Service.
This Participant will be 100% vested in the portion of his or her DC SERP Account described in Section 4.5(C)(i)
(Payroll Contributions) after he or she has been on the E-Series Payroll for a period of 36 consecutive months.
This Participant will vest ratably in the portion of his or her DC SERP Account described in Section 4.5(C)(ii) (One-
Time Contribution), if any, at the rate of 1/36 for each consecutive month that the Participant is on the E-Series
Payroll at a level of E-1 through E-3, starting with the date on which the Participant was first promoted to the E-
Series Payroll at a level of E-1 through E-3. This pro rata vesting rule is not intended to preclude the acceleration of
vesting under subsections (A)(ii) (death) or (iii) (layoff) above, if applicable.
(D)
Authorized Period of Absence
For purposes of this Section, an Authorized Period of Absence from the E-Series Payroll will count as a period on the
E-Series Payroll, and an Authorized Period of Absence from a position at level E-1 through E-3 will count as a period
at these levels.
If an Employee ceases to be at the applicable level for any reason other than an Authorized Period of Absence, and
the Employee later returns to a position at the applicable level, these non-consecutive periods of service will not be
aggregated for purposes of determining whether the 36-consecutive month requirement has been met.
(E)
Transfers to and from ULA and USA
For purposes of computing vesting for a Participant who transfers employment directly from the Controlled Group to
ULA or USA, uninterrupted service at ULA or USA as an executive in a position at a comparable level will be
credited toward the 36 consecutive months requirements described herein, provided that the Participant transfers
directly from the E-Series Payroll (or a position at level E-1 through E-3 if applicable) at the Controlled Group to
comparable executive status at ULA or USA, as applicable. ULA and USA service will not be credited toward vesting
under this Plan for any period following the Participant’s removal from this executive status. For purposes of
computing vesting for a participant who transfers employment directly from ULA or USA to the Controlled Group,
uninterrupted service at ULA or USA as an executive at a position comparable to the E-Series Payroll (or a position at
level E-1 through E-3, if applicable) will be credited toward the 36 consecutive months requirements described
herein, provided that the Participant transfers directly from this executive status at ULA or USA to a position at a
comparable level at the Controlled Group. ULA and USA service will not be credited toward vesting under this Plan
for any period
24

prior to the Participant’s attainment of this executive status at ULA or USA, as applicable.
(F)
Impact of Separation from Service/Transfer
(i)
Payroll Contributions. If a Participant Separates from Service (other than due to an Authorized Period of
Absence) or transfers off of the E-Series Payroll (or a position at level E-1 through E-3, if applicable) before
becoming 100% vested in the payroll contribution portion of his or her DC SERP Account described in
Section 4.5(C)(i)(A) and/or (i)(B), as applicable, the Participant will forfeit all rights to the nonvested portion
of his or her DC SERP Account attributable to the period prior to his or her Separation from Service or
transfer. To the extent any benefit under this Plan becomes vested during an Authorized Period of Absence
that continues after a deemed Separation from Service, it will remain subject to the payment timing rules
under Section 6.1.
(ii)
One-Time Contributions. If a Participant stops accruing service toward satisfaction of applicable vesting
requirements (such as due to a Separation from Service) after becoming partially vested in the one-time
contribution portion of the DC SERP Account, under subsection (C) above, and the Participant subsequently
resumes accruing service toward satisfaction of applicable vesting requirements, the DC SERP Account
accrued after such resumption will not be vested until the Participant satisfies the requirements of
subsection (A) or (C) above following such resumption.
(iii)
Multiple DC SERP Account Components. Separate vesting requirements apply to each component of a
Participant’s DC SERP Account described in Sections 4.4(C)(i)(a), (i)(b), and (ii). This means that a
Participant who has accrued more than one DC SERP Account component (such as, due to a Separation from
Service and subsequent rehire) must satisfy the vesting requirements applicable to each such component. If a
Participant Separates from Service after becoming 100% vested in a particular DC SERP Account component,
the Participant will be fully vested in any additional accruals under the same DC SERP Account component
following rehire or return (even if the Participant fails to be at the applicable pay level for 36 consecutive
months following rehire or return). The Participant will not, however, be fully vested in any amounts accrued
under a different DC SERP Account component unless and until the corresponding applicable vesting
requirements under this Section 5.5 otherwise have been satisfied.
See Section 7.4 regarding missing participants and improper credits, Section 10.2 regarding anti-assignment, and
Section 10.3 regarding the unfunded nature of this Plan. Any amounts forfeited hereunder will not later be reinstated.
25

5.7
DC SERP Forfeiture Rules
The Administrator may determine, in its sole discretion, that a Participant will forfeit any part or all of his or her DC SERP
Account if any of the following circumstances occur while employed by the Controlled Group or within five (5) years after
termination of such employment:
(A)
The Participant is convicted of a felony involving theft, fraud, embezzlement, or other similar unlawful acts against
the Controlled Group or against the Controlled Group’s interests. For purposes of this Plan, “other similar unlawful
acts against the Controlled Group or against the Controlled Group’s interests” shall include any other unlawful act
(i) committed against the Controlled Group, or the interests of the Controlled Group, including, but not limited to, a
governmental agency or instrumentality which conducts business with the Controlled Group, or a customer of the
Controlled Group, or (ii) affecting the Controlled Group or the interests of the Controlled Group, in such a manner
that is determined to be detrimental to, prejudicial to or in conflict with the Controlled Group or the interests of the
Controlled Group, as determined by the Administrator in its sole discretion.
(B)
The Participant, directly or indirectly, engages in any activity, whether individually or as an employee, consultant or
otherwise, which the Administrator determines, in its sole discretion, to be an activity in which the Participant is
“engaging in competition” with any significant aspect of Controlled Group business. For purposes of this Plan,
“engaging in competition” shall include but is not limited to representing, providing services to, or being an employee
of or associated in a business capacity with, any person or entity that is engaged, directly or indirectly, in competition
with any Controlled Group business or that takes a position adverse to any Controlled Group business, regardless of
the position or duties the Participant takes, in such a manner that is determined to be detrimental to, prejudicial to or in
conflict with the interests of the Controlled Group, all as determined by the Administrator in its sole discretion.
(C)
The Participant, without the advance approval of The Boeing Company’s Senior Vice President of Human Resources
(or equivalent but for title), induces or attempts to induce, directly or indirectly, any of the Controlled Group’s
employees, representatives or consultants to terminate, discontinue or cease working with or for the Controlled Group,
or to breach any contract with the Controlled Group, in order to work with or for, or enter into a contract with, the
Participant or any third party.
(D)
The Participant disparages or otherwise makes any statements about the Controlled Group, its products, or its
employees that could be in any way viewed as negative or critical. Nothing in this paragraph will apply to legally
protected communications to government agencies or statements made in the course of sworn testimony in
administrative, judicial, or arbitral proceedings.
(E)
With respect to contributions made to the Plan on and after January 1, 2017, the Participant uses or discloses
proprietary or confidential information, including but not limited to trade secrets, of the Controlled Group. Nothing in
this paragraph will apply to legally protected communications to government agencies or
26

statements made in the course of sworn testimony in administrative, judicial, or arbitral proceedings.
To the extent the Participant has already received or commenced payment of his or her DC SERP Account, the Administrator
will be entitled to pursue any and all legal and equitable relief against the Participant to enforce the forfeiture of and recover
such benefit. The forfeiture provisions will continue to apply unless and to the extent modified by a court of competent
jurisdiction. However, if any portion of these forfeiture provisions is held by such a court to be unenforceable, these
provisions shall be deemed amended to limit their scope to the broadest scope that such authority determines is enforceable,
and as so amended shall continue in effect.
In addition, the Administrator will, in all appropriate circumstances, require forfeiture or reimbursement of any portion of a
DC SERP Account attributable to an incentive award that the Controlled Group seeks to recover under the clawback
provision of any plan providing Cash Incentive.
27

ARTICLE VI 
Distributions
6.1
Form and Timing of Distribution
(A)
Extra Deferral Account
A Participant may elect the form and timing of distribution with regard to his or her Extra Deferral Account as
described below, subject to the cash-out rule in subsection (E) below. This distribution election must be made at the
same time the Participant makes his or her first Extra Deferral Election.
If a Participant fails to make a timely election with regard to the timing of payment of his or her Extra Deferral
Account, then the Participant will be deemed to have elected to receive payment in January of the first Plan Year
following the Participant’s Separation from Service (subject to subsection (H)). If a Participant fails to make a timely
election with regard to the form of payment of his or her Extra Deferral Account, then the Participant will be deemed
to have elected to receive payment in a lump sum.
Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, to the extent the Participant had in effect a distribution election
under the Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company immediately prior to January 1, 2019
and fails to make a timely election with regard to the timing or form of payment of his or her Extra Deferral Account,
such distribution election shall apply automatically to any future deferrals of the same type credited under this Plan
and such Participant will only be permitted to change such deemed election in accordance with subsection (F) below.
A Participant may change a distribution election (or deemed distribution election) with respect to his or her entire
Extra Deferral Account after the initial Extra Deferral Election is made (or deemed made), to the extent permitted and
in accordance with the conditions stated under subsection (F) below.
(B)
Restoration Account
A Participant may elect the form and timing of distribution with regard to his or her Restoration Account as described
below, subject to the cash-out rule in subsection (E) below. This distribution election must be made at the same time
the Participant makes his or her first Restoration Deferral Election or, if earlier, during the enrollment period
immediately preceding the first year with respect to which the Participant receives a Company contribution to his or
her Restoration Account. Any election made as to the form and timing of distribution will apply to the Participant’s
entire Restoration Account, including the Restoration True-Up Contributions and the Restoration SSP+ Company
Contributions made for Plan Years prior to January 1, 2022, if any.
If a Participant fails to make a timely election with regard to the timing of payment of his or her Restoration Account,
then the Participant will be deemed to have elected to receive payment in January of the first Plan Year following the
Participant’s Separation from Service (subject to subsection (H)). If a Participant fails to make a timely election with
regard to the form of payment of his or her Restoration Account, then the Participant will be deemed to have elected
to receive payment in a lump sum.
28

A Participant may change a distribution election (or deemed distribution election) with respect to his or her entire
Restoration Account after the initial Restoration Deferral Election is made (or deemed made), to the extent permitted
and in accordance with the conditions stated under subsection (F) below.
(C)
Executive Benefit Account
No initial distribution elections are permitted or required with regard to a Participant’s Executive Benefit Account, to
which is credited Company Non-Elective Contributions, Executive SSP+ Company Contributions and DC SERP
Contributions. Rather, a Participant is deemed to have elected to receive his or her Executive Benefit Account in a
lump sum, payable in January of the first Plan Year following Separation from Service (subject to subsection (H)).
A Participant may change his or her deemed distribution election with respect to his or her Executive Benefit Account
to the extent permitted and in accordance with the conditions stated under subsection (F) below.
(D)
Timing and Form of Distribution
(i)
Lump Sum Distribution
The lump sum distribution option is a single lump sum payment that will be made in the later of: (i) January of
the first Plan Year following Separation from Service, or (ii) January of the first Plan Year following the
Participant’s attainment of a specified age (subject to subsection (E) below), as elected by the Participant
under this Section 6.1 (in each case subject to subsection (H) below). Except as otherwise provided in
subsection (H) below, the amount of such distribution will equal the value of the Participant’s Account as of
the first business day of January of the Plan Year of payment (or such other distribution valuation date as is
specified by the Administrator), and no additional interest or earnings will be credited thereafter.
(ii)    Installment Payment
The installment payment option is a series of annual installment payments for a period between 2 and 15
years, as elected by the Participant under this Section 6.1. Annual installment payments, if elected, will begin
in the later of: (i) January of the first Plan Year following Separation from Service, or (ii) January of the first
Plan Year following the Participant’s attainment of a specified age (subject to (E) below), as elected by the
Participant under this Section 6.1 (in each case subject to subsection (H) below). Payments will continue to be
made each January thereafter until the full amount of the benefit has been paid.
The amount payable to the Participant each year shall be computed by dividing the balance in the Account (or
the applicable portion of the Account) as of the first business day of January of the Plan Year in which
payment is to be made (or such other distribution valuation date as is specified by the Administrator) by the
number of years remaining in the distribution period. No additional earnings or interest will be credited to a
Participant’s account with respect to an installment payment after the valuation date used to determine the
amount of such payment. See
29

Section 6.1(E) below for application of the cash-out rule to installment payments.
(E)
Cash-outs
Notwithstanding the foregoing, subject to the six-month delay in payment for Specified Employees under
subsection (H), if a Participant has elected to receive installments and his or her remaining Account balance is
$10,000 or less upon any scheduled payment date (excluding the balance of the DCP Account), the entire remaining
balance will be paid as one final installment payment at that time.
(F)
Changes to Distribution Election or Deemed Election
A Participant may change a distribution election (or deemed election) after the initial distribution election becomes
effective (or deemed effective) only once with regard to each of the following subaccounts: the Participant’s
Restoration Account, Executive Benefit Account, Extra Deferral Account, and DCP Account (Deferrals) and DCP
Account (Match).
Such election must change the time of payment (consistent with the requirement of clause (iii) below) and may
change the form of payment (from lump sum to installments, or vice versa). Subject to the following paragraph, such
election may be made at any time and need not be made during an annual enrollment period. If an election change is
made by an Eligible Employee during the annual enrollment period, it can be changed during such period and the last
change on file (if any) as of the end of the annual enrollment period will be irrevocable. If the election change is made
by an Eligible Employee outside of the annual enrollment period or at any time by a Participant who is not an Eligible
Employee, such election change will be irrevocable when made.
To the extent any such changes would defer commencement of any portion of the Participant’s Restoration Account,
Executive Benefit Account, Extra Deferral Account or DCP Account beyond both age 70½ and Separation from
Service, the changes will not be effective.
(i)
A new distribution election must be submitted in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Administrator at
least 12 months before the existing scheduled distribution date under the applicable subaccount.
(ii)
The revised distribution election must not take effect for at least 12 months after it is made.
(iii)
The new distribution election must provide for an additional deferral period of at least 5 years beyond the
original distribution date.
In no event can installment payments be changed or revoked once they have begun. In all cases, payments will be
made in January (subject to subsection (H)).
(G)
Distributions At Age 70½
Payment of benefits under this Plan will begin no later than the first January following the calendar year in which the
Participant both attains (or would have attained) age 70½ and is Separated from Service. Payment of benefits for
Participants actively employed beyond age 70½ will begin no later than the first
30

January following the calendar year in which the Participant Separates from Service. Subject to subsection (D), any
election made by a Participant to the contrary will not be effective.
(H)
Specified Employees
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary under this Article VI, a Specified Employee will not receive any
distribution under this Plan during the six-month period immediately following his or her Separation from Service.
Subject to subsection (F) above, the Account of a Specified Employee will be distributed in the form elected (or
deemed elected) under subsection (A), (B), or (C) above, as applicable. This distribution will be made or commence
as of the latest of:
(1)
the time elected (or deemed elected) under subsection (A), (B), or (C), as applicable,
(2)
the month following completion of the six-month waiting period (for Specified Employees who Separate from
Service between July 1 and December 31), and
(3)
January of the first Plan Year following Separation from Service (for Specified Employees who Separate from
Service between January 1 and June 30).
If a Participant has elected installments, subsequent installment payments will be made in January of each successive
year until the Account is exhausted.
For payments occurring other than in January, the amount of the distribution will be determined based on the value of
the Participant’s Account as of the first business day of the month that payment will be made (or such other
distribution valuation date as is specified by the Administrator). No additional earnings or interest will be credited to
a Participant’s account with respect to a payment after the valuation date used to determine the amount of such
payment.
In the event of a Specified Employee’s death during the six-month waiting period, the waiting period will cease to
apply. The Specified Employee’s benefits will be distributed in accordance with Section 6.2 (Death Benefits) below.
(I)
Distribution Due to Unforeseeable Emergency
A Participant or Beneficiary may elect to receive a distribution of all or a portion of his or her Extra Deferral
Account, DCP Account, Restoration Account, and his or her Executive SSP+ Company Contribution Account
immediately, regardless of whether benefit payments have commenced, to the extent that the Participant or
Beneficiary incurs an Unforeseeable Emergency. A Participant or Beneficiary may not receive a distribution of his or
her DC SERP Account solely in the event of an Unforeseeable Emergency, even if fully vested.
The amount of the distribution will be limited to the amount reasonably necessary to satisfy the emergency need,
including any taxes or penalties reasonably anticipated to result from the distribution, as determined by the
Administrator.
31

6.2
Death Benefits
If a Participant dies before his or her entire Account has been distributed, the remaining balance will be distributed to his or
her Beneficiary in accordance with the Participant’s election or deemed election as to form and timing filed with the
Administrator with regard to such Account(s). Distributions to the Beneficiary will be made at the same time (or as soon as
practicable following the Company’s receipt of a notice of the Participant’s death) and in the same form as the payment that
otherwise would have been made to the Participant.
If a Beneficiary dies after the Participant, but before receiving the payment of all amounts due hereunder, then the unpaid
amounts will be paid to the individual(s) designated (in accordance with the rules established by the Administrator) by the
Beneficiary as his or her beneficiary(ies), or if no such designation has been made (or if such individual(s) do(es) not survive
to receive payment), then such unpaid amounts will be paid to the Beneficiary’s estate, in a single lump sum, as soon as
practicable after the Beneficiary’s death.
32

6.3
Rehires and Authorized Periods of Absence/Reduced Level of Services
This Section 6.3 addresses the form and timing of payment for a Participant who is rehired by the Company following a
Separation from Service, or who remains employed after a Separation from Service has occurred (for example, due to an
extended Authorized Period of Absence or due to reduced level of services).
In the event that a Participant forfeits a nonvested DC SERP Account upon a Separation from Service, this benefit will not be
restored upon rehire. This rule applies regardless of whether the Participant satisfies the vesting criteria under Section 5.5
following rehire.
(A)
After Commencing Benefits
This subsection (A) applies to a Participant who has received or begun receiving benefits under the Plan because he
or she has experienced a Separation from Service and has attained the specified age (if applicable).
(i)
Rehires. Installment payments that commenced prior to the Participant’s rehire with respect to Participant
Deferrals made and Company Contributions received before the Participant’s Separation from Service (“Old
Account”) will not be suspended by reason of the Participant’s rehire. This Old Account will continue to be
paid until exhausted, without regard to the period of rehire.
Participant Deferrals made and Company Contributions received attributable to periods after the date of rehire
(“New Account”) will remain subject to the Participant’s earlier distribution election or deemed election as to
the timing and form of payment under Section 6.1(D) (subject to the change rules in Section 6.1(F)), without
regard to any Separation from Service that occurred prior to rehire. As a result, the New Account will be
distributed in January following the Participant’s Separation from Service after rehire (subject to any 6-month
delay for Specified Employees), in the form selected under the original distribution election or deemed
election. This is because the Participant already has attained the specified age under Section 6.1(D) but has not
yet experienced a Separation from Service attributable to the New Account.
(ii)
Authorized Period of Absence/Reduced Level of Services. To the extent a Participant made additional
Participant Deferrals or received additional Company Contributions while on an Authorized Period of
Absence or during a period of a reduced level of services that constituted a Separation from Service under
Code section 409A, such Participant Deferrals made and Company Contributions received (to the extent
vested) will be distributed in January of the first Plan Year following the year in which they are made, in
accordance with the Participant’s earlier distribution election or deemed election. This is because the
Participant has already satisfied the conditions for payment under Section 6.1(D); namely, he or she has
attained the specified age and has experienced a Separation from Service attributable to such Participant
Deferrals made and contributions received.
33

(B)
Before Commencing Benefits
This subsection (B) applies to a Participant who has not begun receiving benefits under the Plan.
(i)
Rehires. The rehired Participant’s Old Account, to the extent vested, will be distributed in accordance with the
Participant’s earlier distribution election or deemed election as to the timing and form of payment under
Section 6.1(D) (subject to the change rules in Section 6.1(F)). This means that, for example, if the
Participant’s original distribution election selected benefits in the form of a lump sum (or installments)
payable in January following attainment of a specified age under Section 6.1(D), then the Participant’s Old
Account (to the extent vested) will be payable as a lump sum (or installments, if so elected) in January
following the year in which he or she attains the specified age, even if the Participant has not had a subsequent
Separation from Service after rehire. This result will not change in the event that the Participant attains the
specified age after the initial Separation from Service, but is rehired before benefits actually begin.
The Participant’s New Account will remain subject to the Participant’s earlier distribution election or deemed
election as to the timing and form of payment under Section 6.1(D) (subject to the change rules in
Section 6.1(F)), without regard to any Separation from Service that occurred prior to rehire, as described in
Section 6.3(A) above. As a result, the New Account will be distributed either (i) in January following the
Participant’s Separation from Service after rehire, or (ii) in January following both the Participant’s
Separation from Service after rehire and after attainment of the specified age, in accordance with the original
distribution election or deemed election. This is because the Participant has not yet experienced a Separation
from Service attributable to the New Account.
(ii)
Authorized Period of Absence/Reduced Level of Services. Any Participant Deferrals made or Company
Contributions received during an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services (to
the extent vested) will be distributed in accordance with the Participant’s earlier distribution election or
deemed election as to the timing and form of payment under Section 6.1(D) (subject to the change rules in
Section 6.1(F)). This means that, for example, if the Participant’s original distribution election selected
benefits in the form of a lump sum (or installments) payable in January following attainment of a specified age
under Section 6.1(D), then any Participant Deferrals made and contributions received during an Authorized
Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services will be payable as a lump sum (or installments, if
so elected) in January following the year in which he or she attains the specified age.
34

This result will not change in the event that the Participant attains the specified age while on an Authorized
Period of Absence or during a period of a reduced level of services, but resumes (or increases his or her level
of) services before benefits actually begin.
35

ARTICLE VII 
Accounts
7.1
Participant Accounts
The Administrator will establish and maintain an Account for each Participant, for each period of employment. Solely for
this purpose, a period of employment will be treated as commencing upon a Participant’s eligibility for the Plan (following
hire or rehire as applicable) and ending with his or her Separation from Service.
Each Account will be credited with Participant Deferrals and Company Contributions for the relevant period of employment,
as well as Earnings Credits described in Section 7.2 below. Each Account will be reduced as payments are made.
In connection with the January 1, 2019 amendment and restatement of the Plan, there was a one-time transfer of certain
Restoration Benefit sub-accounts of certain participants from the Plan to The Boeing Company Supplemental Savings Plan
(the “SSP”) such that the opening account balances of such participants in the SSP on January 1, 2019 was equal to the
closing balance of such participants’ Restoration Accounts in the Plan on December 31, 2018. The affected participants were:
(A) each Employee (as defined in the SSP) who was an Eligible Employee (as defined in the SSP) on January 1, 2019, and
was a participant in the Restoration Benefit of the Plan prior to 2019 and (B) each other current or former Employee (as
defined in the SSP) who was not as of January 1, 2019 and had never been on the E-Series Payroll (as such term is defined in
the Plan).
7.2
Earnings Credits
A Participant’s Account(s) will be credited, at the Participant’s (or, if applicable, Beneficiary’s) election, with earnings under
one or more of the following, as the individual elects and subject to any rules or limitations as may be imposed by the
Administrator: (i) the Interest Fund method, (ii) the Boeing Stock Fund method, or (iii) the Other Investment Funds method,
each as described below. In the absence of an election the Interest Fund method will be used.
(A)
Interest Fund Method
Under this method, a Participant’s Interest Fund method sub-account shall be adjusted daily in accordance with
changes in the unit value of the sub-account to reflect interest, based on the Participant’s sub-account balance.
Interest will be calculated for each Plan Year as the mean between the high and low (during the first eleven months of
the preceding Plan Year) of yields on AA-rated industrial bonds as reported by Moody’s Investors Service, Inc.,
rounded to the nearest ¼th of one percent. Participants will be notified annually of the established interest rate.
(B)
Boeing Stock Fund Method
Under this method, a Participant’s Boeing Stock Fund sub-account shall be credited with the number of shares of the
common stock of The Boeing Company that could be purchased with the amount credited to such sub-account, based
on the Fair Market Value of the common stock of The Boeing Company on the day the sub-account is so credited (or
on the next business day on which the New York Stock Exchange (the “Exchange”) is open, if the Exchange is closed
on the
36

day the sub-account is credited) excluding commissions, taxes, and other charges. Such number shall be recorded as
stock units in the Participant’s sub-account, for bookkeeping purposes only. For purposes of the Plan, “Fair Market
Value” means the closing price for the common stock of The Boeing Company as reported for the “New York Stock
Exchange - Composite Transactions” for a single trading day. The number of stock units in a sub-account shall be
appropriately adjusted to reflect stock splits, stock dividends, and other like adjustments in the common stock of The
Boeing Company.
Each Participant’s Boeing Stock Fund sub-account periodically shall be credited with the number of shares of the
common stock of The Boeing Company that could be purchased, as set forth in the preceding paragraph, with an
amount equal to the cash dividends that would be payable on the number of shares of the common stock of The
Boeing Company that equals the number of stock units in a Participant’s sub-account. The timing and methodology
will mirror the Boeing 401(k) dividend process. Participants will be notified annually of the number of stock units,
and the dividend equivalents, credited to their sub-account.
(C)
Other Investment Funds Method
Under this method, a Participant may choose to diversify his or her Other Investment Funds sub-account by electing
that it be credited (or charged) with the expenses, income, gains and losses on investment funds similar to those
offered under the Boeing 401(k) (excluding the Boeing Stock Fund and Stable Value Fund offered thereunder) as
designated by the Administrator from time to time, pursuant to an election by the Participant to have the Participant’s
sub-account credited as though the Participant had elected to invest in such funds in such increments as the
Participant will direct in accordance with rules established by the Administrator or its delegates; provided that the
Administrator may disregard such elections in its discretion.
Earnings credits to a Participant’s Account(s) may be subject to valuation adjustments in accordance with the procedures
established by the Administrator; provided, in no event will the portion of a Participant’s Account(s) that has been distributed
as of the time a valuation adjustment is made be subject to such valuation adjustment.
37

7.3
Investment Election Changes and Restrictions
A Participant may change how future additions to his or her Account(s) are deemed invested anytime during the Plan Year
subject to the Administrator’s rules and restrictions. The Participant may also transfer any portion of his or her sub-accounts
from one investment fund to another on a daily basis, provided that a Participant may not transfer funds from one investment
fund to another and back on the same day.
In addition, transfers cannot be made into the Boeing Stock Fund for 30 calendar days after transferring funds out of the
Boeing Stock Fund. This restriction applies regardless of the number of units or the dollar value of the transfer. However, the
Participant may continue to direct future additions into the Boeing Stock Fund and make transfers out of this investment fund
at any time, subject to insider trading rules.
7.4
Missing Participants and Improper Credits
A Participant’s Account may be forfeited or reduced upon the occurrence of one of the following events, even if 100%
vested:
(A)
The Administrator is unable to locate a Participant or Beneficiary to distribute amounts from his or her Account (a
“missing participant”).
(B)
The Administrator recaptures amounts improperly credited to a Participant’s Account.
See also Section 10.2 regarding anti-assignment and Section 10.3 regarding the unfunded nature of this Plan.
38

ARTICLE VIII 
Administration
8.1
Plan Administration
The Plan shall be administered by the Administrator. The Administrator shall make such rules, interpretations,
determinations of fact and computations as it may deem appropriate, including (without limitation) requiring the use of an
electronic or telephonic system for purposes of Participant elections and designations. Any decision of the Administrator
with respect to the Plan, including (without limitation) any determination of eligibility to participate in the Plan and any
calculation of Plan benefits, shall be conclusive and binding on all persons. The Administrator shall submit to the
Compensation Committee periodic reports covering the operation of the Plan.
8.2
Claims Procedure
The procedures for making claims for benefits under the Plan and for having the denial of a benefits claim reviewed shall be
the same as those procedures set forth in the Boeing 401(k), provided that the Compensation Committee of the Board of
Directors shall be substituted for the Administrator thereunder for purposes of the review of claims and appeals with respect
to benefits under the Plan for elected officers of the Company (other than determinations related to potential forfeiture or
reimbursement of benefits under Sections 5.5 or 5.7 of the Plan, which such determinations shall be made by the
Administrator).
See Section 10.8 regarding limitations on subsequent legal action.
39

ARTICLE IX 
Amendment and Termination
The Board of Directors, the Compensation Committee, the Administrator, and their respective delegate or delegates shall each have
the authority to amend the Plan at any time, including, but not limited to, the authority to adopt amendments to combine or transfer
all or part of the Plan with or to other plans maintained by the Controlled Group (including a termination of the Plan for that
purpose) or to change the timing of eligibility for participation in the Plan; provided, however, that the Compensation Committee
shall have the exclusive authority to adopt any amendments or make any other changes to the Plan that change the rate or amount of
Company-provided benefits for employees on the E-Series Payroll. The Board of Directors shall have the authority to terminate the
Plan at any time.
In the event of Plan amendment or termination, a Participant’s benefits under the Plan shall not be less than the Plan benefits to
which the Participant would be entitled if the Participant had terminated employment immediately prior to such amendment or
termination of the Plan, increased or decreased by any Earnings Credits attributable to periods on or after the effective date of such
amendment or termination.
In general, upon the termination of the Plan with respect to any Participant, the affected Participants will not be entitled to receive a
distribution until the time specified in Article VI. Notwithstanding the foregoing, The Boeing Company may, in its discretion,
terminate the entire Plan and pay each Participant a single lump-sum distribution of his or her entire accrued benefit to the extent
permitted under conditions set forth in Code section 409A and any IRS or Treasury guidance thereunder.
40

ARTICLE X 
Miscellaneous
10.1
No Employment Rights
Nothing in the Plan shall be deemed to give any person any right to remain in the employ of the Company or other member
of the Controlled Group, as applicable, or affect any right of the Company or other member of the Controlled Group, as
applicable, to terminate a person’s employment with or without cause.
10.2
Anti-Assignment
No benefit under the Plan shall be subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer, assignment, pledge,
encumbrance, charge, execution, attachment, garnishment, or any other legal process. Any attempt to take such action shall
be void and shall authorize the Administrator, in its sole and absolute discretion, to forfeit all further right and interest in any
benefit under this Plan. In addition, a Participant’s Account may be reduced by the amount of any tax obligation paid by the
Company or other member of the Controlled Group, as applicable, on behalf of a Participant, Beneficiary, or any other
person, if such individual fails to reimburse the Company or other member of the Controlled Group, as applicable, for such
obligation.
10.3
Unfunded Status of Plan
No funds shall be segregated or earmarked for or in the Account of any current or former Participant, Beneficiary or other
person under the Plan. However, the Company or other member of the Controlled Group, as applicable, may establish one or
more trusts to assist in meeting its obligations under the Plan, the assets of which shall be subject to the claims of the general
creditors of the Company or other member of the Controlled Group, as applicable. No current or former Participant,
Beneficiary or other person, individually or as a member of a group, shall have any right, title or interest in any account,
fund, grantor trust, or any asset that may be acquired by the Company or other member of the Controlled Group, as
applicable, in respect of its obligations under the Plan (other than as a general creditor of the Company or other member of
the Controlled Group, as applicable, with an unsecured claim against its general assets).
10.4
Delays or Acceleration in Payment
Payment of benefits under this Plan may be delayed or accelerated to the extent permitted by Code section 409A, as
determined by the Administrator.
10.5
Involuntary Inclusion in Income
If a determination is made that the Account of any Participant (or his or her Beneficiary) is subject to current income taxation
under Code section 409A, then the taxable portion of such Account will be immediately distributed to the Participant (or his
or her Beneficiary), notwithstanding the general timing rules otherwise described herein.
41

10.6
Compliance with Code Section 409A
It is intended that amounts deferred under this Plan will not be taxable under Code section 409A with respect to any
individual. All provisions of this Plan shall be construed in a manner consistent with this intent.
10.7
Construction
The validity of the Plan or any of its provisions will be determined under and will be construed according to federal law and,
to the extent permissible, according to the internal laws of the state of Illinois. If any provision of the Plan is held illegal or
invalid for any reason, such determination will not affect the remaining provisions of the Plan and the Plan will be construed
and enforced as if said illegal or invalid provision had never been included.
10.8
Legal Action
No legal action may be brought in court on a claim for benefits under the Plan after 180 days following the decision on
appeal (or 180 days following the expiration of the time to make an appeal decision if no appeal is made). The Plan, all
benefits awarded thereunder, and all determinations and other actions with respect thereto, shall be governed by the laws of
the State of Illinois without giving effect to principles of conflicts of laws, except to the extent preempted by the laws of the
United States.  Participants irrevocably consent to the nonexclusive jurisdiction and venue of the federal and state courts
located in the State of Illinois, Cook County.
10.9
Tax Withholding
The Company, or other member of the Controlled Group, as applicable, has the right to deduct any federal, state, local or
foreign taxes that are required to be withheld from any payments made hereunder. In addition, if prior to the date of payment
of any amount hereunder, the Federal Insurance Contributions Act (FICA) tax imposed under Code Sections 3101, 3121(a)
and 3121(v)(2), where applicable, becomes due, then the Company, or other member of the Controlled Group, as applicable,
shall have the right to deduct such tax from any other payments made to the Participant or direct that the Participant’s
Account be reduced by the amount needed to pay the Participant’s portion of such tax, plus an amount equal to the
withholding taxes due under federal, state or local law resulting from the payment of such FICA tax, and an additional
amount to pay the additional income tax at source on wages attributable to the pyramiding of the Code section 3401 wages
and taxes, but no greater than the aggregate of the FICA tax amount and the income tax withholding related to such FICA tax
amount. Each Participant shall be responsible for the payment of all individual tax liabilities relating to any benefits under the
Plan that exceed the amounts withheld.
10.10 Liability for Benefit Payments
The obligation to pay or provide for payment of a benefit hereunder to any Participant or Beneficiary shall be the sole and
exclusive liability and responsibility of the employer which employed the Participant during the period which contributions
were made, unless another entity has specifically assumed such liability. No other affiliate or subsidiary of such employer
shall be liable or responsible for such payment, and nothing in the Plan shall be construed as creating or imposing any joint
or shared liability for any such payment. The fact that a company other than the employer actually makes one or more
payments to a Participant or Beneficiary shall not be deemed a waiver of this provision;
42

rather, any such payment shall be deemed to have been made on behalf of and for the account of the employer.
10.11 Recovery of Plan Overpayments
The Plan shall have the right to offset from any future benefit payments due hereunder to (or with respect to) such individual
the amount of such excess in such manner as the Administrator determines in its sole discretion or, if such offset is not
possible, the Administrator may undertake such actions as it deems reasonable to recover the excess.
10.12 Notice
Any notice or filing required or permitted to be given under the Plan shall be sufficient if in writing and hand delivered, or
sent by registered or certified mail, to (a) The Boeing Company’s headquarters, with attention to the Secretary of the
Company, if the notice or filing is to be made to the Administrator or the Company or (b) the Participant’s or Beneficiary’s
address on file with the Company, if the notice or filing is to be made to such individual. Such notice shall be deemed given
as of the date of delivery, or, if delivery is made by mail, as of the date shown on the postmark on the receipt for registration
or certification.
43

APPENDIX A
List of Excluded Entities
[Reserved.]
This Appendix A may be updated by the Administrator from time to time without the need for a formal amendment to the Plan.
A-1

APPENDIX B
Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company
The provisions of this Appendix B apply to DCP Accounts and individuals who were participants in the DCP as of December 31,
2021. In the event of a conflict between this Appendix B and the other provisions of the Plan, the provisions in this Appendix B shall
control.
No DCP Deferrals were made to the DCP with respect to Base Pay earned and paid on and after January 1, 2019, Annual Incentive
Awards with performance periods beginning on or after January 1, 2019, or Performance Awards with grant dates on or after
January 1, 2019.
Effective with respect to amounts deferred on or after January 1, 2006 (including amounts for which Deferral Elections were made
prior to January 1, 2006) the Company no longer provided any DCP Matching Contributions on any DCP Deferrals into a Boeing
Stock Fund account; provided that in the case of DCP Deferrals that were the subject of a deferral election into a Boeing Stock Fund
account made prior to January 1, 2005, the Company continued to match such DCP Deferrals of Boeing Stock Units and
Performance Share Awards that are not yet vested (upon vesting) and such DCP Deferrals of 2005 Annual Incentive Awards that
were paid in 2006. To the extent that the Company previously a DCP Matching Contribution with respect to all or part of any
amounts previously deferred under the DCP, each such DCP Matching Contribution was deferred together with the Deferral to
which it relates, and is subject to all of the Participant elections (including default elections) with respect to such Deferral.
1.
Forfeiture and Reinstatement of Matching Contributions
(A)
Any DCP Matching Contribution shall be canceled and forfeited if the Participant Separates from Service for any
reason other than retirement under a retirement plan sponsored by the Company, disability as determined by the
Company, layoff, or death. The forfeited DCP Matching Contribution (and any Earnings Credits that would have
accrued but for the forfeiture) will be reinstated upon rehire, only where (i) the Participant’s Separation from Service
occurred while the Participant was on an Authorized Period of Absence or due to a reasonably anticipated permanent
reduction in the level of services performed by the Participant to less than 50 percent of the average level of services
performed by the Participant during the immediately preceding 36-month period, and (ii) the Participant’s Separation
from Service was deemed a Separation from Service under Code section 409A or the terms of this Plan (i.e., the
Participant did not incur a termination of employment with the Controlled Group).
(B)
Reinstatement of the Participant’s forfeited benefits will occur upon (i) return to active employment with the
Company within the Authorized Period of Absence, (ii) termination of the Authorized Period of Absence or period of
a reduced level of services due to retirement under a plan sponsored by the Company, disability as determined by the
Company, layoff or death, or (iii) the Participant’s return to active employment at a level of services that is 50 percent
or more of the average level of services performed by the Participant prior to his or her prior deemed Separation from
Service due to a reduction in services. Such reinstated benefits will remain subject to the forfeiture provisions of the
first sentence of section 1(A) the payment timing rules under Section 3(A) hereof.
B-1

2.
DCP Deferrals Eligible for Diversification
The following DCP Deferrals are eligible for investment diversification:
(A)
DCP Deferrals of Base Pay (once earned);
(B)
DCP Deferrals of cash Annual Incentive Awards (once earned);
(C)
Vested Boeing Stock Unit (BSU) DCP Deferrals;
(D)
Unvested BSU DCP Deferrals (once vested);
(E)
Performance Share DCP Deferrals that were vested as of December 31, 2005;
(F)
In the case of a Participant whose termination of employment occurred on or before December 31, 2005, any DCP
Matching Contributions credited to the Participant’s Accounts on or before January 3, 2006 (the next business day the
Exchange is open); and
(G)
Performance Awards.
Performance Shares that were unvested as of December 31, 2005, and deferred into the Boeing Stock Fund account shall not be
eligible for diversification, even upon vesting. DCP Matching contributions (except as described in (F) above) also shall not be
eligible for diversification. Amounts eligible for diversification are sometimes referred to as “transferable amounts” and amounts not
eligible for diversification are sometimes referred to as “nontransferable amounts.”
3.
Form and Timing of Distribution.
(A)
General Rule
A Participant in the DCP was permitted to elect the form and timing of distribution with regard to his or her entire
Account as described in subsections 6.1(D)(i) and 6.1(D)(ii). This distribution election was required to be made at the
same time the Participant made his or her Deferral Election.
In the event that no distribution option was elected, the Participant is deemed to have elected to receive a single lump
sum payable in January of the first Plan Year following the Participant’s Separation from Service.
(B)
Changes to Distribution Election
A Participant may change a distribution election with regard to his or her entire Account only to the extent permitted
by Section 6.1(F) of the Plan.
B-2

(C)
Separate Election for Matching Contributions
Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections (A) and (B), Participants who terminate employment on or after January 1,
2006, were permitted to make a separate election under subsection (A) above as to the time and form of distribution
of (i) the Participant’s Company Matching Contributions and (ii) the balance of the Participant’s Plan Account. Such
a Participant may also make a separate one-time distribution election change under subsection (B) above with respect
to each such separate election under this subsection (C).
(D)
Separate Election for Annual Installments
If a Participant makes a separate election under subsection (C)(ii) above to receive the balance of the Participant’s
DCP Account in annual installment payments, the Participant may further elect to receive either:
(i)
The Participant’s nontransferable Performance Shares (Performance Shares that vested or vest after December
31, 2005, that are deferred into the Boeing Stock Fund), first, or
(ii)
A prorated payment of all the funds in the Participant’s Account each year.
(E)
Distributions At Age 70 ½
See Section 6.1(G) of the Plan.
(F)
Specified Employees
See Section 6.1(H) of the Plan.
(G)
Distribution Due to Unforeseeable Emergency
See Section 6.1(I) of the Plan.
(H)    Death Benefits
If a Participant only has a DCP Account under this Plan, then the Participant’s beneficiary designation made under
the DCP prior to January 1, 2022 will apply hereunder, unless and until changed by the Participant in accordance with
the terms of the Plan. If a Participant has both a DCP Account and another Account under the Plan, then the
Participant’s beneficiary designation under the DCP will become null and void as of January 1, 2022, and such
Participant who wishes to designate a Beneficiary must make a new beneficiary designation in accordance with the
terms of the Plan.
4.
Rehires
See Section 6.3 of the Plan.
B-3

Exhibit 10.16
The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan
(As Amended and Restated Effective December 9, 2021)
Section 1. Purpose of the Plan
The purpose of The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated (the “Plan”), is to attract, retain and motivate employees,
officers, directors, consultants, agents, advisors and independent contractors of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) and to align their interests
and efforts to the long-term interests of the Company’s shareholders.
Section 2. Definitions
As used in the Plan,
“Adjusted Operating Cash Flow” means the net cash provided by operating activities of the Company as reported in the Company’s consolidated
statements of cash flows included in its Annual Report on Form 10-K, adjusted to eliminate the effect on operating cash flows of net customer
financing cash flows, as reported in the Company’s consolidated statements of cash flows included in its Annual Report on Form 10-K.
“Authorized Officer” means the Company’s chief human resources officer, the Company’s vice president of compensation or any other officer of
the Company as may be designated by the Committee.
“Award” means an award or grant made to a Participant under Sections 7, 8, 9, 10, and/or 11 of the Plan, including awards or grants made prior to
the Shareholder Approval Effective Date.
“Board” means the Board of Directors of the Company.
“Corporate Transaction” has the meaning set forth in Section 14.3.
“Corporate Transaction Price” has the meaning set forth in Section 14.3.
“Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended from time to time.
“Committee” has the meaning set forth in Section 3.2.
“Common Stock” means the common stock, par value $5.00 per share, of the Company.
“Disability” means “Disability” as defined by the Committee or an Authorized Officer for purposes of the Plan or an Award or in the instrument
evidencing the Award or in a written employment or services agreement between the Participant and the Company or a Related Company.
“Exchange Act” means the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended from time to time.
“Fair Market Value” means the average of the high and low per share trading prices (or the average of the opening and closing prices, or the
closing  price,  if  so  determined  by  the  Committee)  for  the  Common  Stock  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  during  regular  session  trading  as
reported  by  The  Wall  Street  Journal  or  such  other  source  the  Committee  deems  reliable  for  a  single  trading  day.  The  Committee  may  vary  its
determination of the Fair Market Value as provided in this Section 2 depending on whether Fair Market Value is in reference to the grant, exercise,
vesting, settlement or payout of an Award and, for Awards subject to Section 409A, as provided in Section 409A.
“Grant Date” means the date on which the Committee completes the corporate action authorizing the grant of an Award or such later date specified
by the Committee, provided that conditions to the exercisability or vesting of Awards shall not defer the Grant Date.
“Incentive Stock Option” means an Option granted with the intention that it qualify as an “incentive stock option” as that term is defined in Section
422 of the Code or any successor provision.
“Layoff” means “Layoff” as defined by the Committee or an Authorized Officer for purposes of the Plan or an Award or in the instrument evidencing
the Award or in a written employment or services agreement between the Participant and the Company or a Related Company.
“Nonqualified Stock Option” means an Option other than an Incentive Stock Option.
“Nonrecurring Items” means nonrecurring items deemed not reflective of the Company’s core operating performance, including, but not limited to,
exogenous  events,  acquisitions,  divestitures,  changes  in  accounting  principles  or  “extraordinary  items”  determined  under  generally  accepted
accounting principles.
1

“Old Plan” means The Boeing Company 1997 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended effective May 1, 2000 and as further amended effective January 1,
2008.
“Option” means a right to purchase Common Stock granted under Section 7.
“Other Cash-Based Award” means an Award granted pursuant to Section 11 and payable in cash at such time or times and subject to such terms
and conditions as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion.
“Participant” means any eligible person as set forth in Section 5 to whom an Award is granted.
“Performance  Goals”  means  specified  performance  targets  or  goals  for  a  particular  Performance  Period,  which  may  be  based  on  individual
performance,  performance of the Company (as a whole or with respect to one or more business units, divisions, acquired businesses, minority
investments, partnerships, or joint ventures), and/or other performance criteria including, but not limited to: Adjusted Operating Cash Flow, profits
(including, but not limited to, profit growth, net operating profit or economic profit); profit-related return ratios; return measures (including, but not
limited to, return on assets, capital, equity or sales); cash flow (including, but not limited to, operating cash flow, free cash flow or cash flow return on
capital); earnings (including, but not limited to, net earnings, earnings per share, or earnings before or after taxes); net sales growth; net income
(before  or  after  taxes,  interest,  depreciation  and/or  amortization);  gross  or  operating  margins;  productivity  ratios;  share  price  (including,  but  not
limited to, growth measures and total shareholder return); expense targets; margins; operating efficiency; customer satisfaction; and working capital
targets. Performance Goals and underlying performance criteria may be stated in absolute or relative terms. The Committee shall have the right to
specify, at the time Performance Goals or underlying performance criteria are established, that any Performance Goals or underlying performance
criteria may be adjusted to exclude the impact of any Nonrecurring Item, where applicable.
“Performance Period” means any period of at least 12 consecutive months as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion. The Committee
may establish different Performance Periods for different Participants, and the Committee may establish concurrent or overlapping Performance
Periods.
“Performance Share,” “Performance Restricted Stock” or “Performance Restricted Stock Unit” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.1.
“Performance Unit” has the meaning set forth in Section 10.2.
“Related Company” means any corporation in which the Company owns, directly or indirectly, at least 50% of the total combined voting power of all
classes of stock, or any other entity (including, but not limited to, partnerships and joint ventures) in which the Company owns, directly or indirectly,
at least 50% of the combined equity thereof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of determining whether any individual may be a Participant
for  purposes  of any grant  of  Incentive  Stock  Options,  the  term  “Related  Company”  shall have the  meaning  ascribed  to  the  term  “subsidiary”  in
Section 424(f) of the Code, and for purposes of determining whether any individual may be a Participant for purposes of any grant of Options or
Stock Appreciation Rights, the term “Related Company” shall mean any “Service Recipient” as that term is defined for purposes of Section 409A.
“Restricted Stock” means an Award of shares of Common Stock granted under Section 9, the rights of ownership of which may be subject to
restrictions prescribed by the Committee.
“Retirement” means “Retirement” as defined by the Committee or an Authorized Officer for purposes of the Plan or an Award or in the instrument
evidencing the Award or in a written employment or services agreement between the Participant and the Company or a Related Company.
“Section 409A” means Section 409A of the Code, or any successor provision, including any proposed and final regulations and other guidance
issued thereunder by the Department of the Treasury and/or the Internal Revenue Service.
“Securities Act” means the Securities Act of 1933, as amended from time to time.
“Shareholder Approval Effective Date” means April 28, 2014, the date the Plan was approved by the holders of shares of Common Stock entitled
to vote at the 2014 annual meeting of shareholders of the Company.
“Stock Appreciation Right” or “SAR” has the meaning set forth in Section 8.1.
“Stock Unit” means an Award granted under Section 9 denominated in units of Common Stock.
“Substitute Awards” means Awards granted or shares of Common Stock issued by the Company in assumption of, or in substitution or exchange
for,  awards  previously  granted  by  a  company  acquired  by  the  Company  or  any  Related  Company  or  with  which  the  Company  or  any  Related
Company combines.
2

“Termination of Service,” unless otherwise defined by the Committee, an Authorized Officer or in the instrument evidencing the Award or in a
written employment or services agreement between the Participant and the Company or a Related Company, means a termination of employment
or service relationship with the Company or a Related Company for any reason, whether voluntary or involuntary, including by reason of death,
Disability, Retirement or Layoff. Any question as to whether and when there has been a Termination of Service for the purposes of an Award and
the cause of such Termination of Service shall be determined by an Authorized Officer or by the Committee with respect to officers subject to the
reporting requirements of Section 16(a) of the Exchange Act, and any such determination shall be final. Transfer of a Participant’s employment or
service  relationship  between  wholly  owned  subsidiaries  of  the  Company,  or  between  the  Company  and  any  wholly  owned  subsidiary  of  the
Company, shall not be considered a Termination of Service for purposes of an Award. Unless the Committee determines otherwise, a Termination
of  Service  shall  be  deemed  to  occur  if  the  Participant’s  employment  or  service  relationship  is  with  an  entity  that  has  ceased  to  be  a  Related
Company.
Section 3. Administration
3.1 Administration of the Plan. The Plan shall be administered by the Compensation Committee of the Board; provided, however, that with respect
to nonemployee directors, the Plan shall be administered by the Governance & Public Policy Committee of the Board unless otherwise determined
by  the  Board.  Each  such  committee  shall  be  comprised  of  at  least  three  directors,  each  of  whom  shall  qualify  as  an  “independent  director”  as
defined  under  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  listing  standards  and  a  “nonemployee  director”  as  defined  in  Rule  16b-3  promulgated  under  the
Exchange Act. However, the fact that a Committee member shall fail to qualify under the foregoing requirements shall not invalidate any Award
made by the Committee which is otherwise validly made under the Plan.
3.2 Delegation by Committee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board or the Committee may delegate responsibility for administering the Plan
with respect to designated classes of eligible persons to different committees consisting of one or more members of the Board, subject to such
limitations  as  the  Board  or  the  Compensation  Committee  deems  appropriate,  except  with  respect  to  benefits  to  nonemployee  directors  and  to
officers subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act. Members of any committee shall serve for such term as the Board may determine, subject to
removal by the Board at any time. To the extent consistent with applicable law, the Board or the Committee may authorize one or more officers of
the  Company  to  grant  Awards  to  designated  classes  of  eligible  persons,  within  limits  specifically  prescribed  by  the  Board  or  the  Committee;
provided, however, that no such officer shall have or obtain authority to grant Awards to himself or herself or to any officer subject to Section 16 of
the Exchange Act. All references in the Plan to the “Committee” shall be, as applicable, to the Compensation Committee, the Governance & Public
Policy Committee or any other committee or any officer to whom the Board or the Compensation Committee has delegated authority to administer
the Plan.
3.3 Administration and Interpretation by Committee. Except for the terms and conditions explicitly set forth in the Plan, the Committee shall have
full power and exclusive authority, subject to such orders or resolutions not inconsistent with the provisions of the Plan as may from time to time be
adopted by the Board, to (a) select the eligible persons as set forth in Section 5 to whom Awards may from time to time be granted under the Plan;
(b) determine the type or types of Award to be granted under the Plan; (c) determine the number of shares of Common Stock to be covered by each
Award granted under the Plan; (d) determine the terms and conditions of any Award granted under the Plan; (e) approve the forms of agreements
for use under the Plan; (f) determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances Awards may be settled in cash, shares of Common
Stock or other property or canceled or suspended; (g) determine whether, to what extent and under what circumstances cash, shares of Common
Stock, other property and other amounts payable with respect to an Award shall be deferred either automatically or at the election of the Participant,
subject to Section 409A and in accordance with Section 6.3; (h) interpret and administer the Plan and any instrument or agreement entered into
under the Plan; (i) establish such rules and regulations and appoint such agents as it shall deem appropriate for the proper administration of the
Plan; (j) delegate ministerial duties to such of the Company’s officers as it so determines; (k) amend Section 16.1 in order to comply with Section
10D of the Exchange Act (as determined by the applicable rules and regulations promulgated thereunder from time to time by the U.S. Securities
and Exchange Commission); and (l) make any other determination and take any other action that the Committee deems necessary or desirable for
administration of the Plan. Decisions of the Committee shall be final, conclusive and binding on all persons, including the Company, any Participant,
any shareholder and any eligible person. A majority of the members of the Committee may determine its actions and fix the time and place of its
meetings.
3

Section 4. Shares Subject to the Plan
4.1 Authorized Number of Shares.
(a)  The  aggregate  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  in  respect  of  which  Awards  (or  dividends  or  dividend  equivalents  pursuant  to
Awards) may be granted or paid out under the Plan, subject to adjustment as provided in Section 4.2 and Section 14, shall not exceed 80.0 million
shares, plus the aggregate number of shares of Common Stock described in Section 4.1(b).
(b) Shares of Common Stock that as of the Shareholder Approval Effective Date have not been issued under the Old Plan, and are not
covered by outstanding awards under such plan granted on or before the Shareholder Approval Effective Date, shall be available for Awards under
the Plan in an amount not to exceed 7.0 million shares of Common Stock in the aggregate.
(c) Common Stock which may be issued under the Plan may be either authorized and unissued shares or issued shares which have been
reacquired  by  the  Company  (in  the  open-market  or  in  private  transactions)  and  which  are  being  held  as  treasury  shares.  The  Committee  shall
determine the manner in which fractional share value shall be treated.
(d) In the event of a change in the Common Stock of the Company that is limited to a change in the designation thereof to “Capital Stock” or
other similar designation, or to a change in the par value thereof, or from par value to no par value, without increase or decrease in the number of
issued shares, the shares resulting from any such change shall be deemed to be Common Stock for purposes of the Plan.
4.2 Share Usage.
(a) Shares of Common Stock covered by an Award shall not be counted as used unless and until they are actually issued and delivered to a
Participant. Any shares of Common Stock that are subject to Awards that expire or lapse or are forfeited, surrendered, cancelled, terminated, settled
in cash in lieu of Common Stock or are issued and thereafter reacquired by the Company shall again be available for Awards under the Plan, to the
extent of such expiration, lapse, forfeiture,  surrender,  cancellation, termination,  settlement  or reacquisition of such Awards (as may be adjusted
pursuant to Section 14). The following shares of Common Stock shall not be treated as having been issued under the Plan: (i) shares tendered by a
Participant or retained by the Company as full or partial payment to the Company for the purchase price of an Award or to satisfy any minimum
statutorily required taxes that the Company is required by applicable federal, state, local or foreign law to withhold with respect to the grant, vesting
or exercise of an Award (“tax withholding obligations”), (ii) shares covered by an Award that is settled in cash, (iii) the number of shares subject to a
SAR in excess of the number of shares that are delivered to the Participant upon exercise of the SAR, or (iv) shares issued pursuant to Substitute
Awards.
(b) The Committee shall have the authority to grant Awards as an alternative to or as the form of payment for grants or rights earned or due
under other compensation plans or arrangements of the Company.
4.3 Maximum Awards. The maximum Common Stock amounts in this Section 4.3 are subject to adjustment under Section 14 and are subject to
the Plan maximum set forth in Section 4.1.
(a) Options and Stock Appreciation Rights. The aggregate number of shares of Common Stock that may be subject to Options or Stock
Appreciation Rights granted to any Participant in any calendar year under the Plan shall not exceed 2.0 million shares of Common Stock.
(b) Performance Shares and Performance Restricted Stock or Units; Performance Units; Other Cash-Based Awards. The grant date value
of Awards of Performance Shares, Performance Restricted Stock, Performance Restricted Stock Units, Performance Units, or other Cash-Based
Awards granted to any single Participant in any calendar year shall not exceed in the aggregate the value of 1.0 million shares of Common Stock
(determined as of the applicable Award grant dates).
(c) Limits on Awards to Nonemployee Directors. The aggregate grant date fair value (computed as of the date of grant in accordance with
applicable financial accounting rules) of all Awards granted to any nonemployee director in any calendar year (excluding Awards made pursuant to
deferred compensation arrangements in lieu of all or a portion of cash retainers) shall not exceed $1.0 million.
4

(d) Awards with No Restrictions. The aggregate number of shares of Common Stock that may be issued pursuant to Awards granted under
the Plan (other than Awards of Options or Stock Appreciation Rights or dividends or dividend equivalents credited in connection with vested Awards)
that contain no restrictions or restrictions based solely on continuous employment or services for less than three years (except where Termination of
Service occurs by reason of death, Retirement, Disability or Layoff) shall not exceed 4.0 million shares of Common Stock.
(e) Incentive Stock Options. The aggregate number of shares of Common Stock that may be subject to Incentive Stock Options granted
under the Plan shall not exceed 2.0 million shares of Common Stock.
Section 5. Eligibility
An Award may be granted to any employee, officer or director of the Company or a Related Company whom the Committee from time to time
selects. An Award may also be granted to any consultant, agent, advisor or independent contractor who is a natural person and who provides bona
fide services to the Company or any Related Company. The above are “eligible persons.”
Section 6. Awards
6.1 Form and Grant of Awards. The Committee shall have the authority, in its sole discretion, to determine the type or types of Awards to be
granted under the Plan. Such Awards may be granted either alone, in addition to or in tandem with any other type of Award.
6.2 Evidence of Awards. Awards granted under the Plan shall be evidenced by a written instrument that shall contain such terms, conditions,
limitations and restrictions as the Committee shall deem advisable and that are not inconsistent with the Plan.
6.3 Deferrals. The Committee may permit a Participant to defer receipt of the payment of any Award. If any such deferral election is permitted, the
Committee, in its sole discretion, shall establish rules and procedures for such payment deferrals, which may include the grant of additional Awards
or provisions for the payment or crediting of interest or dividend equivalents, including converting such credits to deferred stock unit equivalents. The
value of the payment so deferred may be allocated to a deferred account established for a Participant under any deferred compensation plan of the
Company designated by the Committee. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any deferral made under this Section 6.3 will be made under a deferred
compensation plan of the Company or pursuant to the terms of an employment agreement, either of which satisfies the requirements for exemption
from or complies with Section 409A.
6.4 Dividends and Distributions. Participants holding Awards may, if the Committee so determines, be credited with dividends paid with respect to
the underlying shares or dividend equivalents while the Awards are so held in a manner determined by the Committee in its sole discretion. The
Committee may apply any restrictions to the dividends or dividend equivalents that the Committee deems appropriate. The Committee, in its sole
discretion, may determine the form of payment of dividends or dividend equivalents, including cash, shares of Common Stock, Restricted Stock or
Stock Units. Dividends and dividend equivalents that may be paid under any awards outstanding under the Old Plan as of the Shareholder Approval
Effective Date shall be granted pursuant to Section 11 below. Notwithstanding the foregoing, (a) the right to any dividends or dividend equivalents
declared and paid on the number of shares underlying an Option or a Stock Appreciation Right may not be contingent, directly or indirectly on the
exercise of the Option or a Stock Appreciation Right, and an Award providing a right to dividends or dividend equivalents declared and paid on the
number of shares underlying an Option or a Stock Appreciation Right, the payment of which is not contingent upon, or otherwise payable on, the
exercise of the Option or a Stock Appreciation Right, must comply with or qualify for an exemption under Section 409A and (b) dividend equivalents
credited in connection with an Award that vests based on the achievement of Performance Goals shall be subject to restrictions and risk of forfeiture
to the same extent as the Award with respect to which such dividend equivalents have been credited.
Section 7. Options
7.1 Grant of Options. The Committee may grant Options designated as Incentive Stock Options or Nonqualified Stock Options.
7.2 Option  Exercise  Price;  Repricing  Prohibition. The  exercise  price  for  shares  purchased  under  an  Option  shall  be  as  determined  by  the
Committee, but shall not be less than 100% of the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock for the Grant Date, except in the case of Substitute
Awards.  In no event  shall the Committee,  without  the  prior  approval of  the  Company’s  shareholders,  (a)  cancel any outstanding  Option  for  the
purpose of reissuing the Option to the Participant at a lower exercise price, (b) exchange any outstanding Option for cash, another Award, or an
Option or Stock Appreciation Right with an exercise or
5

grant price that is less than the exercise price of the cancelled Option, (c) reduce the exercise price of an outstanding Option, or (d) take any other
action that would be a “repricing” of the Option.
7.3 Term  of  Options. Subject  to  earlier  termination  in  accordance  with  the  terms  of  the  Plan  and  the  instrument  evidencing  the  Option,  the
maximum term of an Option shall be ten years from the Grant Date.
7.4 Exercise  of  Options. The  Committee  shall  establish  and  set  forth  in  each  instrument  that  evidences  an  Option  the  time  at  which,  or  the
installments in which, the Option shall vest and become exercisable, any of which provisions may be waived or modified by the Committee at any
time.
To the extent an Option has vested and become exercisable, the Option may be exercised in whole or from time to time in part by delivery as
directed by the Company to the Company or a brokerage firm designated or approved by the Company of a written stock option exercise agreement
or notice, in a form and in accordance with procedures established by the Committee, setting forth the number of shares with respect to which the
Option is being exercised, the restrictions imposed on the shares purchased under such exercise agreement, if any, and such representations and
agreements as may be required by the Committee, accompanied by payment in full as described in Section 7.5. An Option may be exercised only
for whole shares and may not be exercised for less than a reasonable number of shares at any one time, as determined by the Committee.
7.5 Payment of Exercise Price. The exercise price for shares purchased under an Option shall be paid in full as directed by the Company to the
Company or a brokerage firm designated or approved by the Company by delivery of consideration equal to the product of the Option exercise price
and the number of shares purchased. Such consideration must be paid before the Company will issue the shares being purchased and must be in a
form or a combination of forms acceptable to the Committee for that purchase, which forms may include: (a) check; (b) wire transfer; (c) tendering by
attestation shares of Common Stock already owned by the Participant that on the day prior to the exercise date have a Fair Market Value equal to
the aggregate exercise price of the shares being purchased under the Option; (d) to the extent permitted by applicable law, delivery of a properly
executed exercise notice, together with irrevocable instructions to a brokerage firm designated or approved by the Company to deliver promptly to
the Company the aggregate amount of sale or loan proceeds to pay the Option exercise price and any tax withholding obligations that may arise in
connection with the exercise, all in accordance with the regulations of the Federal Reserve Board; or (e) such other consideration as the Committee
may permit in its sole discretion.
7.6 Post-Termination Exercise. The Committee shall establish and set forth in each instrument that evidences an Option whether the Option shall
continue to be exercisable, and the terms and conditions of such exercise, after a Termination of Service, any of which provisions may be waived or
modified by the Committee at any time, provided that any such waiver or modification shall satisfy the requirements for exemption under Section
409A.
7.7 Incentive Stock Options. The terms of any Incentive Stock Options shall comply in all respects with the provisions of Section 422 of the Code,
or any successor provision, and any regulations promulgated thereunder. Individuals who are not employees of the Company or one of its parent or
subsidiary corporations (as such terms are defined for purposes of Section 422 of the Code) may not be granted Incentive Stock Options. To the
extent that the aggregate Fair Market Value of Common Stock with respect to which Incentive Stock Options are exercisable for the first time by a
Participant during any calendar year exceeds $100,000 or, if different, the maximum limitation in effect at the time of grant under the Code (the Fair
Market Value being determined as of the Grant Date for the Option), such portion in excess of $100,000 shall be treated as Nonqualified Stock
Options. No Incentive Stock Options may be granted more than ten years after the adoption in February 2014 of this amended and restated Plan by
the Board.
Section 8. Stock Appreciation Rights
8.1 Grant of Stock Appreciation Rights; SAR Grant Price. The Committee may grant stock appreciation rights (“Stock Appreciation Rights” or
“SARs”). A SAR may be granted in tandem with an Option or alone (“freestanding”). The grant price of a tandem SAR shall be equal to the exercise
price of the related Option, and the grant price of a freestanding SAR shall be equal to the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock for the Grant
Date, except for Substitute Awards. A SAR may be exercised upon such terms and conditions and for the term as the Committee determines in its
sole discretion; provided, however, that, subject to earlier termination in accordance with the terms of the Plan and the instrument evidencing the
SAR, the term of a freestanding SAR shall be a term not to exceed ten years from the Grant Date as established for that SAR by the Committee or,
if not so established, shall be ten years, and in the case of a tandem SAR, (a) the term shall not exceed the term of the related Option and (b) the
tandem SAR may be exercised for all or part of the shares subject to the related Option upon the
6

surrender of the right to exercise the equivalent portion of the related Option, except that the tandem SAR may be exercised only with respect to the
shares for which its related Option is then exercisable.
8.2 Payment of SAR Amount. Upon the exercise of a SAR, a Participant shall be entitled to receive payment from the Company in an amount
determined by multiplying (a) the difference between the Fair Market Value of the Common Stock for the date of exercise over the grant price by (b)
the number of shares with respect to which the SAR is exercised. At the discretion of the Committee, the payment upon exercise of a SAR may be
in cash, in shares of equivalent value, in some combination thereof or in any other manner approved by the Committee in its sole discretion.
8.3 Post-Termination Exercise. The Committee shall establish and set forth in each instrument that evidences a freestanding SAR whether the
SAR shall continue to be exercisable, and the terms and conditions of such exercise, after a Termination of Service, any of which provisions may be
waived or modified by the Committee at any time, provided that any such waiver or modification shall satisfy the requirements for exemption under
Section 409A.
8.4 Repricing Prohibition. In no event shall the Committee, without the prior approval of the Company’s shareholders, (a) cancel any outstanding
SAR for the purpose of reissuing the SAR to the Participant at a lower grant price, (b) exchange any outstanding SAR for cash, another Award, or
an Option or Stock Appreciation Right with an exercise or grant price that is less than the grant price of the cancelled SAR, (c) reduce the grant price
of an outstanding SAR, or (d) take any other action that would be a “repricing” of the SAR.
Section 9. Restricted Stock and Stock Units
9.1 Grant of Restricted Stock and Stock Units. The Committee may grant Restricted Stock and Stock Units on such terms and conditions and
subject  to  such  forfeiture  restrictions,  if  any  (which  may  be  based  on  continuous  service  with  the  Company  or  a  Related  Company  or  the
achievement of any Performance Goals), as the Committee shall determine in its sole discretion, which terms, conditions and restrictions shall be
set forth in the instrument evidencing the Award.
9.2 Issuance of Shares. Upon the satisfaction of any terms, conditions and restrictions prescribed with respect to Restricted Stock or Stock Units,
or upon a Participant’s release from any terms, conditions and restrictions of Restricted Stock or Stock Units, as determined by the Committee, (a)
the shares of Restricted Stock covered by each Award of Restricted Stock shall become freely transferable by the Participant, and (b) Stock Units
shall be paid in cash, shares of Common Stock or a combination of cash and shares of Common Stock as the Committee shall determine in its sole
discretion.
9.3 Waiver of Restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the Plan, the Committee, in its sole discretion, may waive the repurchase or
forfeiture period and any other terms, conditions or restrictions on any Restricted Stock or Stock Unit under such circumstances and subject to such
terms and conditions as the Committee shall deem appropriate.
Section 10. Performance Shares, Performance Restricted Stock 
or Units, and Performance Units
10.1 Grant of Performance Shares and Performance Restricted Stock or Units. The Committee may grant Awards of performance shares,
performance  restricted  stock  and  performance  restricted  stock  units  (“Performance  Shares,  “Performance  Restricted  Stock”  or  “Performance
Restricted Stock Units”, as the case may be) and designate the Participants to whom Performance Shares or Performance Restricted Stock or Units
are to be awarded and determine the number of Performance Shares or Performance Restricted Stock or Units, the length of the Performance
Period and the other terms and conditions of each such Award. Each Award of Performance Shares or Performance Restricted Stock or Units shall
entitle the Participant to a payment in the form of shares of Common Stock upon the achievement of Performance  Goals and other terms and
conditions specified by the Committee. Notwithstanding the achievement of any Performance Goals, the number of shares issued under an Award
of Performance Shares or Performance Restricted Stock or Units may be adjusted on the basis of such further consideration as the Committee shall
determine in its sole discretion. The Committee, in its sole discretion, may make a cash payment equal to the Fair Market Value of the Common
Stock otherwise required to be issued to a Participant pursuant to an Award of Performance Shares or Performance Restricted Stock or Units.
10.2 Grant of Performance Units. The Committee may grant Awards of performance units (“Performance Units”) and designate the Participants to
whom Performance Units are to be awarded and determine the number of Performance Units, the length of the Performance Period and the other
terms and conditions of each such Award. Each Award of Performance Units shall entitle the Participant to a payment in cash upon the achievement
of Performance Goals and other terms and conditions specified by the Committee. Notwithstanding the achievement of any Performance Goals, the
amount to be paid
7

under an Award of Performance Units may be adjusted on the basis of such further consideration as the Committee shall determine in its sole
discretion. The Committee, in its sole discretion, may substitute shares of Common Stock for the cash payment otherwise required to be made to a
Participant pursuant to a Performance Unit.
Section 11. Other Stock or Cash-Based Awards
In addition  to  the  Awards  described  in Sections  7 through  10,  and subject  to  the  terms  of  the  Plan,  the  Committee  may  grant  other  incentives
payable in cash or in shares of Common Stock under the Plan as it determines to be in the best interests of the Company and subject to such other
terms and conditions as it deems appropriate, including dividends and dividend equivalents that may be paid under any awards outstanding under
the Old Plan as of the Shareholder Approval Effective Date.
Section 12. Withholding
The Company may require a Participant to pay to the Company the amount of (a) any tax withholding obligations and (b) any amounts due from the
Participant to the Company or to any Related Company (“other obligations”). The Company shall not be required to issue any shares of Common
Stock under the Plan until such tax withholding obligations and other obligations are satisfied.
The Committee may permit or require a Participant to satisfy all or part of his or her tax withholding obligations and other obligations by (a) paying
cash to the Company, (b) having the Company withhold an amount from any cash amounts otherwise due or to become due from the Company to
the  Participant,  (c)  having  the  Company  withhold  a  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  that  would  otherwise  be  issued  to  the  Participant  (or
become vested in the case of Restricted Stock or Performance Restricted Stock) having a Fair Market Value equal to the tax withholding obligations
and  other  obligations,  or  (d)  surrendering  a  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  the  Participant  already  owns  having  a  value  equal  to  the  tax
withholding obligations and other obligations.
Section 13. Assignability
No Award or Award agreement, and no rights or interests herein or therein, shall or may be assigned, transferred, sold, exchanged, encumbered,
pledged, or otherwise hypothecated or disposed of by a Participant or any beneficiary(ies) of any Participant, except (a) by testamentary disposition
by the Participant or the laws of intestate succession and (b) that to the extent permitted by the Committee, in its sole discretion, a Participant may
designate one or more beneficiaries on a Company-approved form who may receive payment under an Award after the Participant’s death. No such
interest shall be subject to execution, attachment or similar legal process, including, without limitation, seizure for the payment of the Participant’s
debts,  judgments,  alimony,  or  separate  maintenance.  Except  as  provided  in  this  Section  13,  during  the  lifetime  of  a  Participant,  Awards  are
exercisable only by the Participant or his or her legal representative in the case of physical or mental incapacitation of the Participant as evidenced
by legal order.
Section 14. Adjustments
14.1 No Corporate Action Restriction. The existence of the Plan, any Award agreement and/or the Awards granted hereunder shall not limit,
affect  or  restrict  in  any  way  the  right  or  power  of  the  Board  or  the  shareholders  of  the  Company  to  make  or  authorize  (a)  any  adjustment,
recapitalization, reorganization or other change in the Company’s or any subsidiary’s capital structure or its business, (b) any merger, consolidation
or change in the ownership of the Company or any subsidiary, (c) any issue of bonds, debentures, capital, preferred or prior preference stocks
ahead of or affecting the Company’s or any subsidiary’s capital stock or the rights thereof, (d) any dissolution or liquidation of the Company or any
subsidiary, (e) any sale or transfer of all or any part of the Company’s or any subsidiary’s assets or business, or (f) any other corporate act or
proceeding by the Company or any subsidiary. No Participant, beneficiary or any other person shall have any claim against any member of the
Board or the Committee, the Company or any subsidiary, or any employees, officers, shareholders or agents of the Company or any subsidiary, as a
result of any such action.
14.2 Recapitalization Adjustments. In the event of a dividend or other distribution (whether in the form of cash, Common Stock, other securities, or
other property) other than regular cash dividends, recapitalization, stock split, reverse stock split, reorganization, merger, consolidation, split-up,
spin-off, combination, change in control or exchange of Common Stock or other securities of the Company, or other corporate transaction or event
affects the Common Stock such that an adjustment is necessary or appropriate in order to prevent dilution or enlargement of benefits or potential
benefits  intended  to  be  made  available  under  the  Plan,  the  Board  shall  equitably  adjust  (a)  the  number  of  shares  of  Common  Stock  or  other
securities of the Company (or number and kind of other securities or property) with respect
8

to  which  Awards  may  be  granted,  (b)  the  maximum  share  limitation  applicable  to  each  type  of  Award  that  may  be  granted  to  any  individual
Participant  in any calendar year,  (c)  the number  of shares  of Common  Stock  or other  securities  of the Company (or  number  and kind of other
securities or property) subject to outstanding Awards, and (d) the exercise price with respect to any Option or the grant price with respect to any
Stock Appreciation Right.
14.3 Corporate Transactions. If the Company enters into or is involved in any Corporate Transaction, the Board may, prior to such Corporate
Transaction  and  effective  upon  such  Corporate  Transaction,  take  such  action  as  it  deems  appropriate,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  replacing
outstanding Awards with Substitute Awards in respect of the shares, other securities or other property of the surviving corporation or any affiliate of
the surviving corporation on such terms and conditions, as to the number of shares, pricing and otherwise, which shall substantially preserve the
value,  rights  and  benefits  of  any  affected  Awards  granted  hereunder  as  of  the  date  of  the  consummation  of  the  Corporate  Transaction.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Plan, if any Corporate Transaction occurs, the Company shall have the right, but not the obligation,
to cancel each Participant’s Options and/or Stock Appreciation Rights and to pay to each affected Participant in connection with the cancellation of
such Participant’s Options and/or Stock Appreciation Rights, an amount equal to the excess (if any) of the Corporate Transaction Price (as defined
below),  as  determined  by  the  Board,  of  the  Common  Stock  underlying  any  unexercised  Options  or  Stock  Appreciation  Rights  (whether  then
exercisable  or  not)  over  the  aggregate  exercise  price  of  such  unexercised  Options  and/or  Stock  Appreciation  Rights,  and  make  additional
adjustments and/or settlements of other outstanding Awards as it determines to be fair and equitable to affected Participants. Upon receipt by any
affected Participant of any such Substitute Award (or payment) as a result of any such Corporate Transaction, such Participant’s affected Awards for
which such Substitute Awards (or payment) were received shall be thereupon cancelled without the need for obtaining the consent of any such
affected Participant.
Subject  to  the  provisions  of  the  preceding  paragraph,  the  Board  shall  not  take  any  further  action  that  causes  any  Awards,  which  are  not  then
exercisable and vested, to automatically become vested and exercisable in connection with a Corporate Transaction under this Section 14.3.
For purposes of the Plan,
(a) “Corporate Transaction” means the occurrence of any of the following events: (i) any “person” (as such term is used in Sections 13(d) and 14(d)
of the Exchange Act)  becomes  the “beneficial  owner”  (as defined in Rule 13d-3 of the Exchange Act),  directly  or indirectly,  of securities  of the
Company representing fifty percent (50%) or more of the total voting power represented by the Company’s then-outstanding voting securities; (ii) the
consummation of the sale or disposition by the Company of all or substantially all of the Company’s assets; (iii) the consummation of a merger or
consolidation of the Company with any other corporation, other than a merger or consolidation which would result in the voting securities of the
Company outstanding immediately prior thereto continuing to represent (either by remaining outstanding or by being converted into voting securities
of the surviving entity or its parent) at least fifty percent (50%) of the total voting power represented by the voting securities of the Company or such
surviving entity or its parent outstanding immediately after such merger or consolidation or (iv) individuals who, as of the date hereof, constitute the
Board (the “Incumbent Board”) cease for any reason to constitute at least a majority of the Board; provided, however, that any individual becoming a
director subsequent to the date hereof whose election, or nomination for election by the Company’s shareholders, was approved by a vote of at
least  a  majority  of  the  directors  then  comprising  the  Incumbent  Board  shall  be  considered  as  though  such  individual  were  a  member  of  the
Incumbent Board, but excluding, for this purpose, any such individual whose initial assumption of office occurs as a result of an actual or threatened
election contest with respect to the election or removal of directors or other actual or threatened solicitation of proxies or consents by or on behalf of
a person other than the Board.
(b) “Corporate Transaction Price” means the highest price per share of Common Stock paid in any transaction related to a Corporate Transaction.
To the extent that the consideration paid in any Corporate Transaction consists all or in part of securities or other non-cash consideration, the value
of such securities or other non-cash consideration shall be determined in the good-faith discretion of the Board consistent with provisions of Section
409A and/or other applicable law.
Section 15. Amendment and Termination
15.1 Amendment, Suspension or Termination of the Plan. The Board or the Committee may amend, suspend or terminate the Plan or any
portion of the Plan at any time and in such respects as it shall deem advisable; provided, however, that, to the extent required by applicable law,
regulation or stock exchange rule, shareholder approval shall be required for any amendment to the Plan.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, an amendment that constitutes a “material revision,” as defined by the rules of the New York Stock Exchange shall
be submitted to the Company’s shareholders for approval. In
9

addition, any revision that deletes or limits the scope of the provisions in Sections 7.2 and 8.4 prohibiting repricing of Options or SARs without
shareholder approval and any revision that increases the number of shares stated in Section 4.1 as available for issuance under the Plan shall be
considered material revisions that require shareholder approval.
15.2 Term of the Plan. Unless sooner terminated as provided herein, the Plan shall terminate ten years from the Shareholder Approval Effective
Date. After the Plan is terminated, no future Awards may be granted, but Awards previously granted shall remain outstanding in accordance with
their  applicable  terms  and  conditions  and  the  Plan’s  terms  and  conditions.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  no  Incentive  Stock  Options  may  be
granted more than ten years after the adoption in February 2014 of this amended and restated Plan by the Board.
15.3 Consent of Participant. The amendment, suspension or termination of the Plan or a portion thereof or the amendment of an outstanding
Award shall not, without the Participant’s  consent, materially  adversely affect any rights under any Award theretofore  granted to the Participant
under the Plan. Any change or adjustment to an outstanding Incentive Stock Option shall not, without the consent of the Participant, be made in a
manner so as to constitute a “modification” that would cause such Incentive Stock Option to fail to continue to qualify as an Incentive Stock Option.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any adjustments made pursuant to Section 14 shall not be subject to these restrictions.
Section 16. General
16.1 Clawbacks. Awards under the Plan shall be subject to the Clawback Policy as adopted by the Board and as amended from time to time. In
addition, subject to applicable local law, or except as otherwise expressly provided pursuant to an applicable Award agreement, Awards granted
under the Plan shall be subject to clawback and forfeiture (meaning that the Award must be promptly returned to the Company if already distributed,
or that a Participant will lose his or her entitlement to an Award if it has not yet been distributed) in the event a Participant or former Participant
engages in any of the following conduct, as determined by the Company or its delegate in its sole discretion, prior to the second anniversary of the
later of the vesting or receipt of payment of the Award: the Participant (i) pleads or admits to, is convicted of, or is otherwise found guilty of a criminal
or indictable offense involving theft, fraud, embezzlement, or other similar unlawful acts against the Company or against the Company’s interests; (ii)
directly  or  indirectly  engages  in  competition  with  any  aspect  of  Company  business  with  which  the  Participant  was  involved  or  about  which  the
Participant gained Company proprietary or confidential information;  (iii) induces or attempts to induce, directly or indirectly, any of the Company’s
employees, representatives or consultants to terminate, discontinue or cease working with or for the Company, or to breach any contract with the
Company, in order to work with or for, or enter into a contract with, the Participant or any third party; (iv) disparages or defames the Company,its
products, or its current or former employees, provided that this clause shall not be construed to prohibit any individual from reporting, in good faith,
suspected  unlawful conduct  in the workplace;  or  (v)  takes,  misappropriates,  uses,  or discloses Company proprietary  or confidential  information.
Clawback can, if applicable and where permitted by applicable local law, be made by deducting payments that will be due in the future (including
salary,  bonuses,  and  other  forms  of  compensation).  A  Participant’s  acceptance  of  an  Award  under  the  Plan  shall  constitute  such  Participant’s
acknowledgement and recognition that the Participant’s compliance with this Section is a condition for the Participant’s receipt of the Award. For
purposes of this Section, the Company shall include the Company and all Related Companies.
Nothing in this Section 16.1 will apply to legally protected communications to government agencies or statements made in the course of sworn
testimony in administrative, judicial or arbitral proceedings.
16.2 No Individual Rights. No individual or Participant shall have any claim to be granted any Award under the Plan, and the Company has no
obligation for uniformity of treatment of Participants under the Plan.
Furthermore,  nothing  in  the  Plan  or  any  Award  granted  under  the  Plan  shall  be  deemed  to  constitute  an  employment  contract  or  confer  or  be
deemed to confer on any Participant any right to continue in the employ of, or to continue any other relationship with, the Company or any Related
Company or limit in any way the right of the Company or any Related Company to terminate a Participant’s employment or other relationship at any
time, with or without cause.
16.3 Issuance of Shares. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Plan, the Company shall have no obligation to issue or deliver any shares of
Common Stock under the Plan or make any other distribution of benefits under the Plan unless, in the opinion of the Company’s counsel, such
issuance, delivery or distribution would comply with all applicable laws (including, without limitation, the requirements of the Securities Act or the
laws of any state or foreign jurisdiction) and the applicable requirements of any securities exchange or similar entity.
10

The Company shall be under no obligation to any Participant to register for offering or resale or to qualify for exemption under the Securities Act, or
to register or qualify under the laws of any state or foreign jurisdiction, any shares of Common Stock, security or interest in a security paid or issued
under, or created by, the Plan, or to continue in effect any such registrations or qualifications if made. The Company may issue certificates for
shares with such legends and subject to such restrictions on transfer and stop-transfer instructions as counsel for the Company deems necessary or
desirable  for  compliance  by  the  Company  with  federal,  state  and  foreign  securities  laws.  The  Company  may  also  require  such  other  action  or
agreement by the Participants as may from time to time be necessary to comply with applicable securities laws.
To  the  extent  the  Plan  or  any  instrument  evidencing  an  Award  provides  for  issuance  of  stock  certificates  to  reflect  the  issuance  of  shares  of
Common Stock, the issuance may be effected on a noncertificated basis, to the extent not prohibited by applicable law or the applicable rules of any
stock exchange.
16.4 Indemnification. Each person who is or shall have been a member of the Board, or a committee appointed by the Board, or an officer of the
Company to whom authority was delegated in accordance with Section 3 shall be indemnified and held harmless by the Company against and from
any loss, cost, liability or expense that may be imposed upon or reasonably incurred by him or her in connection with or resulting from any claim,
action, suit or proceeding to which he or she may be a party or in which he or she may be involved by reason of any action taken or failure to act
under the Plan and against and from any and all amounts paid by him or her in settlement thereof, with the Company’s approval, or paid by him or
her in satisfaction of any judgment in any such claim, action, suit or proceeding against him or her; provided, however, that he or she shall give the
Company an opportunity, at its own expense, to handle and defend such claim, action, suit or proceeding before he or she undertakes to handle and
defend the same on his or her own behalf, unless such loss, cost, liability or expense is a result of his or her own willful misconduct or except as
expressly provided by statute.
The foregoing right of indemnification shall not be exclusive of any other rights of indemnification to which such persons may be entitled under the
Company’s certificate of incorporation or bylaws, as a matter of law, or otherwise, or of any power that the Company may have to indemnify them or
hold them harmless.
16.5 No  Rights  as  a  Shareholder. Unless  otherwise  provided  by  the  Committee  or  in  the  instrument  evidencing  the  Award  or  in  a  written
employment or services agreement, no Option or Award denominated in units shall entitle the Participant to any cash dividend, voting or other right
of a shareholder unless and until the date of issuance under the Plan of the shares that are the subject of such Award.
16.6 Compliance With Laws and Regulations. Notwithstanding anything in the Plan to the contrary, the Committee, in its sole discretion, may
bifurcate the Plan so as to restrict, limit or condition the use of any provision of the Plan to Participants who are officers or directors subject to
Section 16 of the Exchange Act without so restricting, limiting or conditioning the Plan with respect to other Participants. With respect to officers and
directors subject to Section 16 of the Exchange Act, transactions under the Plan are intended to comply with all applicable conditions of Rule 16b-3
promulgated under the Exchange Act.
Additionally, in interpreting and applying the provisions of the Plan, any Option granted as an Incentive Stock Option pursuant to the Plan shall, to
the extent permitted by law, be construed as an “incentive stock option” within the meaning of Section 422 of the Code or any successor provision.
Additionally, notwithstanding anything contained in the Plan to the contrary, it is the Company’s intention that any and all Awards and compensation
payable under the Plan shall satisfy the requirements for exemption under Section 409A and that all terms and provisions shall be interpreted to
satisfy such requirements. If the Committee determines that an Award, payment, distribution, deferral election, transaction or any other action or
arrangement  contemplated  by  the  provisions  of  the  Plan  would,  if  undertaken,  cause  a  Participant  to  become  subject  to  Section  409A,  the
Committee, to the extent it deems necessary or advisable in its sole discretion, reserves the right , but shall not be required, to unilaterally amend or
modify the Plan and any Award granted under the Plan so that the Award qualifies for exemption from or compliance with Section 409A. Awards not
deferred under Section 6.3 and not otherwise exempt from the requirements of Section 409A are intended to qualify for the short-term deferral
exemption to Section 409A, and payment shall be made as soon as administratively feasible after the Award became vested, but in no event shall
such payment be made later than 2-1/2 months after the end of the calendar year in which the Award became vested unless otherwise permitted
under the exemption provisions of Section 409A. Notwithstanding the foregoing, with respect to any Award made under the Plan that is determined
to be “deferred compensation” (within the meaning of Section 409A), (a) references to Termination of Service will mean the Participant’s “separation
from service” (within the meaning of Section 409A) with the Company or any applicable Related Company, and (b) any payment to be made with
respect to such Award in connection with the Participant’s Termination of Service that would be subject to the limitations in Section 409A(a)(2)(b) of
the Code shall be delayed until six months after
11

the Participant’s separation from service (or earlier death) in accordance with the requirements of Section 409A.
16.7 Participants in Other Countries. The Committee shall have the authority to adopt such modifications, procedures and subplans as may be
necessary or desirable to comply with provisions of the laws of other countries in which the Company or any Related Company may operate to
ensure the viability of the benefits from Awards granted to Participants employed in such countries, to comply with applicable foreign laws and to
meet the objectives of the Plan.
Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 7.2 and 8.1, where applicable foreign law requires that compensatory stock right be priced based upon a
specific price averaging method and period, a stock right granted in accordance with such applicable foreign law will be treated as meeting the
requirements of Sections 7.2 or 8.1, provided that the averaging period does not exceed 30 days.
16.8 No Trust or Fund. The Plan is intended to constitute an “unfunded” plan. Nothing contained herein shall require the Company to segregate
any monies or other property, or shares of Common Stock, or to create any trusts, or to make any special deposits for any immediate or deferred
amounts payable to any Participant, and no Participant shall have any rights that are greater than those of a general unsecured creditor of the
Company.
16.9 Successors All obligations of the Company under the Plan with respect to Awards shall be binding on any successor to the Company, whether
the  existence  of  such  successor  is  the  result  of  a  direct  or  indirect  purchase,  merger,  consolidation,  or  otherwise,  of  all  or  substantially  all  the
business and/or assets of the Company.
16.10 Severability. If any provision of the Plan or any Award is determined to be invalid, illegal or unenforceable in any jurisdiction, or as to any
person, or would disqualify the Plan or any Award under any law deemed applicable by the Committee, such provision shall be construed or deemed
amended to conform to applicable laws, or, if it cannot be so construed or deemed amended without, in the Committee’s determination, materially
altering the intent of the Plan or the Award, such provision shall be stricken as to such jurisdiction, person or Award, and the remainder of the Plan
and any such Award shall remain in full force and effect.
16.11 Choice of Law. The Plan, all Awards granted thereunder and all determinations made and actions taken pursuant thereto, to the extent not
otherwise governed by the laws of the United States, shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Delaware,
without reference to the principles of conflict of laws thereof, except as otherwise expressly provided in an applicable Award agreement.
Section 17. Restatement Effective Date
This amendment and restatement of the Plan shall be effective December 9, 2021.
12

EXHIBIT 21
The Boeing Company Subsidiaries
Name
Place of Incorporation
Astro Limited
Bermuda
Aviall, Inc.
Delaware
BCC Equipment Leasing Corporation
Delaware
Boeing Aircraft Holding Company
Delaware
Boeing Capital Corporation
Delaware
Boeing CAS Holding GmbH
Germany
Boeing Defence Australia Ltd
Australia
Boeing Deutschland GmbH
Germany
Boeing Digital Solutions, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Distribution Services, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Distribution, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Europe B.V.
Netherlands
Boeing Global Holdings Corporation
Delaware
Boeing International Logistics Spares, Inc.
Delaware
Jeppesen Deutschland GmbH
Germany
In accordance with Item 601(b)(21) of Regulation S-K, the company has omitted from this Exhibit the names of its subsidiaries which, considered in
the aggregate or as a single subsidiary, do not constitute a significant subsidiary as defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X.

EXHIBIT 23
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement Nos. 33-25332, 33-31434, 33-43854, 33-58798, 33-52773, 333-16363, 333-
26867,  333-32461,  333-32491,  333-32499,  333-32567,  333-41920,  333-54234,  333-73252,  333-107677,  333-140837,  333-156403,  333-160752,
333-163637, 333-195777, 333-228097, and 333-252770 on Form S-8 and Registration Statement Nos. 333-240300, 333-249827, and 333-250000
on Form S-3 of our reports dated January 31, 2022, relating to the financial statements of The Boeing Company and the effectiveness of The Boeing
Company's internal control over financial reporting appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2021.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
January 31, 2022

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, David L. Calhoun, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: January 31, 2022
/s/ David L. Calhoun
David L. Calhoun
President and Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Brian J. West, certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All  significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: January 31, 2022
/s/ Brian J. West
Brian J. West
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2021, as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, David L. Calhoun, President and Chief Executive Officer of the
Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ David L. Calhoun
David L. Calhoun
President and Chief Executive Officer
January 31, 2022

EXHIBIT 32.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2021, as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Brian J. West, Executive Vice President and Chief Financial
Officer of the Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ Brian J. West
Brian J. West
Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer
January 31, 2022
