UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
x
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017
or
¨
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from                          to                         
Commission file number 1-442
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
 
91-0425694
State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, IL
 
60606-1596
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (312) 544-2000 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Common Stock, $5 par value
 
New York Stock Exchange
(Title of each class)
 
(Name of each exchange on which registered)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes  x No ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes  ¨ No x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during
the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days. Yes  x  No ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes  x No ¨
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§ 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not
be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any
amendment to this Form 10-K.Yes  ¨ No x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, an accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, smaller reporting company, or an emerging
growth company. See the definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer,” “smaller reporting company,” and “emerging growth company” in Rule 12b-2
of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer x
Accelerated filer  ¨
Non-accelerated filer ¨  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Smaller reporting company  ¨
Emerging growth company ¨
If an emerging growth company, indicate by check mark if the registrant has elected not to use the extended transition period for complying with any new or
revised financial accounting standards provided pursuant to Section 13(a) of the Exchange Act. ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes  ¨  No x
As  of June  30,  2017 ,  there  were 593,198,552 common  shares  outstanding  held  by  nonaffiliates  of  the  registrant,  and  the  aggregate  market  value  of  the
common shares (based upon the closing price of these shares on the New York Stock Exchange) was approximately $117.3 billion .
The number of shares of the registrant’s common stock outstanding as of February 5, 2018 was 588,490,313 .
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference to the registrant’s definitive proxy statement, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission within 120
days after the close of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2017 .

Table of Contents
THE BOEING COMPANY
Index to the Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2017
 
PART I
 
 
Page
Item  1.
Business
1
Item  1A.
Risk Factors
5
Item  1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
14
Item  2.
Properties
15
Item  3.
Legal Proceedings
15
Item  4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
15
PART II
Item  5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
16
Item  6.
Selected Financial Data
17
Item  7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
18
Item  7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
44
Item  8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
45
Item  9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
108
Item  9A.
Controls and Procedures
108
Item  9B.
Other Information
108
PART III
Item  10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
109
Item  11.
Executive Compensation
111
Item  12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
112
Item  13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
112
Item  14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
113
PART IV
Item  15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
113
Item  16.
Form 10-K Summary
115
Signatures
116

Table of Contents
PART I
Item 1. Business
The Boeing Company, together with its subsidiaries (herein referred to as “Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our”), is one of the world’s major
aerospace firms.
We are organized based on the products and services we offer. We operate in four reportable segments:
•
Commercial Airplanes (BCA);
•
Defense, Space & Security ( BDS );
•
Global Services ( BGS );
•
Boeing Capital ( BCC ).
Commercial Airplanes Segment
This  segment  develops,  produces  and  markets  commercial  jet  aircraft  and  provides  fleet  support  services,  principally  to  the  commercial  airline
industry worldwide. We are a leading producer of commercial aircraft and offer a family of commercial jetliners designed to meet a broad spectrum
of global passenger and cargo requirements of airlines. This family of commercial jet aircraft in production includes the 737 narrow-body model and
the 747, 767, 777 and 787 wide-body models. Development continues on the 787-10 and certain 737 MAX derivatives and the 777X program.
Defense, Space & Security Segment
This  segment  is  engaged  in  the  research,  development,  production  and  modification  of  manned  and  unmanned  military  aircraft  and  weapons
systems for global strike, including fighter aircraft and missile systems; vertical lift, including rotorcraft and tilt-rotor aircraft; mobility, surveillance and
engagement,  including  battle  management,  airborne,  anti-submarine,  transport  and  tanker  aircraft.  In  addition,  this  segment  is  engaged  in  the
research,  development,  production  and  modification  of  the  following  products  and  related  services:  strategic  defense  and  intelligence  systems,
including  strategic  missile  and  defense  systems,  command,  control,  communications,  computers,  intelligence,  surveillance  and  reconnaissance
(C4ISR), cyber and information solutions, and intelligence systems; satellite systems, including government and commercial satellites and space
exploration.
BDS' primary customer is the United States Department of Defense ( U.S. DoD ). Revenues from the U.S. DoD, including foreign military sales
through  the  U.S.  government,  accounted  for  approximately 79% of  its 2017 revenues.  Other  significant BDS customers  include  the  National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) and customers in international defense, civil and commercial satellite markets.
This  segment's  primary  products  include  the  following  fixed-wing  military  aircraft:  EA-18G  Growler  Airborne  Electronic  Attack,  F/A-18E/F  Super
Hornet, F-15 Strike Eagle, P-8 programs, and KC-46A Tanker. This segment produces rotorcraft and rotary-wing programs, such as CH-47 Chinook,
AH-64 Apache, and V-22 Osprey. In addition, this segment's products include space and missile systems including: government and commercial
satellites, the International Space Station, missile defense and weapons programs, and Joint Direct Attack Munition, as well as the United Launch
Alliance joint venture.
Global Services Segment
This segment provides services to our commercial and defense customers. This segment offers aviation services support, aircraft modifications,
spare parts, training, maintenance documents, data analytics and information-based services, and technical advice to commercial and government
customers worldwide.
1

Table of Contents
In addition, BGS sustains aircraft and systems with a full spectrum of products and services through integrated logistics, including supply chain
management  and  engineering  support;  maintenance,  modification  and  upgrades  for  aircraft;  and  training  systems  and  government  services,
including pilot and maintenance training. Major defense programs supported include the C-17 Globemaster III, F-15 Strike Eagle, F/A-18E/F Super
Hornet, and AH-64 Apache for domestic and international customers.
Boeing Capital Segment
BCC seeks to ensure that Boeing customers have the financing they need to buy and take delivery of their Boeing product and manages overall
financing exposure. BCC ’s portfolio consists of equipment under operating leases, finance leases, notes and other receivables, assets held for sale
or re-lease and investments.
Financial and Other Business Information
See the Summary of Business Segment Data and Note 21 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for financial information, including revenues
and earnings from operations, for each of our business segments.
Intellectual Property
We own numerous patents and have licenses for the use of patents owned by others, which relate to our products and their manufacture. In addition
to owning a large portfolio of intellectual property, we also license intellectual property to and from third parties. For example, the U.S. government
has licenses in our patents that are developed in performance of government contracts, and it may use or authorize others to use the inventions
covered by such patents for government purposes. Unpatented research, development and engineering skills, as well as certain trademarks, trade
secrets,  and  other  intellectual  property  rights,  also  make  an  important  contribution  to  our  business.  While  our  intellectual  property  rights  in  the
aggregate  are  important  to  the  operation  of  each  of  our  businesses,  we  do  not  believe  that  our  business  would  be  materially  affected  by  the
expiration of any particular intellectual property right or termination of any particular intellectual property patent license agreement.
Non-U.S. Revenues
See Note 21 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding non-U.S. revenues.
Research and Development
Research and development (R&D) expenditures involve experimentation, design, development and related test activities for defense systems, new
and  derivative  jet  aircraft  including  both  commercial  and  military,  advanced  space  and  other  company-sponsored  product  development.  R&D
expenditures are expensed as incurred including amounts allocable as reimbursable overhead costs on U.S. government contracts.
Our total research and development expense, net amounted to $3.2 billion , $4.6 billion and $3.3 billion in 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Research and development costs also include bid and proposal efforts related to government products and services, as well as costs incurred in
excess  of  amounts  estimated  to  be  recoverable  under  cost-sharing  research  and  development  agreements.  Bid  and  proposal  costs  were $288
million , $311 million and $286 million in 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
2

Table of Contents
Employees
Total workforce level at December 31, 2017 was approximately 140,800 . As of December 31, 2017 , our principal collective bargaining agreements
were with the following unions:
Union
Percent of our
Employees
Represented
Status of the Agreements with Major Union
The International Association of Machinists and
Aerospace Workers (IAM)
21%
We have two major agreements; one expiring in June 2022 and one in
September 2024.
The Society of Professional Engineering Employees
in Aerospace (SPEEA)
12%
We have two major agreements expiring in Octo ber 2022.
The United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural
Implement Workers of America (UAW)
1%
We have one major agreement expiring in October 2022.
Competition
The commercial jet aircraft  market and the airline industry remain extremely competitive.  We face aggressive international competitors  who are
intent  on  increasing  their  market  share,  such  as  Airbus,  Embraer  and  Bombardier,  and  other  entrants  from  Russia,  China  and  Japan.  We  are
focused on improving our processes and continuing cost reduction efforts. We intend to continue to compete with other airplane manufacturers by
providing customers with greater value products.
BDS  faces  strong  competition  in  all  market  segments,  primarily  from  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation,  Northrop  Grumman  Corporation,  Raytheon
Company, General Dynamics Corporation and SpaceX. Non-U.S. companies such as BAE Systems and Airbus Group continue to build a strategic
presence in the U.S. market by strengthening their North American operations and partnering with U.S. defense companies. In addition, certain
competitors have occasionally formed teams with other competitors to address specific customer requirements. BDS expects the trend of strong
competition to continue into 2018 .
The  commercial  and  defense  services  market  is  an  extremely  challenging  landscape  made  up  of  many  of  the  same  strong  U.S.  and  non-U.S.
competitors facing BCA and BDS along with other competitors in those markets. BGS leverages our extensive services network offering products
and services which span the life cycle of our defense and commercial airplane programs: training, fleet services and logistics, maintenance and
engineering,  modifications  and  upgrades  -  as  well  as  the  daily  cycle  of  gate-to-gate  operations.  BGS  expects  the  market  to  remain  highly
competitive in 2018, and intends to grow market share by leveraging a high level of customer satisfaction and productivity.
Regulatory Matters
Our businesses are heavily regulated in most of our markets. We deal with numerous U.S. government agencies and entities, including but not
limited  to  all  of  the  branches  of  the  U.S.  military,  NASA,  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA)  and  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security.
Similar government authorities exist in our non-U.S. markets.
Government Contracts. The U.S. government, and other governments, may terminate any of our government contracts at their convenience, as well
as for default based on our failure to meet specified performance requirements. If any of our U.S. government contracts were to be terminated for
convenience, we generally would be entitled to receive payment for work completed and allowable termination or cancellation costs. If any of our
government contracts were to be terminated for default, generally the U.S.
3

Table of Contents
government would pay only for the work that has been accepted and could require us to pay the difference between the original contract price and
the cost  to re-procure  the  contract  items,  net  of  the  work  accepted  from  the  original  contract.  The  U.S.  government  can  also hold us  liable for
damages resulting from the default.
Commercial Aircraft. In the U.S., our commercial aircraft products are required to comply with FAA regulations governing production and quality
systems, airworthiness and installation approvals, repair procedures and continuing operational safety. Outside the U.S., similar requirements exist
for airworthiness, installation and operational approvals. These requirements are generally administered by the national aviation authorities of each
country and, in the case of Europe, coordinated by the European Joint Aviation Authorities.
Environmental. We are subject to various federal, state, local and non-U.S. laws and regulations relating to environmental protection, including the
discharge, treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. We continually assess our compliance status and
management  of  environmental  matters  to  ensure  our  operations  are  in  compliance  with  all  applicable  environmental  laws  and  regulations.
Investigation, remediation, and operation and maintenance costs associated with environmental compliance and management of sites are a normal,
recurring part of our operations. These costs often are allowable costs under our contracts with the U.S. government. It is reasonably possible that
costs incurred to ensure continued environmental compliance could have a material impact on our results of operations, financial condition or cash
flows  if  additional  work  requirements  or  more  stringent  clean-up  standards  are  imposed  by  regulators,  new  areas  of  soil,  air  and  groundwater
contamination are discovered and/or expansions of work scope are prompted by the results of investigations.
A Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) has joint and several liability under existing U.S. environmental laws. Where we have been designated a PRP
by the Environmental Protection Agency or a state environmental agency, we are potentially liable to the government or third parties for the full cost
of remediating contamination at our facilities or former facilities or at third-party sites. If we were required to fully fund the remediation of a site for
which we were originally assigned a partial share, the statutory framework would allow us to pursue rights to contribution from other PRPs. For
additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-U.S.  Sales. Our  non-U.S.  sales  are  subject  to  both  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  governmental  regulations  and  procurement  policies  and  practices,
including regulations relating to import-export control, investment, exchange controls, anti-corruption, and repatriation of earnings. Non-U.S. sales
are also subject to varying currency, political and economic risks.
Raw Materials, Parts, and Subassemblies
We  are  highly  dependent  on  the  availability  of  essential  materials,  parts  and  subassemblies  from  our  suppliers  and  subcontractors.  The  most
important raw materials required for our aerospace products are aluminum (sheet, plate, forgings and extrusions), titanium (sheet, plate, forgings
and extrusions) and composites (including carbon and boron). Although alternative sources generally exist for these raw materials, qualification of
the sources could take a year or more. Many major components and product equipment items are procured or subcontracted on a sole-source basis
with a number of companies.
Suppliers
We are dependent upon the ability of a large number of U.S. and non-U.S. suppliers and subcontractors to meet performance specifications, quality
standards and delivery schedules at our anticipated costs. While we maintain an extensive qualification and performance surveillance system to
control  risk  associated  with  such  reliance  on  third  parties,  failure  of  suppliers  or  subcontractors  to  meet  commitments  could  adversely  affect
production schedules and program/contract profitability, thereby jeopardizing our ability
4

Table of Contents
to fulfill commitments to our customers. We are also dependent on the availability of energy sources, such as electricity, at affordable prices.
Seasonality
No material portion of our business is considered to be seasonal.
Executive Officers of the Registrant
See “Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance” in Part III.
Other Information
Boeing was originally incorporated in the State of Washington in 1916 and reincorporated in Delaware in 1934. Our principal executive offices are
located at 100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60606 and our telephone number is (312) 544-2000.
General information about us can be found at www.boeing.com. The information contained on or connected to our website is not incorporated by
reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K and should not be considered part of this or any other report filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission  (SEC).  Our  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  Quarterly  Reports  on  Form  10-Q  and  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K,  as  well  as  any
amendments to those reports, are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish
them to, the SEC. These reports may also be obtained at the SEC’s public reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. The SEC
also maintains a website at www.sec.gov that contains reports, proxy statements and other information regarding SEC registrants, including Boeing.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report, as well as our annual report to shareholders, quarterly reports, and other filings we make with the SEC, press and earnings releases
and other written and oral communications, contain “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act
of  1995.  Words  such  as  “may,”  “should,”  “expects,”  “intends,”  “projects,”  “plans,”  “believes,”  “estimates,”  “targets,”  “anticipates”  and  similar
expressions generally identify these forward-looking statements. Examples of forward-looking statements include statements relating to our future
financial condition and operating results, as well as any other statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact.
Forward-looking statements are based on expectations and assumptions that we believe to be reasonable when made, but that may not prove to be
accurate. These statements are not guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict.
Many factors, including those set forth in the “Risk Factors” section below and other important factors disclosed in this report and from time to time in
our other filings with the SEC, could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely from these forward-looking statements. Any forward-
looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we assume no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
Item 1A. Risk Factors
An investment in our common stock or debt securities involves risks and uncertainties and our actual results and future trends may differ materially
from our past or projected future performance. We urge investors to consider carefully the risk factors described below in evaluating the information
contained in this report.
5

Table of Contents
Our Commercial Airplanes and Global Services businesses depend heavily on commercial airlines, and are subject to unique risks.
Market  conditions  have  a  significant  impact  on  demand  for  our  commercial  aircraft  and  related  services. The  commercial  aircraft  market  is
predominantly  driven  by  long-term  trends  in  airline  passenger  and  cargo  traffic.  The  principal  factors  underlying  long-term  traffic  growth  are
sustained economic growth and political stability both in developed and emerging markets. Demand for our commercial aircraft is further influenced
by airline profitability, availability of aircraft financing, world trade policies, government-to-government relations, technological advances, price and
other competitive factors, fuel prices, terrorism, epidemics and environmental regulations. Traditionally, the airline industry has been cyclical and
very  competitive  and  has  experienced  significant  profit  swings  and  constant  challenges  to  be  more  cost  competitive.  In  addition,  availability  of
financing to non-U.S. customers depends in part on the Export-Import Bank of the United States being fully operational. Significant deterioration in
the global economic environment, the airline industry generally, or the financial stability of one or more of our major customers could result in fewer
new orders for aircraft or services, or could cause customers to seek to postpone or cancel contractual orders and/or payments to us, which could
result in lower revenues, profitability and cash flows and a reduction in our contractual backlog. In addition, because our commercial aircraft backlog
consists  of  aircraft  scheduled  for  delivery  over  a  period  of  several  years,  any  of  these  macroeconomic,  industry  or  customer  impacts  could
unexpectedly affect deliveries over a long period.
We enter into firm fixed-price aircraft sales contracts with indexed price escalation clauses which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns
or if increases in our costs exceed the applicable escalation rate. Commercial aircraft sales contracts are often entered into years before the aircraft
are delivered. In order to help account for economic fluctuations between the contract date and delivery date, aircraft pricing generally consists of a
fixed amount as modified by price escalation formulas derived from labor, commodity and other price indices. Our revenue estimates are based on
current expectations with respect to these escalation formulas, but the actual escalation amounts are outside of our control. Escalation factors can
fluctuate  significantly  from  period  to  period.  Changes  in  escalation  amounts  can  significantly  impact  revenues  and  operating  margins  in  our
Commercial Airplanes business.
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from a limited number of commercial airlines. We can make no assurance that any customer will
exercise purchase options, fulfill existing purchase commitments or purchase additional products or services from us. In addition, fleet decisions,
airline consolidations or financial challenges involving any of our major commercial airline customers could significantly reduce our revenues and
limit our opportunity to generate profits from those customers.
Our Commercial Airplanes business depends on our ability to maintain a healthy production system, achieve planned production rate
targets, successfully develop new aircraft or new derivative aircraft, and meet or exceed stringent performance and reliability standards.
The commercial aircraft business is extremely complex, involving extensive coordination and integration with U.S and non-U.S. suppliers, highly-
skilled labor from thousands of employees and other partners, and stringent regulatory requirements and performance and reliability standards. In
addition,  the  introduction  of  new  aircraft  programs  and/or  derivatives,  such  as  the  787-10,  and  777X,  involves  increased  risks  associated  with
meeting  development,  testing,  production  and  certification  schedules.  As  a  result,  our  ability  to  deliver  aircraft  on  time,  satisfy  regulatory  and
customer requirements, and achieve or maintain, as applicable, program profitability is subject to significant risks.
We  must  minimize  disruption  caused  by  production  changes  and  achieve  productivity  improvements  in  order  to  meet  customer  demand  and
maintain our profitability. We have plans to adjust production rates on several of our commercial aircraft programs, while at the same time engaging
in significant ongoing development and production of the 787-10 and 777X aircraft. In addition, we continue to seek opportunities to reduce the costs
of building our aircraft, including working with our suppliers to reduce supplier costs,
6

Table of Contents
identifying  and  implementing  productivity  improvements,  and  optimizing  how  we  manage  inventory.  If  production  rate  changes  at  any  of  our
commercial aircraft assembly facilities are delayed or create significant disruption to our production system, or if our suppliers cannot timely deliver
components  to  us  at  the  cost  and  rates  necessary  to  achieve  our  targets,  we  may  be  unable  to  meet  delivery  schedules  and/or  the  financial
performance of one or more of our programs may suffer.
Operational  challenges  impacting  the  production  system  for  one  or  more  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs  could  result  in  production  delays
and/or  failure  to  meet  customer  demand  for  new  aircraft,  either  of  which  would  negatively  impact  our  revenues  and  operating  margins. Our
commercial aircraft production system is extremely complex. Operational issues, including delays or defects in supplier components, failure to meet
internal performance plans, or delays or failures to achieve required regulatory certifications, could result in significant out-of-sequence work and
increased production costs, as well as delayed deliveries to customers, impacts to aircraft performance and/or increased warranty or fleet support
costs.
If our commercial airplanes fail to satisfy performance and reliability requirements, we could face additional costs and/or lower revenues. Developing
and manufacturing commercial aircraft that meet or exceed our performance and reliability standards, as well as those of customers and regulatory
agencies, can be costly and technologically challenging. These challenges are particularly significant with newer aircraft programs. Any failure of any
Boeing aircraft to satisfy performance or reliability requirements could result in disruption to our operations, higher costs and/or lower revenues.
Changes in levels of U.S. government defense spending or overall acquisition priorities could negatively impact our financial position
and results of operations.
We  derive  a  substantial  portion  of  our  revenue  from  the  U.S.  government,  primarily  from  defense  related  programs  with  the  United  States
Department of Defense ( U.S. DoD ). Levels of U.S. defense spending are very difficult to predict and may be impacted by numerous factors such as
the political environment, U.S. foreign policy, macroeconomic conditions and the ability of the U.S. government to enact relevant legislation such as
authorization and appropriations bills.
In  addition,  significant  budgetary  delays  and  constraints  have  already  resulted  in  reduced  spending  levels,  and  additional  reductions  may  be
forthcoming.  The  Budget  Control  Act  of  2011  (The  Act)  established  limits  on  U.S.  government  discretionary  spending,  including  a  reduction  of
defense spending between the 2012 and 2021 U.S. government  fiscal years. Accordingly,  long-term  uncertainty remains with respect to overall
levels of defense spending and it is likely that U.S. government discretionary spending levels will continue to be subject to pressure.
In  addition,  there  continues  to  be  significant  uncertainty  with  respect  to  program-level  appropriations  for  the U.S.  DoD and  other  government
agencies  (including  NASA)  within  the  overall  budgetary  framework  described  above.  While  the  House  and  Senate  Appropriations  committees
included funding for Boeing’s major programs,  such as F/A-18,  CH-47 Chinook, AH-64 Apache, KC-46A Tanker and P-8 programs, in the final
FY2017  appropriation  and  in  their  FY2018  bills,  uncertainty  remains  about  how  defense  budgets  in  FY2018  and  beyond  will  affect  Boeing’s
programs. Future budget cuts, including cuts mandated by sequestration, or future procurement decisions associated with the authorizations and
appropriations process could result in reductions, cancellations, and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could have a
material effect on the results of the Company’s operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
In  addition,  as  a  result  of  the  significant  ongoing  uncertainty  with  respect  to  both  U.S.  defense  spending  levels  and  the  nature  of  the  threat
environment, we expect the U.S. DoD to continue to emphasize cost-cutting and other efficiency initiatives in its procurement processes. If we can
no longer  adjust successfully  to these  changing acquisition  priorities  and/or  fail  to meet  affordability  targets  set by the U.S. DoD customer, our
revenues and market share would be further impacted.
7

Table of Contents
We conduct a significant portion of our business pursuant to U.S. government contracts, which are subject to unique risks.
In 2017 , 31% of our revenues were earned pursuant to U.S. government contracts, which include foreign military sales (FMS) through the U.S.
government. Business conducted pursuant to such contracts is subject to extensive procurement regulations and other unique risks.
Our sales to the U.S. government are subject to extensive procurement regulations, and changes to those regulations could increase our costs. New
procurement regulations, or changes to existing requirements, could increase our compliance costs or otherwise have a material impact on the
operating margins of our BDS and BGS businesses. These requirements may result in increased compliance costs, and we could be subject to
additional  costs  in  the  form  of  withheld  payments  and/or  reduced  future  business  if  we  fail  to  comply  with  these  requirements  in  the  future.
Compliance costs attributable to current and potential future procurement regulations such as these could negatively impact our financial condition
and operating results.
The U.S. government may modify, curtail or terminate one or more of our contracts. The U.S. government contracting party may modify, curtail or
terminate its contracts and subcontracts with us, without prior notice and either at its convenience or for default based on performance. In addition,
funding pursuant to our U.S. government contracts may be reduced or withheld as part of the U.S. Congressional appropriations process due to
fiscal constraints, changes in U.S. national security strategy and/or priorities or other reasons. Further uncertainty with respect to ongoing programs
could also result in the event that the U.S. government finances its operations through temporary funding measures such as “continuing resolutions”
rather than full-year appropriations. Any loss or anticipated loss or reduction of expected funding and/or modification, curtailment, or termination of
one or more large programs could have a material adverse effect on our earnings, cash flow and/or financial position.
We are subject to U.S. government inquiries and investigations, including periodic audits of costs that we determine are reimbursable under U.S.
government contracts. U.S. government agencies, including the Defense Contract Audit Agency and the Defense Contract Management Agency,
routinely  audit government  contractors.  These agencies review our performance  under contracts,  cost  structure  and compliance  with applicable
laws, regulations, and standards, as well as the adequacy of and our compliance with our internal control systems and policies. Any costs found to
be misclassified or inaccurately allocated to a specific contract will be deemed non-reimbursable, and to the extent already reimbursed, must be
refunded.  Any  inadequacies  in  our  systems  and  policies  could  result  in  withholds  on  billed  receivables,  penalties  and  reduced  future  business.
Furthermore,  if  any  audit,  inquiry  or  investigation  uncovers  improper  or  illegal  activities,  we  could  be  subject  to  civil  and  criminal  penalties  and
administrative sanctions, including termination of contracts, forfeiture of profits, suspension of payments, fines, and suspension or debarment from
doing business with the U.S. government. We also could suffer reputational harm if allegations of impropriety were made against us, even if such
allegations are later determined to be false.
We enter into fixed-price contracts which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns.
Our BDS and BGS defense businesses generated approximately 65% and 77% of their 2017 revenues from fixed-price contracts. While fixed-price
contracts enable us to benefit from performance improvements, cost reductions and efficiencies, they also subject us to the risk of reduced margins
or incurring losses if we are unable to achieve estimated costs and revenues. If our estimated costs exceed our estimated price, we recognize
reach-forward losses which can significantly affect our reported results. For example, during 2017, we recorded reach-forward losses totaling $471
million on the USAF KC-46A Tanker contract, primarily driven by additional costs attributable to certification and incorporating changes into low rate
initial production (LRIP) aircraft. The long term nature of many of our contracts makes the process of estimating costs and revenues on fixed-price
contracts inherently risky. Fixed-price contracts often contain price incentives and penalties tied to performance which can be difficult to estimate
and have significant
8

Table of Contents
impacts on margins. In addition, some of our contracts have specific provisions relating to cost, schedule and performance.
Fixed-price  development  contracts  are  generally  subject  to  more  uncertainty  than  fixed-price  production  contracts.  Many  of  these  development
programs have highly complex designs. In addition, technical or quality issues that arise during development could lead to schedule delays and
higher costs to complete, which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. Examples of significant BDS
fixed-price development contracts include Commercial Crew, Saudi F-15, USAF KC-46A Tanker , and commercial and military satellites.
We enter into cost-type contracts which also carry risks.
Our BDS and BGS defense businesses generated approximately 35% and 23% of their 2017 revenues from cost-type contracting arrangements.
Some of these are development programs that have complex design and technical challenges. These cost-type programs typically have award or
incentive fees that are subject to uncertainty and may be earned over extended periods. In these cases the associated financial risks are primarily in
reduced fees, lower profit rates or program cancellation if cost, schedule or technical performance  issues arise. Programs  whose contracts  are
primarily cost-type include GMD , Proprietary and SLS programs.
We enter into contracts that include in-orbit incentive payments that subject us to risks.
Contracts in the commercial satellite industry and certain government satellite contracts include in-orbit incentive payments. These in-orbit payments
may be paid over time after final satellite acceptance or paid in full prior to final satellite acceptance. In both cases, the in-orbit incentive payment is
at risk if the satellite does not perform to specifications for up to 15 years after acceptance. The net present value of in-orbit incentive fees we
ultimately  expect  to  realize  is  recognized  as  revenue  in  the  construction  period.  If  the  satellite  fails  to  meet  contractual  performance  criteria,
customers  will not  be obligated  to  continue  making  in-orbit  payments  and/or  we  may  be  required  to  provide  refunds  to  the  customer  and  incur
significant charges.
Our ability to deliver products and services that satisfy customer requirements is heavily dependent on the performance and financial
stability of our subcontractors and suppliers, as well as on the availability of raw materials and other components.
We rely on other companies including U.S. and non-U.S. subcontractors and suppliers to provide and produce raw materials, integrated components
and sub-assemblies, and production commodities and to perform some of the services that we provide to our customers. If one or more of our
suppliers  or  subcontractors  experiences  financial  difficulties,  delivery  delays  or  other  performance  problems,  we  may  be  unable  to  meet
commitments to our customers or incur additional costs. In addition, if one or more of the raw materials on which we depend (such as aluminum,
titanium or composites) becomes unavailable or is available only at very high prices, we may be unable to deliver one or more of our products in a
timely  fashion  or  at  budgeted  costs.  In  some  instances,  we  depend  upon  a  single  source  of  supply.  Any  service  disruption  from  one  of  these
suppliers, either due to circumstances beyond the supplier’s control, such as geo-political developments, or as a result of performance problems or
financial difficulties, could have a material adverse effect on our ability to meet commitments to our customers or increase our operating costs.
We use estimates in accounting for many contracts and programs. Changes in our estimates could adversely affect our future financial
results.
Contract and program accounting require judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating revenues and
9

Table of Contents
costs and making assumptions for schedule and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of many of our contracts and programs, the estimation
of total revenues and cost at completion is complicated and subject to many variables. Assumptions have to be made regarding the length of time to
complete the contract or program because costs also include expected increases in wages and employee benefits, material prices and allocated
fixed costs. Incentives or penalties related to performance on contracts are considered in estimating sales and profit rates, and are recorded when
there is sufficient information for us to assess anticipated performance. Suppliers’ assertions are also assessed and considered in estimating costs
and profit rates. Estimates of award fees are also used in sales and profit rates based on actual and anticipated awards.
With  respect  to  each  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs,  inventoriable  production  costs  (including  overhead),  program  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring costs and routine warranty costs are accumulated and charged as cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. A
program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for
delivery under existing and anticipated contracts limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates. To establish the relationship of
sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates of (a) the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period over
which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced and (c) the units’ expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other
non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total program. Several factors determine accounting quantity, including firm orders, letters of
intent from prospective customers and market studies. Changes to customer or model mix, production costs and rates, learning curve, changes to
price escalation indices, costs of derivative aircraft, supplier performance, customer and supplier negotiations/settlements, supplier claims and/or
certification issues can impact these estimates. Any such change in estimates relating to program accounting may adversely affect future financial
performance.
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes described above, materially different sales and profit amounts could be
recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. Changes in underlying assumptions, circumstances or
estimates may adversely affect future period financial performance. For additional information on our accounting policies for recognizing sales and
profits, see our discussion under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis – Critical Accounting Policies – Contract Accounting/Program Accounting”
on pages 41 – 43 and Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 52 – 64 of this Form 10-K.
Competition within our markets and with respect to the products we sell may reduce our future contracts and sales.
The  markets  in  which  we  operate  are  highly  competitive  and  one  or  more  of  our  competitors  may  have  more  extensive  or  more  specialized
engineering, manufacturing and marketing capabilities than we do in some areas. In our Commercial Airplanes business, we anticipate increasing
competition among non-U.S. aircraft manufacturers of commercial jet aircraft. In our BDS business, we anticipate that the effects of defense industry
consolidation, fewer large and new programs and new priorities, including near and long-term cost competitiveness, of our U.S. DoD and non-U.S.
will intensify competition for many of our BDS products. Our BGS segment faces competition from many of the same strong U.S. and non-U.S.
competitors facing BCA and BDS. Furthermore, we are facing increased international competition and cross-border consolidation of competition.
There can be no assurance that we will be able to compete successfully against our current or future competitors or that the competitive pressures
we face will not result in reduced revenues and market share.
10

Table of Contents
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from non-U.S. sales and are subject to the risks of doing business in other countries.
In 2017 , non-U.S. customers, which includes FMS, accounted for approximately 55% of our revenues. We expect that non-U.S. sales will continue
to account for a significant portion of our revenues for the foreseeable future. As a result, we are subject to risks of doing business internationally,
including:
•
changes in regulatory requirements;
•
U.S. and non-U.S. government policies, including requirements to expend a portion of program funds locally and governmental industrial
cooperation or participation requirements;
•
fluctuations in international currency exchange rates;
•
volatility in international political and economic environments and changes in non-U.S. national priorities and budgets, which can lead to
delays or fluctuations in orders;
•
the complexity and necessity of using non-U.S. representatives and consultants;
•
the uncertainty of the ability of non-U.S. customers to finance purchases, including the availability of financing from the Export-Import Bank
of the United States;
•
uncertainties and restrictions concerning the availability of funding credit or guarantees;
•
imposition of domestic and international taxes, export controls, tariffs, embargoes, sanctions and other trade restrictions;
•
the difficulty of management and operation of an enterprise spread over many countries;
•
compliance with a variety of non-U.S. laws, as well as U.S. laws affecting the activities of U.S. companies abroad; and
•
unforeseen developments and conditions, including terrorism, war, epidemics and international tensions and conflicts.
While the impact of these factors is difficult to predict, any one or more of these factors could adversely affect our operations in the future.
Unauthorized access to our or our customers’ information and systems could negatively impact our business.
We face certain security threats, including threats to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data and systems. We maintain an extensive
network of technical security controls, policy enforcement mechanisms, monitoring systems and management oversight in order to address these
threats.  While  these  measures  are  designed  to  prevent,  detect  and  respond  to  unauthorized  activity  in  our  systems,  certain  types  of  attacks,
including cyber-attacks, could result in significant financial or information losses and/or reputational harm. In addition, we manage information and
information technology systems for certain customers. Many of these customers face similar security threats. If we cannot prevent the unauthorized
access, release and/or corruption of our customers’ confidential, classified or personally identifiable information, our reputation could be damaged,
and/or we could face financial losses.
The  outcome  of  litigation  and  of  government  inquiries  and  investigations  involving  our  business  is  unpredictable  and  an  adverse
decision in any such matter could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.
We are involved in a number of litigation matters. These matters may divert financial and management resources that would otherwise be used to
benefit our operations. No assurances can be given that the results of these matters will be favorable to us. An adverse resolution of any of these
lawsuits, or future lawsuits, could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. In addition, we
11

Table of Contents
are subject to extensive regulation under the laws of the United States and its various states, as well as other jurisdictions in which we operate. As a
result, we are sometimes subject to government inquiries and investigations of our business due, among other things, to our business relationships
with the U.S. government, the heavily regulated nature of our industry, and in the case of environmental proceedings, our current or past ownership
of certain property. Any such inquiry or investigation could potentially result in an adverse ruling against us, which could have a material impact on
our financial position and results of operations.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in certain types of Boeing aircraft,
which exposes us to concentration risks.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in distinct geographic regions. Our portfolio is
also concentrated by varying degrees across Boeing aircraft product types, most notably 717 and 747-8 aircraft, and among customers that we
believe have less than investment-grade credit. If one or more customers holding a significant portion of our portfolio assets experiences financial
difficulties or otherwise defaults on or does not renew its leases with us at their expiration, and we are unable to redeploy the aircraft on reasonable
terms, or if the types of aircraft that are concentrated in our portfolio suffer greater than expected declines in value, our earnings, cash flows and/or
financial position could be materially adversely affected.
We may be unable to obtain debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments at competitive rates, on commercially reasonable
terms or in sufficient amounts.
We depend, in part, upon the issuance of debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments. As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , our
airplane financing commitments totaled $10,221 million and $14,847 million . If we require additional funding in order to fund outstanding financing
commitments or meet other business requirements, our market liquidity may not be sufficient. A number of factors could cause us to incur increased
borrowing costs and to have greater difficulty accessing public and private markets for debt. These factors include disruptions or declines in the
global capital markets and/or a decline in our financial performance, outlook or credit ratings. The occurrence of any or all of these events may
adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and contractual or financing commitments.
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures/strategic alliances or divestitures.
As part of our business strategy, we may merge with or acquire businesses and/or form joint ventures and strategic alliances. Whether we realize
the anticipated benefits from these acquisitions and related activities depends, in part, upon our ability to integrate the operations of the acquired
business, the performance of the underlying product and service portfolio, and the performance of the management team and other personnel of the
acquired  operations.  Accordingly,  our  financial  results  could  be  adversely  affected  by  unanticipated  performance  issues,  legacy  liabilities,
transaction-related charges, amortization of expenses related to intangibles, charges for impairment of long-term assets, credit guarantees, partner
performance and indemnifications. Consolidations of joint ventures could also impact our reported results of operations or financial position. While
we believe that we have established appropriate and adequate procedures and processes to mitigate these risks, there is no assurance that these
transactions will be successful. We also may make strategic divestitures from time to time. These transactions may result in continued financial
involvement in the divested businesses, such as through guarantees or other financial arrangements, following the transaction. Nonperformance by
those divested businesses could affect our future financial results through additional payment obligations, higher costs or asset write-downs.
12

Table of Contents
Our insurance coverage may be inadequate to cover all significant risk exposures.
We  are  exposed  to  liabilities  that  are  unique  to  the  products  and  services  we  provide.  We  maintain  insurance  for  certain  risks  and,  in  some
circumstances,  we  may  receive  indemnification  from  the  U.S.  government.  The  amount  of  our  insurance  coverage  may  not  cover  all  claims  or
liabilities and we may be forced to bear substantial costs. For example, liabilities arising from the use of certain of our products, such as aircraft
technologies, missile systems, border security systems, anti-terrorism technologies, and/or air traffic management systems may not be insurable on
commercially reasonable terms. While some of these products are shielded from liability within the U.S. under the SAFETY Act provisions of the
2002 Homeland Security Act, no such protection is available outside the U.S., potentially resulting in significant liabilities. The amount of insurance
coverage we maintain may be inadequate to cover these or other claims or liabilities.
Business disruptions could seriously affect our future sales and financial condition or increase our costs and expenses.
Our business may be impacted by disruptions including threats to physical security, information technology or cyber-attacks or failures, damaging
weather or other acts of nature and pandemics or other public health crises. Any of these disruptions could affect our internal operations or our
ability to deliver products and services to our customers. Any significant production delays, or any destruction, manipulation or improper use of our
data, information systems or networks could impact our sales, increase our expenses and/or have an adverse effect on the reputation of Boeing and
of our products and services.
Some of our and our suppliers’ workforces are represented by labor unions, which may lead to work stoppages.
Approximately 52,000 employees, which constitute 37% of our total workforce, were union represented as of December 31, 2017 . We experienced
a work stoppage in 2008 when a labor strike halted commercial aircraft and certain BDS program production. We may experience additional work
stoppages in the future, which could adversely affect our business. We cannot predict how stable our relationships, currently with 10 U.S. labor
organizations and 7 non-U.S. labor organizations, will be or whether we will be able to meet the unions’ requirements without impacting our financial
condition. The unions may also limit our flexibility in dealing with our workforce. Union actions at suppliers can also affect us. Work stoppages and
instability in our union relationships could delay the production and/or development of our products, which could strain relationships with customers
and cause a loss of revenues which would adversely affect our operations.
Substantial pension and other postretirement benefit obligations have a material impact on our earnings, shareholders’ equity and cash
flows from operations, and could have significant adverse impacts in future periods.
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Potential pension contributions include both mandatory
amounts required under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and discretionary contributions to improve the plans ' funded status. The
extent of future contributions depends heavily on market factors such as the discount rate and the actual return on plan assets. We estimate future
contributions to these plans using assumptions with respect to these and other items. Changes to those assumptions could have a significant effect
on future contributions as well as on our annual pension costs and/or result in a significant change to shareholders ' equity. For U.S. government
contracts, we allocate pension costs to individual contracts based on U.S. Cost Accounting Standards which can also affect contract profitability. We
also  provide  other  postretirement  benefits  to  certain  of  our  employees,  consisting  principally  of  health  care  coverage  for  eligible  retirees  and
qualifying dependents. Our estimates of future costs associated with these benefits are also subject to assumptions, including
13

Table of Contents
estimates of the level of medical cost increases. For a discussion regarding how our financial statements can be affected by pension and other
postretirement plan accounting policies, see “ Management ' s Discussion and Analysis - Critical Accounting Policies - Pension Plans ” on page 43
of this Form 10-K. Although GAAP expense and pension or other postretirement benefit contributions are not directly related, the key economic
factors that affect GAAP expense would also likely affect the amount of cash or stock we would contribute to our plans.
Our operations expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities.
We are subject to various U.S. federal, state, local and non-U.S. laws and regulations related to environmental protection, including the discharge,
treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. We could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs, fines
and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if we were to violate or become liable under
environmental laws or regulations. In some cases, we may be subject to such costs due to environmental impacts attributable to our current or past
manufacturing  operations  or  the  operations  of  companies  we  have  acquired.  In  other  cases,  we  may  become  subject  to  such  costs  due  to  an
indemnification  agreement  between  us  and  a  third  party  relating  to  such  environmental  liabilities.  In  addition,  new  laws  and  regulations,  more
stringent enforcement of existing laws and regulations, the discovery of previously unknown contamination or the imposition of new remediation
requirements could result in additional costs. For additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see Note 11 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
Not applicable
14

Table of Contents
Item 2. Properties
We  occupied  approximately 85  million square  feet  of  floor  space  on December  31,  2017 for  manufacturing,  warehousing,  engineering,
administration and other productive uses, of which approximately 96% was located in the United States. The following table provides a summary of
the floor space by business as of December 31, 2017 :
(Square feet in thousands)
Owned
Leased
Government
Owned (1)
Total
Commercial Airplanes
41,115
2,455
43,570
Defense, Space & Security
26,449
5,390
31,839
Global Services
681
5,274
5,955
Other (2)
2,448
915
305
3,668
Total
70,693
14,034
305
85,032
(1) Excludes rent-free space furnished by U.S. government landlord of 49 square feet.
(2) Other includes BCC, sites used for common internal services, and our Corporate Headquarters.
At December 31, 2017 , we occupied in excess of 77.8 million square feet of floor space at the following major locations:
•
Commercial Airplanes – Greater Seattle, WA; Greater Charleston, SC; Portland, OR; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Greater Salt Lake City, UT;
Australia; and Canada
•
Defense, Space & Security – Greater St. Louis, MO; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Greater Seattle, WA; Philadelphia, PA; Mesa, AZ; Huntsville, AL;
Oklahoma City, OK; Heath, OH; Greater Washington, DC; and Houston, TX
•
Global Services – San Antonio, TX; Dallas, TX; and Mesa, AZ
•
Other – Chicago, IL; Greater Seattle, WA; and Greater Washington, DC
Most runways and taxiways that we use are located on airport properties owned by others and are used jointly with others. Our rights to use such
facilities are provided for under long-term leases with municipal, county or other government authorities. In addition, the U.S. government furnishes
us certain office space, installations and equipment at U.S. government bases for use in connection with various contract activities.
We believe that our major properties are adequate for our present needs and, as supplemented by planned improvements and construction, expect
them to remain adequate for the foreseeable future.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
Currently, we are involved in a number of legal proceedings. For a discussion of contingencies related to legal proceedings, see Note 20 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements, which is hereby incorporated by reference.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable
15

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The principal market for our common stock is the New York Stock Exchange where it trades under the symbol BA. As of February 5, 2018 , there
were 108,310 shareholders of record. Additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference from Note 22 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The  following  table  provides  information  about  purchases  we  made  during  the  quarter  ended December  31,  2017 of  equity  securities  that  are
registered by us pursuant to Section 12 of the Exchange Act:
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Total Number
of Shares
Purchased (1)
Average
Price Paid per
Share
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
as Part of Publicly
Announced Plans
or Programs
Approximate Dollar
Value of Shares That May Yet
be Purchased Under the
Plans or Programs (2)
10/1/2017 thru 10/31/2017
3,860,891
$259.30
3,856,749
$5,501
11/1/2017 thru 11/30/2017
2,806,168
262.85
2,800,181
4,765
12/1/2017 thru 12/31/2017
39,098
276.49
18,000
Total
6,706,157
$260.89
6,656,930
(1)  We purchased an aggregate of 6,656,930 shares of our common stock in the open market pursuant to our repurchase plan and 49,227 shares
transferred to us from employees in satisfaction of minimum tax withholding obligations associated with the vesting of restricted  stock units
during the period. We did not purchase shares in swap transactions.
(2)  On December 11, 2017 , we announced a new repurchase plan for up to $18 billion of common stock, replacing the plan previously authorized
in 2016.
16

Table of Contents
Item 6. Selected Financial Data
Five-Year Summary (Unaudited)
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$93,392
$94,571
$96,114
$90,762
$86,623
Net earnings from continuing operations
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
$5,446
$4,586
Basic earnings per share from continuing operations
$13.60
$7.70
$7.52
$7.47
$6.03
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
13.43
7.61
7.44
7.38
5.96
Dividends declared per share (1)
5.97
4.69
3.82
3.10
2.185
Cash and cash equivalents
$8,813
$8,801
$11,302
$11,733
$9,088
Short-term and other investments
1,179
1,228
750
1,359
6,170
Total assets
92,333
89,997
94,408
92,921
90,014
Total debt
11,117
9,952
9,964
9,070
9,635
Operating cash flow
$13,344
$10,499
$9,363
$8,858
$8,179
Total backlog
$488,145
$473,492
$489,299
$502,391
$440,928
Year-end workforce
140,800
150,500
161,400
165,500
168,400
(1) Cash dividends have been paid on common stock every year since 1942.
17

Table of Contents
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Overview
We are a global market leader in the design, development, manufacture, sale, service and support of commercial jetliners, military aircraft, satellites,
missile defense, human space flight and launch systems and services. We are one of the two major manufacturers of 100+ seat airplanes for the
worldwide commercial  airline industry  and one of the largest  defense contractors  in the U.S.  While our principal operations are in the U.S.,  we
conduct operations in an expanding number of countries and rely on an extensive network of non-U.S. partners, key suppliers and subcontractors.
Our strategy is centered on successful execution in healthy core businesses – Commercial Airplanes ( BCA ), Defense, Space & Security ( BDS ),
and Global Services ( BGS ) – supplemented and supported by Boeing Capital ( BCC ). Taken together, these core businesses have historically
generated  substantial  earnings  and  cash  flow  that  permit  us  to  invest  in  new  products  and  services.  We  focus  on  producing  the  products  and
providing the services that the market demands, and continue to find new ways to improve efficiency and quality to provide a fair return for our
shareholders. BCA is committed to being the leader in commercial aviation by offering airplanes and services that deliver superior design, efficiency
and value to customers around the world. BDS integrates its resources in defense, intelligence, communications, security, space and services to
deliver  capability-driven  solutions  to its  customers  at  reduced costs.  Our BDS strategy  is to leverage  our core  businesses  to capture  key next-
generation  programs  while  expanding  our  presence  in  adjacent  and  international  markets,  underscored  by  an  intense  focus  on  growth  and
productivity. BGS provides support for commercial, defense and space customers through innovative, comprehensive, and cost-competitive product
and  service  solutions.  Our  strategy  also  benefits  us  as  the  cyclicality  of  commercial  and  defense  markets  sometimes  offset. BCC facilitates,
arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our Boeing customers.
Consolidated Results of Operations
The following table summarizes key indicators of consolidated results of operations:
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Revenues
$93,392
$94,571
$96,114
GAAP
Earnings from operations
10,278
5,834
7,443
Operating margins
11.0%
6.2%
7.7%
Effective income tax rate
18.4%
12.1%
27.7%
Net earnings
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
Diluted earnings per share
$13.43
$7.61
$7.44
Non-GAAP (1)
Core operating earnings
$8,970
$5,464
$7,741
Core operating margins
9.6%
5.8%
8.1%
Core earnings per share
$12.04
$7.24
$7.72
(1)
These measures exclude certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. See page 39 - 40 for important information
about these non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measures.
18

Table of Contents
Revenues
The following table summarizes Revenues:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial Airplanes
$56,729
$58,012
$59,399
Defense, Space & Security
21,057
22,563
23,708
Global Services
14,639
13,925
13,293
Boeing Capital
307
298
413
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
660
(227)
(699)
Total
$93,392
$94,571
$96,114
Revenues in 2017 decreased by $1,179 million or 1% compared with 2016 . BCA revenues decreased by $1,283 million or 2% primarily due to
delivery mix, with fewer twin aisle deliveries more than offsetting the impact of higher single aisle deliveries. BDS revenues decreased by $1,506
million primarily due to fewer C-17 deliveries, l ower milestone revenue on satellite programs, and the mix of deliveries on the Apache and F-15
programs,  partially  offset  by  higher  volume  on  various  weapons  programs.  The  decreases  at  BCA  and  BDS  were  partially  offset  by  higher
unallocated revenue and higher BGS revenue, primarily due to higher commercial parts revenue.
Revenues in 2016 decreased by $1,543 million or 2% compared with 2015. BCA revenues decreased by $1,387 million or 2% due fewer deliveries.
BDS  revenues  decreased  by  $1,145  million  or  5%  primarily  due  to  lower  milestone  revenue  on  government  satellite  programs, fewer  C-17
deliveries, lower Commercial Crew revenue, as well as timing and mix of CH-47 Chinook deliveries, partially offset by higher revenue on several
modifications  and  upgrades  programs.  The  decreases  at  BCA  and  BDS  were  partially  offset  by  higher  BGS  revenue,  primarily  due  to  higher
commercial parts revenue and government services revenue.
The  changes  in  unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  in 2017 , 2016 and 2015 primarily  reflect  the  timing  of  eliminations  for  intercompany
aircraft deliveries and the sale of aircraft previously leased to customers.
Earnings From Operations
The following table summarizes Earnings from operations:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial Airplanes
$5,432
$1,995
$4,284
Defense, Space & Security
2,223
1,966
2,312
Global Services
2,256
2,177
1,835
Boeing Capital
114
59
50
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit
income/(expense)
1,308
370
(298)
Other unallocated items and eliminations
(1,055)
(733)
(740)
Earnings from operations (GAAP)
$10,278
$5,834
$7,443
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit
(1,308)
(370)
298
Core operating earnings (Non-GAAP)
$8,970
$5,464
$7,741
19

Table of Contents
Earnings from operations in 2017 increased by $4,444 million compared with 2016 , primarily due to higher earnings at BCA and BDS, and higher
unallocated pension income, which more than offset other unallocated items and eliminations. BCA's 2017 earnings increased by $3,437 million
primarily reflecting lower reach-forward losses, lower research and development costs, and improved margins reflecting favorable cost performance,
which  more  than  offset  the  impact  of  lower  revenues.  In  2016,  BCA  recorded  reach-forward  losses  of $1,258  million on  the  747  program  and
reclassified $1,235 million of 787 flight test aircraft inventory costs to research and development expense.
BDS earnings from operations in 2017 increased by $257 million compared with 2016 primarily due to lower charges on the KC-46A Tanker and
Commercial Crew programs, which more than offset the impact of fewer C-17 deliveries and Apache delivery mix.
Earnings from operations in 2016 decreased by $1,609 million compared with 2015 due to lower earnings at BCA, partially offset by the change in
unallocated pension and postretirement income/(expense). BCA earnings in 2016 decreased by $2,289 million primarily due to the reclassification of
$1,235  million  of  787  flight  test  aircraft  costs  to  research  and  development  and  higher  reach-forward  losses  on  the  747  and  KC-46A  Tanker
programs. The reclassification of flight test aircraft costs was recorded in the second quarter of 2016 as a result of our determination that two 787
flight test aircraft were no longer commercially saleable. The change in the unallocated pension and postretirement income/(expense) in 2016 was
primarily driven by lower service costs and lower amortization of actuarial losses.
During 2017, 2016 and 2015 , we recorded reach-forward losses on the KC-46A Tanker program. In 2017 , we recorded charges of $471 million , of
which $378 million was recorded at BCA and $93 million at BDS . During 2016 , we recorded charges of $1,128 million : $772 million at BCA and
$356 million at BDS. During 2015 , we recorded charges of $835 million : $513 million at BCA and $322 million at BDS. During 2016 and 2015 we
recorded reach-forward losses on the 747 program of $1,258 million and $885 million.
Core  operating  earnings  for 2017 increased by $3,506  million compared  with 2016 primarily  due  to  lower  reach  forward  losses  and  the
reclassification of costs related to the 787 flight test aircraft in 2016.
Core operating earnings in 2016 decreased by $2,227 million compared with 2015 primarily due to the reclassification of costs related to the 787
flight test aircraft and higher charges on the 747 and KC-46A Tanker programs described above.
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and Other The most significant items included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the
following table:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Share-based plans
($77)
($66)
($76)
Deferred compensation
(240)
(46)
(63)
Eliminations and other
(738)
(621)
(601)
Sub-total (included in core operating earnings*)
(1,055)
(733)
(740)
Pension
1,120
217
(421)
Postretirement
188
153
123
Pension and other postretirement benefit income/(expense)
(excluded from core operating earnings*)
1,308
370
(298)
Total unallocated items, eliminations and other
$253
($363)
($1,038)
* Core operating earnings is a Non-GAAP measure that excludes certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. See
pages 39 - 40 .
20

Table of Contents
Deferred compensation expense increased by $194 million in 2017 and decreased by $17 million in 2016, primarily driven by changes in broad stock
market conditions and our stock price.
Eliminations and other unallocated expense increased by $117 million in 2017 and increased by $20 million in 2016 primarily due to the timing of the
elimination of profit on intercompany aircraft deliveries and expense allocations.
Net  periodic  benefit  cost  related  to  pension  totaled $312  million , $523  million and $2,786  million in 2017,  2016  and  2015 ,  respectively.  The
components of net periodic benefit cost are shown in the following table:
Pension
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Service cost
$402
$604
$1,764
Interest cost
2,991
3,050
2,990
Expected return on plan assets
(3,847)
(3,999)
(4,031)
Amortization of prior service costs
(39)
38
196
Recognized net actuarial loss
804
790
1,577
Settlement/curtailment/other losses
1
40
290
Net periodic benefit cost
$312
$523
$2,786
The decreases in net periodic pension benefit costs of $211 million in 2017 and of $2,263 million in 2016 are primarily due to lower service costs
reflecting the transition of employees in 2016 to defined contribution retirement savings plans. The decrease in 2016 costs is also due to lower
amortization of actuarial losses which reflects actuarial gains in 2015 resulting from the year-end discount rate increase from 3.9% to 4.2%.
A portion of net periodic benefit cost is recognized in Earnings from operations in the period incurred and the remainder is included in inventory at
the end of the reporting period and recorded in Earnings from operations in subsequent periods. Costs are allocated to the business segments as
described in Note 21 .
Net periodic benefit costs included in Earnings from operations were as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
Pension
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Allocated to business segments
($1,759)
($2,196)
($1,945)
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
1,120
217
(421)
Total
($639)
($1,979)
($2,366)
The unallocated pension costs recognized in earnings in 2017 was a benefit of $1,120 million compared with $217 million in 2016 . The higher
unallocated pension benefit recognized in earnings in 2017 primarily reflects the amortization of pension benefits capitalized as inventory in prior
years. The unallocated pension costs recognized in earnings in 2016 was a benefit of $217 million compared with expense of $ 421 million in 2015.
The 2016 benefit reflects the difference between the higher segment allocation compared to the U.S. GAAP net periodic pension costs recognized in
earnings in the current period.
21

Table of Contents
Other Earnings Items
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Earnings from operations
$10,278
$5,834
$7,443
Other income/(loss), net
129
40
(13)
Interest and debt expense
(360)
(306)
(275)
Earnings before income taxes
10,047
5,568
7,155
Income tax expense
(1,850)
(673)
(1,979)
Net earnings from continuing operations
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
Other income, net increased by $89 million and $53 million in 2017 and 2016 , primarily due to higher gains from foreign exchange and interest
income.
Interest and debt expense increased by $54 million in 2017 as a result of lower capitalized interest and increased by $31 million in 2016 as a result
of higher average debt balances.
Our effective income tax rates were 18.4% , 12.1% and 27.7% for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. The Tax Cuts
and Jobs Act, enacted in December 2017, reduced the 2017 effective tax rate by 10.5% and resulted in incremental tax benefits of $1,051 million ,
primarily related to the remeasurement of our U.S. net deferred tax liabilities to reflect the reduction in the corporate tax rate from 35% to 21%. Our
2016 effective tax rate was lower than the 2015 rate primarily due to lower pre-tax income in 2016 and discrete tax benefits of $617 million recorded
in the third quarter of 2016 related to tax basis adjustments and the settlement of the 2011-2012 federal tax audit.
For additional discussion related to Income Taxes, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Total Costs and Expenses (“Cost of Sales”)
Cost of sales, for both products and services, consists primarily of raw materials, parts, sub-assemblies, labor, overhead and subcontracting costs.
Our  Commercial  Airplanes  segment  predominantly  uses  program  accounting  to  account  for  cost  of  sales, BDS predominantly  uses  contract
accounting  and  BGS  uses  contract  accounting  for  defense  contracts.  Under  program  accounting,  cost  of  sales  for  each  commercial  airplane
program  equals  the  product  of  (i)  revenue  recognized  in  connection  with  customer  deliveries  and  (ii)  the  estimated  cost  of  sales  percentage
applicable to the total remaining program. Under contract accounting, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated
cost of sales percentage to the amount of revenue recognized.
The following table summarizes cost of sales:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
Change
2016
2015
Change
Cost of sales
$76,066
$80,790
($4,724)
$80,790
$82,088
($1,298)
Cost of sales as a % of revenues
81.4%
85.4%
(4.0%)
85.4%
85.4%
0.0%
Cost of sales in 2017 decreased by $4,724 million , or 6% , compared with 2016 , primarily due to lower reach-forward losses, delivery model mix at
BCA and improved performance at BCA and BDS.
Cost of sales in 2016 decreased by $1,298 million , or 2%, compared with 2015, primarily due to lower volume across all segments, partially offset
by the 747 reach-forward losses at BCA.
22

Table of Contents
Research and Development The following table summarizes our Research and development expense:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial Airplanes
$2,247
$3,706
$2,311
Defense, Space & Security
834
815
902
Global Services
140
153
113
Other
(42)
(47)
5
Total
$3,179
$4,627
$3,331
Research and development expense in 2017 decreased by $1,448 million compared with 2016 primarily due to the reclassification of $1,235 million
of costs from inventory in the second quarter of 2016 related to the fourth and fifth 787 flight test aircraft as well as lower spending on the 737 MAX,
787-10, and 777X.
Research and development expense in 2016 increased by $1,296 million compared with 2015 primarily due to the reclassification of $1,235 million
of costs from inventory in the second quarter of 2016 related to the fourth and fifth 787 flight test aircraft and higher spending on the 777X.
Backlog
Our backlog at December 31 was as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial Airplanes
$421,345
$413,036
$429,346
Defense, Space & Security
49,577
44,825
46,933
Global Services
17,223
15,631
13,020
Total Backlog
$488,145
$473,492
$489,299
Contractual backlog
470,241
458,277
476,595
Unobligated backlog
17,904
$15,215
$12,704
Total Backlog
$488,145
$473,492
$489,299
Contractual backlog of unfilled orders excludes purchase options, announced orders for which definitive contracts have not been executed, and
unobligated  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  government  contract  funding.  The increase in  contractual  backlog  during 2017 was  primarily  due  to  orders  and
funding in excess of deliveries. The decrease in contractual backlog during 2016 was primarily due to deliveries in excess of net orders.
Unobligated  backlog  includes  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  government  definitive  contracts  for  which  funding  has  not  been  authorized.  The increase in
unobligated backlog in 2017 and 2016 was primarily due to contract awards, partially offset by reclassifications to contractual backlog related to BDS
and BGS contracts.
Additional Considerations
KC-46A Tanker In 2011, we were awarded a contract from the U.S. Air Force ( USAF ) to design, develop, manufacture and deliver four next
generation  aerial  refueling  tankers.  The KC-46A  Tanker is  a  derivative  of  our  767  commercial  aircraft.  This  Engineering,  Manufacturing  and
Development  (EMD)  contract  is  a  fixed-price  incentive  fee  contract  valued  at  $4.9  billion  and  involves  highly  complex  designs  and  systems
integration.  In  2015,  we  began  work  on  low  rate  initial  production  (LRIP)  aircraft  for  the  USAF.  During  the  third  quarter  of  2016,  following  our
achievement of key flight testing milestones, the USAF authorized two LRIP lots for 7 and 12 aircraft valued at $2.8 billion. On January 27, 2017, the
USAF authorized an additional
23

Table of Contents
LRIP lot for 15 aircraft valued at $2.1 billion. The contract contains production options for both LRIP aircraft and full rate production aircraft. If all
options under the contract are exercised, we expect to deliver 179 aircraft for a total expected contract value of approximately $30 billion. The EMD
contract is currently in the certification and flight testing phases and we expect 18 fully operational aircraft to be delivered in 2018.
During 2016 and 2015, we recorded reach-forward losses of $1,128 million and $835 million related to the EMD contract and LRIP aircraft. During
2017,  we  recorded  further  reach-forward  losses  of $471  million primarily  reflecting  higher  estimated  costs  associated  with  certification  and
incorporating changes into LRIP aircraft.  As with any development program,  this program remains subject to additional reach-forward  losses or
delivery delays if we experience further production, technical or quality issues, delays in certification and/or flight testing.
Export-Import  Bank  of  the  United  States Many  of  our  non-U.S.  customers  finance  purchases  through  the  Export-Import  Bank  of  the  United
States. Following the expiration of the bank’s charter on June 30, 2015, the bank’s charter was reauthorized in December 2015. The bank is now
authorized through September 30, 2019. However, until the U.S. Senate confirms members sufficient to reconstitute a quorum of the bank’s board of
directors, the bank will not be able to approve any transaction totaling more than $10 million. As a result, we may fund additional commitments
and/or enter into new financing arrangements with customers. Certain of our non-U.S. customers also may seek to delay purchases if they cannot
obtain financing at reasonable costs, and there may be further impacts with respect to future sales campaigns involving non-U.S. customers. We
continue to work with our customers to mitigate risks associated with the lack of a quorum of the bank’s board of directors and assist with alternative
third party financing sources.
Segment Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Commercial Airplanes
Business Environment and Trends
Airline Industry Environment Global economic growth, a primary driver for air travel, has returned to the long-term average of approximately 3%.
Passenger traffic in 2017 is estimated to grow by more than 7%, exceeding the long-term trend of approximately 5%. While growth was strong
across all major world regions, there continues to be variation between regions and airline business models. Airlines operating in the Asia Pacific
regions and Europe, as well as low-cost-carriers globally, are currently leading the growth in passenger traffic. Air cargo traffic growth, building on
the recovery that started in 2016, is expected to exceed 9% in 2017, driven by strong trade and industrial production in all regions.
Airline financial performance also plays a role in the demand for new capacity. Airlines continue to focus on increasing revenue through alliances,
partnerships, new marketing initiatives, and effective leveraging of ancillary services and related revenues. Airlines are also focusing on reducing
costs and renewing fleets to leverage more efficient airplanes. Net profits in 2017 are expected to approximate $35 billion, consistent with 2016.
The long-term outlook for the industry continues to remain positive due to the fundamental drivers of air travel growth: economic growth and the
increasing propensity to travel due to increased trade, globalization, and improved airline services driven by liberalization of air traffic rights between
countries. Our 20-year forecast projects a long-term average growth rate of 4.7% per year for passenger traffic and 4.2% for cargo traffic. Based on
long-term global economic growth projections of 2.8% average annual GDP growth, we project a $6.1 trillion market for approximately 41,030 new
airplanes over the next 20 years.
The industry remains vulnerable to exogenous developments including fuel price spikes, credit market shocks, acts of terrorism, natural disasters,
conflicts, epidemics and increased global environmental regulations.
24

Table of Contents
Industry  Competitiveness The  commercial  jet  airplane  market  and  the  airline  industry  remain  extremely  competitive.  Market  liberalization  in
Europe, the Middle East and Asia is enabling low-cost  airlines to continue gaining market  share. These airlines are increasing the pressure on
airfares. This results in continued cost pressures for all airlines and price pressure on our products. Major productivity gains are essential to ensure
a favorable market position at acceptable profit margins.
Continued access to global markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales potential and long-term investment returns. Approximately
91% of Commercial Airplanes’ total backlog, in dollar terms, is with non-U.S. airlines.
We face aggressive international competitors who are intent on increasing their market share. They offer competitive products and have access to
most  of  the  same  customers  and  suppliers.  With  government  support,  Airbus  has  historically  invested  heavily  to  create  a  family  of  products  to
compete with ours. Regional jet makers Embraer and Bombardier continue to develop and market larger and increasingly more capable airplanes,
including Embraer’s E-195 in the regional jet market and Bombardier’s C Series in the 100-150 seat transcontinental market. Additionally, other
competitors from Russia, China and Japan are developing commercial jet aircraft. Some of these competitors have historically enjoyed access to
government-provided  financial  support,  including  “launch  aid,”  which  greatly  reduces  the  cost  and  commercial  risks  associated  with  airplane
development activities. This has enabled the development of airplanes without commercial viability; others to be brought to market more quickly than
otherwise possible; and many offered for sale below market-based prices. Many competitors have continued to make improvements in efficiency,
which may result in funding product development, gaining market share and improving earnings. This market environment has resulted in intense
pressures on pricing and other competitive factors, and we expect these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years.
We are focused on improving our products and services and continuing our cost-reduction efforts, which enhances our ability to compete. We are
also focused on taking actions to ensure that Boeing is not harmed by unfair subsidization of competitors.
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Revenues
$56,729
$58,012
$59,399
% of total company revenues
61%
61%
62%
Earnings from operations
$5,432
$1,995
$4,284
Operating margins
9.6%
3.4%
7.2%
Research and development
$2,247
$3,706
$2,311
Revenues
Commercial Airplanes revenues decreased by $1,283 million or 2% in 2017 compared with 2016 due to delivery mix, with fewer twin aisle deliveries
more  than  offsetting  the  impact  of  higher  single  aisle  deliveries.  Commercial  Airplanes  revenues decreased by $1,387  million or 2% in  2016
compared with 2015 primarily due to fewer deliveries.
25

Table of Contents
Commercial Airplanes deliveries as of December 31 were as follows:
737 *
747
†
767
777
787
Total
2017
Cumulative deliveries
6,732
1,542
1,106
1,534
636
Deliveries
529
(17)  
14
(1)  
10
74
136
763
2016
Cumulative deliveries
6,203
1,528
1,096
1,460
500
Deliveries
490 (19)  
9 (3)  
13
99
137
748
2015
Cumulative deliveries
5,713
1,519
1,083
1,361
363
Deliveries
495 (15)  
18 (3)  
16
98
135
762
* Intercompany deliveries identified by parentheses
† Aircraft accounted for as revenues by BCA and as operating leases in consolidation identified by parentheses
Earnings From Operations
Earnings from operations in 2017 increased by $3,437 million compared with 2016 . The increase in earnings and operating margins is primarily
due to lower reach-forward losses, lower research and development costs and improved margins reflecting favorable cost performance, which more
than offset the impact of lower revenues.
Earnings from operations in 2016 decreased by $2,289 million compared with 2015. The decrease in earnings and operating margins is primarily
due to higher research and development costs of $1,395 million , delivery mix and higher reach-forward losses on the 747 program of $1,258
million compared with $885 million in 2015. Research and development expense in 2016 reflect the reclassification from inventory to research and
development  expense  of  $1,235  million  related  to  the  fourth  and  fifth  787  flight  test  aircraft  and  higher  planned  spending  related  to  the  777X
program.
Reach-forward  losses  of $378  million , $772  million and $513  million were  recorded  related  to  the  KC-46A  Tanker  in  2017,  2016  and  2015,
respectively. During 2016 and 2015, we recorded reach-forward losses on the 747 program of $1,258 million and $885 million.
Backlog
Firm backlog represents orders for products and services where no contingencies remain before we and the customer are required to perform.
Backlog does not include prospective orders where customer controlled contingencies remain, such as the customer receiving approval from its
board of directors, shareholders or government or completing financing arrangements. All such contingencies must be satisfied or have expired prior
to recording a new firm order even if satisfying such conditions is highly certain. Firm backlog excludes options. A number of our customers may
have contractual remedies that may be implicated by program delays. We address customer claims and requests for other contractual relief as they
arise. However, once orders are included in firm backlog, orders remain in backlog until canceled or fulfilled, although the value of orders is adjusted
as changes to price and schedule are agreed to with customers.
BCA total backlog was $421,345 million , $413,036 million and $429,346 million at December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. The increase
in 2017 was primarily due to net orders in excess of deliveries. The decrease in 2016 was primarily due to deliveries in excess of net orders.
26

Table of Contents
Accounting Quantity The accounting quantity is our estimate  of the quantity of airplanes that will be produced for delivery under existing and
anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue
and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. It is a key determinant of the gross margins we recognize on sales of individual airplanes throughout a
program’s  life.  Estimation  of  each  program’s  accounting  quantity  takes  into  account  several  factors  that  are  indicative  of  the  demand  for  that
program,  including  firm  orders,  letters  of  intent  from  prospective  customers  and  market  studies.  We  review  our  program  accounting  quantities
quarterly.
The accounting quantity for each program may include units that have been delivered, undelivered units under contract, and units anticipated to be
under contract in the reasonable future (anticipated orders). In developing total program estimates, all of these items within the accounting quantity
must be considered.
The following table provides details of the accounting quantities and firm orders by program as of December 31. Cumulative firm orders represent
the cumulative number of commercial jet aircraft deliveries plus undelivered firm orders.
Program
737
747*
767
777
777X
787
2017
Program accounting quantities
9,800
1,570
1,171
1,625
**
1,400
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,668
12
98
102
326
658
Cumulative firm orders
11,400
1,554
1,204
1,636
326
1,294
2016
Program accounting quantities
9,000
1,555
1,159
1,625
**
1,300
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,452
28
93
136
306
700
Cumulative firm orders
10,655
1,556
1,189
1,596
306
1,200
2015
Program accounting quantities
8,400
1,574
1,147
1,650
**
1,300
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,392
20
80
218
306
779
Cumulative firm orders
10,105
1,539
1,163
1,579
306
1,142
* At December 31, 2017 , the 747 accounting quantity includes one already completed aircraft which is being remarketed.
** The accounting quantity for the 777X will be determined in the year of first airplane delivery, targeted for 2020.
Program Highlights
737 Program The accounting quantity for the 737 program increased by 800 units during 2017 due to the program ’ s normal progress of obtaining
additional orders and delivering airplanes. We are currently producing at a rate of 47 per month and plan to increase to 52 per month in 2018. We
plan to further increase the rate to 57 per month in 2019. We delivered the first 737 MAX 8 in May 2017 and announced the launch of the 737 MAX
10 in June 2017.
747 Program During the fourth quarter of 2017, we received firm orders and commitments for 15 aircraft and we increased the program accounting
quantity by 15 aircraft. The program accounting quantity now includes aircraft scheduled to be produced through 2021. We are currently producing
at a rate of 0.5 aircraft per month, having reduced the rate from 1.0 per month in September 2016. In 2016 and 2015, we recorded reach-forward
losses of $1,258 million and $885 million as lower than expected demand for large commercial passenger and freighter aircraft and slower-than-
expected growth of global freight traffic
27

Table of Contents
resulted in lower anticipated revenues from future sales and higher costs to produce fewer airplanes. We continue to evaluate the viability of the 747
program and it is reasonably possible that we could decide to end production of the 747.
767 Program The accounting quantity for the 767 program increased by 12 units during the third quarter of 2017 due to the program's normal
progress of obtaining additional orders and delivering airplanes. The 767 assembly line includes a 767 derivative to support the tanker program. The
combined tanker and commercial production rate increased from 2 per month to 2.5 per month in the third quarter of 2017.
777 Program We implemented a planned production rate decrease from 8.3 per month to 7 per month during the first quarter of 2017. We further
reduced the rate to 5 per month in the third quarter of 2017. In the fourth quarter of 2013, we launched the 777X, which features a new composite
wing, new engines and folding wing-tips. The 777X will have a separate program accounting quantity, which will be determined in the year of first
airplane delivery, targeted for 2020.
787 Program The accounting quantity for the 787 program increased by 100 units during the third quarter of 2017 due to the program’s normal
progress of obtaining additional orders and delivering airplanes. We are currently producing at a rate of 12 per month and plan to increase to 14 per
month in 2019. First delivery of the 787-10 derivative aircraft is targeted for 2018.
Fleet Support We provide the operators of our commercial airplanes with assistance and services to facilitate efficient and safe airplane operation.
Collectively known as fleet support services, these activities and services begin prior to airplane delivery and continue throughout the operational life
of  the  airplane.  They  include  flight  and  maintenance  training,  field  service  support,  engineering  services,  information  services  and  systems  and
technical  data  and  documents.  The  costs  for  fleet  support  are  expensed  as  incurred  and  have  historically  been  approximately 1.0% of  total
consolidated costs of products and services.
Program  Development The  following  chart  summarizes  the  time  horizon  between  go-ahead  and  planned  initial  delivery  for  major  Commercial
Airplanes derivatives and programs.
Go-ahead and Initial Delivery
737 MAX 7
2011
2019
737 MAX 8
2011
2017
737 MAX 9
2011
2018
737 MAX 10
2017
2020
787-10
2013
2018
777X
2013
2020
Reflects models in development during 2017
We launched the 737 MAX 7, 8, 9 in August 2011 and the 737 MAX 10 in June 2017. We launched the 787-10 in June 2013 and the 777X in
November 2013.
Additional Considerations
The  development  and  ongoing  production  of  commercial  aircraft  is  extremely  complex,  involving  extensive  coordination  and  integration  with
suppliers and highly-skilled labor from employees and other partners. Meeting or exceeding our performance and reliability standards, as well as
those of customers and regulators, can be costly and technologically challenging. In addition, the introduction of new aircraft and derivatives, such
as the 787-10 and 777X, involves increased risks associated with meeting development, production and certification schedules. As a result, our
ability to deliver aircraft on time, satisfy performance and reliability standards and achieve or maintain, as applicable, program profitability is subject
to significant risks. Factors that could result in lower margins (or a material charge if an airplane program has or is determined to have reach-forward
losses) include the following: changes to the program accounting
28

Table of Contents
quantity, customer and model mix, production costs and rates,  changes to price escalation factors  due to changes in the inflation rate or other
economic indicators, performance or reliability issues involving completed aircraft, capital expenditures and other costs associated with increasing or
adding new production capacity, learning curve, additional change incorporation, achieving anticipated cost reductions, flight test and certification
schedules, costs, schedule and demand for new airplanes and derivatives and status of customer claims, supplier assertions and other contractual
negotiations. While we believe the cost and revenue estimates incorporated in the consolidated financial statements are appropriate, the technical
complexity of our airplane programs creates financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could
be extended, which could trigger termination provisions, order cancellations or other financially significant exposure.
Defense, Space & Security
Business Environment and Trends
United States Government Defense Environment Overview
In November 2017, Congress passed the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2018 (FY2018), which authorizes a U.S. DoD budget
topline higher than the administration’s budget request from May. While the appropriations process for FY2018 remains incomplete, both the House
and Senate appropriations committees have also produced bills that increase the U.S. DoD budget topline above the administration’s request . On
February  9,  2018,  Congress  passed  a  fifth  Continuing  Resolution  that  maintains  current  funding  levels  through  March  23,  2018  and  includes
increases  to  the  Budget  Control  Act  caps  for  defense  and  non-defense  spending  for  FY2018  and  FY2019.  However,  the  Budget  Control  Act
continues to mandate limits on U.S. government discretionary spending and remains in effect. As a result, continued budget uncertainty and the risk
of future sequestration cuts will remain unless Congress acts to repeal or suspend this law.
Funding timeliness also remains a risk. If Congress is unable to pass appropriations bills or an omnibus spending bill before the expiration of the
current Continuing Resolution, a government shutdown could result which may have impacts above and beyond those resulting from budget cuts,
sequestration  impacts  or  program-level  appropriations.  For  example,  requirements  to  furlough  employees  in  the  U.S.  DoD,  the  Department  of
Transportation,  or  other  government  agencies  could  result  in  payment  delays,  impair  our  ability  to  perform  work  on  existing  contracts,  and/or
negatively impact future orders.
In  addition,  there  continues  to  be  uncertainty  with  respect  to  program-level  appropriations  for  the  U.S.  DoD  and  other  government  agencies,
including the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), within the overall budgetary framework described above. Future budget cuts
or investment priority changes could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could
have a material effect on the results of the Company’s operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
 
Non-U.S. Defense Environment Overview The non-U.S. market continues to be driven by complex and evolving security challenges and the need
to modernize aging equipment and inventories. BDS expects that it will continue to have a wide range of opportunities across Asia, Europe and the
Middle East given the diverse regional threats. At the end of 2017, 40% of BDS backlog was attributable to non-US customers.
29

Table of Contents
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Revenues
$21,057
$22,563
$23,708
% of total company revenues
23%
24%
25%
Earnings from operations
$2,223
$1,966
$2,312
Operating margins
10.6%
8.7%
9.8%
Since  our  operating  cycle  is  long-term  and  involves  many  different  types  of  development  and  production  contracts  with  varying  delivery  and
milestone schedules, the operating results of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of revenues, earnings and backlog may not be indicative
of future operating results. In addition, depending on the customer and their funding sources, our orders might be structured as annual follow-on
contracts, or as one large multi-year order or long-term award. As a result, period-to-period comparisons of backlog are not necessarily indicative of
future workloads. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context.
Deliveries of units for new-build production aircraft, including remanufactures and modifications were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
F/A-18 Models
23
25
35
F-15 Models
16
15
12
C-17 Globemaster III
4
5
CH-47 Chinook (New)
9
25
41
CH-47 Chinook (Renewed)
35
25
16
AH-64 Apache (New)
11
31
23
AH-64 Apache (Remanufactured)
57
34
38
P-8 Models
19
18
14
AEW&C
1
C-40A
1
1
Total
170
178
186
New-build satellite deliveries were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial and civil satellites
3
5
3
Military satellites
1
2
1
Revenues
BDS revenues in 2017 decreased by $1,506 million compared with 2016 primarily due to fewer C-17 deliveries, lower milestone revenue on satellite
programs, and the mix of deliveries on the Apache and F-15 programs, partially offset by higher volume on various weapons programs.
BDS revenues in 2016 decreased by $1,145 million compared with 2015 primarily due to lower milestone revenue on government satellite programs,
fewer C-17 deliveries, lower Commercial Crew revenue, as well as timing and mix of CH-47 Chinook deliveries, partially offset by higher revenue on
several modifications and upgrades programs.
30

Table of Contents
Earnings From Operations
BDS earnings from operations in 2017 increased by $257 million compared with 2016 primarily due to lower charges on the KC-46A Tanker and
Commercial  Crew  programs,  which  more  than  offset  the  impact  of  fewer  C-17  deliveries  and  Apache  delivery  mix.  Higher  earnings  reflect  the
favorable impact of cumulative catch-up adjustments which were $541 million higher in 2017 than in 2016 , primarily driven by lower charges.
BDS earnings from operations in 2016 decreased by $346 million compared with 2015, primarily due to lower earnings on the Commercial Crew
program, driven by a charge of $162 million during the third quarter of 2016, as well as lower volume and mix on the CH-47 Chinook program. Lower
earnings include the unfavorable impact of cumulative contract catch-up adjustments which were $441 million higher than 2015, primarily due to
Commercial Crew charges in 2016 and the absence of favorable F-15 program adjustments recorded in 2015.
BDS earnings from operations include equity earnings of $183 million , $249 million and $202 million primarily from our ULA joint venture in 2017 ,
2016 and 2015 .
During 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , BDS recorded charges related to the KC-46A Tanker contract of $93 million , $356 million and $322 million .
Backlog
Total backlog of $49,577 million at December 31, 2017 increase d by 11% from December 31, 2016 , primarily due to current year contract awards
for the F-15 and Apache programs, partially offset by revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years.
Total backlog of $44,825 million at December 31, 2016 decreased by 4% reflecting revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years, partially
offset by current year contract awards for satellite, P-8, weapons, Apache and CH-47 Chinook programs.
Additional Considerations
Our BDS business includes a variety of development programs which have complex design and technical challenges. Many of these programs have
cost-type  contracting  arrangements.  In  these  cases,  the  associated  financial  risks  are  primarily  in  reduced  fees,  lower  profit  rates  or  program
cancellation  if  cost,  schedule  or  technical  performance  issues  arise.  Examples  of  these  programs  include Ground-based  Midcourse  Defense ,
Proprietary and Space Launch System programs.
Some of our development programs are contracted on a fixed-price basis. Many of these programs have highly complex designs. As technical or
quality issues arise during development, we may experience schedule delays and cost impacts, which could increase our estimated cost to perform
the work or reduce our estimated price, either of which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. These
programs  are  ongoing,  and  while  we  believe  the  cost  and  fee  estimates  incorporated  in  the  financial  statements  are  appropriate,  the  technical
complexity of these programs creates financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be
extended, which could trigger termination provisions, the loss of satellite in-orbit incentive payments, or other financially significant exposure. These
programs  have risk  for  reach-forward  losses  if our  estimated  costs  exceed  our estimated  contract  revenues.  Examples  of  significant  fixed-price
development programs include KC-46A Tanker, Commercial Crew, Saudi F-15, and commercial and military satellites.
KC-46A Tanker See the discussion of the USAF KC-46A Tanker program on page 23 .
31

Table of Contents
United Launch Alliance See the discussion of Indemnifications to ULA and Financing Commitments in Notes 6 , 11 , and 12 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
F/A-18 See the discussion of the F/A-18 program in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Sea Launch See the discussion of the Sea Launch receivables in Note 7 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Commercial Crew See the discussion of Fixed-Price Development Contracts in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Global Services
Business Environment and Trends
The aerospace markets we serve include parts distribution, logistics, and other inventory services; maintenance, engineering, and upgrades; training
and professional services; and information services. We expect the market to grow by around 3.5% annually.
As the size of the worldwide commercial airline fleet continues to grow, so does demand for aftermarket services designed to increase efficiency and
extend  the  economic  lives  of  airplanes.  Airlines  are  using  data  analytics  to  plan  flight  operations  and  predictive  maintenance  to  improve  their
productivity and efficiency. Airlines continue to look for opportunities to reduce the size and cost of their spare parts inventory, frequently outsourcing
spares management to third parties.
Government services market segments are growing on pace with related fleets, but vary based on the utilization and age of the aircraft. The U.S.
government services market is the single largest individual market, comprising over 50 percent of the government services markets served. Over the
next  decade,  we  expect  U.S.  growth  to  remain  flat  and  non-U.S.  fleets,  led  by  Middle  East  and  Asia  Pacific  customers,  to  add  rotorcraft  and
commercial derivative aircraft at the fastest rates. We expect less than 20 percent of the worldwide fleet of military aircraft to be retired and replaced
over the next ten years, driving increased demand for services to maintain aging aircraft and enhance aircraft capability.
BGS’ major customer, the U.S. government, remains subject to the spending limits and uncertainty described on page 29 , which could restrict the
execution of certain program activities and delay new programs or competitions.
Industry Competitiveness Aviation services is a competitive market with many domestic and international competitors. This market environment
has resulted in intense pressures on pricing and we expect these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years. Continued access to global
markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales growth potential and long-term investment returns.
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Revenues
$14,639
$13,925
$13,293
% of total company revenues
16%
15%
14%
Earnings from operations
$2,256
$2,177
$1,835
Operating margins
15.4%
15.6%
13.8%
32

Table of Contents
Revenues
BGS revenues in 2017 increased by $714 million compared with 2016 primarily due to higher commercial parts revenue.
BGS revenues in 2016 increased by $632 million compared with 2015 primarily due to higher commercial parts revenues and government services
revenue.
Earnings From Operations
BGS earnings from operations in 2017 increased by $79 million compared with 2016 primarily due to higher revenues, partially offset by commercial
services mix. Net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $9 million lower in 2017 than in 2016 .
BGS earnings  from  operations  in 2016 increased by $342  million compared  with 2015 primarily  due  to  higher  revenues  and  favorable  mix  of
commercial parts and government services. Net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $12 million higher in 2016 than in 2015 .
Backlog
BGS total backlog of $17,223 million at December 31, 2017 increased by 10% from December 31, 2016 , primarily due to current year contract
awards including F-15, C-17, and Apache support programs.
BGS total backlog of $15,631 million at December 31, 2016 increased by 20% from December 31, 2015 primarily due to current year contract
awards including the C-17 support program.
Boeing Capital
Business Environment and Trends
BCC’s gross customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2017 totaled $3,006 million . A substantial portion of BCC’s portfolio is
related to customers that we believe have less than investment-grade credit. BCC’s portfolio is also concentrated by varying degrees across Boeing
aircraft product types, most notably 717 and 747-8 aircraft.
BCC provided customer financing of $480 million and $1,376 million during 2017 and 2016 . While we may be required to fund a number of new
aircraft deliveries in 2018 and/or provide refinancing for existing bridge debt, we expect alternative financing will be available at reasonable prices
from broad and globally diverse sources. However, a number of factors could cause BCC’s new business volume to increase further, including if the
Export-Import Bank of the United States continues to be unable to, or does not, approve new financing transactions.
Aircraft values and lease rates are impacted by the number and type of aircraft that are currently out of service. Approximately 2,000 western-built
commercial jet aircraft ( 8.3% of current world fleet) were parked at the end of 2017 , including both in-production and out-of-production aircraft
types. Of these parked aircraft,  approximately 2% are not expected  to  return  to  service.  At  the  end of 2016 and 2015 , 8.8% and 9.5% of the
western-built commercial jet aircraft were parked. Aircraft valuations could decline if significant numbers of additional aircraft, particularly types with
relatively few operators, are placed out of service.
33

Table of Contents
Results of Operations    
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Revenues
$307
$298
$413
Earnings from operations
$114
$59
$50
Operating margins
37%
20%
12%
Revenues
BCC segment revenues consist principally of lease income from equipment under operating lease, interest income from financing receivables and
notes, and other income. BCC ’s revenues in 2017 were consistent with 2016 .
BCC ’s revenues in 2016 decreased by $115 million compared with 2015 primarily due to lower lease income, and lower end of lease settlement
payments.
Earnings From Operations
BCC’s earnings from operations are presented net of interest expense, provision for (recovery of) losses, asset impairment expense, depreciation
on  leased  equipment  and  other  operating  expenses.  Earnings  from  operations  in 2017 increased  by $55  million primarily  due  to  lower  asset
impairment and depreciation expenses. Earnings from operations in 2016 increased by $9 million primarily due to lower asset impairment expense
which more than offset lower revenues.
Financial Position
The following table presents selected financial data for BCC as of December 31:
(Dollars in millions)
2017
2016
Customer financing and investment portfolio, net
$3,003
$4,109
Other assets, primarily cash and short-term investments
677
346
Total assets
$3,680
$4,455
Other liabilities, primarily deferred income taxes
$653
$1,007
Debt, including intercompany loans
2,523
2,864
Equity
504
584
Total liabilities and equity
$3,680
$4,455
Debt-to-equity ratio
5.0-to-1
4.9-to-1
BCC ’s customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2017 decreased from December 31, 2016 , primarily due to $1,434 million of
asset sales, note payoffs, and portfolio run-off, partially offset by new volume.
Aircraft subject to leases with a carrying value of approximately $25 million are scheduled to be returned off lease during 2018 . We are seeking to
remarket these aircraft or have the leases extended.
BCC enters into certain transactions with Boeing, reflected in Unallocated items, eliminations and other, in the form of intercompany guarantees and
other subsidies that mitigate the effects of certain credit quality or asset impairment issues on the BCC segment.
34

Table of Contents
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Net earnings
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
Non-cash items
2,652
2,559
2,392
Changes in working capital
2,495
3,045
1,795
Net cash provided by operating activities
13,344
10,499
9,363
Net cash used by investing activities
(2,062)
(3,380)
(1,846)
Net cash used by financing activities
(11,350)
(9,587)
(7,920)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
80
(33)
(28)
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
12
(2,501)
(431)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
8,801
11,302
11,733
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
$8,813
$8,801
$11,302
Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities was $13.3 billion during 2017 , compared with $10.5 billion during 2016 and $9.4
billion in 2015 . The increase of $2.8 billion in 2017 was primarily driven by higher advances more than offsetting inventory increases. The increase
of $1.1 billion in 2016 was primarily due to lower expenditures on commercial airplane program inventory, primarily 787. Advances and progress
billings increase d by $4.6 billion in 2017 , decrease d by $1.9 billion in 2016 and increase d by $0.4 billion in 2015 . During 2017, our discretionary
contributions to our pension plans included 14.4 million shares of our common stock with an aggregate value of $3.5 billion and $ 0.5 billion in cash.
Discretionary contributions to our pension plans were insignificant in 2016 and 2015 .
Investing  Activities Cash  used  by  investing  activities  during 2017 , 2016 and 2015 was $2.1  billion , $3.4  billion and $1.8  billion .  Capital
expenditures totaled $1.7 billion in 2017 , down from $2.6 billion in 2016 and $2.5 billion in 2015 . We expect capital expenditures in 2018 to be
higher than 2017 . Net proceeds from investments was insignificant in 2017. Net contributions to investments were $0.5 billion in 2016 compared
with net proceeds from investments of $0.6 billion in 2015.
Financing Activities Cash used by financing activities was $11.4 billion during 2017 , an increase of $1.8 billion compared with 2016 , primarily due
to higher share repurchases and dividend payments. During 2017 , our net borrowings were $1.1 billion compared with minimal net repayments in
2016 . Cash used by financing activities was $9.6 billion during 2016, an increase of $1.7 billion compared with 2015 , primarily due to lower net
borrowings and higher dividend payments and share repurchases.
At December 31, 2017 and 2016 the recorded balance of debt was $11.1 billion and $10.0 billion of which $1.3 billion and $0.4 billion was classified
as short-term. At December 31, 2017 and 2016 this included $2.5 billion and $2.9 billion of debt attributable to BCC , of which $0.9 billion and $0.1
billion were classified as short-term.
During 2017 and 2016 we repurchased 46.1 million and 55.1 million shares totaling $9.2 billion and $7.0 billion through our open market share
repurchase program. In 2017 and 2016 , we had 0.7 million shares transferred to us from employees for tax withholdings. At December 31, 2017 ,
the amount available under the share repurchase plan, announced on December 11, 2017 , totaled $18 billion .
Capital Resources We have substantial borrowing capacity. Any future borrowings may affect our credit ratings and are subject to various debt
covenants as described below. We have a commercial paper
35

Table of Contents
program that serves as a source of short-term liquidity. At December 31, 2017 , commercial paper borrowings totaling $600 million were supported
by unused commitments under the revolving credit agreement. We had no commercial paper borrowings in 2016. Currently, we have $5.0 billion of
unused borrowing capacity on revolving credit line agreements. We anticipate that these credit lines will primarily serve as backup liquidity to support
our general corporate borrowing needs.
Financing commitments totaled $10.2 billion and $14.8 billion at December 31, 2017 and 2016 . We anticipate that we will not be required to fund a
significant portion of our financing commitments as we continue to work with third party financiers to provide alternative financing to customers.
Historically, we have not been required to fund significant amounts of outstanding commitments. However, there can be no assurances that we will
not be required to fund greater amounts than historically required. In addition, many of our non-U.S. customers finance aircraft purchases through
the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Following the expiration of the bank’s charter on June 30, 2015, the bank’s charter was reauthorized in
December  2015.  The  bank  is  now  authorized  through  September  30,  2019.  However,  until  the  U.S.  Senate  confirms  members  sufficient  to
reconstitute a quorum of the bank’s board of directors, the bank will not be able to approve any transaction totaling more than $10 million. As a
result, we may fund additional commitments and/or enter into new financing arrangements with customers.
In the event we require additional funding to support strategic business opportunities, our commercial aircraft financing commitments, unfavorable
resolution of litigation or other loss contingencies, or other business requirements, we expect to meet increased funding requirements by issuing
commercial paper or term debt. We believe our ability to access external capital resources should be sufficient to satisfy existing short-term and
long-term commitments and plans, and also to provide adequate financial flexibility to take advantage of potential strategic business opportunities
should  they  arise  within  the  next  year.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  of  the  cost  or  availability  of  future  borrowings,  if  any,  under  our
commercial paper program, in the debt markets or our credit facilities.
At December 31, 2017 and 2016 , our pension plans were $16.4 billion and $20.1 billion underfunded as measured under GAAP. On an Employee
Retirement Income Security Act ( ERISA ) basis our plans are more than 100% funded at December 31, 2017 with minimal required contributions in
2018 . During 2017, we contributed shares of our common stock with an aggregate value of $3.5 billion and $ 0.5 billion in cash. We do not expect
to make contributions to our pension plans in 2018 . We may be required to make higher contributions to our pension plans in future years.
At December  31,  2017 ,  we  were  in  compliance  with  the  covenants  for  our  debt  and  credit  facilities.  The  most  restrictive  covenants  include  a
limitation  on  mortgage  debt  and  sale  and  leaseback  transactions  as  a  percentage  of  consolidated  net  tangible  assets  (as  defined  in  the  credit
agreements), and a limitation on consolidated debt as a percentage of total capital (as defined). When considering debt covenants, we continue to
have substantial borrowing capacity.
36

Table of Contents
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our known obligations to make future payments pursuant to certain contracts as of December 31, 2017 , and the
estimated timing thereof.
(Dollars in millions)
Total
Less
than 1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
After 5
years
Long-term debt (including current portion)
$11,130
$1,285
$2,362
$1,266
$6,217
Interest on debt
5,635
478
831
672
3,654
Pension and other postretirement cash requirements
6,190
609
1,245
1,246
3,090
Capital lease obligations
147
55
61
16
15
Operating lease obligations
1,367
220
365
212
570
Purchase obligations not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of
Financial Position
115,064
48,375
31,369
23,223
12,097
Purchase obligations recorded on the Consolidated Statements of
Financial Position
18,630
18,289
325
2
14
Total contractual obligations  (1)
$158,163
$69,311
$36,558
$26,637
$25,657
(1)
 Excludes income tax matters. As of December 31, 2017 , our net liability for income taxes payable, including uncertain tax positions of $1,736 million , was $1,634 million .
For further discussion of income taxes, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. We are not able to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows
related to uncertain tax positions.
Pension  and  Other  Postretirement  Benefits Pension  cash  requirements  are  based  on  an  estimate  of  our  minimum  funding  requirements,
pursuant to ERISA regulations, although we may make additional discretionary contributions. Estimates of other postretirement benefits are based
on both our estimated future benefit payments and the estimated contributions to plans that are funded through trusts.
Purchase Obligations Purchase obligations represent contractual agreements to purchase goods or services that are legally binding; specify a
fixed,  minimum  or  range  of  quantities;  specify  a  fixed,  minimum,  variable,  or  indexed  price  provision;  and  specify  approximate  timing  of  the
transaction. Purchase obligations include amounts recorded as well as amounts that are not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial
Position.
Purchase  Obligations  Not  Recorded  on  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position Purchase  obligations  not  recorded  on  the
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position include agreements for inventory procurement, tooling costs, electricity and natural gas contracts,
property,  plant  and  equipment,  customer  financing  equipment,  and  other  miscellaneous  production  related  obligations.  The  most  significant
obligation  relates  to  inventory  procurement  contracts.  We  have  entered  into  certain  significant  inventory  procurement  contracts  that  specify
determinable prices and quantities, and long-term delivery timeframes. In addition, we purchase raw materials on behalf of our suppliers. These
agreements require suppliers and vendors to be prepared to build and deliver items in sufficient time to meet our production schedules. The need for
such arrangements with suppliers and vendors arises from the extended production planning horizon for many of our products. A significant portion
of these inventory commitments is supported by firm contracts and/or has historically resulted in settlement through reimbursement from customers
for penalty payments to the supplier should the customer not take delivery. These amounts are also included in our forecasts of costs for program
and contract accounting. Some inventory procurement contracts may include escalation adjustments. In these limited cases, we have included our
best estimate of the effect of the escalation adjustment in the amounts disclosed in the table above.
Purchase Obligations Recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position Purchase obligations recorded on the Consolidated
Statements  of  Financial  Position  primarily  include  accounts  payable  and  certain  other  current  and  long-term  liabilities  including  accrued
compensation.
37

Table of Contents
Industrial Participation Agreements We have entered into various industrial participation agreements with certain customers outside of the U.S. to
facilitate economic flow back and/or technology or skills transfer to their businesses or government agencies as the result of their procurement of
goods and/or services from us. These commitments may be satisfied by our local operations there, placement of direct work or vendor orders for
supplies, opportunities to bid on supply contracts, transfer of technology or other forms of assistance. However, in certain cases, our commitments
may be satisfied through other parties (such as our vendors) who purchase supplies from our non-U.S. customers. In certain cases, penalties could
be imposed if we do not meet our industrial participation commitments. During 2017 , we incurred no such penalties. As of December 31, 2017 , we
have outstanding industrial participation agreements totaling $17.9 billion that extend through 2030 . Purchase order commitments associated with
industrial participation agreements are included in purchase obligations in the table above. To be eligible for such a purchase order commitment
from us, a non-U.S. supplier must have sufficient capability to meet our requirements and must be competitive in cost, quality and schedule.
Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our commercial commitments outstanding as of December 31, 2017 .
(Dollars in millions)
Total Amounts
Committed/Maximum
Amount of Loss
Less than
1 year
1-3
years
4-5
years
After 5
years
Standby letters of credit and surety bonds
$3,708
$1,659
$782
$559
$708
Commercial aircraft financing commitments
10,221
2,047
4,372
2,256
1,546
Total commercial commitments
$13,929
$3,706
$5,154
$2,815
$2,254
Commercial  aircraft  financing  commitments  include  commitments  to  provide  financing  related  to  aircraft  on  order,  under  option  for  deliveries  or
proposed as part of sales campaigns or refinancing with respect to delivered aircraft, based on estimated earliest potential funding dates. Based on
historical experience, we anticipate that we will not be required to fund a significant portion of our financing commitments. However, there can be no
assurances that we will not be required to fund greater amounts than historically required, particularly if the Export-Import Bank of the United States
continues to be unable to, or does not, provide new financing support. See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contingent Obligations
We have significant contingent obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business, which include the following:
Legal Various  legal  proceedings,  claims  and  investigations  are  pending  against  us.  Legal  contingencies  are  discussed  in  Note 20 to  our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental Remediation We  are involved  with  various  environmental  remediation  activities  and have  recorded  a  liability  of $524 million at
December 31, 2017 . For additional information, see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are a party to certain off-balance sheet arrangements including certain guarantees. For discussion of these arrangements, see Note 12 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
38

Table of Contents
Non-GAAP Measures
Core Operating Earnings, Core Operating Margin and Core Earnings Per Share
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States of America (
GAAP ) which we supplement with certain non-GAAP financial information. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a
substitute  for  the  related  GAAP  measures,  and  other  companies  may  define  such  measures  differently.  We  encourage  investors  to  review  our
financial  statements  and  publicly-filed  reports  in  their  entirety  and  not  to  rely  on  any  single  financial  measure.  Core  operating  earnings,  core
operating  margin  and  core  earnings  per  share  exclude  the  impact  of  certain  pension  and  other  postretirement  benefit  expenses  that  are  not
allocated to business segments. Pension costs, comprising service and prior service costs computed in accordance with GAAP are allocated to BCA
and  certain  BGS  businesses  supporting  commercial  customers.  Pension  costs  allocated  to  BDS  and  BGS  businesses  supporting  government
customers are computed in accordance with U.S. Government Cost Accounting Standards (CAS), which employ different actuarial assumptions and
accounting  conventions  than  GAAP.  CAS  costs  are  allocable  to  government  contracts.  Other  postretirement  benefit  costs  are  allocated  to  all
business segments based on CAS, which is generally based on benefits paid. The unallocated pension costs recognized in earnings during 2017
was a benefit of $1,120 million compared with a benefit of $217 million in 2016 and an expense of $421 million in 2015 . The higher 2017 benefit
reflects  the amortization  of pension benefits  capitalized  as inventory  in prior  years.  The 2016 benefit  reflects  the  difference  between  the higher
segment allocation compared to the U.S. GAAP net periodic pension costs recognized in earnings in the current period, as well as lower settlements
and curtailments. For further discussion of pension and other postretirement costs see the Management’s Discussion and Analysis on pages 20 and
21 of this Form 10-K and see Note 21 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Management uses core operating earnings, core operating margin
and  core  earnings  per  share  for  purposes  of  evaluating  and  forecasting  underlying  business  performance.  Management  believes  these  core
earnings measures provide investors additional insights into operational performance as unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit cost
primarily represent costs driven by market factors and costs not allocable to U.S. government contracts.
39

Table of Contents
Reconciliation of GAAP Measures to Non-GAAP Measures
The table below reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share with
the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures of earnings from operations, operating margins and diluted earnings per share.
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Revenues
$93,392
$94,571
$96,114
Earnings from operations, as reported
$10,278
$5,834
$7,443
Operating margins
11.0%
6.2%
7.7%
Unallocated pension (income)/expense
($1,120)
($217)
$421
Unallocated other postretirement benefit income
($188)
($153)
($123)
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit (income)/expense
($1,308)
($370)
$298
Core operating earnings (non-GAAP)
$8,970
$5,464
$7,741
Core operating margins (non-GAAP)
9.6%
5.8%
8.1%
Diluted earnings per share, as reported
$13.43
$7.61
$7.44
Unallocated pension (income)/expense
($1.83)
($0.33)
$0.61
Unallocated other postretirement benefit income
($0.31)
($0.24)
($0.18)
Provision for deferred income taxes on 
adjustments (1)
$0.75
$0.20
($0.15)
Core earnings per share (non-GAAP)
$12.04
$7.24
$7.72
Weighted average diluted shares (in millions)
610.7
643.8
696.1
(1)
The income tax impact is calculated using the tax rate in effect for the non-GAAP adjustments.
40

Table of Contents
Critical Accounting Policies
Contract Accounting
Contract  accounting  is used to  determine  revenue,  cost  of  sales,  and profit  predominantly  by BDS and for  defense  contracts  at BGS.  Contract
accounting involves a judgmental process of estimating the total sales and costs for each contract, which results in the development of estimated
cost of sales percentages. For each contract, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage
to the amount of revenue recognized.
Due to the size, duration and nature of many of our contracts, the estimation of total sales and costs through completion is complicated and subject
to many variables. Total contract sales estimates are based on negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions regarding
contract  options,  change  orders,  incentive  and  award  provisions  associated  with  technical  performance,  and  price  adjustment  clauses  (such  as
inflation or index-based clauses). The majority of these contracts are with the U.S. government where the price is generally based on estimated cost
to  produce  the  product  or  service  plus  profit.  Federal  Acquisition  Regulations  provide  guidance  on  the  types  of  cost  that  will  be  reimbursed  in
establishing  contract  price.  Total  contract  cost  estimates  are  largely  based  on  negotiated  or  estimated  purchase  contract  terms,  historical
performance trends, business base and other economic projections. Factors that influence these estimates include inflationary trends, technical and
schedule risk, internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, asset utilization, and anticipated labor agreements.
Revenue  and  cost  estimates  for  all  significant  contracts  are  reviewed  and  reassessed  quarterly.  Changes  in  these  estimates  could  result  in
recognition of cumulative catch-up adjustments to the contract’s inception to date revenues, cost of sales and profit, in the period in which such
changes are made. Changes in revenue and cost estimates could also result in a reach-forward loss or an adjustment to a reach-forward loss, which
would be recorded immediately in earnings. For the year ended December 31, 2017 net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-
forward losses, across all contracts increased Earnings from operations by $14 million . For the years ended December 31, 2016 and 2015 , net
unfavorable  cumulative catch-up  adjustments,  including reach-forward  losses,  across  all contracts  decreased  Earnings from  operations by $912
million and $224 million .
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is likely that materially different cost of sales amounts could be
recorded  if  we  used  different  assumptions  or  if  the  underlying  circumstances  were  to  change.  Changes  in  underlying  assumptions/estimates,
supplier performance, or circumstances may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods. If the combined gross margin for
all contracts in BDS and defense contracts at BGS for all of 2017 had been estimated to be higher or lower by 1%, it would have increased or
decreased pre-tax income for the year by approximately $280 million . In addition, a number of our fixed price development contracts are in a reach-
forward loss position. Changes to estimated losses are recorded immediately in earnings.
Program Accounting
Program  accounting  requires  the  demonstrated  ability  to  reliably  estimate  the  relationship  of  sales  to  costs  for  the  defined  program  accounting
quantity.  A  program  consists  of  the  estimated  number  of  units  (accounting  quantity)  of  a  product  to  be  produced  in  a  continuing,  long-term
production effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make
reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. For each program, the amount reported as cost of
sales  is  determined  by  applying  the  estimated  cost  of  sales  percentage  for  the  total  remaining  program  to  the  amount  of  sales  recognized  for
airplanes delivered and accepted by the customer.
41

Table of Contents
Factors that must be estimated include program accounting quantity, sales price, labor and employee benefit costs, material costs, procured part
costs, major component costs, overhead costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and warranty costs. Estimation of the accounting
quantity for each program takes into account several factors that are indicative of the demand for the particular program, such as firm orders, letters
of intent from prospective customers, and market studies. Total estimated program sales are determined by estimating the model mix and sales
price for all unsold units within the accounting quantity, added together with the sales prices for all undelivered units under contract. The sales prices
for all undelivered units within the accounting quantity include an escalation adjustment for inflation that is updated quarterly. Cost estimates are
based  largely  on  negotiated  and  anticipated  contracts  with  suppliers,  historical  performance  trends,  and  business  base  and  other  economic
projections.  Factors  that  influence  these  estimates  include  production  rates,  internal  and  subcontractor  performance  trends,  customer  and/or
supplier claims or assertions, asset utilization, anticipated labor agreements, and inflationary or deflationary trends.
To ensure  reliability  in our estimates,  we employ  a rigorous  estimating  process  that  is reviewed  and updated  on a quarterly  basis.  Changes in
estimates  are  normally  recognized  on  a  prospective  basis;  when  estimated  costs  to  complete  a  program  exceed  estimated  revenues  from
undelivered units in the accounting quantity, a loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the
accounting quantity. For example, in 2016 and 2015, we recorded reach-forward losses of $1,258 million and $885 million on the 747 program. We
continue to evaluate the viability of the 747 program and it is reasonably possible that we could decide to end production of the 747.
The program method of accounting allocates tooling and other non-recurring and production costs over the accounting quantity for each program.
Because of the higher unit production costs experienced at the beginning of a new program and substantial investment required for initial tooling and
other  non-recurring  costs,  new  commercial  aircraft  programs,  such  as  the  787  and  777X  programs,  typically  have  lower  initial  margins  than
established  programs.  In  addition,  actual  costs  incurred  for  earlier  units  in  excess  of  the  estimated  average  cost  of  all  units  in  the  program
accounting quantity are included within program inventory as deferred production costs. Deferred production, unamortized tooling and other non-
recurring costs are expected to be fully recovered when all units in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries
is below the estimated average cost as learning curve and other improvements are realized.
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is reasonably possible that changes in underlying circumstances or
assumptions  could  have  a  material  effect  on  program  gross  margins.  If  the  combined  gross  margin  percentages  for  our  commercial  airplane
programs had been estimated to be 1% higher or lower it would have a similar effect on the Commercial Airplane segment’s operating margins. For
the year ended December 31, 2017 , a 1% increase or decrease in operating margins for our Commercial Airplane segment would have a $567
million impact on operating earnings.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Impairments
We  test  goodwill  for  impairment  by  performing  a  qualitative  assessment  or  using  a  two-step  impairment  process.  If  we  choose  to  perform  a
qualitative assessment, we evaluate economic, industry and company-specific factors as an initial step in assessing the fair value of operations. If
we determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related operations, the two-step
impairment process is then performed; otherwise, no further testing is required. For operations where the two-step impairment process is used, we
first compare the book value of net assets to the fair value of the related operations. If the fair value is determined to be less than book value, a
second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. In this process, a fair value for goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair
value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. The shortfall of the fair value below carrying value represents the amount of goodwill
impairment.
42

Table of Contents
We estimate the fair values of the related operations using discounted cash flows. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of
future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements and
general market conditions. Changes in these forecasts could significantly change the amount of impairment recorded, if any.
The cash flow forecasts are adjusted by an appropriate discount rate derived from our market capitalization plus a suitable control premium at the
date of evaluation. Therefore, changes in the stock price may also affect the amount of impairment recorded, if any.
We completed our assessment of goodwill as of April 1, 2017 and determined that there is no impairment of goodwill. As a result of the change in
our reportable segments, as described in Note 21 , we reallocated goodwill to our new reporting units using a relative fair value approach. We
evaluated goodwill for impairment at July 1, 2017 and determined that no impairment existed. As of December 31, 2017 , we estimated that the fair
value of each reporting unit significantly exceeded its corresponding carrying value. Changes in our forecasts, or decreases in the value of our
common stock could cause book values of certain operations to exceed their fair values which may result in goodwill impairment charges in future
periods.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , we had $490 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets related to the Jeppesen and Aviall brand and trade
names  acquired  in  business  combinations.  We  test  these  intangibles  for  impairment  by  comparing  their  carrying  value  to  current  projections  of
discounted cash flows attributable to the brand and trade names. Any excess carrying value over the amount of discounted cash flows represents
the amount of the impairment. A 10% decrease in the discounted cash flows would not impact the carrying value of these indefinite-lived intangible
assets.
Pension Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. Accounting
rules  require  an  annual  measurement  of  our  projected  obligation  and  plan  assets.  These  measurements  are  based  upon  several  assumptions,
including  the  discount  rate  and  the  expected  long-term  rate  of  asset  return.  Future  changes  in  assumptions  or  differences  between  actual  and
expected outcomes can significantly affect our future annual expense, projected benefit obligation and Shareholders’ equity.
The following table shows the sensitivity of our pension plan liability and net periodic cost to a 25 basis point change in the discount rate as of
December 31, 2017 .
(Dollars in millions)
Change in discount rate
Increase 25 bps
Change in discount rate
Decrease 25 bps
Pension plans
Projected benefit obligation
($2,364)
$2,961
Net periodic pension cost
(84)
99
Pension  expense  is  also  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  expected  long-term  rate  of  asset  return.  A  decrease  or  increase  of  25  basis  points  in  the
expected long-term rate of asset return would have increased or decreased 2017 net periodic pension expense by $148 million . We expect 2018
net periodic pension cost to decrease by approximately $44 million and the portion recognized in earnings before income taxes to decrease by
approximately $512 million primarily due to lower amortization of actuarial losses.
43

Table of Contents
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Interest Rate Risk
We  have  financial  instruments  that  are  subject  to  interest  rate  risk,  principally  fixed-rate  debt  obligations,  and  customer  financing  assets  and
liabilities. Additionally, BCC uses interest rate swaps with certain debt obligations to manage exposure to interest rate changes. Historically, we have
not experienced material gains or losses on our customer financing assets and liabilities due to interest rate changes. As of December 31, 2017 ,
the impact over the next 12 months of a 100 basis point rise in interest rates to our pre-tax earnings would not be significant. The investors in our
fixed-rate debt obligations do not generally have the right to demand we pay off these obligations prior to maturity. Therefore, exposure to interest
rate risk is not believed to be material for our fixed-rate debt.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
We are subject to foreign currency exchange rate risk relating to receipts from customers and payments to suppliers in foreign currencies. We use
foreign  currency  forward  contracts  to  hedge  the  price  risk  associated  with  firmly  committed  and  forecasted  foreign  denominated  payments  and
receipts  related  to  our  ongoing  business.  Foreign  currency  forward  contracts  are  sensitive  to  changes  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  At
December  31,  2017 ,  a  10%  increase  or  decrease  in  the  exchange  rate  in  our  portfolio  of  foreign  currency  contracts  would  have  increased  or
decreased our unrealized losses by $289 million. Consistent with the use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of exchange rate fluctuations,
such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions
being hedged. When taken together, these forward currency contracts and the offsetting underlying commitments do not create material market risk.
44

Table of Contents
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Index to the Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations
46
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
47
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
48
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
49
Consolidated Statements of Equity
50
Summary of Business Segment Data
51
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
52
Note 2 - Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
65
Note 3 - Earnings Per Share
66
Note 4 - Income Taxes
67
Note 5 - Accounts Receivable
70
Note 6 - Inventories
71
Note 7 - Customer Financing
72
Note 8 - Property, Plant and Equipment
74
Note 9 - Investments
75
Note 10 - Other Assets
75
Note 11 - Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
76
Note 12 - Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
80
Note 13 - Debt
81
Note 14 - Postretirement Plans
83
Note 15 - Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
91
Note 16 - Shareholders’ Equity
95
Note 17 - Derivative Financial Instruments
96
Note 18 - Significant Group Concentrations of Risk
98
Note 19 - Fair Value Measurements
98
Note 20 - Legal Proceedings
101
Note 21 - Segment Information
101
Note 22 - Quarterly Financial Data
105
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
106
45

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Sales of products
$83,204
$84,399
$85,255
Sales of services
10,188
10,172
10,859
Total revenues
93,392
94,571
96,114
Cost of products
(68,365)
(72,713)
(73,446)
Cost of services
(7,631)
(8,018)
(8,578)
Boeing Capital interest expense
(70)
(59)
(64)
Total costs and expenses
(76,066)
(80,790)
(82,088)
17,326
13,781
14,026
Income from operating investments, net
204
303
274
General and administrative expense
(4,094)
(3,616)
(3,525)
Research and development expense, net
(3,179)
(4,627)
(3,331)
Gain/(loss) on dispositions, net
21
(7)
(1)
Earnings from operations
10,278
5,834
7,443
Other income/(loss), net
129
40
(13)
Interest and debt expense
(360)
(306)
(275)
Earnings before income taxes
10,047
5,568
7,155
Income tax expense
(1,850)
(673)
(1,979)
Net earnings
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
Basic earnings per share
$13.60
$7.70
$7.52
Diluted earnings per share
$13.43
$7.61
$7.44
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 55 – 106 .
46

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Net earnings
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax:
Currency translation adjustments
128
(104)
(92)
Unrealized gain/(loss) on certain investments, net of tax of ($1), $1 and ($5)
1
(2)
8
Unrealized gain/(loss) on derivative instruments:
Unrealized gain/(loss) arising during period, net of tax of ($66), $4 and $77
119
(8)
(140)
Reclassification adjustment for loss included in net earnings, net of tax of ($28), ($43) and ($43)
52
78
79
Total unrealized gain/(loss) on derivative instruments, net of tax
171
70
(61)
Defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits:
Net actuarial loss arising during the period, net of tax of $248, $752 and $402
(495)
(1,365)
(732)
Amortization of actuarial losses included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of ($272), ($288)
and ($570)
542
524
1,038
Settlements and curtailments included in net income, net of tax of $0, ($7) and ($27)
14
51
Pension and postretirement (cost)/benefit related to our equity method investments, net of tax $5,
($7) and ($2)
(11)
12
3
Amortization of prior service (credits)/cost included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of $59,
$31 and ($22)
(117)
(57)
38
Prior service cost arising during the period, net of tax of ($14), ($18) and ($496)
28
33
902
Total defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits, net of tax
(53)
(839)
1,300
Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax
247
(875)
1,155
Comprehensive loss related to noncontrolling interests
(2)
(1)
(3)
Comprehensive income, net of tax
$8,442
$4,019
$6,328
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 55 – 106 .
47

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position  
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
December 31,
2017
2016
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$8,813
$8,801
Short-term and other investments
1,179
1,228
Accounts receivable, net
10,516
8,832
Current portion of customer financing, net
309
428
Inventories, net of advances and progress billings
44,344
43,199
Total current assets
65,161
62,488
Customer financing, net
2,740
3,773
Property, plant and equipment, net
12,672
12,807
Goodwill
5,559
5,324
Acquired intangible assets, net
2,573
2,540
Deferred income taxes
341
332
Investments
1,260
1,317
Other assets, net of accumulated amortization of $482 and $497
2,027
1,416
Total assets
$92,333
$89,997
Liabilities and equity
Accounts payable
$12,202
$11,190
Accrued liabilities
15,292
14,691
Advances and billings in excess of related costs
27,440
23,869
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt
1,335
384
Total current liabilities
56,269
50,134
Deferred income taxes
1,839
1,338
Accrued retiree health care
5,545
5,916
Accrued pension plan liability, net
16,471
19,943
Other long-term liabilities
2,015
2,221
Long-term debt
9,782
9,568
Shareholders’ equity:
Common stock, par value $5.00 – 1,200,000,000 shares authorized; 1,012,261,159 shares issued
5,061
5,061
Additional paid-in capital
6,804
4,762
Treasury stock, at cost
(43,454)
(36,097)
Retained earnings
45,320
40,714
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(13,376)
(13,623)
Total shareholders’ equity
355
817
Noncontrolling interests
57
60
Total equity
412
877
Total liabilities and equity
$92,333
$89,997
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 55 – 106 .
48

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Dollars in millions)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Cash flows – operating activities:
Net earnings
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
Non-cash items –
Share-based plans expense
202
190
189
Depreciation and amortization
2,069
1,910
1,833
Investment/asset impairment charges, net
113
90
167
Customer financing valuation cost/(benefit)
2
(7)
(5)
(Gain)/Loss on dispositions, net
(21)
7
1
Other charges and credits, net
287
369
364
Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
(157)
Changes in assets and liabilities –
Accounts receivable
(1,821)
112
(1,069)
Inventories, net of advances and progress billings
(1,085)
3,755
(1,110)
Accounts payable
130
622
(238)
Accrued liabilities
573
726
2
Advances and billings in excess of related costs
3,570
(493)
1,192
Income taxes receivable, payable and deferred
857
(810)
477
Other long-term liabilities
94
(68)
46
Pension and other postretirement plans
(582)
153
2,470
Customer financing, net
1,017
(696)
167
Other
(258)
(256)
(142)
Net cash provided by operating activities
13,344
10,499
9,363
Cash flows – investing activities:
Property, plant and equipment additions
(1,739)
(2,613)
(2,450)
Property, plant and equipment reductions
92
38
42
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(324)
(297)
(31)
Contributions to investments
(3,601)
(1,719)
(2,036)
Proceeds from investments
3,639
1,209
2,590
Purchase of distribution rights
(131)
Other
2
2
39
Net cash used by investing activities
(2,062)
(3,380)
(1,846)
Cash flows – financing activities:
New borrowings
2,077
1,325
1,746
Debt repayments
(953)
(1,359)
(885)
Repayments of distribution rights and other asset financing
(24)
Stock options exercised
311
321
399
Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
157
Employee taxes on certain share-based payment arrangements
(132)
(93)
(96)
Common shares repurchased
(9,236)
(7,001)
(6,751)
Dividends paid
(3,417)
(2,756)
(2,490)
Net cash used by financing activities
(11,350)
(9,587)
(7,920)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
80
(33)
(28)
Net decrease in cash and cash equivalents
12
(2,501)
(431)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
8,801
11,302
11,733
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$8,813
$8,801
$11,302
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 55 – 106 .
49


Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Equity
 
Boeing shareholders
 
 
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Common 
Stock
Additional 
Paid-In 
Capital
Treasury 
Stock
Retained 
Earnings
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Loss
Non- 
controlling 
Interest
Total
Balance at January 1, 2015
$5,061
$4,625
($23,298)
$36,180
($13,903)
$125
$8,790
Net earnings
5,176
(3)
5,173
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of ($686)
1,155
1,155
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
214
(25)
189
Excess tax pools
158
158
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(29)
428
399
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(134)
53
(81)
Common shares repurchased
(6,751)
(6,751)
Cash dividends declared ($3.82 per share)
(2,575)
(2,575)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(60)
(60)
Balance at December 31, 2015
$5,061
$4,834
($29,568)
$38,756
($12,748)
$62
$6,397
Net earnings
4,895
(1)
4,894
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $425
(875)
(875)
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
244
(35)
209
Excess tax pools
(84)
(84)
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(63)
383
320
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(169)
89
(80)
Common shares repurchased
(7,001)
(7,001)
Cash dividends declared ($4.69 per share)
(2,902)
(2,902)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(1)
(1)
Balance at December 31, 2016
$5,061
$4,762
($36,097)
$40,714
($13,623)
$60
$877
Net earnings
8,197
(2)
8,195
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of ($69) 
247
247
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
238
(35)
203
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(88)
399
311
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(190)
62
(128)
Treasury shares contributed to pension plans
2,082
1,418
3,500
Common shares repurchased
(9,236)
(9,236)
Cash dividends declared ($5.97 per share)
(3,556)
(3,556)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(1)
(1)
Balance at December 31, 2017
$5,061
$6,804
($43,454)
$45,320
($13,376)
$57
$412
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 55 – 106 .
50

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Summary of Business Segment Data
(Dollars in millions)
 
Years ended December 31,  
2017
2016
2015
Revenues:
Commercial Airplanes
$56,729
$58,012
$59,399
Defense, Space & Security
21,057
22,563
23,708
Global Services
14,639
13,925
13,293
Boeing Capital
307
298
413
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
660
(227)
(699)
Total revenues
$93,392
$94,571
$96,114
Earnings from operations:
Commercial Airplanes
$5,432
$1,995
$4,284
Defense, Space & Security
2,223
1,966
2,312
Global Services
2,256
2,177
1,835
Boeing Capital
114
59
50
Segment operating profit
10,025
6,197
8,481
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
253
(363)
(1,038)
Earnings from operations
10,278
5,834
7,443
Other income/(loss), net
129
40
(13)
Interest and debt expense
(360)
(306)
(275)
Earnings before income taxes
10,047
5,568
7,155
Income tax expense
(1,850)
(673)
(1,979)
Net earnings
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
This information is an integral part of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 21 for further segment results.
51

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The Boeing Company (herein referred to as
“Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”). These statements include the accounts of all majority-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities
that  are  required  to  be  consolidated.  All  significant  intercompany  accounts  and  transactions  have  been  eliminated.  As  described  in  Note 21 ,
effective  July  1,  2017,  we  now  operate  in four reportable  segments:  Commercial  Airplanes  (BCA);  Defense,  Space  &  Security  (BDS),  Global
Services (BGS), and Boeing Capital (BCC). Amounts in prior periods have been reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
Use of Estimates
Management makes assumptions and estimates to prepare financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United  States  of  America.  Those  assumptions  and  estimates  directly  affect  the  amounts  reported  in  the  Consolidated  Financial  Statements.
Significant estimates for which changes in the near term are considered reasonably possible and that may have a material impact on the financial
statements are disclosed in these Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Operating Cycle
For classification of certain current assets and liabilities, we use the duration of the related contract or program as our operating cycle, which is
generally longer than one year .
Revenue and Related Cost Recognition
Contract Accounting Contract accounting is used for development and production activities predominantly by BDS and for defense contracts at
BGS. The majority of these activities are performed under contracts with the U.S. government and other customers that extend over several years.
Contract accounting involves a judgmental process of estimating total sales and costs for each contract resulting in the development of estimated
cost of sales percentages. For each contract, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage
to the amount of revenue recognized. When the current estimates of total sales and costs for a contract indicate a loss, a provision for the entire loss
on the contract is recognized.
Changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effect on operating income are recognized using a cumulative catch-up adjustment
which recognizes in the current period the cumulative effect of the changes on current and prior periods based on a contract’s percent complete. Net
cumulative catch-up adjustments to prior years’ earnings, including reach-forward losses, across all contracts were as follows:
2017
2016
2015
Increase/(decrease) to Earnings from Operations
$14
($912)
($224)
Increase/(decrease) to Diluted EPS
$0.02
($1.25)
($0.23)
Significant adjustments during the three years ended December 31, 2017 included reach-forward losses of $471 , $1,128 and $835 on the USAF
KC-46A Tanker contract recorded during 2017, 2016 and 2015.
52

Table of Contents
We combine contracts for accounting purposes when they are negotiated as a package with an overall profit margin objective. These essentially
represent an agreement to do a single project for a single customer, involve interrelated construction activities with substantial common costs, and
are performed concurrently or sequentially. When a group of contracts is combined, revenue and profit are earned uniformly over the performance of
the combined contracts. Similarly, we may segment a single contract or group of contracts when a clear economic decision has been made during
contract negotiations that would produce different rates of profitability for each element or phase of the contract.
Sales  related  to  fixed-price  contracts  are  recognized  as  deliveries  are  made,  except  for  certain  fixed-price  contracts  that  require  substantial
performance over an extended period before deliveries begin, for which sales are recorded based on the attainment of performance milestones.
Sales related to contracts in which we are reimbursed for costs incurred plus an agreed upon profit are recorded as costs are incurred. The Federal
Acquisition  Regulations  provide  guidance  on  the  types  of  cost  that  will  be  reimbursed  in  establishing  contract  price.  Contracts  may  contain
provisions to earn incentive and award fees if specified targets are achieved. Incentive and award fees that can be reasonably estimated and are
probable are recorded over the performance period of the contract. Incentive and award fees that cannot be reasonably estimated are recorded
when awarded.
Program Accounting Our Commercial Airplanes segment uses program accounting to account for cost of sales related to its programs. Program
accounting is applicable to products manufactured for delivery under production-type contracts where profitability is realized over multiple contracts
and  years.  Under  program  accounting,  inventoriable  production  costs,  program  tooling  and  other  non-recurring  costs,  and  warranty  costs  are
accumulated and charged to cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. A program consists of the estimated number of
units  (accounting  quantity)  of  a  product  to  be  produced  in  a  continuing,  long-term  production  effort  for  delivery  under  existing  and  anticipated
contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue and cost of
existing and anticipated contracts. To establish the relationship of sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates of (a) the number of
units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period over which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced, and (c) the units’
expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total program.
We recognize sales for commercial airplane deliveries as each unit is completed and accepted by the customer. Sales recognized represent the
price negotiated with the customer, adjusted by an escalation formula as specified in the customer agreement. The amount reported as cost of sales
is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage for the total remaining program to the amount of sales recognized for airplanes
delivered and accepted by the customer. Changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effects on program margins are recognized
prospectively except in cases where the program is determined to have a reach-forward loss in which case the loss is recognized in the current
period. Reductions to a reach-forward loss are spread over all undelivered units in the accounting quantity, whereas increases to the estimated loss
are recorded immediately. See Note 11 .
Concession  Sharing  Arrangements We  account  for  sales  concessions  to  our  customers  in  consideration  of  their  purchase  of  products  and
services  as  a  reduction  to  revenue  when  the  related  products  and  services  are  delivered.  The  sales  concessions  incurred  may  be  partially
reimbursed by certain suppliers in accordance with concession sharing arrangements. We record these reimbursements, which are presumed to
represent reductions in the price of the vendor’s products or services, as a reduction in Cost of products.
Spare Parts Revenue We recognize sales of spare parts upon delivery and the amount reported as cost of sales is recorded at average cost.
Service Revenue Service revenue is recognized when the service is performed with the exception of U.S. government service agreements, which
are accounted for using contract accounting. Service activities
53

Table of Contents
primarily  include:  support  agreements  associated  with  military  aircraft  and  helicopter  contracts,  space  travel  on  Commercial  Crew,  ongoing
maintenance of International Space Station, military and commercial aircraft training contracts, fleet care, and technical and flight operation services
for  commercial  aircraft.  Service  revenue  and  associated  cost  of  sales  from  pay-in-advance  subscription  fees  are  deferred  and  recognized  as
services are rendered.
Financial  Services  Revenue We  record  financial  services  revenue  associated  with  sales-type/finance  leases,  operating  leases,  and  notes
receivable.
Lease and financing revenue arrangements are included in Sales of services on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For sales-type/finance
leases, we record an asset at lease inception. This asset is recorded at the aggregate of future minimum lease payments, estimated residual value
of the leased equipment, and deferred incremental direct costs less unearned income. Income is recognized over the life of the lease to approximate
a level rate of return on the net investment. Residual values, which are reviewed periodically, represent the estimated amount we expect to receive
at lease termination from the disposition of the leased equipment. Actual residual values realized could differ from these estimates. Declines in
estimated residual value that are deemed other-than-temporary are recognized in the period in which the declines occur.
For operating leases, revenue on leased aircraft and equipment is recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Operating lease
assets, included in Customer financing, are recorded at cost and depreciated over the period that we project we will hold the asset to an estimated
residual  value,  using  the  straight-line  method.  We  periodically  review  our  estimates  of  residual  value  and  recognize  forecasted  changes  by
prospectively adjusting depreciation expense.
For notes receivable, notes are recorded net of any unamortized discounts and deferred incremental direct costs. Interest income and amortization
of any discounts are recorded ratably over the related term of the note.
Reinsurance  Revenue Our  wholly-owned  insurance  subsidiary,  Astro  Ltd.,  participates  in  a  reinsurance  pool  for  workers’  compensation.  The
member agreements and practices of the reinsurance pool minimize any participating members’ individual risk. Reinsurance revenues were $141 ,
$147 and $136 during 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Reinsurance costs related to premiums and claims paid to the reinsurance pool were
$144 , $139 and $132 during 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Revenues and costs are presented net in Cost of sales in the Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
Fleet Support
We  provide  assistance  and  support  to  facilitate  efficient  and  safe  aircraft  operation  to  the  operators  of  all  our  commercial  airplane  models.
Collectively known as fleet support, these activities and support services include flight and maintenance training, field service support, engineering
support, and technical data and documents. Fleet support activity begins prior to aircraft delivery as the customer receives training, manuals, and
technical consulting support. This activity continues throughout the aircraft’s operational life. Services provided after delivery include field service
support, consulting on maintenance, repair, and operational issues brought forth by the customer or regulators, updating manuals and engineering
data, and the issuance of service bulletins that impact the entire model’s fleet. Field service support involves our personnel located at customer
facilities providing and coordinating fleet support activities and requests. The costs for fleet support are expensed as incurred as Cost of services.
Research and Development
Research  and  development  includes  costs  incurred  for  experimentation,  design,  and  testing,  as  well  as  bid  and  proposal  efforts  related  to
government products and services which are expensed as incurred
54

Table of Contents
unless the costs are related to certain contractual arrangements with customers. Costs that are incurred pursuant to such contractual arrangements
are recorded over the period that revenue is recognized, consistent with our contract accounting policy. We have certain research and development
arrangements that meet the requirement for best efforts research and development accounting. Accordingly, the amounts funded by the customer
are  recognized  as  an  offset  to  our  research  and  development  expense  rather  than  as  contract  revenues.  Research  and  development  expense
included bid and proposal costs of $288 , $311 and $286 in 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Share-Based Compensation
We provide various forms of share-based compensation to our employees. For awards settled in shares, we measure compensation expense based
on the grant-date fair value net of estimated forfeitures.  For awards settled in cash, or that may be settled in cash, we measure compensation
expense based on the fair value at each reporting date net of estimated forfeitures. The expense is recognized over the requisite service period,
which is generally the vesting period of the award.
Income Taxes
Provisions for U.S. federal, state and local, and non-U.S. income taxes are calculated on reported Earnings before income taxes based on current
tax law and also include, in the current period, the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in determining deferred
tax assets and liabilities. Such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable because certain items of income and expense are
recognized in different time periods for financial reporting purposes than for income tax purposes. Significant judgment is required in determining
income tax provisions and evaluating tax positions.
The accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax
positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured for
financial statement purposes and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax
positions  changes,  the  change  in estimate  is  recorded  in  the  period  in  which  the  determination  is  made.  Tax-related  interest  and  penalties  are
classified as a component of Income tax expense.
Postretirement Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. We also provide
postretirement  benefit  plans  other  than  pensions,  consisting  principally  of  health  care  coverage  to  eligible  retirees  and  qualifying  dependents.
Benefits under the pension and other postretirement benefit plans are generally based on age at retirement and years of service and, for some
pension plans, benefits are also based on the employee’s annual earnings. The net periodic cost of our pension and other postretirement plans is
determined using the projected unit credit method and several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, the long-
term rate of asset return, and medical trend (rate of growth for medical costs). A portion of net periodic pension and other postretirement income or
expense is not recognized in net earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to production as product costs, and reflected in inventory at the
end  of  a  reporting  period.  Actuarial  gains  and  losses,  which  occur  when  actual  experience  differs  from  actuarial  assumptions,  are  reflected  in
Shareholders’ equity (net of taxes). If actuarial gains and losses exceed ten percent of the greater of plan assets or plan liabilities we amortize them
over the average future service period of employees. The funded status of our pension and postretirement plans is reflected on the Consolidated
Statements of Financial Position.
55

Table of Contents
Postemployment Plans
We record a liability for postemployment benefits, such as severance or job training, when payment is probable, the amount is reasonably estimable,
and the obligation relates to rights that have vested or accumulated.
Environmental Remediation
We  are  subject  to  federal  and  state  requirements  for  protection  of  the  environment,  including  those  for  discharge  of  hazardous  materials  and
remediation  of  contaminated  sites.  We  routinely  assess,  based  on  in-depth  studies,  expert  analyses  and  legal  reviews,  our  contingencies,
obligations, and commitments for remediation of contaminated sites, including assessments of ranges and probabilities of recoveries from other
responsible parties and/or insurance carriers. Our policy is to accrue and charge to current expense identified exposures related to environmental
remediation sites when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. The amount of the liability is
based  on  our  best  estimate  or  the  low  end  of  a  range  of  reasonably  possible  exposure  for  investigation,  cleanup,  and  monitoring  costs  to  be
incurred. Estimated remediation costs are not discounted to present value as the timing of payments cannot be reasonably estimated. We may be
able to recover a portion of the remediation costs from insurers or other third parties. Such recoveries are recorded when realization of the claim for
recovery is deemed probable.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of highly liquid instruments, such as commercial paper, time deposits, and other money market instruments,
which have original maturities of three months or less. We aggregate our cash balances by bank where conditions for right of set-off are met, and
reclassify any negative balances, consisting mainly of uncleared checks, to Accounts payable. Negative balances reclassified to Accounts payable
were $116 and $77 at December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
Inventories
Inventoried  costs  on  commercial  aircraft  programs  and  long-term  contracts  include  direct  engineering,  production  and  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring  costs,  and  applicable  overhead,  which  includes  fringe  benefits,  production  related  indirect  and  plant  management  salaries  and  plant
services, not in excess of estimated net realizable value. To the extent a material amount of such costs are related to an abnormal event or are fixed
costs not appropriately attributable to our programs or contracts, they are expensed in the current period rather than inventoried. Inventoried costs
include amounts relating to programs and contracts with long-term production cycles, a portion of which is not expected to be realized within one
year. Included in inventory for federal government contracts is an allocation of allowable costs related to manufacturing process reengineering.
Commercial aircraft programs inventory includes deferred production costs and supplier advances. Deferred production costs represent actual costs
incurred for production of early units that exceed the estimated average cost of all units in the program accounting quantity. Higher production costs
are experienced at the beginning of a new or derivative airplane program. Units produced early in a program require substantially more effort (labor
and  other  resources)  than  units  produced  later  in  a  program  because  of  volume  efficiencies  and  the  effects  of  learning.  We  expect  that  these
deferred costs will be fully recovered when all units included in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries is
below the estimated average cost of all units in the program. Supplier advances represent payments for parts we have contracted to receive from
suppliers in the future. As parts are received, supplier advances are amortized to work in process.
56

Table of Contents
The determination of net realizable value of long-term contract costs is based upon quarterly reviews that estimate costs to be incurred to complete
all contract requirements. When actual contract costs and the estimate to complete exceed total estimated contract revenues, a loss provision is
recorded. The determination of net realizable value of commercial aircraft program costs is based upon quarterly program reviews that estimate
revenue  and  cost  to  be  incurred  to  complete  the  program  accounting  quantity.  When  estimated  costs  to  complete  exceed  estimated  program
revenues to go, a program loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the accounting quantity.
Used aircraft purchased by the Commercial Airplanes segment and general stock materials are stated at cost not in excess of net realizable value.
See ‘Aircraft Valuation’ within this Note for a discussion of our valuation of used aircraft. Spare parts inventory is stated at lower of average unit cost
or net realizable value. We review our commercial spare parts and general stock materials quarterly to identify impaired inventory, including excess
or obsolete inventory, based on historical sales trends, expected production usage, and the size and age of the aircraft fleet using the part. Impaired
inventories are charged to Cost of products in the period the impairment occurs.
Included in inventory for commercial aircraft programs are amounts paid or credited in cash, or other consideration to certain airline customers, that
are referred to as early issue sales consideration. Early issue sales consideration is recognized as a reduction to revenue when the delivery of the
aircraft under contract occurs. If an airline customer does not perform and take delivery of the contracted aircraft, we believe that we would have the
ability to recover amounts paid. However, to the extent early issue sales consideration exceeds advances and is not considered to be otherwise
recoverable, it would be written off in the current period.
We net advances and progress billings on long-term contracts against inventory in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Advances and
progress billings in excess of related inventory are reported in Advances and billings in excess of related costs.
Precontract Costs
We may, from time to time, incur costs in excess of the amounts required for existing contracts. If we determine the costs are probable of recovery
from  future  orders,  then  we  capitalize  the  precontract  costs  we  incur,  excluding  start-up  costs  which  are  expensed  as  incurred.  Capitalized
precontract costs are included in Inventories, net of advances and progress billings, in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Financial
Position. Should future orders not materialize or we determine the costs are no longer probable of recovery, the capitalized costs would be written
off.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property,  plant  and  equipment  are  recorded  at  cost,  including  applicable  construction-period  interest,  less  accumulated  depreciation  and  are
depreciated principally over the following estimated useful lives: new buildings and land improvements, from 10 to 40 years; and new machinery and
equipment, from 4  to 20 years. The principal methods of depreciation are as follows: buildings and land improvements, 150% declining balance;
and  machinery  and  equipment,  sum-of-the-years’  digits.  Capitalized  internal  use  software  is  included  in  Other  assets  and  amortized  using  the
straight  line  method  over 5 years.  We  periodically  evaluate  the  appropriateness  of  remaining  depreciable  lives  assigned  to  long-lived  assets,
including assets that may be subject to a management plan for disposition.
Long-lived  assets  held  for  sale  are  stated  at  the  lower  of  cost  or  fair  value  less  cost  to  sell.  Long-lived  assets  held  for  use  are  subject  to  an
impairment assessment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying
value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between
the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
57

Table of Contents
Asset Retirement Obligations
We record all known asset retirement obligations for which the liability’s fair value can be reasonably estimated, including certain asbestos removal,
asset decommissioning and contractual lease restoration obligations. Recorded amounts are not material.
We also have known conditional asset retirement  obligations, such as certain asbestos remediation and asset decommissioning activities to be
performed in the future, that are not reasonably estimable due to insufficient information about the timing and method of settlement of the obligation.
Accordingly, these obligations have not been recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements. A liability for these obligations will be recorded in
the period when sufficient information regarding timing and method of settlement becomes available to make a reasonable estimate of the liability’s
fair value. In addition, there may be conditional asset retirement obligations that we have not yet discovered (e.g., asbestos may exist in certain
buildings but we have not become aware of it through the normal course of business), and therefore, these obligations also have not been included
in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangibles
Goodwill and other acquired intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually and when an event
occurs or circumstances change such that it is more likely than not that an impairment may exist. Our annual testing date is April 1.
We  test  goodwill  for  impairment  by  performing  a  qualitative  assessment  or  using  a  two-step  impairment  process.  If  we  choose  to  perform  a
qualitative assessment and determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related
operations,  the  two-step  impairment  process  is  then  performed;  otherwise,  no  further  testing  is  required.  For  operations  where  the  two-step
impairment  process  is  used,  we  first  compare  the  carrying  value  of  net  assets  to  the  fair  value  of  the  related  operations.  If  the  fair  value  is
determined to be less than carrying value, a second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. In this process, a fair value for
goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. The shortfall of the fair value below
carrying value represents the amount of goodwill impairment.
Indefinite-lived  intangibles  consist  of  brand  and  trade  names  acquired  in  business  combinations.  We  test  these  intangibles  for  impairment  by
comparing their carrying value to current projections of discounted cash flows attributable to the brand and trade names. Any excess carrying value
over the amount of discounted cash flows represents the amount of the impairment.
Our finite-lived acquired intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows: developed technology,
from 4 to 14 years; product know-how, from 3 to 30 years; customer base, from 3 to 17 years; distribution rights, from 3 to 27 years; and other, from
2 to 32 years. We evaluate the potential impairment of finite-lived acquired intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of
the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
58

Table of Contents
Investments
Time deposits are held-to-maturity investments that are carried at cost.
Available-for-sale  securities  include  commercial  paper,  U.S.  government  agency  securities,  and  corporate  debt  securities.  Available-for-sale
securities are recorded at fair value, and unrealized gains and losses are recorded, net of tax, as a component of accumulated other comprehensive
income. Realized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities are recognized based on the specific identification method. Available-for-sale
securities are assessed for impairment quarterly.
The equity method of accounting is used to account for investments for which we have the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control,
over an investee. Significant influence is generally deemed to exist if we have an ownership interest in the voting stock of an investee of between
20% and 50% .
We  classify  investment  income  and  loss  on  our  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations  based  on  whether  the  investment  is  operating  or  non-
operating in nature. Operating investments align strategically and are integrated with our operations. Earnings from operating investments, including
our  share  of  income  or  loss  from  equity  method  investments,  dividend  income  from  certain  cost  method  investments,  and  any  impairments  or
gain/loss on the disposition of these investments, are recorded in Income from operating investments, net. Non-operating investments are those we
hold  for  non-strategic  purposes.  Earnings  from  non-operating  investments,  including  interest  and  dividends  on  marketable  securities,  and  any
impairments or gain/loss on the disposition of these investments are recorded in Other income/(expense), net.
Derivatives
All derivative instruments are recognized in the financial statements and measured at fair value regardless of the purpose or intent of holding them.
We use derivative instruments to principally manage a variety of market risks. For derivatives designated as hedges of the exposure to changes in
fair value of the recognized asset or liability or a firm commitment (referred to as fair value hedges), the gain or loss is recognized in earnings in the
period of change together with the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged. The effect of that accounting is to
include in earnings the extent to which the hedge is not effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair value. For our cash flow hedges, the effective
portion of the derivative’s gain or loss is initially reported in comprehensive income and is subsequently reclassified into earnings in the same period
or  periods  during  which  the  hedged  forecasted  transaction  affects  earnings.  The  ineffective  portion  of  the  gain  or  loss  of  a  cash  flow  hedge  is
reported  in  earnings  immediately.  We  have  agreements  to  purchase  and  sell  aluminum  to  address  long-term  strategic  sourcing  objectives  and
international  business  requirements.  These  agreements  are  derivatives  for  accounting  purposes  but  are  not  designated  for  hedge  accounting
treatment. We also hold certain derivative instruments for economic purposes that are not designated for hedge accounting treatment. For these
aluminum  agreements  and  for  other  derivative  instruments  not  designated  for  hedge  accounting  treatment,  the  changes  in  their  fair  value  are
recorded in earnings immediately.
Aircraft Valuation
Used aircraft under trade-in commitments and aircraft under repurchase commitments In conjunction with signing a definitive agreement for
the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain customers that give them the right to trade in used
aircraft at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. Additionally, we have entered into contingent repurchase commitments with certain
customers wherein we agree to repurchase the Sale Aircraft at a specified price, generally 10 to 15 years after delivery of the Sale Aircraft. Our
repurchase of the Sale Aircraft is contingent upon a future, mutually acceptable agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft. If we execute an
agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft, and if the customer exercises its right to sell the Sale
59

Table of Contents
Aircraft to us, a contingent repurchase commitment would become a trade-in commitment. Our historical experience is that contingent repurchase
commitments infrequently become trade-in commitments.
Exposure related to trade-in commitments may take the form of:
(1) adjustments to revenue for the difference between the contractual trade-in price in the definitive agreement and our best estimate of the
fair value of the trade-in aircraft as of the date of such agreement, which would be recognized upon delivery of the Sale Aircraft, and/or
(2) charges  to  cost  of  products  for  adverse  changes  in  the  fair  value  of  trade-in  aircraft  that  occur  subsequent  to  signing  of  a  definitive
agreement for Sale Aircraft but prior to the purchase of the used trade-in aircraft. Estimates based on current aircraft values would be
included in Accrued liabilities.
The fair value of trade-in aircraft is determined using aircraft-specific data such as model, age and condition, market conditions for specific aircraft
and  similar  models,  and  multiple  valuation  sources.  This  process  uses  our  assessment  of  the  market  for  each  trade-in  aircraft,  which  in  most
instances begins years before the return of the aircraft. There are several possible markets in which we continually pursue opportunities to place
used aircraft. These markets include, but are not limited to, the resale market, which could potentially include the cost of long-term storage; the
leasing  market,  with  the  potential  for  refurbishment  costs  to  meet  the  leasing  customer’s  requirements;  or  the  scrap  market.  Trade-in  aircraft
valuation varies significantly depending on which market we determine is most likely for each aircraft. On a quarterly basis, we update our valuation
analysis based on the actual activities associated with placing each aircraft into a market or using current published third-party aircraft valuations
based on the type and age of the aircraft, adjusted for individual attributes and known conditions.
Used aircraft acquired by the Commercial Airplanes segment are included in Inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value as it is our intent
to sell these assets. To mitigate costs and enhance marketability, aircraft may be placed on operating lease. While on operating lease, the assets
are included in Customer financing.
Customer financing Customer financing includes operating lease equipment, notes receivable, and sales-type/finance leases. Sales-type/finance
leases are treated as receivables, and allowances for losses are established as necessary.
We  assess  the  fair  value  of  the  assets  we  own,  including  equipment  under  operating  leases,  assets  held  for  sale  or  re-lease,  and  collateral
underlying receivables, to determine if their fair values are less than the related assets’ carrying values. Differences between carrying values and fair
values of sales-type/finance leases and notes and other receivables, as determined by collateral value, are considered in determining the allowance
for losses on receivables.
We use a median calculated from published collateral values from multiple third-party aircraft value publications based on the type and age of the
aircraft to determine the fair value of aircraft. Under certain circumstances, we apply judgment based on the attributes of the specific aircraft or
equipment,  usually  when  the  features  or  use  of  the  aircraft  vary  significantly  from  the  more  generic  aircraft  attributes  covered  by  outside
publications.
Impairment review for assets under operating leases and held for sale or re-lease We evaluate for impairment assets under operating lease or
assets held for sale or re-lease when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the expected undiscounted cash flow from the asset may be
less than the carrying value. We use various assumptions when determining the expected undiscounted cash flow, including our intentions for how
long we will hold an asset subject to operating lease before it is sold, the expected future lease rates, lease terms, residual value of the asset,
periods in which the asset may be held in preparation for a follow-on lease, maintenance costs, remarketing costs and the remaining economic
60

Table of Contents
life of the asset. We record assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value less costs to sell.
When we determine that impairment is indicated for an asset, the amount of impairment expense recorded is the excess of the carrying value over
the fair value of the asset.
Allowance for losses on customer financing receivables We record the potential impairment of customer financing receivables in a valuation
account, the balance of which is an accounting estimate of probable but unconfirmed losses. The allowance for losses on receivables relates to two
components of receivables: (a) receivables that are evaluated individually for impairment and (b) all other receivables.
We determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due
according to the original contractual terms of the receivable agreement, without regard to any subsequent restructurings. Factors considered in
assessing collectability include, but are not limited to, a customer’s extended delinquency, requests for restructuring and filings for bankruptcy. We
determine a specific impairment allowance based on the difference between the carrying value of the receivable and the estimated fair value of the
related collateral we would expect to realize.
We review the adequacy of the allowance attributable to the remaining receivables (after excluding receivables subject to a specific impairment
allowance) by assessing both the collateral exposure and the applicable cumulative default rate. Collateral exposure for a particular receivable is the
excess of the carrying value of the receivable over the fair value of the related collateral. A receivable with an estimated fair value in excess of the
carrying value is considered to have no collateral exposure. The applicable cumulative default rate is determined using two components: customer
credit ratings and weighted average remaining contract term. Internally assigned credit ratings, our credit quality indicator, are determined for each
customer in the portfolio. Those ratings are updated based upon public information and information obtained directly from our customers.
We have entered into agreements with certain customers that would entitle us to look beyond the specific collateral underlying the receivable for
purposes of determining the collateral exposure as described above. Should the proceeds from the sale of the underlying collateral asset resulting
from a default condition be insufficient to cover the carrying value of our receivable (creating a shortfall condition), these agreements would, for
example, permit us to take the actions necessary to sell or retain certain other assets in which the customer has an equity interest and use the
proceeds to cover the shortfall.
Each quarter we review customer credit ratings, published historical credit default rates for different rating categories, and multiple third-party aircraft
value publications as a basis to validate the reasonableness of the allowance for losses on receivables. There can be no assurance that actual
results will not differ from estimates or that the consideration of these factors in the future will not result in an increase or decrease to the allowance
for losses on receivables.
Warranties
In conjunction with certain product sales, we provide warranties that cover factors such as non-conformance to specifications and defects in material
and design. The majority of our warranties are issued by our Commercial Airplanes segment. Generally, aircraft sales are accompanied by a three
to four -year standard warranty for systems, accessories, equipment, parts, and software manufactured by us or manufactured to certain standards
under our authorization. These warranties are included in the programs’ estimate at completion. On occasion we have made commitments beyond
the  standard  warranty  obligation  to  correct  fleet-wide  major  issues  of  a  particular  model,  resulting  in  additional  accrued  warranty  expense.
Warranties issued by our BDS segment principally relate to sales of military aircraft and weapons hardware and are included in the contract cost
estimates. These sales are generally accompanied by a six month to two -year warranty period and cover systems, accessories, equipment, parts,
and software manufactured by us to certain contractual specifications. Estimated costs related to standard warranties are recorded in the
61

Table of Contents
period in which the related product sales occur. The warranty liability recorded at each balance sheet date reflects the estimated number of months
of warranty coverage outstanding for products delivered times the average of historical monthly warranty payments, as well as additional amounts
for certain major warranty issues that exceed a normal claims level. Estimated costs of these additional warranty issues are considered changes to
the initial liability estimate.
We  provide  guarantees  to  certain  commercial  airplane  customers  which  include  compensation  provisions  for  failure  to  meet  specified  aircraft
performance targets. We account for these performance guarantees as warranties. The estimated liability for these warranties is based on known
and anticipated operational characteristics and forecasted customer operation of the aircraft relative to contractually specified performance targets,
and anticipated settlements when contractual remedies are not specified. Estimated payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue at delivery of
the related  aircraft.  We have agreements  that  require  certain  suppliers  to compensate  us for  amounts  paid to  customers  for  failure  of  supplied
equipment to meet specified performance targets. Claims against suppliers under these agreements are included in Inventories and recorded as a
reduction  in  Cost  of  products  at  delivery  of  the  related  aircraft.  These  performance  warranties  and  claims  against  suppliers  are  included  in  the
programs’ estimate at completion.
Supplier Penalties
We record an accrual for supplier penalties when an event occurs that makes it probable that a supplier penalty will be incurred and the amount is
reasonably estimable. Until an event occurs, we fully anticipate accepting all products procured under production-related contracts.
Guarantees
We record a liability in Accrued liabilities for the fair value of guarantees that are issued or modified after December 31, 2002. For a residual value
guarantee  where  we  received  a  cash  premium,  the  liability  is  equal  to  the  cash  premium  received  at  the  guarantee’s  inception.  For  credit
guarantees, the liability is equal to the present value of the expected loss. We determine the expected loss by multiplying the creditor’s default rate
by  the  guarantee  amount  reduced  by  the  expected  recovery,  if  applicable,  for  each  future  period  the  credit  guarantee  will  be  outstanding.  If  at
inception of a guarantee, we determine there is a probable related contingent loss, we will recognize a liability for the greater of (a) the fair value of
the guarantee as described above or (b) the probable contingent loss amount.
Standards Issued and Not Yet Implemented
In February 2016, the Financial Accounting Standards Board issued Accounting Standards Update (ASU) No. 2016 - 02, Leases (Topic 842) . The
new standard is effective for reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2018 and early adoption is permitted. The standard will require lessees
to report most  leases as assets and liabilities on the balance sheet, while lessor accounting will remain substantially  unchanged. The standard
requires a modified retrospective transition approach for existing leases, whereby the new rules will be applied to the earliest year presented. We
plan to adopt the new lease standard in 2019 and do not expect it to have a material effect on our financial position, results of operations or cash
flows.
We  are  adopting  ASU  No.  2014-09, Revenue  from  Contracts  with  Customers  (Topic  606) in  the  first  quarter  of  2018  using  the  retrospective
transition method which will require 2016 and 2017 financial statements to be restated. The new standard requires revenue to be recognized when
promised goods or services are transferred to customers in amounts that reflect the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in
exchange for those goods or services. The standard also requires expanded disclosures regarding revenue and contracts with customers.
62

Table of Contents
Most of our defense contracts at BDS and BGS that have historically recognized revenue as deliveries are made or based on the attainment of
performance milestones will recognize revenue under the new standard over time as costs are incurred. Certain military derivative aircraft contracts
included in our BCA segment will also recognize revenue as costs are incurred. The new standard will not change the total amount of revenue
recognized on these contracts, only accelerate the timing of when the revenue is recognized. In addition, the timing of cost of sales recognition for
these contracts will be accelerated, resulting in a decrease in Inventories from long-term contracts in progress.
The  new  standard  will  not  affect  revenue  recognition  or  the  use  of  program  accounting  for  commercial  airplane  contracts.  We  will  continue  to
recognize revenue for these contracts at the point in time when the customer accepts delivery of the airplane.
Because revenue will be recognized under the new standard as costs are incurred for most of our defense and military derivative airplane contracts,
approximately $10,000 of revenues and $1,300 of associated operating earnings will be accelerated into years ending prior to January 1, 2016. The
restatement will result in a cumulative adjustment to increase retained earnings by $900 effective January 1, 2016. Restated income statements for
2016 and 2017 are shown below.
We are also adopting ASU No. 2017-07 , Compensation - Retirement Benefits (Topic 715): Improving the Presentation of Net Periodic Pension Cost
and Net Periodic Postretirement Benefit Cost in the first quarter of 2018. The standard requires non-service cost components of net periodic benefit
cost to be presented in non-operating earnings using a retrospective transition method which will require us to restate 2016 and 2017 in the first
quarter of 2018. In addition, only service costs may be allocated to production costs and capitalized in inventory on a prospective basis effective
January 1, 2018. Adoption in the first quarter of 2018 is expected to result in a reclassification of non-service cost components of net periodic benefit
cost of $6 in 2017 and $478 in 2016 from Earnings from Operations to Other income/(loss), net. We applied a practical expedient as the estimation
basis for this reclassification. Adoption of the new pension standard will not affect previously reported financial position, earnings per share, or cash
flows.
63

Table of Contents
The impact to our 2017 and 2016 operating results as a result of adopting ASC Topic 606 and ASU No. 2017-07 is presented in the tables below:
Reported
Restated
Reported
Restated
Years ended December 31,
2017
2017
2016
2016
Revenues:
Commercial Airplanes
$56,729
$58,014
$58,012
$59,378
Defense, Space & Security
21,057
20,561
22,563
20,180
Global Services
14,639
14,581
13,925
13,819
Boeing Capital
307
307
298
298
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
660
542
(227)
(179)
Total revenues
$93,392
$94,005
$94,571
$93,496
Earnings from operations:
Commercial Airplanes
$5,432
$5,452
$1,995
$1,981
Defense, Space & Security
2,223
2,193
1,966
1,678
Global Services
2,256
2,246
2,177
2,159
Boeing Capital
114
114
59
59
Segment operating profit
10,025
10,005
6,197
5,877
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
253
(1,099)
(363)
(707)
FAS/CAS service cost adjustment (1)
1,438
1,357
Earnings from operations
10,278
10,344
5,834
6,527
Other income/(loss), net  (1)
129
123
40
(438)
Interest and debt expense
(360)
(360)
(306)
(306)
Earnings before income taxes
10,047
10,107
5,568
5,783
Income tax expense
(1,850)
(1,649)
(673)
(749)
Net earnings
$8,197
$8,458
$4,895
$5,034
Diluted earnings per share
$13.43
$13.85
$7.61
$7.83
(1)  The  FAS/CAS  service  cost  adjustment  represents  the  difference  between  the  pension  and  postretirement  service  costs  calculated  under
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and costs allocated to the business segments which are based on U.S. Government Cost
Accounting Standards for our defense businesses. Restated Other income/(loss), net includes the non-service cost components of net periodic
benefit cost.
In addition to the income statement changes described above, adoption of ASC Topic 606 is expected to increase total assets and total liabilities at
December 31, 2017 and 2016 by approximately $20,000 and $19,000 primarily due to classifying certain advances from customers as liabilities
under the new standard, whereas these advances were netted against inventory under existing GAAP. Adoption of ASU No. 2017-07 has no impact
on total assets and total liabilities. The new standards have no impact on cash flows reported in 2017 and 2016. The impact of the new revenue
standard  on  our  2017  and  2016  financial  results  may  not  be  representative  of  the  impact  on  our  financial  position  and  operating  results  in
subsequent years. ASC Topic 606 requires additional detailed disclosures regarding the Company’s contracts with customers, including disclosure
of  remaining  unsatisfied  performance  obligations,  in  the  first  quarter  of  2018  which  we  are  continuing  to  assess.  We  have  identified  and
implemented changes to the Company’s business processes, systems and controls to support adoption of the new standard.
64

Table of Contents
Note 2 – Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
Changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 were as follows:
Commercial
Airplanes
Defense, Space
& Security
Global Services
Total
Balance at January 1, 2016
$992
$2,648
$1,486
$5,126
Acquisitions (1)
206
206
Goodwill adjustments
(8)
(8)
Balance at December 31, 2016
$992
$2,854
$1,478
$5,324
Acquisitions (1)
220
220
Goodwill adjustments
15
15
Balance at December 31, 2017 (1)
$992
$3,074
$1,493
$5,559
(1)
The increase in goodwill is primarily the result of acquisitions in the fourth quarter of 2016 and 2017.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , we had indefinite-lived intangible assets with carrying amounts of $490 relating to trade names.
The gross carrying amounts and accumulated amortization of our acquired finite-lived intangible assets were as follows at December 31:
2017
2016
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization
Distribution rights
$2,445
$943
$2,281
$797
Product know-how
522
298
503
271
Customer base
650
479
595
436
Developed technology
556
406
523
376
Other
213
177
194
166
Total
$4,386
$2,303
$4,096
$2,046
Amortization expense for acquired finite-lived intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 was $240 and $220 . Estimated
amortization expense for the five succeeding years is as follows:
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Estimated amortization expense
$236
$213
$183
$174
$165
During 2017 and 2016 we acquired $298 and $113 of finite-lived intangible assets, of which $55 and $31 related to non-cash investing and financing
transactions.
65

Table of Contents
Note 3 – Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share are computed using the two-class method, which is an earnings allocation method that determines earnings
per  share  for  common  shares  and  participating  securities.  The  undistributed  earnings  are  allocated  between  common  shares  and  participating
securities as if all earnings had been distributed during the period. Participating securities and common shares have equal rights to undistributed
earnings.
Basic  earnings  per  share  is  calculated  by  taking  net  earnings,  less  earnings  available  to  participating  securities,  divided  by  the  basic  weighted
average common shares outstanding.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated by taking net earnings, less earnings available to participating securities, divided by the diluted weighted
average common shares outstanding.
The elements used in the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share were as follows:
(In millions - except per share amounts)  
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Net earnings
$8,197
$4,895
$5,176
Less: earnings available to participating securities
6
3
4
Net earnings available to common shareholders
$8,191
$4,892
$5,172
Basic
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
603.2
636.5
688.0
Less: participating securities
0.7
1
1.1
Basic weighted average common shares outstanding
602.5
635.5
686.9
Diluted
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
603.2
636.5
688.0
Dilutive potential common shares (1)
7.5
7.3
8.1
Diluted weighted average shares outstanding
610.7
643.8
696.1
Less: participating securities
0.7
1.0
1.1
Diluted weighted average common shares outstanding
610.0
642.8
695.0
Net earnings per share:
Basic
$13.60
$7.70
$7.52
Diluted
13.43
7.61
7.44
(1)  Diluted earnings per share includes any dilutive impact of stock options, restricted stock units, performance-based restricted stock units and
performance awards.
The following table includes the number of shares that may be dilutive potential common shares in the future. These shares were not included in the
computation of diluted earnings per share because the effect was either antidilutive or the performance condition was not met.
(Shares in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Performance awards
4.1
6.5
5.6
Performance-based restricted stock units
0.5
2.5
2.3
66

Table of Contents
Note 4 – Income Taxes
The components of earnings before income taxes were:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
U.S.
$9,615
$5,175
$6,828
Non-U.S.
432
393
327
Total
$10,047
$5,568
$7,155
Income tax expense/(benefit) consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Current tax expense
U.S. federal
$1,276
$1,193
$2,102
Non-U.S.
149
133
122
U.S. state
23
15
21
Total current
1,448
1,341
2,245
Deferred tax expense
U.S. federal
405
(618)
(297)
Non-U.S.
(1)
(4)
4
U.S. state
(2)
(46)
27
Total deferred
402
(668)
(266)
Total income tax expense
$1,850
$673
$1,979
Net income tax payments were $896 , $1,460 and $1,490 in 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
67

Table of Contents
The following is a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 35% to our effective income tax rates:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
U.S. federal statutory tax
35.0 %
35.0 %
35.0 %
Impact of Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (1)
(10.5)
Tax basis adjustment (2)
(7.9)
Federal audit settlements (3)
(3.2)
Excess tax benefits (4)
(2.1)
(1.9)
Research and development credits
(1.6)
(5.2)
(3.4)
U.S. manufacturing activity tax benefit
(1.3)
(3.8)
(2.9)
Tax on non-US activities
(0.9)
(0.5)
(0.6)
Other provision adjustments
(0.2)
(0.4)
(0.4)
Effective income tax rate
18.4 %
12.1 %
27.7 %
(1)  On December 22, 2017, the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act (TCJA) was enacted. The TCJA revises the U.S. corporate income tax by, among other
things, lowering the rate from 35% to 21% effective January 1, 2018, implementing a territorial tax system and imposing a one-time tax on
deemed repatriated earnings of non-U.S. subsidiaries. In the fourth quarter of 2017, we recorded provisional tax benefits of $1,210 related to the
remeasurement  of  our  net  U.S.  deferred  tax  liabilities  to  reflect  the  reduction  in  the  corporate  tax  rate.  We  also  recorded  a  provisional  tax
expense of $159 related to tax on non-U.S. activities resulting from the TCJA.
(2)  In the third quarter of 2016, we recorded incremental tax benefits of $440 related to the application of a 2012 Federal Court of Claims decision
which held that the tax basis in certain assets could be increased (tax basis adjustment).
(3)  In the third quarter of 2016, a tax benefit of $177 was recorded as a result of the settlement of the 2011-2012 federal tax audit.
(4)  In 2017 and 2016, we recorded excess tax benefits related to employee share-based payments of $207 and $105 .
68

Table of Contents
Significant components of our deferred tax (liabilities)/assets at December 31 were as follows:
2017
2016
Inventory and long-term contract methods of income recognition
(6,290)
(9,954)
Pension benefits
3,690
7,385
Retiree health care benefits
1,319
2,268
Fixed assets, intangibles and goodwill (net of valuation allowance of $16 and $16)
(1,259)
(2,007)
Other employee benefits
847
1,225
Customer and commercial financing
(369)
(730)
Accrued expenses and reserves
347
587
Net operating loss, credit and capital loss carryovers (net of valuation allowance of $53 and $79) (1)
299
277
Other
(82)
(57)
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets (2)
($1,498)
($1,006)
(1)  Of the deferred tax asset for net operating loss and credit carryovers, $278 expires on or before December 31, 2036 and $21 may be carried
over indefinitely.
(2)  Included in the net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 are deferred tax assets in the amounts of $4,636 and
$7,701 related to Accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets at December 31 were as follows:
2017
2016
Deferred tax assets
$8,459
$13,591
Deferred tax liabilities
(9,888)
(14,502)
Valuation allowance
(69)
(95)
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets
($1,498)
($1,006)
The deferred tax assets are reduced by a valuation allowance if, based upon available evidence, it is more likely than not that some or all of the
deferred tax assets will not be realized.
The TCJA one-time repatriation tax liability effectively taxed the undistributed earnings previously deferred from U.S. income taxes. We have not
provided  for  foreign  withholding  tax  on  the  undistributed  earnings  from  our  non-U.S.  subsidiaries  because  such  earnings  are  considered  to  be
indefinitely reinvested. If such earnings were to be distributed, any foreign withholding tax would not be significant.
In accordance with U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Staff Accounting Bulletin No. 118 the amounts recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017
related to the TCJA represent reasonable estimates based on our analysis to date and are considered to be provisional and subject to revision
during 2018. Provisional amounts were recorded for the repatriation tax, the remeasurement of our 2017 U.S. net deferred tax liabilities and ancillary
state tax effects. These amounts are considered to be provisional as we continue to assess available tax methods and elections and refine our
computations. In addition, further regulatory guidance related to the TCJA is expected to be issued in 2018 which may result in changes to our
current estimates. Any revisions to the estimated impacts of TCJA will be recorded quarterly until the computations are complete which is expected
no later than the fourth quarter of 2018.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , the amounts accrued for the payment of income tax-related interest and penalties included in the Consolidated
Statements of Financial Position were not significant. The amounts of interest benefit included in the Consolidated Statements of Operations were
not significant for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 .
69

Table of Contents
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
2017
2016
2015
Unrecognized tax benefits – January 1
$1,557
$1,617
$1,312
Gross increases – tax positions in prior periods
3
17
38
Gross decreases – tax positions in prior periods
(44)
(348)
(25)
Gross increases – current-period tax positions
220
344
292
Settlements
(73)
Unrecognized tax benefits – December 31
$1,736
$1,557
$1,617
As of December 31 , 2017, 2016 and 2015 , the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits was $1,736 , $1,557 and $1,617 , respectively, of which
$1,568 , $1,402 and $1,479 would affect the effective tax rate, if recognized. As of December 31, 2017 , these amounts are primarily associated with
U.S. federal tax issues such as the amount of research tax credits claimed, the U.S. manufacturing activity tax benefit and tax basis adjustments.
Also included in these amounts are accruals for domestic state tax issues such as the allocation of income among various state tax jurisdictions and
the amount of state tax credits claimed.
Federal income tax audits have been settled for all years prior to 2013. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS) began the 2013-2014 federal tax audit in
the fourth quarter of 2016. We are also subject to examination in major state and non-U.S. jurisdictions for the 2001-2016 tax years. We believe
appropriate provisions for all outstanding tax issues have been made for all jurisdictions and all open years.
Audit outcomes and the timing of audit settlements are subject to significant uncertainty. It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months
unrecognized tax benefits related to federal and state matters under audit may decrease by up to $540 and $430 , respectively, based on current
estimates.
Note 5 – Accounts Receivable, net
Accounts receivable at December 31 consisted of the following:
2017
2016
U.S. government contracts
$5,989
$4,639
Commercial Airplanes
1,542
1,375
Global Services (1)
1,472
1,257
Defense, Space & Security (1)
760
533
Reinsurance receivables
467
526
Other
348
567
Less valuation allowance
(62)
(65)
Total
$10,516
$8,832
(1)  Excludes U.S. government contracts
The  following  table  summarizes  our  accounts  receivable  under  long-term  contracts  that  were  unbillable  or  related  to  outstanding  claims  as  of
December 31 :
Unbillable
Claims
2017
2016
2017
2016
Current
$2,876
$1,919
$4
$38
Expected to be collected after one year
1,564
2,011
$55
91
Total
$4,440
$3,930
$59
$129
70

Table of Contents
Under contract accounting unbillable receivables on long-term contracts arise when the sales or revenues based on performance attainment, though
appropriately recognized, cannot be billed yet under terms of the contract as of the balance sheet date. Any adjustment for the credit quality of
unbillable receivables, if required, would be recorded as a direct reduction of revenue. Factors considered in assessing the collectability of unbillable
receivables  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  a  customer’s  extended  delinquency,  requests  for  restructuring  and  filings  for  bankruptcy.  Unbillable
receivables  related  to  commercial  customers  expected  to  be  collected  after  one  year  were $172 and $172 at December  31,  2017  and  2016 .
Accounts receivable related to claims are items that we believe are earned, but are subject to uncertainty concerning their determination or ultimate
realization.
Accounts receivable, other than those described above, expected to be collected after one year are not material.
Note 6 – Inventories
Inventories at December 31 consisted of the following:
2017
2016
Long-term contracts in progress
$13,889
$12,801
Commercial aircraft programs
52,861
52,048
Commercial spare parts, used aircraft, general stock materials and other
5,688
5,446
Inventory before advances and progress billings
72,438
70,295
Less advances and progress billings
(28,094)
(27,096)
Total
$44,344
$43,199
Long-Term Contracts in Progress
Long-term contracts in progress includes Delta launch program inventory that is being sold at cost to United Launch Alliance ( ULA ) under an
inventory supply agreement that terminates on March 31, 2021. The inventory balance was $120 (net of advances of $164 and $220 ) at December
31, 2017 and 2016 . See indemnifications to ULA in Note 12 .
Included in inventories at December 31, 2017 and 2016 are capitalized precontract costs of $933 and $729 primarily related to KC-46A Tanker, C-
17 and F/A-18. See Note 11 .
Commercial Aircraft Programs
At December 31, 2017 and 2016 , commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 787 program: $30,695 and
$32,501 of work in process (including deferred production costs of $25,358 and $27,308 ), $3,189 and $2,398 of supplier advances, and $3,173 and
$3,625 of unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs. At December 31, 2017 , $22,220 of 787 deferred production costs, unamortized tooling
and other non-recurring costs are expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that have firm orders and $6,311
is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent expected future orders.
At December 31, 2017 and 2016 , commercial aircraft programs inventory included $151 and $284 of unamortized tooling costs related to the 747
program.  At December  31,  2017 , $146 of  747  unamortized  tooling  costs  are  expected  to  be  recovered  from  units  included  in  the  program
accounting quantity that have firm orders or commitments. The program accounting quantity includes one already completed aircraft which is being
remarketed.
71

Table of Contents
Commercial  aircraft  programs  inventory  included  amounts  credited  in  cash  or  other  consideration  (early  issue  sales  consideration)  to  airline
customers totaling $2,976 and $3,117 at December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
Note 7 – Customer Financing
Customer financing primarily relates to the BCC segment and consisted of the following at December 31:
2017
2016
Financing receivables:
Investment in sales-type/finance leases
$1,364
$1,482
Notes
677
807
Total financing receivables
2,041
2,289
Operating lease equipment, at cost, less accumulated depreciation of $320 and $359
1,020
1,922
Gross customer financing
3,061
4,211
Less allowance for losses on receivables
(12)
(10)
Total
$3,049
$4,201
The components of investment in sales-type/finance leases at December 31 were as follows:
2017
2016
Minimum lease payments receivable
$1,159
$1,321
Estimated residual value of leased assets
495
505
Unearned income
(290)
(344)
Total
$1,364
$1,482
Operating lease equipment primarily includes large commercial jet aircraft.
Financing receivable balances evaluated for impairment at December 31 were as follows:
2017
2016
Individually evaluated for impairment
$77
$55
Collectively evaluated for impairment
1,964
2,234
Total financing receivables
$2,041
$2,289
We determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due
according  to  the  original  contractual  terms.  At December  31,  2017 and 2016 ,  we  individually  evaluated  for  impairment  customer  financing
receivables  of $77 and $55 ,  of  which $66 and $44 were  determined  to  be  impaired.  We  recorded  no  allowance  for  losses  on  these  impaired
receivables as the collateral values exceeded the carrying values of the receivables.
Income recognition is generally suspended for financing receivables at the date full recovery of income and principal becomes not probable. Income
is recognized when financing receivables become contractually current and performance is demonstrated by the customer . The average recorded
investment in impaired financing receivables for the year ended December 31, 2017 was $46 and the related interest income was insignificant.
72

Table of Contents
The  change  in  the  allowance  for  losses  on  financing  receivables  for  the years  ended  December  31,  2017,  2016  and  2015 ,  consisted  of  the
following:
2017
2016
2015
Beginning balance - January 1
($10)
($16)
($21)
Customer financing valuation (cost)/benefit
(2)
6
5
Ending balance - December 31
($12)
($10)
($16)
Collectively evaluated for impairment
($12)
($10)
($16)
The adequacy of the allowance for losses is assessed quarterly. Three primary factors influencing the level of our allowance for losses on customer
financing  receivables  are  customer  credit  ratings,  default  rates  and  collateral  values.  We  assign  internal  credit  ratings  for  all  customers  and
determine the creditworthiness of each customer based upon publicly available information and information obtained directly from our customers.
Our rating categories are comparable to those used by the major credit rating agencies.
Our financing receivable balances at December 31 by internal credit rating category are shown below:
Rating categories
2017
2016
BBB
$1,170
$1,324
BB
627
538
B
177
383
CCC
67
44
Total carrying value of financing receivables
$2,041
$2,289
At December 31, 2017 , our allowance related to receivables with ratings of B, BB and BBB. We applied default rates that averaged 22.6% , 4.7%
and 0.9% to the exposure associated with those receivables.
Customer Financing Exposure
Customer financing is collateralized by security in the related asset. The value of the collateral is closely tied to commercial airline performance and
overall  market  conditions  and  may  be  subject  to  reduced  valuation  with  market  decline.  Declines  in  collateral  values  could  result  in  asset
impairments, reduced finance lease income, and an increase in the allowance for losses. Our customer financing collateral is concentrated in 747-8
and out-of-production aircraft. Generally, out-of-production aircraft have experienced greater collateral value declines than in-production aircraft.
The majority of customer financing carrying values are concentrated in the following aircraft models at December 31:
2017
2016
717 Aircraft ($269 and $301 accounted for as operating leases)
$1,081
$1,282
747-8 Aircraft ($467 and $1,086 accounted for as operating leases)
467
1,111
MD-80 Aircraft (Accounted for as sales-type finance leases)
231
259
757 Aircraft ($27 and $43 accounted for as operating leases)
217
246
747-400 Aircraft ($88 and $149 Accounted for as operating leases)
170
149
737 Aircraft ($127 and $103 Accounted for as operating leases)
161
103
767 Aircraft ($25 and $85 accounted for as operating leases)
98
170
777 Aircraft (Accounted for as notes)
14
165
73

Table of Contents
Charges related to customer financing asset impairment for the years ended December 31 were as follows:
2017
2016
2015
Boeing Capital
$13
$45
$162
Other Boeing
30
21
Total
$43
$66
$162
Scheduled receipts on customer financing are as follows:
Year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Beyond
2022
Principal payments on notes receivable
$149
$167
$132
$175
$37
$17
Sales-type/finance lease payments receivable
236
223
185
120
107
288
Operating lease equipment payments receivable
417
86
69
53
40
62
Note 8 – Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment at December 31 consisted of the following:
2017
2016
Land
$530
$535
Buildings and land improvements
14,125
13,796
Machinery and equipment
14,577
13,569
Construction in progress
1,081
1,790
Gross property, plant and equipment
30,313
29,690
Less accumulated depreciation
(17,641)
(16,883)
Total
$12,672
$12,807
Depreciation expense was $1,548 , $1,418 and $1,357 for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Interest capitalized
during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 totaled $110 , $170 and $158 , respectively.
Rental  expense  for  leased  properties  was $283 , $287 and $267 ,  for  the years  ended  December  31,  2017,  2016  and  2015 ,  respectively.  At
December 31, 2017 , minimum rental payments under capital leases aggregated $147 . Minimum rental payments under operating leases with initial
or  remaining  terms  of  one  year  or  more  aggregated $1,355 ,  net  of  sublease  payments  of $13 at December  31,  2017 .  Payments  due  under
operating and capital leases net of sublease amounts and non-cancellable future rentals during the next five years are as follows:
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Minimum operating lease payments, net of sublease amounts
$216
$201
$157
$115
$96
Minimum capital lease payments
55
37
24
12
4
Accounts payable related to purchases of property, plant and equipment were $196 and $292 for the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
74

Table of Contents
Note 9 – Investments
Our investments, which are recorded in Short-term and other investments or Investments, consisted of the following at December 31:
2017
 
2016
Equity method investments (1)
$1,214
$1,242
Time deposits
613
665
Available-for-sale investments
508
537
Other investments
30
33
Restricted cash & cash equivalents (2)
74
68
Total
$2,439
$2,545
(1)  Dividends received were $247 and $314 during 2017 and 2016 . Retained earnings at December 31, 2017 include undistributed earnings from
our equity method investments of $307 .
(2)  Reflects amounts restricted in support of our workers’ compensation programs, employee benefit programs, and insurance premiums.
Equity Method Investments
Our equity method investments consisted of the following as of December 31:
Segment
Ownership
Percentages
Investment Balance
2017
 
2016
United Launch Alliance
BDS
50%
$889
$914
Other
BCA, BDS, and BGS
325
328
Total equity method investments
$1,214
$1,242
Note 10 – Other Assets
Sea Launch
At December 31, 2017 and 2016 , Other assets included $356 of receivables related to our former investment in the Sea Launch venture which
became payable by certain Sea Launch partners following Sea Launch’s bankruptcy filing in June 2009. The net amounts owed to Boeing by each of
the partners are as follows: S.P. Koroley Rocket and Space Corporation Energia of Russia (RSC Energia) – $223 , PO Yuzhnoye Mashinostroitelny
Zavod of Ukraine – $89 and KB Yuzhnoye of Ukraine – $44 .
In 2013, we filed an action in the United States District Court for the Central District of California seeking reimbursement from the other Sea Launch
partners. In 2016, the United States District Court for the Central District of California issued a judgment in favor of Boeing. Later that year, we
reached an agreement which we believe will enable us to recover  the outstanding  receivable balance from  RSC Energia over the next several
years. We continue to pursue collection efforts against the former Ukrainian partners in connection with the court judgment. We continue to believe
the partners have the financial wherewithal to pay and intend to pursue vigorously all of our rights and remedies. In the event we are unable to
secure reimbursement from RSC Energia and the Ukrainian Sea Launch partners, we could incur additional charges.
75

Table of Contents
Spirit AeroSystems
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , Other assets included $137 and $143 of receivables related to indemnifications from Spirit AeroSystems, Inc.
(Spirit), for costs incurred related to pension and retiree medical obligations of former Boeing employees who were subsequently employed by Spirit.
During  the  fourth  quarter  of  2014,  Boeing  filed  a  complaint  against  Spirit  in  the  Delaware  Superior  Court  seeking  to  enforce  our  rights  to
indemnification and to recover from Spirit amounts incurred by Boeing for pension and retiree medical obligations. During 2017, the court ruled
against Boeing and denied our claim. In January 2018, Boeing filed a notice of appeal with the Delaware Supreme Court. We believe we have
substantial arguments on appeal and expect to fully recover from Spirit.
Note 11 – Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
Accrued Liabilities
Accrued liabilities at December 31 consisted of the following:
2017
2016
Accrued compensation and employee benefit costs
$6,659
$5,720
Environmental
524
562
Product warranties
1,211
1,414
Forward loss recognition
1,683
1,385
Dividends payable
1,005
866
Income Taxes Payable
380
89
Other
3,830
4,655
Total
$15,292
$14,691
Environmental
The following table summarizes environmental remediation activity during the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
2017
2016
Beginning balance – January 1
$562
$566
Reductions for payments made
(45)
(47)
Changes in estimates
7
43
Ending balance – December 31
$524
$562
The liabilities recorded represent our best estimate or the low end of a range of reasonably possible costs expected to be incurred to remediate
sites, including operation and maintenance over periods of up to 30 years. It is reasonably possible that we may incur charges that exceed these
recorded amounts because of regulatory agency orders and directives, changes in laws and/or regulations, higher than expected costs and/or the
discovery of new or additional contamination. As part of our estimating process, we develop a range of reasonably possible alternate scenarios that
includes the high end of a range of reasonably possible cost estimates for all remediation sites for which we have sufficient information based on our
experience  and  existing  laws  and  regulations.  There  are  some  potential  remediation  obligations  where  the  costs  of  remediation  cannot  be
reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2017 and 2016 , the high end of the estimated range of reasonably possible remediation costs exceeded
our recorded liabilities by $868 and $857 .
76

Table of Contents
Product Warranties
The following table summarizes product warranty activity recorded during the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
2017
2016
Beginning balance – January 1
$1,414
$1,485
Additions for current year deliveries
274
356
Reductions for payments made
(241)
(309)
Changes in estimates
(236)
(118)
Ending balance – December 31
$1,211
$1,414
Commercial Aircraft Commitments
In conjunction with signing definitive agreements for the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain
customers that give them the right to trade in used aircraft  at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. The probability that trade-in
commitments will be exercised is determined by using both quantitative information from valuation sources and qualitative information from other
sources. The probability of exercise is assessed quarterly, or as events trigger a change, and takes into consideration the current economic and
airline industry environments. Trade-in commitments, which can be terminated by mutual consent with the customer, may be exercised only during
the period specified in the agreement, and require advance notice by the customer.
Trade-in commitment agreements at December 31, 2017 have expiration dates from 2018 through 2026 . At December 31, 2017 and 2016 , total
contractual trade-in commitments were $1,462 and $1,485 . As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , we estimated that it was probable we would be
obligated to perform on certain of these commitments  with net amounts payable to customers totaling $155 and $126 and the fair value of the
related trade-in aircraft was $155 and $126 .
Financing Commitments
Financing commitments related to aircraft on order, including options and those proposed in sales campaigns, and refinancing of delivered aircraft,
totaled $10,221 and $14,847 as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 . The estimated  earliest potential funding dates for these commitments  as of
December 31, 2017 are as follows:
Total
2018
$2,047
2019
2,975
2020
1,396
2021
1,322
2022
935
Thereafter
1,546
$10,221
As of December 31, 2017 , all of these financing commitments related to customers we believe have less than investment-grade credit. We have
concluded that no reserve for future potential losses is required for these financing commitments based upon the terms, such as collateralization
and interest rates, under which funding would be provided.
77

Table of Contents
Standby Letters of Credit and Surety Bonds
We  have  entered  into  standby  letters  of  credit  and  surety  bonds  with  financial  institutions  primarily  relating  to  the  guarantee  of  our  future
performance  on  certain  contracts.  Contingent  liabilities  on  outstanding  letters  of  credit  agreements  and  surety  bonds  aggregated  approximately
$3,708 and $4,701 as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
Commitments to ULA
We and Lockheed Martin Corporation have each committed to provide ULA with additional capital contributions in the event ULA does not have
sufficient funds to make a required payment to us under an inventory supply agreement. As of December 31, 2017 , ULA’s total remaining obligation
to Boeing under the inventory supply agreement was $120 . See Note 6 .
F/A-18
At December 31, 2017 , our backlog included 26 F/A-18 aircraft under contract with the U.S. Navy. We have begun work or authorized suppliers to
begin working  on  aircraft  beyond  those  already  in  backlog  in  anticipation  of  future  orders.  At December 31, 2017 , we had $155 of capitalized
precontract costs and $855 of potential termination liabilities to suppliers associated with F/A-18 aircraft not yet ordered.
Company Owned Life Insurance
McDonnell Douglas Corporation insured its executives with Company Owned Life Insurance (COLI), which are life insurance policies with a cash
surrender value. Although we do not use COLI currently, these obligations from the merger with McDonnell Douglas are still a commitment at this
time. We have loans in place to cover costs paid or incurred to carry the underlying life insurance policies. As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , the
cash surrender value was $489 and $483 and the total loans were $470 and $456 . As we have the right to offset the loans against the cash
surrender value of the policies, we present the net asset in Other assets on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31,
2017 and 2016 .
United States Government Defense Environment Overview
In November 2017, Congress passed the National Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2018 (FY2018), which authorizes a U.S. DoD budget
topline higher than the administration’s budget request from May. While the appropriations process for FY2018 remains incomplete, both the House
and Senate appropriations committees have also produced bills that increase the U.S. DoD budget topline above the administration’s request . On
February  9,  2018,  Congress  passed  a  fifth  Continuing  Resolution  that  maintains  current  funding  levels  through  March  23,  2018  and  includes
increases  to  the  Budget  Control  Act  caps  for  defense  and  non-defense  spending  for  FY2018  and  FY2019.  However,  the  Budget  Control  Act
continues to mandate limits on U.S. government discretionary spending and remains in effect. As a result, continued budget uncertainty and the risk
of future sequestration cuts will remain unless Congress acts to repeal or suspend this law.
Funding timeliness also remains a risk. If Congress is unable to pass appropriations bills or an omnibus spending bill before the expiration of the
current Continuing Resolution, a government shutdown could result which may have impacts above and beyond those resulting from budget cuts,
sequestration  impacts  or  program-level  appropriations.  For  example,  requirements  to  furlough  employees  in  the  U.S.  DoD,  the  Department  of
Transportation,  or  other  government  agencies  could  result  in  payment  delays,  impair  our  ability  to  perform  work  on  existing  contracts,  and/or
negatively impact future orders.
78

Table of Contents
In  addition,  there  continues  to  be  uncertainty  with  respect  to  program-level  appropriations  for  the  U.S.  DoD  and  other  government  agencies,
including the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), within the overall budgetary framework described above. Future budget cuts
or investment priority changes could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could
have a material effect on the results of the Company’s operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
BDS Fixed-Price Development Contracts
Fixed-price development work is inherently uncertain and subject to significant variability in estimates of the cost and time required to complete the
work. BDS fixed-price contracts with significant development work include Commercial Crew, Saudi F-15, USAF KC-46A Tanker and commercial
and military satellites. The operational and technical complexities of these contracts create financial risk, which could trigger termination provisions,
order  cancellations  or  other  financially  significant  exposure.  Changes  to  cost  and  revenue  estimates  could  result  in  lower  margins  or  material
charges for reach-forward losses. For example, during 2017, we recorded additional reach-forward losses of $471 on the KC-46A Tanker program.
Moreover, this and our other fixed-price development programs remain subject to additional reach-forward losses if we experience further technical
or quality issues, schedule delays, or increased costs.
KC-46A Tanker
In  2011,  we  were  awarded  a  contract  from  the  U.S.  Air  Force  (USAF)  to  design,  develop,  manufacture  and  deliver  four  next  generation  aerial
refueling tankers. This Engineering, Manufacturing and Development (EMD) contract is a fixed-price incentive fee contract valued at $4.9 billion and
involves highly complex designs and systems integration. In 2016, the USAF authorized two low rate initial production (LRIP) lots for 7 and 12
aircraft valued at $2.8 billion . In January 2017, the USAF authorized an additional LRIP lot for 15 aircraft valued at $2.1 billion.
At December 31, 2017 , we had approximately $347 of capitalized precontract costs and $1,024 of potential termination liabilities to suppliers.
Recoverable Costs on Government Contracts
Our final incurred costs for each year are subject to audit and review for allowability by the U.S. government, which can result in payment demands
related to costs they believe should be disallowed. We work with the U.S. government to assess the merits of claims and where appropriate reserve
for amounts disputed. If we are unable to satisfactorily resolve disputed costs, we could be required to record an earnings charge and/or provide
refunds to the U.S. government.
79

Table of Contents
Note 12 – Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
We enter into arrangements with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business, primarily in the form of guarantees.
The  following  table  provides  quantitative  data  regarding  our  third  party  guarantees.  The  maximum  potential  payments  represent  a  “worst-case
scenario,” and do not necessarily reflect amounts that we expect to pay. Estimated proceeds from collateral and recourse represent the anticipated
values  of  assets  we  could  liquidate  or  receive  from  other  parties  to  offset  our  payments  under  guarantees.  The  carrying  amount  of  liabilities
represents the amount included in Accrued liabilities.
Maximum
Potential
Payments
Estimated
Proceeds from
Collateral/
Recourse
Carrying
Amount of
Liabilities
December 31,
2017
2016
2017
2016
2017
2016
Contingent repurchase commitments
$1,605
$1,306
$1,605
$1,306
$9
$9
Indemnifications to ULA:
Contributed Delta program launch inventory
72
77
Contract pricing
261
261
7
7
Other Delta contracts
191
216
5
Credit guarantees
109
29
55
27
16
2
Contingent  Repurchase  Commitments The  repurchase  price  specified  in  contingent  repurchase  commitments  is  generally  lower  than  the
expected fair value at the specified repurchase date. Estimated proceeds from collateral/recourse  in the table above represent the lower of the
contracted repurchase price or the expected fair value of each aircraft at the specified repurchase date.
Indemnifications  to  ULA In  2006,  we  agreed  to  indemnify  ULA  through  December  31,  2020  against  potential  non-recoverability  and  non-
allowability of $1,360 of Boeing Delta  launch program  inventory  included in contributed  assets  plus $1,860 of inventory subject to an inventory
supply agreement which ends on March 31, 2021 . Since inception, ULA has consumed $1,288 of the $1,360 of inventory that was contributed by us
and has yet to consume $72 . Under the inventory supply agreement, we have recorded revenues and cost of sales of $1,528 through December
31, 2017 . ULA has made payments of $1,740 to us under the inventory supply agreement and we have made $48 of net indemnification payments
to ULA.
We agreed to indemnify ULA against potential losses that ULA may incur in the event ULA is unable to obtain certain additional contract pricing from
the USAF for four satellite missions. In 2009, ULA filed a complaint before the Armed Services Board of Contract Appeals (ASBCA) for a contract
adjustment for the price of two of these missions, followed in 2011 by a subsequent notice of appeal with respect to a third mission. The USAF did
not exercise an option for a fourth mission prior to the expiration of the contract. During the second quarter of 2016, the ASBCA ruled that ULA is
entitled to additional contract pricing for each of the three missions and remanded to the parties to negotiate appropriate pricing. During the fourth
quarter of 2016, the USAF appealed the ASBCA’s ruling. In April 2017, the USAF withdrew its appeal. If ULA is ultimately unsuccessful in obtaining
additional pricing, we may be responsible for an indemnification payment up to $261 and may record up to $277 in pre-tax losses associated with
the three missions.
Potential payments for Other Delta contracts include $85 related to deferred support costs and $91 related to deferred production costs. In June
2011,  the  Defense  Contract  Management  Agency  (DCMA)  notified  ULA  that  it  had  determined  that $271 of  deferred  support  costs  are  not
recoverable under government contracts. In December 2011, the DCMA notified ULA of the potential non-recoverability of an additional $114 of
deferred production costs. ULA and Boeing believe that all costs are recoverable and in November
80

Table of Contents
2011, ULA filed a certified claim with the USAF for collection of deferred support and production costs. The USAF issued a final decision denying
ULA’s certified claim in May 2012. In 2012, Boeing and ULA filed a suit in the Court of Federal Claims seeking recovery of the deferred support and
production costs from the U.S. government, which subsequently asserted a counterclaim for credits that it alleges were offset by deferred support
cost invoices. We believe that the U.S. government’s counterclaim is without merit. The discovery phase of the litigation completed in 2017, and
during the fourth quarter, Boeing filed a motion for summary judgment for full recovery of its costs. If, contrary to our belief, it is determined that
some or all of the deferred support or production costs are not recoverable, we could be required to record pre-tax losses and make indemnification
payments to ULA for up to $317 of the costs questioned by the DCMA.
Other Indemnifications In conjunction with our sales of Electron Dynamic Devices, Inc. and Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power businesses and our
BCA facilities in Wichita, Kansas and Tulsa and McAlester, Oklahoma, we agreed to indemnify, for an indefinite period, the buyers for costs relating
to pre-closing environmental conditions and certain other items. We are unable to assess the potential number of future claims that may be asserted
under these indemnifications, nor the amounts thereof (if any). As a result, we cannot estimate the maximum potential amount of future payments
under these indemnities and therefore, no liability has been recorded. To the extent that claims have been made under these indemnities and/or are
probable and reasonably estimable, liabilities associated with these indemnities are included in the environmental liability disclosure in Note 11 .
Credit Guarantees We have issued credit guarantees where we are obligated to make payments to a guaranteed party in the event that the original
lessee or debtor does not make payments or perform certain specified services. Generally, these guarantees have been extended on behalf of
guaranteed parties with less than investment-grade  credit and are collateralized by certain assets. Current outstanding credit guarantees expire
through 2036 .
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Industrial Revenue Bonds (IRB) issued by St. Louis County were used to finance the purchase and/or construction of real and personal property at
our St. Louis site. Tax benefits associated with IRBs include a twelve-year property tax abatement and sales tax exemption from St. Louis County.
We  record  these  properties  on  our  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position.  We  have  also  purchased  the  IRBs  and  therefore  are  the
bondholders as well as the borrower/lessee of the properties purchased with the IRB proceeds. The liabilities and IRB assets are equal and are
reported net in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , the assets and liabilities associated with the IRBs were $166 and $64 .
Note 13 – Debt
On February 16, 2017 , we issued $900 of fixed rate senior notes consisting of $300 due March 1, 2022 that bear an annual interest rate of 2.125% ,
$300 due March 1, 2027 that bear an annual interest rate of 2.8% , and $300 due March 1, 2047 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.65% . The
notes  are  unsecured  senior  obligations  and  rank  equally  in  right  of  payment  with  our  existing  and  future  unsecured  and  unsubordinated
indebtedness. The net proceeds of the issuance totaled $871 , after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
Interest incurred, including amounts capitalized, was $541 , $535 and $497 for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Interest expense recorded by BCC is reflected as Boeing Capital interest expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Company
interest payments were $527 , $523 and $488 for the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
81

Table of Contents
We have $5,000 currently available under credit line agreements, of which $2,500 is a 364-day revolving credit facility expiring in October 2018 ,
$2,470 expires in November 2022 , and $30 expires in November 2021 . The 364-day credit facility has a one-year term out option which allows us
to  extend  the  maturity  of  any  borrowings  one  year  beyond  the  aforementioned  expiration  date.  We  continue  to  be  in  full  compliance  with  all
covenants contained in our debt or credit facility agreements.
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2017
2016
Unsecured debt securities
$599
$255
Non-recourse debt and notes
33
33
Capital lease obligations
52
57
Commercial Paper
600
Other notes
51
39
Total
$1,335
$384
Debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2017
2016
Unsecured debt securities
0.95% - 4.88% due through 2047
$6,127
5,250
5.80% - 6.88% due through 2043
2,386
2,383
7.25% - 8.75% due through 2043
1,637
1,641
Commercial paper
600
Variable rate: 3-month USD LIBOR plus 12.5 basis points due 2017
$250
Non-recourse debt and notes
6.98% - 7.38% notes due through 2021
94
127
Capital lease obligations due through 2034
138
138
Other notes
135
163
Total debt
$11,117
$9,952
As of December 31, 2017 , borrowings of commercial paper of $600 , with a weighted-average interest rate of 1.4% , were supported by unused
commitments under the revolving credit agreement. We had no commercial paper borrowings in 2016.
Total debt is attributable to:
2017
2016
BCC
$2,523
$2,864
Other Boeing
8,594
7,088
Total debt
$11,117
$9,952
At December 31, 2017 , $94 of debt (non-recourse debt, notes and capital lease obligations) was collateralized by customer financing assets totaling
$231 .
82

Table of Contents
Scheduled principal payments for debt and minimum capital lease obligations for the next five years are as follows:
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Scheduled principal payments
$1,340
$1,275
$1,148
$728
$554
Note 14 – Postretirement Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans transitioned to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016.
We fund our major pension plans through trusts. Pension assets are placed in trust solely for the benefit of the plans’ participants, and are structured
to maintain liquidity that is sufficient to pay benefit obligations as well as to keep pace over the long-term with the growth of obligations for future
benefit payments.
We also have other postretirement benefits (OPB) other than pensions which consist principally of health care coverage for eligible retirees and
qualifying dependents, and to a lesser extent, life insurance to certain groups of retirees. Retiree health care is provided principally until age 65 for
approximately half those retirees who are eligible for health care coverage. Certain employee groups, including employees covered by most United
Auto Workers bargaining agreements, are provided lifetime health care coverage. The funded status of the plans is measured as the difference
between the plan assets at fair value and the projected benefit obligation (PBO). We have recognized the aggregate of all overfunded plans in Other
assets, and the aggregate of all underfunded plans in either Accrued retiree health care or Accrued pension plan liability, net. The portion of the
amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits included in the PBO exceeds the fair value of plan assets, payable in the next 12 months, is
reflected in Accrued liabilities.
The components of net periodic benefit cost were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
2017
2016
2015
Service cost
$402
$604
$1,764
$106
$128
$140
Interest cost
2,991
3,050
2,990
229
262
248
Expected return on plan assets
(3,847)
(3,999)
(4,031)
(7)
(8)
(8)
Amortization of prior service (credits)/costs
(39)
38
196
(137)
(126)
(136)
Recognized net actuarial loss
804
790
1,577
10
22
31
Settlement/curtailment/other losses
1
40
290
10
Net periodic benefit cost
$312
$523
$2,786
$201
$278
$285
Net periodic benefit cost included in Earnings from
operations
$639
$1,979
$2,366
$262
$274
$288
The  following  tables  show  changes  in  the  benefit  obligation,  plan  assets  and  funded  status  of  both  pensions  and  OPB  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2017 and 2016 . Benefit obligation balances presented below reflect the PBO for our pension plans, and accumulated postretirement
benefit obligations (APBO) for our OPB plans.
83

Table of Contents
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2017
2016
2017
2016
Change in benefit obligation
Beginning balance
$76,745
$74,388
$6,431
$7,138
Service cost
402
604
106
128
Interest cost
2,991
3,050
229
262
Plan participants’ contributions
1
Amendments
(7)
6
(35)
(57)
Actuarial loss/(gain)
5,653
2,669
(204)
(612)
Settlement/curtailment/other
(751)
(63)
Gross benefits paid
(4,658)
(3,903)
(481)
(469)
Subsidies
33
37
Exchange rate adjustment
18
(7)
6
4
Ending balance
$80,393
$76,745
$6,085
$6,431
Change in plan assets
Beginning balance at fair value
$56,692
$56,514
134
$132
Actual return on plan assets
8,552
3,885
15
7
Company contribution
4,025
113
6
6
Plan participants’ contributions
1
4
7
Settlement payments
(744)
(24)
Benefits paid
(4,530)
(3,791)
(16)
(18)
Exchange rate adjustment
16
(6)
Ending balance at fair value
$64,011
$56,692
$143
$134
Amounts recognized in statement of financial position at December 31
consist of:
Other assets
$218
$3
Other accrued liabilities
(129)
(113)
(397)
(381)
Accrued retiree health care
(5,545)
(5,916)
Accrued pension plan liability, net
(16,471)
(19,943)
Net amount recognized
($16,382)
($20,053)
($5,942)
($6,297)
Amounts recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss at December 31 were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2017
2016
2017
2016
Net actuarial loss/(gain)
$22,942
$22,802
($59)
$152
Prior service (credits)
(1,211)
(1,243)
(226)
(328)
Total recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss
$21,731
$21,559
($285)
($176)
84

Table of Contents
The  estimated  amount  that  will  be  amortized  from  Accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss  into  net  periodic  benefit  cost  during  the  year  ending
December 31, 2018 is as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement
Benefits
Recognized net actuarial loss/(gain)
$1,128
($10)
Amortization of prior service (credits)
(56)
(126)
Total
$1,072
($136)
The accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) for all pension plans was $77,414 and $74,240 at December 31, 2017 and 2016 . Key information for our
plans with ABO in excess of plan assets as of December 31 was as follows:
2017
2016
Projected benefit obligation
$74,953
$76,586
Accumulated benefit obligation
71,975
74,081
Fair value of plan assets
$58,353
$56,530
Assumptions
The following assumptions, which are the weighted average for all plans, are used to calculate the benefit obligation at December 31 of each year
and the net periodic benefit cost for the subsequent year.
December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Discount rate:
Pension
3.60%
4.00%
4.20%
Other postretirement benefits
3.30%
3.70%
3.80%
Expected return on plan assets
6.80%
6.80%
7.00%
Rate of compensation increase
5.30%
4.40%
4.00%
The discount rate for each plan is determined based on the plans’ expected future benefit payments using a yield curve developed from high quality
bonds that are rated as Aa or better by at least half of the four rating agencies utilized as of the measurement date. The yield curve is fitted to yields
developed from bonds at various maturity points. Bonds with the ten percent highest and the ten percent lowest yields are omitted. A portfolio of
about 400 bonds is used to construct the yield curve. Since corporate bond yields are generally not available at maturities beyond 30 years, it is
assumed that spot rates will remain level beyond that 30-year point. The present value of each plan’s benefits is calculated by applying the discount
rates to projected benefit cash flows. All bonds are U.S. issues, with a minimum outstanding of $50.
The pension fund’s expected return on plan assets assumption is derived from a review of actual historical returns achieved by the pension trust and
anticipated future long-term performance of individual asset classes. While consideration is given to recent trust performance and historical returns,
the assumption represents a long-term, prospective return. The expected return on plan assets component of the net periodic benefit cost for the
upcoming plan year is determined based on the expected return on plan assets assumption and the market-related value of plan assets (MRVA).
Since our adoption of the accounting standard for pensions in 1987, we have determined the MRVA based on a five -year moving average of plan
assets. As of December 31, 2017 , the MRVA was approximately $2,260 less than the fair market value of assets.
85

Table of Contents
Assumed health care cost trend rates were as follows:
December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Health care cost trend rate assumed next year
6.00%
6.50%
6.50%
Ultimate trend rate
4.50%
5.00%
5.00%
Year that trend reached ultimate rate
2021
2021
2021
Assumed health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for the health care plans. To determine the health care cost
trend rates we look at a combination of information including ongoing claims cost monitoring, annual statistical analyses of claims data, reconciliation
of forecast claims against actual claims, review of trend assumptions of other plan sponsors and national health trends, and adjustments for plan
design changes, workforce changes, and changes in plan participant behavior. A one-percentage-point change in assumed health care cost trend
rates would have the following effect:
Increase
Decrease
Effect on total of service and interest cost
$45
($37)
Effect on postretirement benefit obligation
529
(448)
Plan Assets
Investment Strategy The overall objective of our pension assets is to earn a rate of return over time to satisfy the benefit obligations of the pension
plans and to maintain sufficient liquidity to pay benefits and address other cash requirements of the pension fund. Specific investment objectives for
our  long-term  investment  strategy  include  reducing  the  volatility  of  pension  assets  relative  to  pension  liabilities,  achieving  a  competitive  total
investment return, achieving diversification between and within asset classes and managing other risks. Investment objectives for each asset class
are determined based on specific risks and investment opportunities identified.
We periodically update our long-term, strategic asset allocations. We use various analytics to determine the optimal asset mix and consider plan
liability characteristics, liquidity characteristics, funding requirements, expected rates of return and the distribution of returns. We identify investment
benchmarks to evaluate performance for the asset classes in the strategic asset allocation that are market-based and investable where possible.
Actual allocations to each asset class vary from target allocations due to periodic investment strategy changes, market value fluctuations, the length
of time it takes to fully implement investment allocation positions, and the timing of benefit payments and contributions. Short-term investments and
exchange-traded derivatives are used to rebalance the actual asset allocation to the target asset allocation. The asset allocation is monitored and
rebalanced on a monthly basis. The actual and target allocations by asset class for the pension assets at December 31 were as follows:
Actual Allocations
Target Allocations
Asset Class
2017
2016
2017
2016
Fixed income
46%
48%
47%
47%
Global equity
31
28
29
29
Private equity
5
5
5
5
Real estate and real assets
8
9
9
9
Hedge funds
10
10
10
10
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
86

Table of Contents
Fixed  income  securities  are  invested  primarily  in  a  diversified  portfolio  of  long  duration  instruments.  Global  equity  securities  are  invested  in  a
diversified portfolio of U.S. and non-U.S. companies, across various industries and market capitalizations.
Real estate and real assets include global private investments that may be held through an investment in a limited partnership (LP) or other fund
structures and publicly traded investments (such as Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) in the case of real estate). Real estate includes, but is
not limited to, investments in office, retail, apartment and industrial properties. Real assets include, but are not limited to, investments in natural
resources  (such  as  energy,  farmland  and  timber),  commodities  and  infrastructure.  Private  equity  investment  vehicles  are  primarily  limited
partnerships (LPs) that mainly invest in U.S. and non-U.S. leveraged buyout, venture capital and special situation strategies.
Hedge fund investments seek to capitalize on inefficiencies identified across and within different asset classes or markets. Hedge fund strategy
types include, but are not limited to directional, event driven, relative value, long-short and multi-strategy.
Investment managers are retained for explicit investment roles specified by contractual investment guidelines. Certain investment managers are
authorized to use derivatives, such as equity or bond futures, swaps, options and currency futures or forwards. Derivatives are used to achieve the
desired  market  exposure  of  a  security  or  an  index,  transfer  value-added  performance  between  asset  classes,  achieve  the  desired  currency
exposure, adjust portfolio duration or rebalance the total portfolio to the target asset allocation.
As a percentage of total pension plan assets, derivative net notional amounts were 5.0% and 6.0% for fixed income, including to-be-announced
mortgage-backed securities and treasury forwards, and 6.9% and 1.2% for global equity and commodities at December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
In August 2017, the Company elected to contribute $3,500 of our common stock to the pension fund. An independent fiduciary was retained to
manage and liquidate the stock over time at its discretion. The liquidation of the common stock holdings was completed during the fourth quarter of
2017.
Risk Management In managing the plan assets, we review and manage risk associated with funded status risk, interest  rate risk, market  risk,
counterparty risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. Liability matching and asset class diversification are central to our risk management approach
and  are  integral  to  the  overall  investment  strategy.  Further,  asset  classes  are  constructed  to  achieve  diversification  by  investment  strategy,  by
investment manager, by industry or sector and by holding. Investment manager guidelines for publicly traded assets are specified and are monitored
regularly  through  the  custodian.  Credit  parameters  for  counterparties  have  been  established  for  managers  permitted  to  trade  over-the-counter
derivatives.  Valuation  is  governed  through  several  types  of  procedures,  including  reviews  of  manager  valuation  policies,  custodian  valuation
processes, pricing vendor practices, pricing reconciliation, and periodic, security-specific valuation testing .
87

Table of Contents
Fair Value Measurements The following table presents our plan assets using the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 . The fair
value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined based on
quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs, and Level 3
includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs.
December 31, 2017
December 31, 2016
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Fixed income securities:
Corporate
$19,603
$19,591
$12
$16,730
$16,723
$7
U.S. government and agencies
5,430
5,430
4,876
4,875
1
Mortgage backed and asset backed
760
460
300
706
370
336
Municipal
1,355
1,355
1,398
1,398
Sovereign
1,237
1,237
782
782
Other
118
$59
59
74
$9
65
Derivatives:
Assets
49
49
40
40
Liabilities
(25)
(25)
(38)
(38)
Cash equivalents and other short-term
investments
1,778
1,778
1,037
1,037
Equity securities:
U.S. common and preferred stock
4,615
4,615
5,374
5,373
1
Non-U.S. common and preferred stock
6,204
6,204
5,746
5,746
Derivatives:
Assets
4
1
3
6
6
Liabilities
(4)
(4)
(8)
(8)
Private equity  
Real estate and real assets:
Real estate
462
462
468
468
Real assets
705
449
253
3
672
372
295
5
Derivatives:
Assets
17
17
4
4
Liabilities
(3)
(3)
(1)
(1)
Total
$42,305
$11,790
$30,200
$315
$37,866
$11,968
$25,548
$350
Fixed income common/collective/pooled
funds
$1,257
$1,625
Fixed income other
303
227
Equity common/collective pooled funds
6,786
4,962
Private equity
2,767
2,639
Real estate and real assets
3,744
3,625
Hedge funds
6,440
5,441
Total investments measured at NAV as a
practical expedient
$21,297
$18,519
Cash
$170
$160
Receivables
436
374
Payables
(197)
(227)  
 
 
Total
$64,011
$56,692
88

Table of Contents
Fixed  income  securities  are  primarily  valued  upon  a  market  approach,  using  matrix  pricing  and  considering  a  security’s  relationship  to  other
securities for which quoted prices in an active market may be available, or an income approach, converting future cash flows to a single present
value amount. Inputs used in developing fair value estimates include reported trades, broker quotes, benchmark yields, and base spreads.
Common/collective/pooled funds are typically common or collective trusts valued at their NAVs that are calculated by the investment manager or
sponsor of the fund and have daily or monthly liquidity. Derivatives included in the table above are over-the-counter and are primarily valued using
an income approach with inputs that include benchmark yields, swap curves, cash flow analysis, rating agency data and interdealer broker rates.
Exchange-traded derivative positions are reported in accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected
in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Cash equivalents and other short-term investments (which are used to pay benefits) are held in a separate account which consists of a commingled
fund (with daily liquidity) and separately held short-term securities and cash equivalents. All of the investments in this cash vehicle are valued daily
using  a  market  approach  with  inputs  that  include  quoted  market  prices  for  similar  instruments.  In  the  event  a  market  price  is  not  available  for
instruments  with an original maturity  of one year or less,  amortized  cost  is used as a proxy  for fair value. Common  and preferred  stock  equity
securities are primarily valued using a market approach based on the quoted market prices of identical instruments.
Private  equity  and  private  debt  NAV  valuations  are  based  on  the  valuation  of  the  underlying  investments,  which  include  inputs  such  as  cost,
operating results, discounted future cash flows and market based comparable data. For those investments reported on a one-quarter lagged basis
(primarily LPs) we use NAVs, adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events.
Real estate and real asset NAV valuations are based on valuation of the underlying investments, which include inputs such as cost, discounted
future  cash  flows,  independent  appraisals  and  market  based  comparable  data.  For  those  investments  reported  on  a  one-quarter  lagged  basis
(primarily LPs) NAVs are adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events. Publicly traded REITs and infrastructure stocks are valued
using a market approach based on quoted market prices of identical instruments. Exchange-traded commodities futures positions are reported in
accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Hedge  fund  NAVs  are  generally  based  on  the  valuation  of  the  underlying  investments.  This  is  primarily  done  by  applying  a  market  or  income
valuation methodology depending on the specific type of security or instrument held.
Investments in private equity, private debt, real estate, real assets, and hedge funds are primarily calculated and reported by the General Partner
(GP), fund manager or third party administrator. Additionally, some investments in fixed income and equity are made via commingled vehicles and
are valued in a similar fashion. Pension assets invested in commingled and limited partnership structures rely on the NAV of these investments as
the practical expedient for the valuations.
89

Table of Contents
The following tables present a reconciliation of Level 3 assets (excluding investments which are valued using NAVs as a practical expedient) held
during the years ended December 31, 2017 and 2016 . Transfers into and out of Level 3 are reported at the beginning-of-year values.
January 1 
2017 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized
Gains/(Losses)
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Out of Level 3
December 31 
2017 Balance
Fixed income securities:
Corporate  (1)
$12
$1
($1)
$12
U.S. government and agencies
1
(1)
Mortgage backed and asset
backed (1)
331
$10
(39)
(2)
300
Equity securities:
U.S. common and preferred stock
1
(1)
Real assets
5
(2)
3
Total
$350
$9
($40)
($4)
$315
January 1 
2016 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized
Gains/(Losses)
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Out of Level 3
December 31 
2016 Balance
Fixed income securities:
Corporate (1)
$11
($1)
($3)
$7
U.S. government and agencies
1
1
Mortgage backed and asset
backed (1)
440
$7
(93)
(18)
336
Equity securities:
U.S. common and preferred
stock
1
1
Non-U.S. common and preferred
stock
2
(2)
Private equity
3
(3)
Real assets
6
(1)
5
Total
$464
$4
($97)
($21)
$350
(1)  Certain fixed income securities were reclassified between mortgage backed and asset backed to corporate on January 1, 2017 and 2016.
The changes in unrealized gains for Level 3 mortgage backed and asset backed fixed income securities still held at December 31, 2017 and 2016
were $6 and $4 .
OPB Plan Assets The majority of OPB plan assets are invested in a balanced index fund which is comprised of approximately 60% equities and
40% debt securities. The index fund is valued using a market approach based on the quoted market price of an identical instrument (Level 1). The
expected rate of return on these assets does not have a material effect on the net periodic benefit cost.
90

Table of Contents
Cash Flows
Contributions Required pension contributions under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act ( ERISA ), as well as rules governing funding of
our non-US pension plans, are not expected to be significant in 2018 . During the third quarter of 2017, we contributed $500 in cash and $3,500 in
common stock. We do not expect to make contributions to our pension plans in 2018 .
Estimated Future Benefit Payments The table below reflects the total pension benefits expected to be paid from the plans or from our assets,
including both our share of the benefit cost and the participants’ share of the cost, which is funded by participant contributions. OPB payments
reflect our portion only.
Year(s)
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023-2027
Pensions
$4,758
$4,712
$4,740
$4,703
$4,631
$22,770
Other postretirement benefits:
Gross benefits paid
496
507
517
520
516
2,364
Subsidies
(16)
(16)
(17)
(17)
(17)
(87)
Net other postretirement benefits
$480
$491
$500
$503
$499
$2,277
Termination Provisions
Certain of the pension plans provide that, in the event there is a change in control of the Company which is not approved by the Board of Directors
and the plans are terminated within five years thereafter, the assets in the plan first will be used to provide the level of retirement benefits required
by ERISA , and then any surplus will be used to fund a trust to continue present and future payments under the postretirement medical and life
insurance benefits in our group insurance benefit programs.
Should we terminate certain pension plans under conditions in which the plan’s assets exceed that plan’s obligations, the U.S. government will be
entitled to a fair allocation of any of the plan’s assets based on plan contributions that were reimbursed under U.S. government contracts.
Defined Contribution Plans
We provide certain defined contribution plans to all eligible employees. The principal plans are the Company-sponsored 401(k) plans. The expense
for these defined contribution plans was $1,522 , $1,413 and $768 in 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
Note 15 – Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
Share-Based Compensation
Our 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated, permits awards of incentive and non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights,
restricted stock or units, performance shares, performance restricted stock or units, performance units and other stock and cash-based awards to
our employees, officers, directors, consultants, and independent contractors. The aggregate number of shares of our stock authorized for issuance
under the plan is 87,000,000 .
Shares issued as a result of stock option exercises or conversion of stock unit awards will be funded out of treasury shares, except to the extent
there are insufficient treasury shares, in which case new shares will be issued. We believe we currently have adequate treasury shares to satisfy
these issuances during 2018 .
91

Table of Contents
Share-based plans expense is primarily included in General and administrative expense since it is incentive compensation issued primarily to our
executives. The share-based plans expense and related income tax benefit were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Stock options
$4
$30
Restricted stock units and other awards
212
189
160
Share-based plans expense
$212
$193
$190
Income tax benefit
$46
$69
$68
Stock Options
We discontinued granting options in 2014, replacing them with performance-based restricted stock units. Options granted through January 2014 had
an exercise price equal to the fair market value of our stock on the date of grant and expire ten years after the date of grant. The stock options
vested over a period of three years and were fully vested at December 31, 2017 .
Stock option activity for the year ended December 31, 2017 is as follows:
Shares
Weighted Average
Exercise Price Per Share
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Life
(Years)
Aggregate
Intrinsic Value
Number of shares under option:
Outstanding at beginning of year
8,646,612
$72.64
Exercised
(4,224,194)
73.61
Expired
(5,200)
89.65
Outstanding at end of year
4,417,218
$71.69
3.93
$986
Exercisable at end of year
4,417,218
$71.69
3.93
$986
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016 and 2015 was $491 , $265 and $385 , with a related
tax benefit of $175 , $94 and $135 , respectively. The grant date fair value of stock options vested during the years ended December 31, 2017, 2016
and 2015 was $0 , $27 and $56 , respectively.
Restricted Stock Units
In February  2017, 2016 and 2015 , we granted to our executives 523,835 , 777,837 and 590,778 restricted stock units (RSUs) as part of our long-
term incentive program with grant date fair values of $178.72 , $117.50 and $154.64 per unit, respectively. The RSUs granted under this program
will vest and settle in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. If an executive terminates employment
because of retirement, involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) will receive a proration of stock units based on active
employment during the three-year service period. In all other cases, the RSUs will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate. In addition
to RSUs awarded under our long-term incentive program, we grant RSUs to certain executives and employees to encourage retention or to reward
various achievements. These RSUs are labeled other RSUs in the table below. The fair values of all RSUs are estimated using the average of the
high and low stock prices on the date of grant.
92

Table of Contents
RSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2017 was as follows:
Long-Term Incentive
Program
Other
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
1,814,644
1,077,920
Granted
570,538
390,152
Dividends
45,799
30,477
Forfeited
(142,907)
(40,670)
Distributed
(660,972)
(301,417)
Outstanding at end of year
1,627,102
1,156,462
Unrecognized compensation cost
$98
$82
Weighted average remaining contractual life (years)
1.8
3.4
The number of vested but undistributed RSUs at December 31, 2017 was not significant.
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (PBRSUs) are stock units that pay out based on the Company’s total shareholder return as compared to
a group of peer companies over a three-year period. The award payout can range from 0% to 200% of the initial PBRSU grant, but will not exceed
400% of the initial value (excluding dividend equivalent credits). The PBRSUs granted under this program will vest at the payout amount and settle
in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. If an executive terminates employment because of retirement,
involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) remains eligible under the award and, if the award is earned, will receive a
proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service period. In all other cases, the PBRSUs will not vest and all rights
to the stock units will terminate.
In February  2017, 2016 and 2015 , we granted to our executives 492,273 , 721,176 and 556,203 PBRSUs as part of our long-term  incentive
program. Compensation expense for the award is recognized over the three-year performance period based upon the grant date fair value. The
grant  date  fair  values  were  estimated  using  a  Monte-Carlo  simulation  model  with  the  assumptions  presented  below.  The  model  includes  no
expected dividend yield as the units earn dividend equivalents.
Grant Year
Grant Date
Performance Period
Expected Volatility
Risk Free Interest
Rate
Grant Date Fair Value
2017
2/27/2017
3 years
21.37%
1.46%
190.17
2016
2/22/2016
3 years
22.44%
0.92%
126.74
2015
2/23/2015
3 years
20.35%
1.03%
164.26
93

Table of Contents
PBRSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2017 was as follows:
Long-Term Incentive Program
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
1,746,511
Granted
492,273
Performance based adjustment (1)
137,363
Dividends
54,683
Forfeited
(130,367)
Distributed
(748,729)
Outstanding at end of year
1,551,734
Unrecognized compensation cost
$90
Weighted average remaining contractual life (years)
1.8
(1)  Represents net incremental number of units issued at vesting based on TSR for units granted in 2014
Other Compensation Arrangements
Performance Awards
Performance Awards are cash units that pay out based on the achievement of long-term financial goals at the end of a three-year period. Each unit
has an initial value of $100 dollars. The amount payable at the end of the three-year performance period may be anywhere from $0 to $200 dollars
per unit, depending on the Company’s performance against plan for a three-year period. The Compensation Committee has the discretion to pay
these awards in cash, stock, or a combination of both after the three-year performance period. Compensation expense, based on the estimated
performance payout, is recognized ratably over the performance period.
During 2017, 2016 and 2015 , we granted Performance Awards to our executives as part of our long-term incentive program with the payout based
on the achievement of financial goals for each three -year period following the grant date. The minimum payout amount is $0 and the maximum
amount we could be required to pay out for the 2017, 2016 and 2015 Performance Awards is $352 , $318 and $312 , respectively. The 2015 grant is
expected to be paid out in cash in March 2018 .
Deferred Compensation
The Company has deferred compensation plans which permit employees to defer a portion of their salary, bonus, certain other incentive awards,
and retirement contributions. Participants can diversify these amounts among 22 investment funds including a Boeing stock unit account.
Total expense related to deferred compensation was $240 , $46 and $63 in 2017, 2016 and 2015 , respectively. As of December 31, 2017 and 2016
, the deferred compensation liability which is being marked to market was $1,547 and $1,289 .
94

Table of Contents
Note 16 – Shareholders’ Equity
On December  11,  2017 ,  the  Board  approved  a  new  repurchase  plan  for  up  to $18,000 of  common  stock,  replacing  the  previously  authorized
program. The program will expire when we have used all authorized funds or is otherwise terminated.
As of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , there were 1,200,000,000 shares of common stock and 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized. No
preferred stock has been issued.
Changes in Share Balances
The following table shows changes in each class of shares:
Common
Stock
Treasury
Stock
Balance at January 1, 2015
1,012,261,159
305,533,606
Issued
(7,288,113)
Acquired
47,391,861
Balance at December 31, 2015
1,012,261,159
345,637,354
Issued
(6,376,868)
Acquired
55,849,082
Balance at December 31, 2016
1,012,261,159
395,109,568
Issued
(20,746,426)
Acquired
46,859,184
Balance at December 31, 2017
1,012,261,159
421,222,326
95

Table of Contents
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss
Changes in Accumulated other comprehensive loss (AOCI) by component for the years ended December 31, 2017 , 2016 and 2015 were as follows:
Currency
Translation
Adjustments
Unrealized
Gains and
Losses on
Certain
Investments
Unrealized
Gains and
Losses on
Derivative
Instruments
Defined Benefit
Pension Plans &
Other Postretirement
Benefits
Total (1)
Balance at January 1, 2015
$53
($8)
($136)
($13,812)
($13,903)
Other comprehensive (loss)/income before reclassifications
(92)
8
(140)
173
(51)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
79
1,127
(2)  
1,206
Net current period Other comprehensive (loss)/income
(92)
8
(61)
1,300
1,155
Balance at December 31, 2015
($39)
$—
($197)
($12,512)
($12,748)
Other comprehensive loss before reclassifications
(104)
(2)
(8)
(1,320)
(1,434)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
78
481
(2)  
559
Net current period Other comprehensive (loss)/income
(104)
(2)
70
(839)
(875)
Balance at December 31, 2016
($143)
($2)
($127)
($13,351)
($13,623)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications
128
1
119
(478)
(230)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
52
425
(2)  
477
Net current period Other comprehensive income/(loss)
128
1
171
(53)
247
Balance at December 31, 2017
($15)
($1)
$44
($13,404)
($13,376)
(1)  Net of tax.
(2)  Primarily relates to amortization of actuarial losses for the years ended December 31, 2017 , 2016 , and 2015 totaling $542 , $524 , and $1,038
(net of tax of ($272) , ($288) , and ($570) ), respectively. These are included in the net periodic pension cost of which a portion is allocated to
production as inventoried costs. See Note 14 .
Note 17 – Derivative Financial Instruments
Cash Flow Hedges
Our cash flow hedges include foreign currency forward contracts and commodity purchase contracts. We use foreign currency forward contracts to
manage  currency  risk  associated  with  certain  transactions,  specifically  forecasted  sales  and  purchases  made  in  foreign  currencies.  Our  foreign
currency contracts  hedge forecasted  transactions  through 2024 .  We use commodity  derivatives,  such  as fixed-price  purchase  commitments  to
hedge against potentially unfavorable price changes for items used in production. Our commodity contracts hedge forecasted transactions through
2021 .
Fair Value Hedges
Interest rate swaps under which we agree to pay variable rates of interest are designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate debt. The net change in
fair value of the derivatives and the hedged items is reported in Boeing Capital interest expense.
96

Table of Contents
Derivative Instruments Not Receiving Hedge Accounting Treatment
We  have  entered  into  agreements  to  purchase  and  sell  aluminum  to  address  long-term  strategic  sourcing  objectives  and  non-U.S.  business
requirements. These agreements are derivative instruments for accounting purposes. The quantities of aluminum in these agreements offset and
are priced at prevailing market prices. We also hold certain foreign currency forward contracts which do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
Notional Amounts and Fair Values
The notional amounts and fair values of derivative instruments in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31 were as
follows:
Notional
  amounts (1)
Other assets
Accrued
liabilities
2017
2016
2017
2016
2017
2016
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange contracts
$2,930
$2,584
$131
$34
($63)
($225)
Interest rate contracts
125
125
3
6
Commodity contracts
56
53
4
7
(6)
(5)
Derivatives not receiving hedge accounting treatment:
Foreign exchange contracts
406
465
16
21
(5)
(17)
Commodity contracts
563
648
—
Total derivatives
$4,080
$3,875
154
68
(74)
(247)
Netting arrangements
(61)
(45)
61
45
Net recorded balance
$93
$23
($13)
($202)
(1)  Notional amounts represent the gross contract/notional amount of the derivatives outstanding.
Gains/(losses) associated with our cash flow and undesignated hedging transactions and their effect on Other comprehensive income/(loss) and Net
earnings were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
Effective portion recognized in Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of taxes:
Foreign exchange contracts
$123
($9)
Commodity contracts
(4)
1
Effective portion reclassified out of Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings, net of taxes:
Foreign exchange contracts
(50)
(70)
Commodity contracts
(2)
(8)
Forward points recognized in Other income, net:
Foreign exchange contracts
8
13
Undesignated derivatives recognized in Other income, net:
Foreign exchange contracts
8
(2)
Based  on  our  portfolio  of  cash  flow  hedges,  we  expect  to  reclassify  losses  of $12 (pre-tax)  out  of  Accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss  into
earnings  during  the  next  12  months.  Ineffectiveness  related  to  our  hedges  recognized  in  Other  income  was  insignificant  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2017 and 2016 .
97

Table of Contents
We have derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features. For foreign exchange contracts with original maturities of at least five
years,  our  derivative  counterparties  could  require  settlement  if  we  default  on  our  five-year  credit  facility.  For  certain  commodity  contracts,  our
counterparties could require collateral posted in an amount determined by our credit ratings. The fair value of foreign exchange and commodity
contracts that have credit-risk-related contingent features that are in a net liability position at December 31, 2017 was $13 . At December 31, 2017 ,
there was no collateral posted related to our derivatives.
Note 18 – Significant Group Concentrations of Risk
Credit Risk
Financial instruments involving potential credit risk are predominantly with commercial aircraft customers and the U.S. government. Of the $13,639
in gross accounts receivable and gross customer financing included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2017 ,
$5,572 related  predominantly  to  commercial  aircraft  customers  ( $2,512 of  accounts  receivable  and $3,060 of  customer  financing)  and $5,989
related to the U.S. government.
Of the $3,061 in gross customer financing, $1,828 related  to  customers  we believe  have less than  investment-grade  credit  including  Silk Way,
American, and Hawaiian Airlines who were associated with 14% , 8% , and 7% , respectively, of our financing portfolio. Financing for aircraft is
collateralized by security in the related asset and in some instances security in other assets as well.
Other Risk
As of December 31, 2017 , approximately 37% of our total workforce was represented by collective bargaining agreements.
Note 19 – Fair Value Measurements
The fair value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined
based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs and
Level 3 includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs. The following table presents our assets and liabilities that are measured
at fair value on a recurring basis and are categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
December 31, 2017
December 31, 2016
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Assets
Money market funds
$1,582
$1,582
$2,858
$2,858
Available-for-sale investments:
Commercial paper
70
70
162
162
Corporate notes
382
382
271
271
U.S. government agencies
47
47
63
63
Other
18
18
46
46
Derivatives
93
93
23
$23
Total assets
$2,192
$1,600
$592
$3,423
$2,904
$519
Liabilities
Derivatives
($13)
($13)
($202)
($202)
Total liabilities
($13)
($13)
($202)
($202)
98

Table of Contents
Money market funds, available-for-sale debt investments and equity securities are valued using a market approach based on the quoted market
prices or broker/dealer quotes of identical or comparable instruments.
Derivatives include foreign currency, commodity and interest rate contracts. Our foreign currency forward contracts are valued using an income
approach based on the present value of the forward rate less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. Commodity derivatives are valued
using an income approach based on the present value of the commodity index prices less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. The
fair value of our interest rate swaps is derived from a discounted cash flow analysis based on the terms of the contract and the interest rate curve.
Certain  assets  have  been  measured  at  fair  value  on  a  nonrecurring  basis  using  significant  unobservable  inputs  (Level  3).  The  following  table
presents the nonrecurring losses recognized for the years ended December 31 due to long-lived asset impairment, and the fair value and asset
classification of the related assets as of the impairment date:
2017
2016
Fair Value
Total Losses
Fair Value
Total Losses
Investments
$1
($44)
Operating lease equipment
90
(32)
$84
($52)
Other assets and Acquired intangible assets
14
(23)
12
(10)
Property, plant and equipment
8
(2)
10
(9)
Total
$113
($101)
$106
($71)
Investments,  Acquired  intangible  assets  and  Property,  plant  and  equipment  were  primarily  valued  using  an  income  approach  based  on  the
discounted cash flows associated with the underlying assets. The fair value of the impaired operating lease equipment is derived by calculating a
median collateral value from a consistent group of third party aircraft value publications. The values provided by the third party aircraft publications
are derived from their knowledge of market trades and other market factors. Management reviews the publications quarterly to assess the continued
appropriateness and consistency with market trends. Under certain circumstances, we adjust values based on the attributes and condition of the
specific aircraft or equipment, usually when the features or use of the aircraft vary significantly from the more generic aircraft attributes covered by
third party publications, or on the expected net sales price for the aircraft.
99

Table of Contents
For Level 3 assets that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis during the year ended December 31, 2017 , the following table presents
the fair value of those assets as of the measurement date, valuation techniques and related unobservable inputs of those assets.
Fair
Value
Valuation
Technique(s)
Unobservable Input
Range
Median or Average
Operating lease equipment
$90
Market approach
Aircraft value publications
$140 - $191 (1)
Median $167
Aircraft condition
adjustments
($77) - $0 (2)
Net ($77)
(1)  The range represents the sum of the highest and lowest values for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, according to the third party
aircraft valuation publications that we use in our valuation process.
(2)  The negative amount represents the sum, for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, of all downward adjustments based on consideration
of individual aircraft attributes and condition. The positive amount represents the sum of all such upward adjustments.
Fair Value Disclosures
The  fair  values  and  related  carrying  values  of  financial  instruments  that  are  not  required  to  be  remeasured  at  fair  value  on  the  Consolidated
Statements of Financial Position at December 31 were as follows:
December 31, 2017
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair
Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Notes receivable, net
$677
$682
$682
Liabilities
Debt, excluding capital lease obligations and
commercial paper
(10,380)
(11,923)
(11,823)
($100)
December 31, 2016
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair
Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Notes receivable, net
$807
$803
$803
Liabilities
Debt, excluding capital lease obligations
(9,815)
(11,209)
(11,078)
($131)
The fair values of notes receivable are estimated with discounted cash flow analysis using interest rates currently offered on loans with similar terms
to borrowers of similar credit quality. The fair value of our debt that is traded in the secondary market is classified as Level 2 and is based on current
market yields. For our debt that is not traded in the secondary market, the fair value is classified as Level 2 and is based on our indicative borrowing
cost derived from dealer quotes or discounted cash flows. The fair values of our debt classified as Level 3 are based on discounted cash flow
models using the implied yield from similar securities. With regard to other financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, it is not practicable to
estimate the fair value of our indemnifications and financing commitments because the amount and timing of those arrangements are uncertain.
Items not included in the above disclosures include cash, restricted cash, time deposits and other deposits, commercial paper, money market funds,
Accounts receivable, Accounts payable and long-term payables. The carrying values of those items, as reflected in the
100

Table of Contents
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position, approximate their fair value at December 31, 2017 and 2016 . The fair value of assets and liabilities
whose carrying value approximates fair value is determined using Level 2 inputs, with the exception of cash (Level 1).
Note 20 – Legal Proceedings
Various legal proceedings, claims and investigations related to products, contracts, employment and other matters are pending against us.
In addition, we are subject to various U.S. government inquiries and investigations from which civil, criminal or administrative proceedings could
result or have resulted in the past. Such proceedings involve or could involve claims by the government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble
damages, restitution and/or forfeitures. Under government regulations, a company, or one or more of its operating divisions or subdivisions, can also
be suspended or debarred from government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of investigations. We believe, based upon
current information, that the outcome of any such legal proceeding, claim, or government dispute and investigation will not have a material effect on
our financial position, results of operations, or cash flows.
Note 21 – Segment Information
Effective July 1, 2017, we now operate in four reportable segments: BCA , BDS , BGS , and BCC. The new segment, BGS, brings together the
Commercial  Aviation  Services  businesses,  previously  included  in  the  BCA  segment,  and  certain  BDS  businesses  (primarily  those  previously
included in the Global Services & Support segment). All other activities fall within Unallocated items, eliminations and other. See page 51 for the
Summary of Business Segment Data, which is an integral part of this note. Prior year numbers have been revised to conform to the current segment
presentation.
BCA develops, produces and markets commercial jet aircraft principally to the commercial airline industry worldwide.
BDS is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of the following products and related services: manned and unmanned
military  aircraft  and  weapons  systems,  surveillance  and  engagement,  strategic  defense  and  intelligence  systems,  satellite  systems  and  space
exploration.
BGS provides  parts,  maintenance,  modifications,  logistics  support,  training,  data  analytics  and  information-based  services  to  commercial  and
government customers worldwide.
BCC facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our Boeing customers.
Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  include  common  internal  services  that  support  Boeing’s  global  business  operations,  intercompany
guarantees provided to BCC and eliminations of certain sales between segments.
101

Table of Contents
Revenues, including foreign military sales, are reported by customer location and consist of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Asia, other than China
$8,899
$10,553
$13,433
Europe
11,457
13,790
12,248
China
11,911
10,312
12,556
Middle East
12,287
13,297
10,846
Oceania
2,061
1,843
2,601
Canada
2,197
2,076
1,870
Africa
755
1,999
1,398
Latin America, Caribbean and other
1,494
1,936
1,875
Total non-U.S. revenues
51,061
55,806
56,827
United States
42,331
38,765
39,287
Total revenues
$93,392
$94,571
$96,114
Revenues  from  the  U.S.  government  (including  foreign  military  sales  through  the  U.S.  government),  primarily  recorded  at  BDS  and  BGS,
represented 31% , 23% and 27% of consolidated revenues for 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively. Approximately 5% and 4% of operating assets
were located outside the United States as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 . The information in the following tables is derived directly from the
segments’ internal financial reporting used for corporate management purposes.
Depreciation and Amortization
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial Airplanes
$521
$442
$388
Defense, Space, & Security 
252
220
248
Global Services
322
312
317
Boeing Capital Corporation
70
83
87
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
904
853
793
Total
$2,069
$1,910
$1,833
Capital Expenditures
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial Airplanes
$636
$830
$819
Defense, Space, & Security
210
290
226
Global Services
180
209
132
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
713
1,284
1,273
Total
$1,739
$2,613
$2,450
Unallocated capital expenditures relate primarily to assets managed centrally on behalf of the five principal segments.
We recorded Earnings from operations associated with our equity method investments of $233 , $303 and $274 , primarily in our BDS segment, for
the years ended December 31, 2017 , 2016 and 2015 , respectively.
For segment reporting purposes, we record Commercial Airplanes segment revenues and cost of sales for airplanes transferred to other segments.
Such transfers may include airplanes accounted for as operating leases and considered transferred to the BCC segment and airplanes transferred
to the BDS
102

Table of Contents
segment for further modification prior to delivery to the customer. In addition, BGS segment revenue and costs include certain services provided to
other segments. The revenues and cost of sales for these transfers are eliminated in the Unallocated items and eliminations caption. For segment
reporting purposes, we record BDS revenues and cost of sales for the modification performed on airplanes received from Commercial Airplanes
when the airplane is delivered to the customer or at the attainment of performance milestones.
Intersegment revenues, eliminated in Unallocated items, eliminations and other, are shown in the following table.
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Commercial Airplanes
$1,571
$2,001
$1,700
Global Services
49
75
95
Boeing Capital
28
16
15
Total
$1,648
$2,092
$1,810
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and other
Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  includes  costs  not  attributable  to  business  segments  as  well  as  intercompany  profit  eliminations.  We
generally allocate costs to business segments based on the U.S. federal cost accounting standards. Components of Unallocated items, eliminations
and other are shown in the following table.
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
Share-based plans
($77)
($66)
($76)
Deferred compensation
(240)
(46)
(63)
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
(98)
(94)
(90)
Eliminations and other unallocated items
(640)
(527)
(511)
Sub-total
(1,055)
(733)
(740)
Pension
1,120
217
(421)
Postretirement
188
153
123
Pension and Postretirement
1,308
370
(298)
Total
$253
($363)
($1,038)
Unallocated Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Expense
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense represent the portion of pension and other postretirement benefit costs that are not
recognized by business segments for segment reporting purposes. Pension costs, comprising GAAP service and prior service costs, are allocated to
BCA.  Pension  costs  are  allocated  to  BDS  and  BGS  businesses  supporting  government  customers  using U.S.  Government  Cost  Accounting
Standards ( CAS ), which employ different actuarial assumptions and accounting conventions than GAAP . These costs are allocable to government
contracts. Other postretirement benefit costs are allocated to business segments based on CAS , which is generally based on benefits paid.
103

Table of Contents
Assets
Segment assets are summarized in the table below.
December 31,
2017
2016
Commercial Airplanes
$47,737
$46,745
Defense, Space & Security
15,865
14,123
Global Services
12,353
11,490
Boeing Capital
3,156
4,139
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
13,222
13,500
Total
$92,333
$89,997
Assets included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other primarily consist of Cash and cash equivalents, Short-term  and other investments,
Deferred tax assets, capitalized interest and assets held centrally as well as intercompany eliminations.
104

Table of Contents
Note 22 – Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
2017
2016
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
Total revenues
$25,368
$24,309
$22,739
$20,976
$23,286
$23,898
$24,755
$22,632
Total costs and expenses
(20,427)
(19,987)
(18,388)
(17,264)
(19,464)
(19,904)
(22,325)
(19,097)
Earnings from operations
3,030
2,689
2,535
2,024
2,183
2,282
(419)
1,788
Net earnings/(loss)
3,132
1,853
1,761
1,451
1,631
2,279
(234)
1,219
Basic earnings/(loss) per share
5.25
3.10
2.93
2.36
2.63
3.64
(0.37)
1.85
Diluted earnings/(loss) per share
5.18
3.06
2.89
2.34
2.59
3.60
(0.37)
1.83
Cash dividends declared per share
3.13
2.84
2.51
2.18
Common stock sales price per share:
High
299.33
259.30
204.39
185.71
160.07
139.45
137.89
141.70
Low
253.53
197.75
175.47
155.21
130.74
123.96
122.35
102.10
Quarter end
294.91
254.21
197.75
176.86
155.68
131.74
129.87
126.94
Gross profit is calculated as Total revenues minus Total costs and expenses. Total costs and expenses includes Cost of products, Cost of services
and Boeing Capital interest expense.
During the fourth quarter of 2017, as a result of the enactment of the TCJA, we recorded incremental tax benefits of $1,051 , primarily related to the
remeasurement of net U.S. deferred tax liabilities.
During 2017 and 2016, higher estimated costs to complete the KC-46A Tanker contract for the U.S. Air Force resulted in reach-forward losses. We
recorded $329 and $142 in the third and first quarter of 2017. We recorded $312 , $573 and $243 in the fourth, second and first quarter of 2016,
respectively.
During the third quarter of 2016, delays in completion of engineering and supply chain activities for the Commercial Crew program resulted in a
charge of $162 .
During the second quarter of 2016 and first quarter of 2016, we recorded reach-forward losses of $1,188 and $70 on the 747 program.
During the second quarter of 2016, we determined that the fourth and fifth flight test aircraft for the 787 program are not commercially saleable, and
we reclassified costs of $1,235 associated with these aircraft from 787 program inventory to research and development expense.
During the third quarter of 2016, we recorded an incremental tax benefit of $440 that related to the application of a 2012 Federal Court of Claims
decision. We also recorded a tax benefit of $177 as a result of the 2011-2012 federal tax audit settlements.
We increased our quarterly dividend from $1.09 to $1.42 in December 2016 and to $1.71 in December 2017.
105

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of The Boeing Company
Opinion on the Financial Statements
We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of
December 31, 2017 and 2016 , the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows, for each of the
three years in the period ended December 31, 2017 , and the related notes (collectively referred to as the “financial statements”). In our opinion, the
financial statements  present fairly, in all material respects,  the financial position of the Company as of December 31, 2017 and 2016 , and the
results  of its operations  and its  cash flows  for  each of  the three  years in the period  ended December 31, 2017 , in conformity with accounting
principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
Company’s  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  as  of December  31,  2017 ,  based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  –  Integrated
Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 12, 2018 ,
expressed an unqualified opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
Basis for Opinion
These financial statements  are  the responsibility  of the  Company's  management.  Our  responsibility  is to  express  an opinion on the  Company's
financial statements based on our audits. We are a public accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with
respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange
Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement, whether due to error or fraud. Our audits included
performing  procedures  to  assess  the  risks  of  material  misstatement  of  the  financial  statements,  whether  due  to  error  or  fraud,  and  performing
procedures that respond to those risks. Such procedures included examining, on a test basis, evidence regarding the amounts and disclosures in
the financial statements. Our audits also included evaluating the accounting principles used and significant estimates made by management, as well
as evaluating the overall presentation of the financial statements. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
February 12, 2018
We have served as the Company's auditor since at least 1934; however, an earlier year cannot be reliably determined.
106

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the shareholders and the Board of Directors of The Boeing Company
Opinion on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2017 ,
based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013) issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the
Treadway Commission (COSO). In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting
as of December 31, 2017 , based on criteria established in Internal Control - Integrated Framework (2013) issued by COSO.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States)  (PCAOB),  the
consolidated financial statements as of and for the year ended December 31, 2017 , of the Company and our report dated February 12, 2018 ,
expressed an unqualified opinion on those financial statements.
Basis for Opinion
The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  maintaining  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  and  for  its  assessment  of  the
effectiveness  of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial
Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit. We are a public
accounting firm registered with the PCAOB and are required to be independent with respect to the Company in accordance with the U.S. federal
securities laws and the applicable rules and regulations of the Securities and Exchange Commission and the PCAOB.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the PCAOB. Those standards require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain
reasonable assurance about whether effective internal control over financial reporting was maintained in all material respects. Our audit included
obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that a material weakness exists, testing and evaluating the
design  and  operating  effectiveness  of  internal  control  based  on  the  assessed  risk,  and  performing  such  other  procedures  as  we  considered
necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our opinion.
Definition and Limitations of Internal Control over Financial Reporting
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial
reporting  and  the  preparation  of  financial  statements  for  external  purposes  in  accordance  with  generally  accepted  accounting  principles.  A
company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies and procedures that (1) pertain to the maintenance of records that, in
reasonable detail, accurately and fairly reflect the transactions and dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that
transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles,
and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being made only in accordance with authorizations of management and directors of the
company;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding  prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or  disposition  of  the
company’s assets that could have a material effect on the financial statements. Because of its inherent limitations, internal control over financial
reporting may not prevent or detect misstatements. Also, projections of any evaluation of effectiveness to future periods are subject to the risk that
controls  may  become  inadequate  because  of  changes  in  conditions,  or  that  the  degree  of  compliance  with  the  policies  or  procedures  may
deteriorate.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
February 12, 2018
107

Table of Contents
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
(a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures.
Our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2017 and have
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in the reports that we
file or submit under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and forms and is accumulated and communicated to our management, including the Chief Executive
Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
(b) Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.
Our  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  as  such  term  is  defined  in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f). Our management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based
on  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission.  Based  on  this  evaluation  under  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework,  our  management  concluded  that  our
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2017 .
Our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2017 , has been audited by Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included in Item 8 of this report and is incorporated by reference herein.
(c) Changes in Internal Controls Over Financial Reporting.
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2017 that have materially affected or
are reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
108

Table of Contents
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Our executive officers and their ages as of February 5, 2018 , are as follows:
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Bertrand-Marc Allen
44
Senior  Vice  President  and  President,  Boeing  International  since  February  2015.  Mr.  Allen
previously served as President of Boeing Capital Corporation from March 2014 to February 2015;
Corporate  Vice  President,  Boeing  International  and  Chairman  and  President  of  Boeing  (China)
Co., Ltd. from March 2011 to March 2014; and Vice President, Global Law Affairs from May 2007
to March 2011.
Heidi B. Capozzi
48
Senior Vice President, Human Resources since March 2016. Ms. Capozzi previously served as
Vice President of Leadership Development, Talent Management and Organization Effectiveness
from April 2013 to March 2016; Director of Human Resources for the Airplane Programs division of
Commercial  Airplanes  from  April  2011 to April  2013;  and Director  of  Human  Resources  for  the
Surveillance and Engagement division of Boeing Military Aircraft from May 2009 to April 2011.
Leanne G. Caret
51
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Defense,  Space  &
Security since March 2016. Ms. Caret joined Boeing in 1988, and her previous positions include
President of Global Services & Support from February 2015 to March 2016; Chief Financial Officer
and  Vice  President,  Finance,  for  BDS  from  March  2014  to  February  2015;  Vice  President  and
General Manager, Vertical Lift from November 2012 to February 2014; and Vice President and
Program Manager, Chinook from November 2009 to October 2012.
Theodore Colbert III
44
Chief  Information  Officer  and  Senior  Vice  President,  Information  Technology  &  Data  Analytics
since April 2016. Mr. Colbert previously served as Chief Information Officer and Vice President of
Information  Technology  from  November  2013  to  April  2016;  Vice  President  of  Information
Technology  Infrastructure  from  December  2011  to  November  2013;  and  Vice  President  of  IT
Business Systems from September 2010 to December 2011.
Stanley A. Deal
53
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Global  Services  since
November 2016. Mr. Deal joined Boeing in 1986, and his previous positions include Senior Vice
President of Commercial Aviation Services from March 2014 to November 2016; Vice President
and  General  Manager  of  Supply  Chain  Management  and  Operations  for  Commercial  Airplanes
from September 2011 to February 2014; Vice President of Supplier Management from February
2010 to August 2011; and Vice President of Asia Pacific Sales from December 2006 to January
2010.
Gregory L. Hyslop
59
Chief Technology Officer and Senior Vice President, Boeing Engineering, Test & Technology since
July 2016. Mr. Hyslop was named Senior Vice President, Boeing Engineering, Test & Technology
in March 2016, and his previous positions include Vice President and General Manager of Boeing
Research  &  Technology  from  February  2013  to  March  2016  and  Vice  President  and  General
Manager of Boeing Strategic Missile & Defense Systems from March 2009 to February 2013.
109

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Timothy J. Keating
56
Senior  Vice  President,  Government  Operations  since  joining  Boeing  in  June  2008.  Mr.  Keating
served  as  Senior  Vice  President,  Global  Government  Relations  at  Honeywell  International  Inc.
from  October  2002  to  May  2008.  Prior  thereto,  Mr.  Keating  was  Chairman  of  the  Board  and
Managing Partner of Timmons and Company (a Washington, D.C. lobbying firm).
J. Michael Luttig
63
Executive Vice President and General Counsel since April 2009. Mr. Luttig joined Boeing in May
2006 as Senior Vice President, General Counsel. From October 1991 to May 2006, he served on
the United States Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit. Mr. Luttig previously served as Assistant
Attorney General of the United States, Counselor to the Attorney General at the Department of
Justice  and  Principal  Deputy  Assistant  Attorney  General  at  the  Department  of  Justice  and  was
associated  with  Davis  Polk  &  Wardwell  LLP.  Mr.  Luttig  serves  as  Director,  Franklin  Templeton
Mutual Funds.
Kevin G. McAllister
54
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer,  Boeing  Commercial  Airplanes
since  November  2016.  Mr.  McAllister  served  as  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  GE
Aviation  Services  from  January  2014  to  November  2016  and  Vice  President,  Global  Sales  and
Marketing of GE Aviation from June 2008 to January 2014.
Dennis A. Muilenburg
54
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer since March 2016. Mr. Muilenburg was named
President and Chief Executive Officer in July 2015. He joined Boeing in 1985, and his previous
positions include Vice Chairman, President and Chief Operating Officer from December 2013 to
July  2015;  Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  BDS  from
September 2009 to December 2013; President of Global Services & Support from February 2008
to  August  2009;  Vice  President  and  General  Manager  of  Combat  Systems  from  May  2006  to
February  2008;  and  Vice  President  and  Program  Manager  for  Future  Combat  Systems.  Mr.
Muilenburg also serves on the board of Caterpillar Inc.
Philip A. Musser
45
Senior Vice President, Communications since September 2017. Mr. Musser previously served as
President of New Frontier Strategy from January 2007 to September 2017 and co-founder of The
Media Group of America where he served as Chairman and CEO of IMGE from January 2013 to
September 2017.
Jenette E. Ramos
52
Senior Vice President, Supply Chain & Operations since June 2017. Ms. Ramos joined Boeing in
1988, and her previous positions include Vice President and General Manager, BCA Fabrication
from April 2014 to May 2017; Vice President, Supply Chain Management from January 2012 to
April  2014;  Vice President,  Operations  Supply  Chain Rate,  Supplier  Management  Capability  for
Boeing Commercial Airplanes from June 2011 to January 2012; director of Business Operations
for Boeing Fabrication from June 2009 to May 2011; General Manager of Boeing Portland from
February  2005  to  May  2009  and  director  of  Boeing  Fabrication  Integrated  AeroStructures  from
September 2003 to January 2005.
110

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Diana L. Sands
52
Senior Vice President, Office of Internal Governance and Administration since March 2016. Ms.
Sands previously served as Senior Vice President, Office of Internal Governance from April 2014
to March 2016; Vice President of Finance and Corporate Controller from February 2012 to April
2014 and Vice President of Investor Relations, Financial Planning & Analysis from February 2010
to February 2012. Prior to that, she held positions in Investor Relations, Financial Planning and in
Corporate Treasury.
Gregory D. Smith
51
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy since
February 2015. Mr. Smith previously served as Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer
from February 2012 to February 2015; Vice President of Finance and Corporate Controller from
February 2010 to February 2012; and Vice President of Financial Planning & Analysis from June
2008 to February 2010. From August 2004 until June 2008, he served as Vice President of Global
Investor Relations at Raytheon Company. Prior to that, he held a number of positions at Boeing
including  CFO,  Shared  Services  Group;  Controller,  Shared  Services  Group;  Senior  Director,
Internal Audit; and leadership roles in supply chain, factory operations and program management.
Mr. Smith serves on the board of Intel Corporation.
Information relating to our directors and nominees will be included under the caption “Election of Directors” in the 2018 Proxy Statement for our
Annual  Shareholders  Meeting  scheduled  to  be  held  on April  30,  2018 and  is  incorporated  by  reference  herein.  The  information  required  by
Items 405, 407(d)(4) and 407(d)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Stock Ownership Information – Section 16(a) Beneficial
Ownership Reporting Compliance” and “Board Committees” in the 2018 Proxy Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Codes of Ethics. We have adopted (1) The Boeing Company Code of Ethical Business Conduct for the Board of Directors; (2) The Boeing Company
Code of Conduct for Finance Employees which is applicable to our Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Controller and all
finance employees; and (3) The Boeing Code of Conduct that applies to all employees, including our CEO (collectively, the Codes of Conduct). The
Codes  of  Conduct  are  posted  on  our  website,  www.boeing.com/company/general-info/corporate-governance.page,  and  printed  copies  may  be
obtained, without charge, by contacting the Office of Internal Governance, The Boeing Company, 100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, IL 60606. We
intend to disclose promptly on our website any amendments to, or waivers of, the Codes of Conduct covering our CEO, CFO and/or Controller.
No family relationships exist among any of the executive officers, directors or director nominees.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The  information  required  by  Item  402  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  captions  “Compensation  Discussion  and  Analysis,”
“Compensation  of  Executive  Officers,”  and  “Compensation  of  Directors”  in  the 2018 Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is  incorporated  by
reference herein. The information required by Item 407(e)(4) and 407(e)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Compensation
Committee  Interlocks  and  Insider  Participation”  and  “Compensation  Committee  Report”  in  the 2018 Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is
incorporated by reference herein.
111

Table of Contents
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The  information  required  by  Item  403  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Stock  Ownership  Information”  in  the 2018 Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
We currently maintain two equity compensation plans that provide for the issuance of common stock to officers and other employees, directors and
consultants. Each of these compensation plans was approved by our shareholders. The following table sets forth information regarding outstanding
options and shares available for future issuance under these plans as of December 31, 2017 :
Plan Category
Number of shares
to be issued upon
exercise of outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
Weighted-average
exercise price of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
Number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
shares reflected
in column (a))
(a)
(b)
(c)
Equity compensation plans approved by shareholders
Stock options
4,417,218
$71.69
Deferred compensation
2,237,472
Other stock units (1)
5,887,032
Equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders
None
None
None
Total (2)
12,541,722
$71.69
14,492,124
(1)  
Includes 3,103,468      shares  issuable  in  respect  of  PBRSUs  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  performance  criteria  and  assumes  payout  at
maximum levels.
(2)  
Excludes the potential performance awards which the Compensation Committee has the discretion to pay in cash, stock or a combination of
both after the three-year performance periods which end in 2017 , 2018 and 2019 .
For further information, see Note 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The  information  required  by  Item  404  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Related  Person  Transactions”  in  the 2018 Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
The information required by Item 407(a) of Regulation S-K will be included under the caption “Director Independence” in the 2018 Proxy Statement,
and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
112

Table of Contents
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information required by this Item will be included under the caption “Independent Auditor Fees” in the 2018 Proxy Statement, and that
information is incorporated by reference herein.
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a) List of documents filed as part of this report:
1.
Financial Statements
Our consolidated financial statements are as set forth under Item 8 of this report on Form 10-K.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules
All  schedules  are  omitted  because  they  are  not  applicable,  not  required,  or  the  information  is  included  in  the  consolidated  financial
statements.
3.
Exhibits
3.1
Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  of  The  Boeing  Company  dated  May  5,  2006  (Exhibit  3.1  to  the  Company’s
Current Report on Form 8-K dated May 1, 2006).
3.2
By-Laws of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated December 17, 2017 (Exhibit 3.2 to the Company’s Current Report on
Form 8-K dated December 17, 2017).
10.1
364-Day  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  November  1,  2017,  among  The  Boeing  Company,  Citigroup  Global  Markets  Inc.  and
JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent
and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated November 1, 2017).
10.2
Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of November 10, 2011, among The Boeing Company, the Lenders party thereto, Citigroup
Global Markets Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A.
as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
November 10, 2011).
10.3
Amendment No. 1 dated as of October 9, 2014 to the Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of November 10, 2011, among The
Boeing Company, the Lenders party thereto, Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as joint lead arrangers
and joint book managers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.2
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 14, 2014).
10.4
Amendment No. 2 dated as of November 4, 2015 to the Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of November 10, 2011, among The
Boeing Company, the Lenders party thereto, Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as joint lead arrangers
and joint book managers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.2
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated November 4, 2015).
10.5
Amendment No. 3 dated as of November 2, 2016 to the Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of November 10, 2011, among The
Boeing Company, the Lenders party thereto, Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as joint lead arrangers
and joint book managers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.2
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated November 2, 2016).
10.6
Amendment No. 4 dated as of November 1, 2017 to the Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of November 10, 2011, among The
Boeing Company, the Lenders party thereto, Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as joint lead arrangers
and joint book managers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.2
to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated November 1, 2017).
113

Table of Contents
10.7
Joint Venture Master Agreement, dated as of May 2, 2005, by and among Lockheed Martin Corporation, The Boeing Company and
United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. (Exhibit (10)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2005).
10.8
Delta Inventory Supply Agreement, dated as of December 1, 2006, by and between United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. and The Boeing
Company (Exhibit (10)(vi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2006).
10.9
Summary of Non-Employee Director Compensation (Exhibit 10 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30,
2016).*
10.10
Deferred Compensation Plan for Directors of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2008 (Exhibit
10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).*
10.11
Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated on January 1, 2008 (Exhibit 10.1 to
the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).*
10.12
Incentive Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries, as amended and restated effective October
31, 2016 (Exhibit (10)(xi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.13
The  Boeing  Company  Elected  Officer  Annual  Incentive  Plan,  as  amended  and  restated  effective  October  31,  2016  (Exhibit  (10)
(xii) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.14
The Boeing Company 1997 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended effective May 1, 2000 and further amended effective January 1, 2008
(Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).*
10.15
Supplemental Pension Agreement between The Boeing Company and J. Michael Luttig dated January 25, 2007, as amended on
November 14, 2007 (Exhibit (10)(xxx) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007).*
10.16
Supplemental Benefit Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2016 (Exhibit (10)
(xvi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.17
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated as of January 1, 2016
(Exhibit (10)(xvi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2015).*
10.18
The Boeing Company Executive Layoff Benefits Plan, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2017 (Exhibit (10)(xviii) to the
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.19
The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated effective October 31, 2016 (Exhibit (10)(xix)(a) to the
Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2016).*
10.20
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Grant Notice of Terms (Exhibit (10)(xvii)(b) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended
December 31, 2010).*
10.21
Form of Notice of Terms of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.2 of the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended
March 31, 2017).*
10.22
Form of Performance Award Notice (Exhibit 10.3 of the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2017).*
10.23
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s 10-Q for the quarter ended March 31, 2017).*
10.24
Form of Notice of Terms of Supplemental Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated
June 25, 2017).*
114

Table of Contents
10.25
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units dated February 24, 2014 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form
8-K dated February 24, 2014).*
10.26
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units dated February 23, 2015. (Exhibit (10)(xviii)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2015).*
10.27
Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated June 22, 2015).*
12
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
21
List of Company Subsidiaries.
23
Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
31.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
31.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.1
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
32.2
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 .
99.1
Commercial Program Method of Accounting (Exhibit (99)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 1997).
101.INS
XBRL Instance Document
101.SCH
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
101.CAL
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
101.DEF
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
101.LAB
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
101.PRE
XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
In accordance with Item 601(b)(4)(iii)(A) of Regulation S-K, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the
Company are not filed herewith. Pursuant to this regulation, we hereby agree to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the SEC upon request.
Item 16. Form 10-K Summary
None
115

Table of Contents
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on February 12, 2018 .
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Registrant)
By:  
/s/ Robert E. Verbeck
 
Robert E. Verbeck – Senior Vice President, Finance and Corporate
Controller
116

Table of Contents
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities indicated on February 12, 2018 .
/s/ Dennis A. Muilenburg
/s/ Lynn J. Good
Dennis A. Muilenburg – Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer
Lynn J. Good – Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
/s/ Lawrence W. Kellner
Gregory D. Smith – Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice
President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy
Lawrence W. Kellner – Director
(Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ Robert E. Verbeck
/s/ Caroline B. Kennedy
Robert E. Verbeck – Senior Vice President, Finance and Corporate
Controller
Caroline B. Kennedy – Director
(Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ Robert A. Bradway
/s/ Edward M. Liddy
Robert A. Bradway – Director
Edward M. Liddy – Director
/s/ David L. Calhoun
/s/ Susan C. Schwab
David L. Calhoun – Director
Susan C. Schwab – Director
/s/ Arthur D. Collins, Jr.
/s/ Ronald A. Williams
Arthur D. Collins, Jr. – Director
Ronald A. Williams – Director
/s/ Kenneth M. Duberstein
/s/ Mike S. Zafirovski
Kenneth M. Duberstein – Director
Mike S. Zafirovski – Director
/s/ Edmund P. Giambastiani, Jr.
Edmund P. Giambastiani, Jr. – Director
117

EXHIBIT 12
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2017
2016
2015
2014
2013
Earnings before income taxes
$10,047
$5,568
$7,155
$7,137
$6,232
Fixed charges excluding capitalized interest
486
422
391
455
514
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
98
94
90
72
74
Net adjustment for earnings from affiliates
14
11
(34)
7
13
Earnings available for fixed charges
$10,645
$6,095
$7,602
$7,671
$6,833
Fixed charges:
Interest and debt expense (1)
$430
$365
$339
$402
$461
Interest capitalized during the period
110
170
158
102
87
Rentals deemed representative of an interest factor
56
57
52
53
53
Total fixed charges
$596
$592
$549
$557
$601
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
17.9
10.3
13.8
13.8
11.4
(1)  Amount does not include tax-related interest expense which is reported as a component of Income tax expense in our Consolidated Statements
of Operations .

EXHIBIT 21
The Boeing Company Subsidiaries
Name
Place of Incorporation
Astro Limited
Bermuda
Aviall Services, Inc.
Delaware
Aviall, Inc.
Delaware
BCC Equipment Leasing Corporation
Delaware
Boeing Aerostructures Australia Pty Limited
Australia
Boeing Aircraft Holding Company
Delaware
Boeing Australia Holdings Proprietary Limited
Australia
Boeing Canada Operations Ltd.
Canada
Boeing Capital Corporation
Delaware
Boeing CAS Holding GmbH
Germany
Boeing Commercial Aviation Services Europe Limited
United Kingdom
Boeing Defence Australia Ltd
Australia
Boeing Deutschland GmbH
Germany
Boeing European Holdings Limited
United Kingdom
Boeing Global Holdings Corporation
Delaware
Boeing Intellectual Property Licensing Company
Delaware
Boeing International Logistics Spares, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Netherlands B.V.
Netherlands
Boeing Netherlands C.V.
Netherlands
Boeing Operations International, Incorporated
Delaware
Boeing Singapore PTE. Ltd.
Singapore
Insitu, Inc.
Washington
Jeppesen DataPlan, Inc.
Delaware
Jeppesen Deutschland GmbH
Germany
Jeppesen GmbH
Germany
Jeppesen Sanderson, Inc.
Delaware
In accordance with Item 601(b)(21) of Regulation S-K, the company has omitted from this Exhibit the names of its subsidiaries which, considered in
the aggregate or as a single subsidiary, do not constitute a significant subsidiary as defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X.

EXHIBIT 23
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement Nos. 33-25332, 33-31434, 33-43854, 33-58798, 33-52773, 333-16363, 333-
26867,  333-32461,  333-32491,  333-32499,  333-32567,  333-41920,  333-54234,  333-73252,  333-107677,  333-140837,  333-156403,  333-160752,
333-163637,  and  333-195777  on  Form  S-8  and  Registration  Statement  Nos.  333-219627  and  333-219630  on  Form  S-3  of  our  reports  dated
February  12,  2018 ,  relating  to  the  consolidated  financial  statements  of  The  Boeing  Company  and  subsidiaries  (the  “Company"),  and  the
effectiveness of the Company’s internal control over financial reporting, appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company, for the year
ended December 31, 2017 .
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
February 12, 2018

EXHIBIT 31.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Dennis A. Muilenburg , certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: February 12, 2018
/s/ Dennis A. Muilenburg
Dennis A. Muilenburg
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer

EXHIBIT 31.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Gregory D. Smith , certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: February 12, 2018
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
Gregory D. Smith
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy

EXHIBIT 32.1
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2017 , as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Dennis A. Muilenburg , Chairman, President and Chief Executive
Officer of the Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ Dennis A. Muilenburg
Dennis A. Muilenburg
Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer
February 12, 2018

EXHIBIT 32.2
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2017 , as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Gregory D. Smith , Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice
President,  Enterprise  Performance  and  Strategy of  the  Company,  certify,  pursuant  to  18  U.S.C.  §  1350,  as  adopted  pursuant  to  §  906  of  the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
Gregory D. Smith
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Enterprise Performance and Strategy
February 12, 2018
