UNITED STATES
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION
Washington, D.C. 20549
FORM 10-K
(Mark One)
x
ANNUAL REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015
or
¨
TRANSITION REPORT PURSUANT TO SECTION 13 OR 15(d) OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934
For the transition period from                          to                         
Commission file number 1-442
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Exact name of registrant as specified in its charter)
Delaware
 
91-0425694
State or other jurisdiction of
incorporation or organization
 
(I.R.S. Employer Identification No.)
100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, IL
 
60606-1596
(Address of principal executive offices)
 
(Zip Code)
Registrant’s telephone number, including area code (312) 544-2000 
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(b) of the Act:
Common Stock, $5 par value
 
New York Stock Exchange
(Title of each class)
 
(Name of each exchange on which registered)
Securities registered pursuant to Section 12(g) of the Act: None
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is a well-known seasoned issuer, as defined in Rule 405 of the Securities Act. Yes  x No ¨
Indicate by check mark if the registrant is not required to file reports pursuant to Section 13 or Section 15(d) of the Act. Yes  ¨ No x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant (1) has filed all reports required to be filed by Section 13 or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 during
the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the registrant was required to file such reports), and (2) has been subject to such filing requirements for
the past 90 days. Yes  x  No ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant has submitted electronically and posted on its corporate Web site, if any, every Interactive Data File required to be
submitted and posted pursuant to Rule 405 of Regulation S-T (§ 232.405 of this chapter) during the preceding 12 months (or for such shorter period that the
registrant was required to submit and post such files). Yes  x No ¨
Indicate by check mark if disclosure of delinquent filers pursuant to Item 405 of Regulation S-K (§ 229.405 of this chapter) is not contained herein, and will not
be contained, to the best of registrant’s knowledge, in definitive proxy or information statements incorporated by reference in Part III of this Form 10-K or any
amendment to this Form 10-K. x
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a large accelerated filer, accelerated filer, a non-accelerated filer, or a smaller reporting company. See the
definitions of “large accelerated filer,” “accelerated filer” and “smaller reporting company” in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act.
Large accelerated filer x
Accelerated filer  ¨
Non-accelerated filer ¨  (Do not check if a smaller reporting company)
Smaller reporting company  ¨
Indicate by check mark whether the registrant is a shell company (as defined in Rule 12b-2 of the Exchange Act). Yes  ¨  No x
As  of June  30,  2015 ,  there  were 681,067,191 common  shares  outstanding  held  by  nonaffiliates  of  the  registrant,  and  the  aggregate  market  value  of  the
common shares (based upon the closing price of these shares on the New York Stock Exchange) was approximately $94.5 billion .
The number of shares of the registrant’s common stock outstanding as of February 4, 2016 was 662,503,822 .
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE
Part III incorporates information by reference to the registrant’s definitive proxy statement, to be filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission within 120
days after the close of the fiscal year ended December 31, 2015 .

THE BOEING COMPANY
Index to the Form 10-K
For the Fiscal Year Ended December 31, 2015
 
PART I
 
 
Page
Item  1.
Business
1
Item  1A.
Risk Factors
7
Item  1B.
Unresolved Staff Comments
15
Item  2.
Properties
16
Item  3.
Legal Proceedings
16
Item  4.
Mine Safety Disclosures
16
PART II
Item  5.
Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity
Securities
17
Item  6.
Selected Financial Data
18
Item  7.
Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
19
Item  7A.
Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
47
Item  8.
Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
48
Item  9.
Changes in and Disagreements With Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
112
Item  9A.
Controls and Procedures
112
Item  9B.
Other Information
112
PART III
Item  10.
Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
113
Item  11.
Executive Compensation
115
Item  12.
Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
116
Item  13.
Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
116
Item  14.
Principal Accounting Fees and Services
116
PART IV
Item  15.
Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
117
Signatures
121

PART I
Item 1. Business
The Boeing Company, together with its subsidiaries (herein referred to as “Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” “our”), is one of the world’s major
aerospace firms.
We are organized based on the products and services we offer. We operate in five principal segments:
•
Commercial Airplanes;
•
Our Defense, Space & Security ( BDS ) business comprises three segments:
•
Boeing Military Aircraft ( BMA ),
•
Network & Space Systems ( N&SS ) and
•
Global Services & Support ( GS&S ); and
•
Boeing Capital ( BCC ).
The unallocated activities of Engineering, Operations & Technology ( EO&T ) and Shared Services Group ( SSG ), Corporate and intercompany
guarantees  provided  to BCC are  included  in  Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other. EO&T provides  Boeing  with  technical  and  functional
capabilities,  including  information  technology,  research  and  development,  test  and  evaluation,  technology  strategy  development,  environmental
remediation management and intellectual property management.
Commercial Airplanes Segment
The Commercial Airplanes segment develops, produces and markets commercial jet aircraft and provides related support services, principally to the
commercial airline industry worldwide. We are a leading producer of commercial aircraft and offer a family of commercial jetliners designed to meet
a  broad  spectrum  of  global  passenger  and  cargo  requirements  of  airlines.  This  family  of  commercial  jet  aircraft  in  production  includes  the  737
narrow-body model and the 747, 767, 777 and 787 wide-body models. Development continues on the 787-10 and 737 MAX derivatives and the
777X programs. The Commercial Airplanes segment also offers aviation services support, aircraft modifications, spare parts, training, maintenance
documents and technical advice to commercial and government customers worldwide.
Defense, Space & Security
Our BDS operations  principally  involve  research,  development,  production,  modification  and  support  of  the  products  and  related  systems  as
described below. BDS' primary customer is the United States Department of Defense ( U.S. DoD ) with approximately 62% of BDS 2015 revenues
being derived from this customer (excluding foreign military sales through the U.S. government). Other significant BDS revenues were derived from
the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), international defense markets, civil markets and commercial satellite markets. BDS
consists of three capabilities-driven businesses: BMA, N&SS and GS&S. Additionally, the Phantom Works group is an integrated team that works
with the three businesses via product development, rapid prototyping and customer engagement through experimentation and enterprise technology
investment strategies.
Boeing Military Aircraft Segment
This segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of manned and unmanned military aircraft and weapons
systems  for  global  strike,  including  fighter  aircraft  and  missile  systems;  vertical  lift,  including  rotorcraft  and  tilt-rotor  aircraft;  autonomous
systems; and mobility, surveillance and engagement, including command and control, battle management, airborne, anti-
1

Table of Contents
submarine,  transport and tanker aircraft.  The major programs in this segment include for global strike:  EA-18G Growler Airborne Electronic
Attack, F/A-18E/F Super Hornet, F-15 Strike Eagle and Joint Direct Attack Munition; for vertical lift: CH-47 Chinook, AH-64 Apache, and V-22
Osprey;  for  autonomous  systems:  ScanEagle  and  Integrator;  and  for  mobility,  surveillance  and  engagement:  C-17  Globemaster  III,  P-8
programs, and KC-46A Tanker. C-17 Globemaster III production ended in 2015.
Network & Space Systems Segment
This segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of the following products and related services: electronics
and  information  solutions,  including  command,  control,  communications,  computers,  intelligence,  surveillance  and  reconnaissance  (C4ISR),
cyber and information solutions, and intelligence systems; strategic missile and defense systems; space and intelligence systems, including
satellites and commercial satellite launch vehicles; and space exploration. The major programs in this segment include for strategic missile and
defense systems: Ground-based Midcourse Defense ( GMD ); for space and intelligence systems: commercial, civil and military satellites; and
for space exploration: Space Launch System ( SLS ), Commercial Crew and International Space Station. This segment also includes our joint
venture operations related to United Launch Alliance .
Global Services & Support Segment
This segment provides customers with mission readiness through total support solutions. Our global services business sustains aircraft and
systems with a full spectrum of products and services through integrated logistics, including supply chain management and engineering support;
maintenance, modification and upgrades for aircraft; and training systems and government services, including pilot and maintenance training.
GS&S international operations include Boeing Defence U.K. Ltd., and Boeing Defence Australia, as well as Alsalam Aircraft Company, Aviation
Training International, Ltd and Boeing Sikorsky International Services LLC, joint ventures.
Integrated  logistics  comprises  an  integrated  array  of  services  that  address  the  complete  life  cycle  of  aircraft  and  systems.  Major  programs
supported include the F/A-18E/F, F-15, AH-64 Apache and CH-47 Chinook for domestic and international customers.
Aircraft modernization and sustainment is performed at centers throughout the United States and around the world, providing rapid cycle time
and aircraft services for military customers on a wide variety of BDS and non- BDS platforms. Major support is performed as part of the C-17
Globemaster III Integrated Sustainment Program. Aircraft programs include the Airborne Early Warning and Control ( AEW&C ) Peace Eagle
contract with Turkey and Airborne Warning and Control Systems ( AWACS ) program. We delivered the final AEW&C aircraft to Turkey in 2015.
Training systems and government services comprise a full range of training capabilities for domestic and international customers, including the
design and development of trainers for multiple aircraft platforms and logistics and asset management solutions.
Boeing Capital Segment
BCC seeks to ensure that Boeing customers have the financing they need to buy and take delivery of their Boeing product and manages overall
financing exposure. BCC ’s portfolio consists of equipment under operating leases, finance leases, notes and other receivables, assets held for sale
or re-lease and investments.
2

Table of Contents
Financial and Other Business Information
See the Summary of Business Segment Data and Note 21 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for financial information, including revenues
and earnings from operations, for each of our business segments.
Intellectual Property
We own numerous patents and have licenses for the use of patents owned by others, which relate to our products and their manufacture. In addition
to owning a large portfolio of intellectual property, we also license intellectual property to and from third parties. For example, the U.S. government
has licenses in our patents that are developed in performance of government contracts, and it may use or authorize others to use the inventions
covered by such patents for government purposes. Unpatented research, development and engineering skills, as well as certain trademarks, trade
secrets,  and  other  intellectual  property  rights,  also  make  an  important  contribution  to  our  business.  While  our  intellectual  property  rights  in  the
aggregate  are  important  to  the  operation  of  each  of  our  businesses,  we  do  not  believe  that  our  business  would  be  materially  affected  by  the
expiration of any particular intellectual property right or termination of any particular intellectual property patent license agreement.
Non-U.S. Revenues
See Note 21 to our Consolidated Financial Statements for information regarding non-U.S. revenues.
Research and Development
Research and development expenditures involve experimentation, design, development and related test activities for defense systems, new and
derivative  jet  aircraft  including  both  commercial  and  military,  advanced  space  and  other  company-sponsored  product  development.  These  are
expensed as incurred including amounts allocable as reimbursable overhead costs on U.S. government contracts.
Our total research and development expense, net amounted to $3.3 billion , $3.0 billion and $3.1 billion in 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively.
Research and development costs also include bid and proposal efforts related to government products and services, as well as costs incurred in
excess  of  amounts  estimated  to  be  recoverable  under  cost-sharing  research  and  development  agreements.  Bid  and  proposal  costs  were $286
million , $289 million and $285 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively.
3

Table of Contents
Employees
Total workforce level at December 31, 2015 was approximately 161,400 . As of December 31, 2015 , our principal collective bargaining agreements
were with the following unions:
Union
Percent of our
Employees
Represented
Status of the Agreements with Major Union
The International Association of Machinists and
Aerospace Workers (IAM)
22%
We have two major agreements; one expiring in June 2022 and one in
September 2024.
The Society of Professional Engineering Employees
in Aerospace (SPEEA)
13%
We have two major agreements expiring in Octo ber 2016.
The United Automobile, Aerospace and Agricultural
Implement Workers of America (UAW)
1%
We have one major agreement expiring in October 2022.
Competition
The commercial jet aircraft  market and the airline industry remain extremely competitive.  We face aggressive international competitors  who are
intent  on  increasing  their  market  share,  such  as  Airbus,  Embraer  and  Bombardier,  and  other  entrants  from  Russia,  China  and  Japan.  We  are
focused on improving our processes and continuing cost reduction efforts. We intend to continue to compete with other airplane manufacturers by
providing customers with greater value products, services, and support. We continue to leverage our extensive customer support services network
which spans the life cycle of the airplane: aircraft acquisition, readying for service, maintenance and engineering, enhancing and upgrading, and
transitioning to the next model - as well as the daily cycle of gate-to-gate operations. This enables us to provide a high level of customer satisfaction
and productivity.
BDS  faces  strong  competition  in  all  market  segments,  primarily  from  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation,  Northrop  Grumman  Corporation,  Raytheon
Company and General Dynamics Corporation. Non-U.S. companies such as BAE Systems and Airbus Group, continue to build a strategic presence
in the U.S. market by strengthening their North American operations and partnering with U.S. defense companies. In addition, certain competitors
have occasionally formed teams with other competitors to address specific customer requirements. BDS expects the trend of strong competition to
continue into 2016 .
Regulatory Matters
Our businesses are heavily regulated in most of our markets. We deal with numerous U.S. government agencies and entities, including but not
limited  to  all  of  the  branches  of  the  U.S.  military,  NASA,  the  Federal  Aviation  Administration  (FAA)  and  the  Department  of  Homeland  Security.
Similar government authorities exist in our international markets.
Government Contracts. The U.S. government, and other governments, may terminate any of our government contracts at their convenience, as well
as for default, based on our failure to meet specified performance requirements. If any of our U.S. government contracts were to be terminated for
convenience, we generally would be entitled to receive payment for work completed and allowable termination or cancellation costs. If any of our
government contracts were to be terminated for default, generally the U.S. government would pay only for the work that has been accepted and
could require us to pay the difference between the original contract price and the cost to re-procure the contract items, net of the work accepted from
the original contract. The U.S. government can also hold us liable for damages resulting from the default.
4

Table of Contents
Commercial Aircraft. In the U.S., our commercial aircraft products are required to comply with FAA regulations governing production and quality
systems, airworthiness and installation approvals, repair procedures and continuing operational safety. Internationally, similar requirements exist for
airworthiness, installation and operational approvals. These requirements are generally administered by the national aviation authorities of each
country and, in the case of Europe, coordinated by the European Joint Aviation Authorities.
Environmental. We are subject to various federal, state, local and non-U.S. laws and regulations relating to environmental protection, including the
discharge, treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. We continually assess our compliance status and
management  of  environmental  matters  to  ensure  our  operations  are  in  substantial  compliance  with  all  applicable  environmental  laws  and
regulations. Investigation, remediation, and operation and maintenance costs associated with environmental compliance and management of sites
are a normal, recurring part of our operations. These costs often are allowable costs under our contracts with the U.S. government. It is reasonably
possible  that  costs  incurred  to  ensure  continued  environmental  compliance  could  have  a  material  impact  on  our  results  of  operations,  financial
condition or cash flows if additional work requirements or more stringent clean-up standards are imposed by regulators, new areas of soil, air and
groundwater contamination are discovered and/or expansions of work scope are prompted by the results of investigations.
A Potentially Responsible Party (PRP) has joint and several liability under existing U.S. environmental laws. Where we have been designated a PRP
by the Environmental Protection Agency or a state environmental agency, we are potentially liable to the government or third parties for the full cost
of remediating contamination at our facilities or former facilities or at third-party sites. If we were required to fully fund the remediation of a site for
which we were originally assigned a partial share, the statutory framework would allow us to pursue rights to contribution from other PRPs. For
additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
International. Our international sales are subject to U.S. and non-U.S. governmental regulations and procurement policies and practices, including
regulations  relating  to  import-export  control,  investment,  exchange  controls  and  repatriation  of  earnings.  International  sales  are  also  subject  to
varying currency, political and economic risks.
Raw Materials, Parts, and Subassemblies
We  are  highly  dependent  on  the  availability  of  essential  materials,  parts  and  subassemblies  from  our  suppliers  and  subcontractors.  The  most
important raw materials required for our aerospace products are aluminum (sheet, plate, forgings and extrusions), titanium (sheet, plate, forgings
and extrusions) and composites (including carbon and boron). Although alternative sources generally exist for these raw materials, qualification of
the sources could take one year or more. Many major components and product equipment items are procured or subcontracted on a sole-source
basis with a number of companies.
Suppliers
We are dependent upon the ability of a large number of suppliers and subcontractors to meet performance specifications, quality standards and
delivery  schedules  at  our  anticipated  costs.  While  we  maintain  an  extensive  qualification  and  performance  surveillance  system  to  control  risk
associated  with  such  reliance  on  third  parties,  failure  of  suppliers  or  subcontractors  to  meet  commitments  could  adversely  affect  production
schedules and program/contract profitability, thereby jeopardizing our ability to fulfill commitments to our customers. We are also dependent on the
availability of energy sources, such as electricity, at affordable prices.
5

Table of Contents
Seasonality
No material portion of our business is considered to be seasonal.
Executive Officers of the Registrant
See “Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance” in Part III.
Other Information
Boeing was originally incorporated in the State of Washington in 1916 and reincorporated in Delaware in 1934. Our principal executive offices are
located at 100 N. Riverside Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60606 and our telephone number is (312) 544-2000.
General information about us can be found at www.boeing.com. The information contained on or connected to our website is not incorporated by
reference into this Annual Report on Form 10-K and should not be considered part of this or any other report filed with the Securities and Exchange
Commission  (SEC).  Our  Annual  Report  on  Form  10-K,  Quarterly  Reports  on  Form  10-Q  and  Current  Reports  on  Form  8-K,  as  well  as  any
amendments to those reports, are available free of charge through our website as soon as reasonably practicable after we file them with, or furnish
them to, the SEC. These reports may also be obtained at the SEC’s public reference room at 100 F Street, N.E., Washington, D.C. 20549. The SEC
also maintains a website at www.sec.gov that contains reports, proxy statements and other information regarding SEC registrants, including Boeing.
Forward-Looking Statements
This report, as well as our Annual Report to Shareholders, quarterly reports, and other filings we make with the SEC, press releases and other
written and oral communications, contains “forward-looking statements” within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995.
Words such as “may,” “should,” “expects,” “intends,” “projects,” “plans,” “believes,” “estimates,” “targets,” “anticipates” and similar expressions are
used  to  identify  these  forward-looking  statements.  Examples  of  forward-looking  statements  include  statements  relating  to  our  future  financial
condition and operating results, as well as any other statement that does not directly relate to any historical or current fact.
Forward-looking statements are based on our current expectations and assumptions, which may not prove to be accurate. These statements are not
guarantees and are subject to risks, uncertainties and changes in circumstances that are difficult to predict. Many factors, including those set forth in
the “Risk Factors” section below could cause actual results to differ materially and adversely from these forward-looking statements. Any forward-
looking statement speaks only as of the date on which it is made, and we assume no obligation to update or revise any forward-looking statement
whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise, except as required by law.
6

Table of Contents
Item 1A. Risk Factors
An investment in our common stock or debt securities involves risks and uncertainties and our actual results and future trends may differ materially
from our past or projected future performance. We urge investors to consider carefully the risk factors described below in evaluating the information
contained in this report.
Our Commercial Airplanes business depends heavily on commercial airlines, and is subject to unique risks.
Market conditions have a significant impact on demand for our commercial aircraft. The commercial aircraft market is predominantly driven by long-
term  trends  in  airline  passenger  and  cargo  traffic.  The  principal  factors  underlying  long-term  traffic  growth  are  sustained  economic  growth  and
political stability both in developed and emerging markets. Demand for our commercial aircraft is further influenced by airline profitability, availability
of  aircraft  financing,  world  trade  policies,  government-to-government  relations,  technological  changes,  price  and  other  competitive  factors,  fuel
prices,  terrorism,  epidemics  and  environmental  regulations.  Traditionally,  the  airline  industry  has  been  cyclical  and  very  competitive  and  has
experienced significant profit swings and constant challenges to be more cost competitive. In addition, availability of financing to non-U.S. customers
depends in part on the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Significant deterioration in the global economic environment, the airline industry
generally, or in the financial stability of one or more of our major customers could result in fewer new orders for aircraft or could cause customers to
seek  to  postpone  or  cancel  contractual  orders  and/or  payments  to  us,  which  could  result  in  lower  revenues,  profitability  and  cash  flows  and  a
reduction in our contractual backlog. In addition, because our commercial aircraft backlog consists of aircraft scheduled for delivery over a period of
several years, any of these macroeconomic, industry or customer impacts could unexpectedly affect deliveries over a long period.
We enter into firm fixed-price aircraft sales contracts with indexed price escalation clauses which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns
or if increases in our costs exceed the applicable escalation rate. Commercial aircraft sales contracts are often entered into years before the aircraft
are delivered. In order to account for economic fluctuations between the contract date and delivery date, aircraft pricing generally consists of a fixed
amount  as  modified  by  price  escalation  formulas  derived  from  labor,  commodity  and  other  price  indices.  Our  revenue  estimates  are  based  on
current expectations with respect to these escalation formulas, but the actual escalation amounts are outside of our control. Escalation factors can
fluctuate  significantly  from  period  to  period.  Changes  in  escalation  amounts  can  significantly  impact  revenues  and  operating  margins  in  our
Commercial Airplanes business.
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from a limited number of commercial airlines. We can make no assurance that any customer will
exercise purchase options, fulfill existing purchase commitments or purchase additional products or services from us. In addition, fleet decisions,
airline consolidations or financial challenges involving any of our major commercial airline customers could significantly reduce our revenues and
limit our opportunity to generate profits from those customers.
Our Commercial Airplanes business depends on our ability to maintain a healthy production system, achieve planned production rate
targets, successfully develop new aircraft or new derivative aircraft, and meet or exceed stringent performance and reliability standards.
The commercial aircraft business is extremely complex, involving extensive coordination and integration with U.S and non-U.S. suppliers, highly-
skilled labor from thousands of employees and other partners, and stringent regulatory requirements and performance and reliability standards. In
addition, the introduction of new aircraft programs and/or derivatives, such as the 787-10, 737 MAX and 777X, involves increased risks associated
with meeting development, testing, production and certification schedules. As
7

Table of Contents
a  result,  our  ability  to  deliver  aircraft  on  time,  satisfy  regulatory  and  customer  requirements,  and  achieve  or  maintain,  as  applicable,  program
profitability is subject to significant risks.
We must meet planned production rate and productivity improvement targets in order to satisfy customer demand and maintain our profitability. We
continue to increase production rates for the 737, 767 and 787 programs, while at the same time engaging in significant ongoing development of the
787-10, 737 MAX and 777X aircraft. In addition, we continue to seek opportunities to reduce the costs of building our aircraft, including working with
our  suppliers  to  reduce  supplier  costs,  identifying  and  implementing  productivity  improvements,  and  optimizing  how  we  manage  inventory.  If
production rate ramp-up efforts at any of our commercial aircraft assembly facilities are delayed or if our suppliers cannot timely deliver components
to us at the cost and rates necessary to achieve our targets, we may be unable to meet delivery schedules and the financial performance of one or
more of our programs may suffer.
Operational  challenges  impacting  the  production  system  for  one  or  more  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs  could  result  in  production  delays
and/or  failure  to  meet  customer  demand  for  new  aircraft,  either  of  which  would  negatively  impact  our  revenues  and  operating  margins. Our
commercial aircraft production system is extremely complex. Operational issues, including delays or defects in supplier components, failure to meet
internal performance plans, or delays or failures to achieve required regulatory certifications, could result in significant out-of-sequence work and
increased production costs, as well as delayed deliveries to customers, impacts to aircraft performance and/or increased warranty or fleet support
costs. Further, if we cannot efficiently and cost-effectively incorporate design changes into early build 787 aircraft, we may face further profitability
pressures on this program.
If our commercial airplanes fail to satisfy performance and reliability requirements, we could face additional costs and/or lower revenues. Developing
and manufacturing commercial aircraft that meet or exceed our performance and reliability standards, as well as those of customers and regulatory
agencies, can be costly and technologically challenging. These challenges are particularly significant with newer aircraft programs. Any failure of any
Boeing aircraft to satisfy performance or reliability requirements could result in disruption to our operations, higher costs and/or lower revenues.
Changes in levels of U.S. government defense spending or overall acquisition priorities could negatively impact our financial position
and results of operations.
We derive a substantial portion of our revenue from the U.S. government, primarily from defense related programs with the U.S. DoD . Levels of
U.S. defense spending in future periods are very difficult to predict and subject to significant risks. In addition, significant budgetary delays and
constraints have already resulted in reduced spending levels, and additional reductions may be forthcoming. In August 2011, the Budget Control Act
(The Act) established limits on U.S. government discretionary spending, including a reduction of defense spending by approximately $490 billion
between the 2012 and 2021 U.S. government fiscal years. The Act also provided that the defense budget would face “sequestration” cuts of up to an
additional $500 billion during that same period to the extent that discretionary spending limits are exceeded. The impact of sequestration cuts has
been reduced with respect to FY2016 and FY2017 following the enactment of The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 in November 2015. However, long-
term uncertainty remains with respect to overall levels of defense spending and it is likely that U.S. government discretionary spending levels will
continue to be subject to significant pressure, including risk of future sequestration cuts.
In  addition,  there  continues  to  be  significant  uncertainty  with  respect  to  program-level  appropriations  for  the U.S.  DoD and  other  government
agencies  (including  NASA)  within  the  overall  budgetary  framework  described  above.  While  the  FY2016  appropriations  enacted  December  2015
included funding for Boeing’s major programs,  such as F/A-18,  CH-47 Chinook, AH-64 Apache, KC-46A Tanker and P-8 programs, uncertainty
remains about how defense budgets in FY2017 and beyond will affect Boeing’s programs. We also expect that ongoing concerns regarding the U.S.
national debt will continue to place downward
8

Table of Contents
pressure on U.S. DoD spending levels. Future budget cuts, including cuts mandated by sequestration, or future procurement decisions associated
with the authorizations and appropriations process could result in reductions, cancellations, and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. Any of
these impacts could have a material effect on the results of the Company’s operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
In  addition,  as  a  result  of  the  significant  ongoing  uncertainty  with  respect  to  both  U.S.  defense  spending  levels  and  the  nature  of  the  threat
environment, we expect the U.S. DoD to continue to emphasize cost-cutting and other efficiency initiatives in its procurement processes. If we can
no longer  adjust successfully  to these  changing acquisition  priorities  and/or  fail  to meet  affordability  targets  set by the U.S. DoD customer, our
revenues and market share would be further impacted.
We conduct a significant portion of our business pursuant to U.S. government contracts, which are subject to unique risks.
In 2015 , 27% of  our  revenues  were  earned  pursuant  to  U.S.  government  contracts,  which  include  foreign  military  sales  through  the  U.S.
government. Business conducted pursuant to such contracts is subject to extensive procurement regulations and other unique risks.
Our sales to the U.S. government are subject to extensive procurement regulations, and changes to those regulations could increase our costs. New
procurement regulations, or changes to existing requirements, could increase our compliance costs or otherwise have a material impact on the
operating margins of our BDS business. These requirements may result in increased compliance costs, and we could be subject to additional costs
in  the  form  of  withheld  payments  and/or  reduced  future  business  if  we  fail  to  comply  with  these  requirements  in  the  future.  Compliance  costs
attributable  to  current  and  potential  future  procurement  regulations  such  as  these  could  negatively  impact  our  financial  condition  and  operating
results.
The U.S. government may modify, curtail or terminate one or more of our contracts. The U.S. government contracting party may modify, curtail or
terminate its contracts and subcontracts with us, without prior notice and either at its convenience or for default based on performance. In addition,
funding pursuant to our U.S. government contracts may be reduced or withheld as part of the U.S. Congressional appropriations process due to
fiscal constraints, changes in U.S. national security strategy and/or priorities or other reasons. Further uncertainty with respect to ongoing programs
could also result in the event that the U.S. government finances its operations through temporary funding measures such as “continuing resolutions”
rather than full-year appropriations. Any loss or anticipated loss or reduction of expected funding and/or modification, curtailment, or termination of
one or more large programs could have a material adverse effect on our earnings, cash flow and/or financial position.
We are subject to U.S. government inquiries and investigations, including periodic audits of costs that we determine are reimbursable under U.S.
government contracts. U.S. government agencies, including the Defense Contract Audit Agency and the Defense Contract Management Agency,
routinely  audit government  contractors.  These agencies review our performance  under contracts,  cost  structure  and compliance  with applicable
laws, regulations, and standards, as well as the adequacy of and our compliance with our internal control systems and policies. Any costs found to
be misclassified or inaccurately allocated to a specific contract will be deemed non-reimbursable, and to the extent already reimbursed, must be
refunded.  Any  inadequacies  in  our  systems  and  policies  could  result  in  withholds  on  billed  receivables,  penalties  and  reduced  future  business.
Furthermore,  if  any  audit,  inquiry  or  investigation  uncovers  improper  or  illegal  activities,  we  could  be  subject  to  civil  and  criminal  penalties  and
administrative sanctions, including termination of contracts, forfeiture of profits, suspension of payments, fines, and suspension or debarment from
doing business with the U.S. government. We also could suffer reputational harm if allegations of impropriety were made against us, even if such
allegations are later determined to be false.
9

Table of Contents
We enter into fixed-price contracts which could subject us to losses if we have cost overruns.
Our BDS business generated approximately 72% of its 2015 revenues from fixed-price contracts. While fixed-price contracts enable us to benefit
from performance improvements, cost reductions and efficiencies, they also subject us to the risk of reduced margins or incurring losses if we are
unable to achieve estimated costs and revenues. If our estimated costs exceed our estimated price, we recognize reach-forward losses which can
significantly affect our reported results. For example, during the second quarter of 2015, we recorded a reach-forward loss of $835 million on the
USAF KC-46A Tanker contract, primarily driven by additional costs attributable to design changes, testing and manufacturing complexity. The long
term nature of many of our contracts  makes  the process of estimating  costs  and revenues on fixed-price  contracts  inherently risky. Fixed-price
contracts often contain price incentives and penalties tied to performance which can be difficult to estimate and have significant impacts on margins.
In addition, some of our contracts have specific provisions relating to cost, schedule and performance.
Fixed-price  development  contracts  are  generally  subject  to  more  uncertainty  than  fixed-price  production  contracts.  Many  of  these  development
programs have highly complex designs. In addition, technical or quality issues that arise during development could lead to schedule delays and
higher costs to complete, which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. Examples of significant BDS
fixed-price development contracts include Commercial Crew, Saudi F-15, USAF KC-46A Tanker , and commercial and military satellites.
We enter into cost-type contracts which also carry risks.
Our BDS business generated approximately 28% of its 2015 revenues from cost-type contracting arrangements. Some of these are development
programs that have complex design and technical challenges. These cost-type programs typically have award or incentive fees that are subject to
uncertainty and may be earned over extended periods. In these cases the associated financial risks are primarily in reduced fees, lower profit rates
or program cancellation if cost, schedule or technical performance issues arise. Programs whose contracts are primarily cost-type include GMD ,
Proprietary and SLS programs.
We enter into contracts that include in-orbit incentive payments that subject us to risks.
Contracts in the commercial satellite industry and certain government satellite contracts include in-orbit incentive payments. These in-orbit payments
may be paid over time after final satellite acceptance or paid in full prior to final satellite acceptance. In both cases, the in-orbit incentive payment is
at risk if the satellite does not perform to specifications for up to 15 years after acceptance. The net present value of in-orbit incentive fees we
ultimately  expect  to  realize  is  recognized  as  revenue  in  the  construction  period.  If  the  satellite  fails  to  meet  contractual  performance  criteria,
customers  will not  be obligated  to  continue  making  in-orbit  payments  and/or  we  may  be  required  to  provide  refunds  to  the  customer  and  incur
significant charges.
Our  ability  to  deliver  products  and  services  that  satisfy  customer  requirements  is  heavily  dependent  on  the  performance  of  our
subcontractors and suppliers, as well as on the availability of raw materials and other components.
We  rely  on  other  companies  including  subcontractors  and  suppliers  to  provide  and  produce  raw  materials,  integrated  components  and  sub-
assemblies, and production commodities and to perform some of the services that we provide to our customers. If one or more of our suppliers or
subcontractors  experiences delivery delays or other performance problems, we may be unable to meet commitments  to our customers  or incur
additional  costs.  In  addition,  if  one  or  more  of  the  raw  materials  on  which  we  depend  (such  as  aluminum,  titanium  or  composites)  becomes
unavailable or is available only at very high prices, we may be unable to deliver one or more of our products in a timely fashion or at budgeted costs.
In some instances,
10

Table of Contents
we depend upon a single source of supply. Any service disruption from one of these suppliers, either due to circumstances beyond the supplier’s
control, such as geo-political developments, or as a result of performance problems or financial difficulties, could have a material adverse effect on
our ability to meet commitments to our customers or increase our operating costs. For example, we continue to monitor political unrest involving
Russia and Ukraine, where we and some of our suppliers source titanium products and/or have operations.
We use estimates in accounting for many contracts and programs. Changes in our estimates could adversely affect our future financial
results.
Contract and program accounting require judgment relative to assessing risks, estimating revenues and costs and making assumptions for schedule
and technical issues. Due to the size and nature of many of our contracts and programs, the estimation of total revenues and cost at completion is
complicated and subject to many variables. Assumptions have to be made regarding the length of time to complete the contract or program because
costs also include expected increases in wages and employee benefits, material prices and allocated fixed costs. Incentives or penalties related to
performance on contracts are considered in estimating sales and profit rates, and are recorded when there is sufficient information for us to assess
anticipated performance. Suppliers’ assertions are also assessed and considered in estimating costs and profit rates. Estimates of award fees are
also used in sales and profit rates based on actual and anticipated awards.
With  respect  to  each  of  our  commercial  aircraft  programs,  inventoriable  production  costs  (including  overhead),  program  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring costs and routine warranty costs are accumulated and charged as cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. A
program consists of the estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for
delivery under existing and anticipated contracts limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates. To establish the relationship of
sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates of (a) the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period over
which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced and (c) the units’ expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other
non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total program. Several factors determine accounting quantity, including firm orders, letters of
intent from prospective customers and market studies. Changes to customer or model mix, production costs and rates, learning curve, changes to
price escalation indices, costs of derivative aircraft, supplier performance, customer and supplier negotiations/settlements, supplier claims and/or
certification issues can impact these estimates. Any such change in estimates relating to program accounting may adversely affect future financial
performance.
Because of the significance of the judgments and estimation processes described above, materially different sales and profit amounts could be
recorded if we used different assumptions or if the underlying circumstances were to change. Changes in underlying assumptions, circumstances or
estimates may adversely affect future period financial performance. For additional information on our accounting policies for recognizing sales and
profits, see our discussion under “Management’s Discussion and Analysis – Critical Accounting Policies – Contract Accounting/Program Accounting”
on pages 44 – 45 and Note 1 to our Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 55 – 66 of this Form 10-K.
11

Table of Contents
Competition within our markets and with respect to the products we sell may reduce our future contracts and sales.
The  markets  in  which  we  operate  are  highly  competitive  and  one  or  more  of  our  competitors  may  have  more  extensive  or  more  specialized
engineering, manufacturing and marketing capabilities than we do in some areas. In our Commercial Airplanes business, we anticipate increasing
competition  among  non-U.S.  aircraft  manufacturers  and  service  providers  in  one  or  more  of  our  market  segments.  In  our  BDS  business,  we
anticipate that the effects of defense industry consolidation, fewer large and new programs and new priorities, including near and long-term cost
competitiveness, of our U.S. DoD and international customers will intensify competition for many of our products and services. Furthermore, we are
facing increased international competition and cross-border consolidation of competition. There can be no assurance that we will be able to compete
successfully against our current or future competitors  or that the competitive pressures we face will not result in reduced revenues and market
share.
We derive a significant portion of our revenues from non-U.S. sales and are subject to the risks of doing business in other countries.
In 2015 , non-U.S. customers  accounted for approximately 59% of  our revenues.  We expect  that  non-U.S.  sales  will  continue  to  account  for  a
significant portion of our revenues for the foreseeable future. As a result, we are subject to risks of doing business internationally, including:
•
changes in regulatory requirements;
•
domestic  and  international  government  policies,  including  requirements  to  expend  a  portion  of  program  funds  locally  and  governmental
industrial cooperation or participation requirements;
•
fluctuations in international currency exchange rates;
•
volatility in international political and economic environments and changes in non-U.S. national priorities and budgets, which can lead to
delays or fluctuations in orders;
•
the complexity and necessity of using non-U.S. representatives and consultants;
•
the uncertainty of the ability of non-U.S. customers to finance purchases, including the availability of financing from the Export-Import Bank
of the United States;
•
uncertainties and restrictions concerning the availability of funding credit or guarantees;
•
imposition of domestic and international taxes, export controls, tariffs, embargoes, sanctions and other trade restrictions;
•
the difficulty of management and operation of an enterprise spread over many countries;
•
compliance with a variety of international laws, as well as U.S. laws affecting the activities of U.S. companies abroad; and
•
unforeseen developments and conditions, including terrorism, war, epidemics and international conflicts.
While the impact of these factors is difficult to predict, any one or more of these factors could adversely affect our operations in the future.
The  outcome  of  litigation  and  of  government  inquiries  and  investigations  involving  our  business  is  unpredictable  and  an  adverse
decision in any such matter could have a material effect on our financial position and results of operations.
We are involved in a number of litigation matters. These matters may divert financial and management resources that would otherwise be used to
benefit our operations. No assurances can be given that the results of these matters will be favorable to us. An adverse resolution of any of these
lawsuits could have
12

Table of Contents
a material impact on our financial position and results of operations. In addition, we are subject to extensive regulation under the laws of the United
States and its various states, as well as other jurisdictions in which we operate. As a result, we are sometimes subject to government inquiries and
investigations of our business due, among other things, to our business relationships with the U.S. government, the heavily regulated nature of our
industry, and in the case of environmental proceedings, our current or past ownership of certain property. Any such inquiry or investigation could
potentially result in an adverse ruling against us, which could have a material impact on our financial position and results of operations.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers based in the United States, and in
certain types of Boeing aircraft, which exposes us to concentration risks.
A significant portion of our customer financing portfolio is concentrated among certain customers and in distinct geographic regions, particularly in
the United States. Our portfolio is also concentrated by varying degrees across Boeing aircraft product types, most notably 717 and 747-8F aircraft.
If one or more customers holding a significant portion of our portfolio assets experiences financial difficulties or otherwise defaults on or does not
renew  its  leases  with  us  at  their  expiration,  and  we  are  unable  to  redeploy  the  aircraft  on  reasonable  terms,  or  if  the  types  of  aircraft  that  are
concentrated in our portfolio suffer greater than expected declines in value, our earnings, cash flows and/or financial position could be materially
adversely affected.
We may be unable to obtain debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments at competitive rates, on commercially reasonable
terms or in sufficient amounts.
We depend, in part, upon the issuance of debt to fund our operations and contractual commitments. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , our
airplane financing commitments totaled $16,283 million and $16,723 million . If we require additional funding in order to fund outstanding financing
commitments or meet other business requirements, our market liquidity may not be sufficient. A number of factors could cause us to incur increased
borrowing costs and to have greater difficulty accessing public and private markets for debt. These factors include disruptions or declines in the
global capital markets and/or a decline in our financial performance, outlook or credit ratings. The occurrence of any or all of these events may
adversely affect our ability to fund our operations and contractual or financing commitments.
We may not realize the anticipated benefits of mergers, acquisitions, joint ventures/strategic alliances or divestitures.
As part of our business strategy, we may merge with or acquire businesses and/or form joint ventures and strategic alliances. Whether we realize
the anticipated benefits from these acquisitions and related activities depends, in part, upon our ability to integrate the operations of the acquired
business, the performance of the underlying product and service portfolio, and the performance of the management team and other personnel of the
acquired  operations.  Accordingly,  our  financial  results  could  be  adversely  affected  by  unanticipated  performance  issues,  legacy  liabilities,
transaction-related charges, amortization of expenses related to intangibles, charges for impairment of long-term assets, credit guarantees, partner
performance and indemnifications. Consolidations of joint ventures could also impact our reported results of operations or financial position. While
we believe that we have established appropriate and adequate procedures and processes to mitigate these risks, there is no assurance that these
transactions will be successful. We also may make strategic divestitures from time to time. These transactions may result in continued financial
involvement in the divested businesses, such as through guarantees or other financial arrangements, following the transaction. Nonperformance by
those divested businesses could affect our future financial results through additional payment obligations, higher costs or asset write-downs.
13

Table of Contents
Our insurance coverage may be inadequate to cover all significant risk exposures.
We  are  exposed  to  liabilities  that  are  unique  to  the  products  and  services  we  provide.  We  maintain  insurance  for  certain  risks  and,  in  some
circumstances,  we  may  receive  indemnification  from  the  U.S.  government.  The  amount  of  our  insurance  coverage  may  not  cover  all  claims  or
liabilities and we may be forced to bear substantial costs. For example, liabilities arising from the use of certain of our products, such as aircraft
technologies, missile systems, border security systems, anti-terrorism technologies, and/or air traffic management systems may not be insurable on
commercially reasonable terms. While some of these products are shielded from liability within the U.S. under the SAFETY Act provisions of the
2002 Homeland Security Act, no such protection is available outside the U.S., potentially resulting in significant liabilities. The amount of insurance
coverage we maintain may be inadequate to cover these or other claims or liabilities.
Business disruptions could seriously affect our future sales and financial condition or increase our costs and expenses.
Our business may be impacted by disruptions including threats to physical security, information technology or cyber-attacks or failures, damaging
weather or other acts of nature and pandemics or other public health crises. Any of these disruptions could affect our internal operations or our
ability to deliver products and services to our customers. Any significant production delays, or any destruction, manipulation or improper use of our
data, information systems or networks could impact our sales, increase our expenses and/or have an adverse effect on the reputation of Boeing and
of our products and services.
Some of our and our suppliers’ workforces are represented by labor unions, which may lead to work stoppages.
Approximately 61,000 employees, which constitute 38% of our total workforce, were union represented as of December 31, 2015 . We experienced
a work stoppage in 2008 when a labor strike halted commercial aircraft and certain BMA program production. We may experience additional work
stoppages in the future, which could adversely affect our business. We cannot predict how stable our relationships, currently with 11 U.S. labor
organizations and 6 non-U.S. labor organizations, will be or whether we will be able to meet the unions’ requirements without impacting our financial
condition. The unions may also limit our flexibility in dealing with our workforce. Union actions at suppliers can also affect us. Work stoppages and
instability in our union relationships could delay the production and/or development of our products, which could strain relationships with customers
and cause a loss of revenues which would adversely affect our operations.
We have substantial pension and other postretirement benefit obligations, which have a material impact on our earnings, shareholders '
equity and cash flows from operations and could have significant adverse impacts in future periods.
We have qualified defined benefit pension plans that cover the majority of our employees. Potential pension contributions include both mandatory
amounts required under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act and discretionary contributions to improve the plans ' funded status. The
extent of future contributions depends heavily on market factors such as the discount rate and the actual return on plan assets. We estimate future
contributions to these plans using assumptions with respect to these and other items. Changes to those assumptions could have a significant effect
on future contributions as well as on our annual pension costs and/or result in a significant change to shareholders ' equity. For U.S. government
contracts, we allocate pension costs to individual contracts based on U.S. Cost Accounting Standards which can also affect contract profitability. We
also  provide  other  postretirement  benefits  to  certain  of  our  employees,  consisting  principally  of  health  care  coverage  for  eligible  retirees  and
qualifying dependents. Our estimates of future costs associated with these benefits are also subject to assumptions, including
14

Table of Contents
estimates of the level of medical cost increases. For a discussion regarding how our financial statements can be affected by pension and other
postretirement plan accounting policies, see “ Management ' s Discussion and Analysis - Critical Accounting Policies - Pension Plans ” on pages 46
– 47 of this Form 10-K. Although GAAP expense and pension or other postretirement benefit contributions are not directly related, the key economic
factors that affect GAAP expense would also likely affect the amount of cash or stock we would contribute to our plans.
Our operations expose us to the risk of material environmental liabilities.
We  are  subject  to  various  federal,  state,  local  and  non-U.S.  laws  and  regulations  related  to  environmental  protection,  including  the  discharge,
treatment, storage, disposal and remediation of hazardous substances and wastes. We could incur substantial costs, including cleanup costs, fines
and civil or criminal sanctions, as well as third-party claims for property damage or personal injury, if we were to violate or become liable under
environmental laws or regulations. In some cases, we may be subject to such costs due to environmental impacts attributable to our current or past
manufacturing  operations  or  the  operations  of  companies  we  have  acquired.  In  other  cases,  we  may  become  subject  to  such  costs  due  to  an
indemnification  agreement  between  us  and  a  third  party  relating  to  such  environmental  liabilities.  In  addition,  new  laws  and  regulations,  more
stringent enforcement of existing laws and regulations, the discovery of previously unknown contamination or the imposition of new remediation
requirements could result in additional costs. For additional information relating to environmental contingencies, see Note 11 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Unauthorized access to our or our customers’ information and systems could negatively impact our business.
We face certain security threats, including threats to the confidentiality, availability and integrity of our data and systems. We maintain an extensive
network of technical security controls, policy enforcement mechanisms, monitoring systems and management oversight in order to address these
threats.  While  these  measures  are  designed  to  prevent,  detect  and  respond  to  unauthorized  activity  in  our  systems,  certain  types  of  attacks,
including  cyber-attacks,  could  result  in  significant  financial  or  information  losses  and/or  reputational  harm.  In  addition,  we  manage  information
technology systems for certain customers. Many of these customers face similar security threats. If we cannot prevent the unauthorized access,
release and/or corruption of our customers’ confidential, classified or personally identifiable information, our reputation could be damaged, and/or we
could face financial losses.
Item 1B. Unresolved Staff Comments
Not applicable
15

Table of Contents
Item 2. Properties
We  occupied  approximately 83  million square  feet  of  floor  space  on December  31,  2015 for  manufacturing,  warehousing,  engineering,
administration and other productive uses, of which approximately 96% was located in the United States. The following table provides a summary of
the floor space by business as of December 31, 2015 :
(Square feet in thousands)
Owned
Leased
Government
Owned (1)
Total
Commercial Airplanes
39,761
5,806
45,567
Defense, Space & Security
26,047
8,091
34,138
Other (2)
2,400
643
318
3,361
Total
68,208
14,540
318
83,066
(1) Excludes rent-free space furnished by U.S. government landlord of 272 square feet.
(2) Other includes BCC; EO&T; SSG; and our Corporate Headquarters.
At December 31, 2015 , we occupied in excess of 75.3 million square feet of floor space at the following major locations:
•
Commercial Airplanes – Greater Seattle, WA; Greater Charleston, SC; Portland, OR; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Greater Salt Lake City, UT;
Australia; and Canada
•
Defense, Space & Security – Greater St. Louis, MO; Greater Los Angeles, CA; Greater Seattle, WA; Philadelphia, PA; Mesa, AZ; San Antonio,
TX; Huntsville, AL; Greater Washington, DC; Oklahoma City, OK; and Houston, TX
•
Other – Chicago, IL and Greater Seattle, WA
Most runways and taxiways that we use are located on airport properties owned by others and are used jointly with others. Our rights to use such
facilities are provided for under long-term leases with municipal, county or other government authorities. In addition, the U.S. government furnishes
us certain office space, installations and equipment at U.S. government bases for use in connection with various contract activities.
We believe that our major properties are adequate for our present needs and, as supplemented by planned improvements and construction, expect
them to remain adequate for the foreseeable future.
Item 3. Legal Proceedings
Currently, we are involved in a number of legal proceedings. For a discussion of contingencies related to legal proceedings, see Note 20 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements, which is hereby incorporated by reference.
Item 4. Mine Safety Disclosures
Not applicable
16

Table of Contents
PART II
Item 5. Market for Registrant’s Common Equity, Related Stockholder Matters and Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The principal market for our common stock is the New York Stock Exchange where it trades under the symbol BA. As of February 4, 2016 , there
were 123,824 shareholders of record. Additional information required by this item is incorporated by reference from Note 22 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Issuer Purchases of Equity Securities
The following table provides information about purchases of our common stock we made during the quarter ended December 31, 2015 :
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Total Number
of Shares
Purchased (1)
Average
Price Paid per
Share
Total Number of
Shares Purchased
as Part of Publicly
Announced Plans
or Programs
Approximate Dollar
Value of Shares That May Yet
be Purchased Under the
Plans or Programs (2)
10/1/2015 thru 10/31/2015
3,582,002
$139.77
3,577,758
$5,500
11/1/2015 thru 11/30/2015
1,718,412
145.83
1,714,600
5,250
12/1/2015 thru 12/31/2015
10,579
146.09
14,000
Total
5,310,993
$141.74
5,292,358
(1)  We purchased an aggregate of 5,292,358 shares of our common stock in the open market pursuant to our repurchase plan and 18,349 shares
transferred to us from employees in satisfaction of minimum tax withholding obligations associated with the vesting of restricted  stock units
during the period. We purchased 286 shares in swap transactions.
(2)  On December 14, 2015, we announced a new repurchase plan for up to $14 billion of common stock, replacing the plan previously authorized in
2014.
17

Table of Contents
Item 6. Selected Financial Data
Five-Year Summary (Unaudited)
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
Operations
Revenues:
Commercial Airplanes
$66,048
$59,990
$52,981
$49,127
$36,171
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
13,482
13,500
15,275
15,373
14,100
Network & Space Systems
7,751
8,003
8,512
7,911
8,964
Global Services & Support
9,155
9,378
9,410
9,323
8,912
Total Defense, Space & Security
30,388
30,881
33,197
32,607
31,976
Boeing Capital
413
416
408
468
547
Unallocated items, eliminations, and other
(735)
(525)
37
(504)
41
Total revenues
$96,114
$90,762
$86,623
$81,698
$68,735
General and administrative expense
3,525
3,767
3,956
3,717
3,408
Research and development expense
3,331
3,047
3,071
3,298
3,918
Other (loss)/income, net
(13)
(3)
56
62
47
Net earnings from continuing operations
$5,176
$5,446
$4,586
$3,903
$4,011
Net (loss)/gain on disposal of discontinued operations, net of tax
(1)
(3)
7
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
$3,900
$4,018
Basic earnings per share from continuing operations
7.52
7.47
6.03
5.15
5.38
Diluted earnings per share from continuing operations
7.44
7.38
5.96
5.11
5.33
Cash dividends declared
$2,575
$2,210
$1,642
$1,360
$1,263
Per share
3.82
3.10
2.185
1.81
1.70
Additions to Property, plant and equipment
2,450
2,236
2,098
1,703
1,713
Depreciation of Property, plant and equipment
1,357
1,414
1,338
1,248
1,119
Year-end workforce
161,400
165,500
168,400
174,400
171,700
Financial position at December 31
Total assets (1)
$94,408
$92,921
$90,014
$84,528
$77,206
Working capital (1)
17,822
19,534
19,830
16,667
11,287
Property, plant and equipment, net
12,076
11,007
10,224
9,660
9,313
Cash and cash equivalents
11,302
11,733
9,088
10,341
10,049
Short-term and other investments
750
1,359
6,170
3,217
1,223
Total debt
9,964
9,070
9,635
10,409
12,371
Customer financing assets
3,570
3,561
3,971
4,420
4,772
Shareholders’ equity
6,335
8,665
14,875
5,867
3,515
Common shares outstanding (in millions)
666.6
706.7
747.4
755.6
744.7
Contractual Backlog:
Commercial Airplanes
$431,408
$440,118
$372,980
$317,287
$293,303
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
20,019
21,119
23,580
27,878
22,091
Network & Space Systems
7,368
8,935
9,832
10,078
9,429
Global Services & Support
17,800
16,920
16,269
17,112
14,834
Total Defense, Space & Security
45,187
46,974
49,681
55,068
46,354
Total contractual backlog
$476,595
$487,092
$422,661
$372,355
$339,657
Cash dividends have been paid on common stock every year since 1942.
(1)  
Prior year balances of deferred tax assets/(liabilities) have been revised to reflect current year presentation. See Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
18

Table of Contents
Item 7. Management’s Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations
Consolidated Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Overview
We are a global market leader in design, development, manufacture, sale, service and support of commercial jetliners, military aircraft, satellites,
missile defense, human space flight and launch systems and services. We are one of the two major manufacturers of 100+ seat airplanes for the
worldwide commercial  airline industry  and one of the largest  defense contractors  in the U.S.  While our principal operations are in the U.S.,  we
conduct operations in many countries and rely on an extensive network of international partners, key suppliers and subcontractors.
Our strategy is centered on successful execution in healthy core businesses – Commercial Airplanes and Defense, Space & Security ( BDS ) –
supplemented and supported by Boeing Capital ( BCC ). Taken together, these core businesses have historically generated substantial earnings
and cash flow that permit us to invest in new products and services. We focus on producing the products and providing the services that the market
demands and we price our products and services to provide a fair return for our shareholders while continuing to find new ways to improve efficiency
and quality. Commercial Airplanes is committed to being the leader in commercial aviation by offering airplanes and services that deliver superior
design, efficiency and value to customers around the world. BDS integrates its resources in defense, intelligence, communications, security, space
and services to deliver capability-driven solutions to its customers at reduced costs. Our BDS strategy is to leverage our core businesses to capture
key next-generation programs while expanding our presence in adjacent and international markets, underscored by an intense focus on growth and
productivity.  Our  strategy  also  benefits  us  as  the  cyclicality  of  commercial  and  defense  markets  sometimes  offset. BCC facilitates,  arranges,
structures and provides selective financing solutions for our Boeing customers.
Consolidated Results of Operations
Earnings From Operations and Core Operating Earnings (Non-GAAP) The following table summarizes key indicators of consolidated results of
operations:
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$96,114
$90,762
$86,623
GAAP
Earnings from operations
7,443
7,473
6,562
Operating margins
7.7%
8.2%
7.6%
Effective income tax rate
27.7%
23.7%
26.4%
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
Diluted earnings per share
$7.44
$7.38
$5.96
Non-GAAP (1)
Core operating earnings
$7,741
$8,860
$7,876
Core operating margin
8.1%
9.8%
9.1%
Core earnings per share
$7.72
$8.60
$7.07
(1)
These measures exclude certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. See page 43 for important information about
these non-GAAP measures and reconciliations to the most comparable GAAP measures.
19

Table of Contents
Revenues
The following table summarizes Revenues:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Commercial Airplanes
$66,048
$59,990
$52,981
Defense, Space & Security
30,388
30,881
33,197
Boeing Capital
413
416
408
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(735)
(525)
37
Total
$96,114
$90,762
$86,623
Revenues in 2015 increased by $5,352 million or 6% compared with 2014 . Commercial Airplanes revenues increased by $6,058 million or 10% due
to higher new airplane deliveries and mix . BDS revenues decreased by $493 million or 2% due to lower revenues in all three segments. Revenues
in 2014 increased by $4,139 million or 5% compared with 2013. Commercial Airplanes revenues increased by $7,009 million primarily due to higher
new airplane deliveries. BDS revenues decreased by $2,316 million due to lower revenues in all three segments. The changes in unallocated items,
eliminations and other in 2015 , 2014 and 2013 primarily reflect the timing of eliminations for intercompany aircraft deliveries.
Earnings From Operations
The following table summarizes Earnings from operations:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Commercial Airplanes
$5,157
$6,411
$5,795
Defense, Space & Security
3,274
3,133
3,235
Boeing Capital
50
92
107
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense
(298)
(1,387)
(1,314)
Other unallocated items and eliminations
(740)
(776)
(1,261)
Earnings from operations (GAAP)
$7,443
$7,473
$6,562
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense
298
1,387
1,314
Core operating earnings (Non-GAAP)
$7,741
$8,860
$7,876
Earnings from operations in 2015 decreased by $30 million compared with 2014 primarily reflecting a fourth quarter charge of $885 million related to
the  747  program  at  Commercial  Airplanes  and  higher  charges  of $410  million related  to  the USAF  KC-46A  Tanker recorded  by  Commercial
Airplanes and our Boeing Military Aircraft ( BMA ) segment, partially offset by lower unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense of
$1,089 million .
Earnings from operations in 2014 increased by $911 million compared with 2013 primarily reflecting higher earnings at Commercial Airplanes of
$616 million and lower unallocated items and eliminations of $485 million. The decrease in unallocated items is due to the A-12 litigation settlement
of $406 million which was recorded in 2013 and lower 2014 deferred compensation of $194 million. The A-12 aircraft litigation settlement resulted in
the Company recording a $406 million pre-tax charge in 2013, which consisted of writing-off A-12 inventory, recorded as cost of sales, and providing
three EA-18G Growlers at no cost to the U.S. Navy, recorded as a reduction in revenues.
20

Table of Contents
During the second quarter of 2015 and of 2014 , we recorded reach-forward losses of $835 million and $425 million on the USAF KC-46A Tanker
contract. $513 million of the 2015 charge was recorded at Commercial Airplanes and $322 million at our BMA segment. $238 million of the 2014
charge was recorded at Commercial Airplanes and $187 million at our BMA segment.
Core operating earnings in 2015 decreased by $1,119 million compared with 2014 primarily due to the 2015 747 charge and higher USAF KC-46A
Tanker charges. Core operating earnings in 2014 increased by $984 million compared with 2013 primarily reflecting higher earnings at Commercial
Airplanes and the 2013 A-12 charge.
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and Other The most significant items included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other are shown in the
following table:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Share-based plans
($76)
($67)
($95)
Deferred compensation
(63)
(44)
(238)
Eliminations and other
(601)
(665)
(522)
Litigation settlements
(406)
Sub-total (included in core operating earnings*)
(740)
(776)
(1,261)
Pension
(421)
(1,469)
(1,374)
Postretirement
123
82
60
Pension and other postretirement benefit expense
(excluded from core operating earnings*)
(298)
(1,387)
(1,314)
Total unallocated items, eliminations and other
($1,038)
($2,163)
($2,575)
* Core operating earnings is a Non-GAAP measure that excludes certain components of pension and other postretirement benefit expense. See
page 43 .
Deferred compensation expense increased by $19 million in 2015 and decreased by $194 million in 2014, primarily driven by changes in broad stock
market conditions and our stock price.
Eliminations and other unallocated expense decreased by $64 million in 2015 primarily due to the timing of the elimination of profit on intercompany
aircraft deliveries and expense allocations. The increase of $143 million in 2014 was primarily due to insurance recoveries which were recorded in
the third quarter of 2013.
Litigation settlements include the 2013 charge of $406 million related to the settlement of the A-12 litigation.
21

Table of Contents
Net periodic benefit cost related to pension totaled $2,786 million , $2,208 million and $3,449 million in 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. The
components of net periodic benefit cost are shown in the following table:
Pension
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Service cost
$1,764
$1,661
$1,886
Interest cost
2,990
3,058
2,906
Expected return on plan assets
(4,031)
(4,169)
(3,874)
Amortization of prior service costs
196
177
196
Recognized net actuarial loss
1,577
1,020
2,231
Settlement/curtailment/other losses
290
461
104
Net periodic benefit cost
$2,786
$2,208
$3,449
The increase in 2015 net periodic benefit cost related to pension is primarily due to $557 million of higher amortization of actuarial losses due to
lower discount rates. The decrease in 2014 is primarily due to lower amortization of actuarial losses due to higher discount rates which more than
offset higher 2014 curtailment charges.
A portion of net periodic benefit cost is recognized in Earnings from operations in the period incurred and the remainder is included in inventory at
the end of the reporting period and recorded in Earnings from operations in subsequent periods. Costs are allocated to the business segments as
described in Note 21 .
Net periodic benefit costs included in Earnings from operations were as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
Pension
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Allocated to business segments
($1,945)
($1,746)
($1,662)
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(421)
(1,469)
(1,374)
Total
($2,366)
($3,215)
($3,036)
Unallocated pension expense recognized  in earnings decreased  by $1,048 million in 2015 primarily due to lower amortization  of pension costs
capitalized as inventory in prior years and lower curtailment charges in 2015. Unallocated pension expense in 2014 reflects pension charges of $395
million, primarily for pension curtailment costs.
Other Earnings Items
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Earnings from operations
$7,443
$7,473
$6,562
Other (loss)/income, net
(13)
(3)
56
Interest and debt expense
(275)
(333)
(386)
Earnings before income taxes
7,155
7,137
6,232
Income tax expense
(1,979)
(1,691)
(1,646)
Net earnings from continuing operations
$5,176
$5,446
$4,586
22

Table of Contents
Interest and debt expense decreased by $58 million in 2015 as a result of higher interest capitalized on construction in progress. Interest and debt
expense decreased by $53 million in 2014 as a result of lower weighted average debt balances.
Our effective income tax rates were 27.7% , 23.7% and 26.4% for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Our 2015
effective tax rate was higher than 2014 primarily due to tax benefits of $524 million recorded in the second quarter of 2014 related to tax basis
adjustments and settlement of the 2007 - 2010 federal tax audits. Our 2014 effective tax rate was lower than 2013 primarily due to the tax benefits of
$524 million recorded in the second quarter of 2014.
For additional discussion related to Income Taxes, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Total Costs and Expenses (“Cost of Sales”)
Cost of sales, for both products and services, consists primarily of raw materials, parts, sub-assemblies, labor, overhead and subcontracting costs.
Our Commercial Airplanes segment predominantly uses program accounting to account for cost of sales and BDS predominantly uses contract
accounting.  Under  program  accounting,  cost  of  sales  for  each  commercial  airplane  program  equals  the  product  of  (i)  revenue  recognized  in
connection  with  customer  deliveries  and  (ii)  the  estimated  cost  of  sales  percentage  applicable  to  the  total  remaining  program.  Under  contract
accounting,  the  amount  reported  as  cost  of  sales  is  determined  by  applying  the  estimated  cost  of  sales  percentage  to  the  amount  of  revenue
recognized.
The following table summarizes cost of sales:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
Change
2014
2013
Change
Cost of sales
$82,088
$76,752
$5,336
$76,752
$73,268
$3,484
Cost of sales as a % of revenues
85.4%
84.6%
0.8%
84.6%
84.6%
0.0%
Cost of sales in 2015 increased by $5,336 million , or 7% , compared with the same period in 2014 , primarily driven by the $5,352 million , or 6% ,
increase  in  revenues.  Cost  of  sales  at  Commercial  Airplanes increased by $6,846  million ,  or 14% ,  primarily  driven  by  the 10% increase  in
revenues. Cost of sales at BDS decreased by $252 million , or 1% , primarily due to the 2% reduction in revenues. Cost of sales as a percentage of
revenue  was  approximately 85.4% in  2015  compared  with 84.6% in  2014  primarily  driven  by  the  2015  747  charge  and  higher  KC-46A  Tanker
charges. Cost of sales in 2014 increased by $3,484 million, or 5%, compared with the same period in 2013, primarily driven by the increase in
revenue. Cost of sales at Commercial Airplanes increased by $6,265 million, or 14%, primarily driven by the 13% increase in revenues. Cost of
sales at BDS decreased by $2,085 million, or 8%, primarily due to the 7% reduction in revenues.
Research and Development The following table summarizes our Research and development expense:
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Commercial Airplanes
$2,340
$1,881
$1,807
Defense, Space & Security
986
1,158
1,215
Other
5
8
49
Total
$3,331
$3,047
$3,071
23

Table of Contents
Research and development expense in 2015 increased by $284 million compared to 2014 primarily due to higher 777X spending at Commercial
Airplanes which more than offset lower spending at BDS. Research and development expense in 2014 decreased by $24 million compared to 2013.
In 2014 , Commercial Airplanes spending increased on 777X, 787-10 and 737 MAX, partially offset by lower spending on the 787-9.
Backlog
Our backlog at December 31 was as follows:
(Dollars in millions)
2015
2014
2013
Contractual Backlog:
Commercial Airplanes
$431,408
$440,118
$372,980
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
20,019
21,119
23,580
Network & Space Systems
7,368
8,935
9,832
Global Services & Support
17,800
16,920
16,269
Total Defense, Space & Security
45,187
46,974
49,681
Total contractual backlog
$476,595
$487,092
$422,661
Unobligated backlog
$12,704
$15,299
$18,267
Contractual backlog of unfilled orders excludes purchase options, announced orders for which definitive contracts have not been executed, and
unobligated U.S. and non-U.S. government contract funding. The decrease in contractual backlog at December 31, 2015 compared with December
31,  2014  was  primarily  due  to  deliveries  in  excess  of  net  orders.  The  increase  in  contractual  backlog  at  December  31,  2014  compared  with
December 31, 2013 was primarily due to commercial airplane orders and reclassifications from unobligated backlog related to incremental funding.
The increase was partially offset by commercial airplane deliveries and revenues recognized on awarded contracts .
Unobligated  backlog  includes  U.S.  and  non-U.S.  government  definitive  contracts  for  which  funding  has  not  been  authorized.  The  decreases  in
unobligated  backlog  in 2015 and 2014 were  primarily  due  to  reclassifications  to  contractual  backlog  related  to  incremental  funding  for  BDS
contracts, partially offset by contract awards.
Additional Considerations
KC-46A Tanker In 2011, we were awarded a contract from the U.S. Air Force ( USAF ) to design, develop, manufacture and deliver four next
generation  aerial  refueling  tankers.  The  KC-46A  Tanker  is  a  derivative  of  our  767  commercial  aircraft.  This Engineering,  Manufacturing  and
Development ( EMD )  contract  is  a  fixed-price  incentive  fee  contract  valued  at  $4.9  billion  and  involves  highly  complex  designs  and  systems
integration. We have also begun work on low rate initial production ( LRIP ) aircraft for the USAF. The USAF is expected to authorize two low rate
initial production lots in 2016 for a total of 19 aircraft, subject to satisfactory progress being made on the EMD contract .
In second quarter 2014, we recorded a reach-forward loss of $425 million on the EMD contract. In second quarter 2015, we recorded an additional
reach-forward loss of $835 million. $513 million of this loss was recorded at our Commercial Airplanes segment and the remaining $322 million was
recorded in our BMA segment. The $835 million loss includes $670 million related to the EMD contract and $165 million related to LRIP aircraft. The
reach-forward loss on the EMD contract was driven primarily by design changes required in the aircraft fuels and aerial refueling systems which
were identified as we prepared for and conducted ground and flight testing. Other costs include additional qualification and certification testing as
well as investments that will enable us to meet our delivery commitments in 2017. The reach-forward
24

Table of Contents
loss related to LRIP aircraft was primarily driven by increased manufacturing complexity resulting from design changes. As with any development
program, this program remains subject to additional reach-forward losses if we experience technical or quality issues, schedule delays or increased
costs.
We  continue  to  expect  to  meet  our  commitment  to  deliver  18  fully  operational  aircraft  to  the  customer  by  August  2017.  The  contract  contains
production options for both LRIP aircraft and full rate production aircraft. If all options under the contract are exercised, we expect to deliver 179
aircraft for a total expected contract value of approximately $30 billion.
Russia/Ukraine We continue to monitor political unrest involving Russia and Ukraine, where we and some of our suppliers source titanium products
and/or have operations. A number of our commercial customers also have operations in Russia and Ukraine. To date, we have not experienced any
significant disruptions to production or deliveries. Should suppliers or customers experience disruption, our production and/or deliveries could be
materially impacted.
Export-Import  Bank  of  the  United  States Many  of  our  non-U.S.  customers  finance  purchases  through  the  Export-Import  Bank  of  the  United
States. Following the expiration of the bank’s charter on June 30, 2015, the bank’s charter was reauthorized in December 2015. The bank is now
authorized through September 30, 2019. However, until the U.S. Senate confirms members sufficient to reconstitute a quorum of the bank’s board of
directors, the bank will not be able to approve any transaction totaling more than $10 million. As a result, we may fund additional commitments
and/or enter into new financing arrangements with customers. Certain of our non-U.S. customers also may seek to delay purchases if they cannot
obtain financing at reasonable costs, and there may be further impacts with respect to future sales campaigns involving non-U.S. customers. We
continue to work with our customers to mitigate risks associated with the lack of a quorum of the bank’s board of directors and assist with alternative
third party financing sources.
Segment Results of Operations and Financial Condition
Commercial Airplanes
Business Environment and Trends
Airline Industry Environment Global economic activity and global trade, which are the primary drivers of the demand for air travel, grew below the
long-term average for the fourth year in a row in 2015. Despite this, passenger traffic continued to grow more than 5%, as it has every year since
2010, and accelerated to more than 6% in 2015. While growth was strong across all major world regions, there continues to be significant variation
between regions and airline business models. Airlines operating in the Middle East and Asia Pacific regions as well as low-cost-carriers globally are
currently leading passenger growth.
Air cargo traffic grew at 5% in the first quarter and 3% in the second quarter of 2015 compared with the same periods in 2014. However, weaker
global industrial production and world trade resulted in little to no cargo traffic growth during the remainder of the year. The slowing air cargo market
recovery has resulted in reduced orders and demand for new freighter aircraft and freighter conversions, and in January 2016, we announced plans
to further reduce production rates on the 747 program.
Airline financial performance also plays a role in the demand for new capacity. Airlines continue to focus on increasing revenue through alliances,
partnerships, new marketing initiatives, and effective leveraging of ancillary services and related revenues. Airlines are also relentlessly focusing on
reducing costs by renewing fleets to leverage more efficient airplanes and in 2015 benefited significantly from lower fuel costs. Net profits for the
global airline industry are estimated to total $33 billion in 2015 compared to $17 billion in 2014. We expect airline profits to continue to grow in 2016,
driven by strong passenger demand and relatively low oil prices.
25

Table of Contents
The long-term outlook for the industry continues to remain positive due to the fundamental drivers of air travel growth: economic growth and the
increasing propensity to travel due to increased trade, globalization, and improved airline services driven by liberalization of air traffic rights between
countries. Our 20-year forecast projects a long-term average growth rate of 4.9% per year for passenger traffic and 4.2% for cargo traffic. Based on
long-term global economic growth projections of 3.1% average annual GDP growth, and factoring in increased utilization of the worldwide airplane
fleet and requirements to replace older airplanes, we project a $5.6 trillion market for approximately 38,000 new airplanes over the next 20 years.
The  industry  remains  vulnerable  to  near-term  exogenous  developments  including  fuel  price  spikes,  credit  market  shocks,  terrorism,  natural
disasters, conflicts, epidemics and increased global environmental regulations.
Industry  Competitiveness The  commercial  jet  airplane  market  and  the  airline  industry  remain  extremely  competitive.  Market  liberalization  in
Europe and Asia is enabling low-cost airlines to continue gaining market share. These airlines are increasing the pressure on airfares. This results in
continued cost pressures for all airlines and price pressure on our products. Major productivity gains are essential to ensure a favorable market
position at acceptable profit margins.
Continued access to global markets remains vital to our ability to fully realize our sales potential and long-term investment returns. Approximately
11% of Commercial Airplanes’ contractual backlog, in dollar terms, is with U.S. airlines, including cargo carriers.
We face aggressive international competitors who are intent on increasing their market share. They offer competitive products and have access to
most  of  the  same  customers  and  suppliers.  With  government  support,  Airbus  has  historically  invested  heavily  to  create  a  family  of  products  to
compete with ours. Regional jet makers Embraer and Bombardier, coming from the less than 100-seat commercial jet market, continue to develop
larger and increasingly capable airplanes. Additionally, other competitors from Russia, China and Japan are developing commercial jet aircraft in the
market above 90 seats. Many of these competitors have historically enjoyed access to government-provided financial support, including “launch
aid,” which greatly reduces the commercial risks associated with airplane development activities and enables airplanes to be brought to market more
quickly than otherwise possible. This market environment has resulted in intense pressures on pricing and other competitive factors, and we expect
these pressures to continue or intensify in the coming years.
Worldwide, airplane sales are generally conducted in U.S. dollars. Fluctuating exchange rates affect the profit potential of our major competitors, all
of whom have significant costs in other currencies. Changes in value of the U.S. dollar relative to their local currencies impact competitors’ revenues
and profits. Many competitors are expected to benefit from the strong U.S. dollar experienced in 2015 and ongoing improvements in efficiency,
which may result in funding product development, gaining market share through pricing and/or improving earnings.
We are focused on improving our processes and continuing cost-reduction efforts. We continue to leverage our extensive customer support services
network which includes aviation support, spare parts, training, maintenance documents and technical advice for airlines throughout the world. This
enables us to provide a high level of customer satisfaction and productivity. These efforts enhance our ability to pursue pricing strategies that enable
us to price competitively.
26

Table of Contents
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$66,048
$59,990
$52,981
% of total company revenues
69%
66%
61%
Earnings from operations
$5,157
$6,411
$5,795
Operating margins
7.8%
10.7%
10.9%
Research and development
$2,340
$1,881
$1,807
Contractual backlog
$431,408
$440,118
$372,980
Unobligated backlog
$216
$360
$660
Revenues
Commercial Airplanes revenues increased by $6,058 million or 10% in 2015 compared with 2014 and by $7,009 million or 13% in 2014 compared
with 2013 primarily due to higher new airplane deliveries and mix .
Commercial Airplanes deliveries as of December 31 were as follows:
737
*
747
†
767
777
787
†
Total
2015
Cumulative deliveries
5,713
1,519
1,083
1,361
363
Deliveries
495
(15)  
18
(3)  
16
98
135
762
2014
Cumulative deliveries
5,218
1,501
1,067
1,263
228
Deliveries
485 (15)  
19 (3)  
6
99
114
723
2013
Cumulative deliveries
4,733
1,482
1,061
1,164
114
Deliveries
440 (8)  
24
21
98
65 (1)  
648
*     Intercompany deliveries identified by parentheses
†
Aircraft accounted for as revenues by Commercial Airplanes and as operating leases in consolidation identified by parentheses
Earnings From Operations
Earnings from operations in 2015 decreased by $1,254 million or 20% compared with 2014 primarily due to higher reach-forward losses of $1,160
million and higher research and development spending of $459 million, largely on the 777X, which more than offset higher new airplane deliveries
and mix. During the fourth quarter of 2015 we recorded a charge of $885 million to recognize a reach-forward loss on the 747 program. In addition,
we recorded reach-forward losses on the USAF KC-46A Tanker contract of $513 million in the second quarter of 2015 and $238 million in the
second quarter of 2014. Operating margins in 2015 decreased primarily due to additional reach-forward losses, higher research and development
expense and the dilutive impact of 787 volume and mix.
Earnings  from  operations  in  2014  increased  by  $616  million  or  11%  compared  with  2013.  The  increase  in  earnings  is  primarily  due  to  higher
earnings of $947 million driven by higher new airplane deliveries and commercial aviation services revenue growth. This earnings increase was
partially offset by a reach-
27

Table of Contents
forward  loss  of  $238  million  recorded  in  the  second  quarter  of  2014  related  to  the  USAF  KC-46A  Tanker  contract  and  higher  research  and
development expense of $74 million. The increase in research and development reflects higher spending on the 777X, 787-10 and 737 MAX, which
more than offset lower 787-9 spending. Operating margins decreased from 10.9% in 2013 to 10.7% in 2014 primarily due to the dilutive impact of
747 and 787 deliveries and the USAF KC-46A Tanker reach-forward loss.
Backlog
Firm backlog represents orders for products and services where no contingencies remain before we and the customer are required to perform.
Backlog does not include prospective orders where customer controlled contingencies remain, such as the customers receiving approval from their
Board of Directors, shareholders or government and completing financing arrangements. All such contingencies must be satisfied or have expired
prior to recording a new firm order even if satisfying such conditions is highly certain. Firm orders exclude options. A number of our customers may
have contractual remedies that may be implicated by program delays. We continue to address customer claims and requests for other contractual
relief as they arise. However, once orders are included in firm backlog, orders remain in backlog until canceled or fulfilled, although the value of
orders is adjusted as changes to price and schedule are agreed to with customers.
The decrease in contractual backlog during 2015 was due to deliveries in excess of net orders. The increase in contractual backlog during 2014 was
due to net orders in excess of deliveries. The decrease in unobligated backlog during 2015 and 2014 was primarily due to the reclassification from
unobligated to contractual backlog related to incremental funding of the existing multi-year contract for Commercial Airplanes’ share of the USAF
KC-46A Tanker contract.
Accounting Quantity The accounting quantity is our estimate  of the quantity of airplanes that will be produced for delivery under existing and
anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue
and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. It is a key determinant of the gross margins we recognize on sales of individual airplanes throughout a
program’s  life.  Estimation  of  each  program’s  accounting  quantity  takes  into  account  several  factors  that  are  indicative  of  the  demand  for  that
program,  including  firm  orders,  letters  of  intent  from  prospective  customers  and  market  studies.  We  review  our  program  accounting  quantities
quarterly.
The accounting quantity for each program may include units that have been delivered, undelivered units under contract, and units anticipated to be
under contract in the reasonable future (anticipated orders). In developing total program estimates, all of these items within the accounting quantity
must be considered.
28

Table of Contents
The following table provides details of the accounting quantities and firm orders by program as of December 31. Cumulative firm orders represent
the cumulative number of commercial jet aircraft deliveries plus undelivered firm orders.
Program
737
747**
767
777
777X
787
2015
Program accounting quantities
8,400
1,574
1,147
1,650
*
1,300
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,392
20
80
218
306
779
Cumulative firm orders
10,105
1,539
1,163
1,579
306
1,142
2014
Program accounting quantities
7,800
1,574
1,113
1,600
*
1,300
Undelivered units under firm orders
4,299
36
47
278
286
843
Cumulative firm orders
9,517
1,537
1,114
1,541
286
1,071
2013
Program accounting quantities
7,000
1,574
1,113
1,550
*
1,300
Undelivered units under firm orders
3,680
55
49
314
66
916
Cumulative firm orders
8,413
1,537
1,110
1,478
66
1,030
* The accounting quantity for the 777X will be determined in the year of first airplane delivery, targeted for 2020.
** At December 31, 2015 , undelivered 747 units under firm orders include a number of aircraft that are being remarketed.
Program Highlights
737 Program The accounting quantity for the 737 program increased by 600 units during 2015 due to the program ’ s normal progress of obtaining
additional orders and delivering airplanes. We are currently producing at a rate of 42 per month and plan an additional increase to 47 per month in
2017. We plan to further increase the rate to 52 per month in 2018 and to 57 per month in 2019. First delivery of the 737 MAX is expected in 2017.
747 Program Lower-than-expected demand for large commercial passenger and freighter aircraft and slower-than-expected growth of global freight
traffic have resulted in market uncertainties, ongoing pricing pressures and fewer orders than anticipated. During the second half of 2015, the cargo
market recovery slowed, and in January 2016, we announced a plan to further reduce the production rate to 0.5 per month as well as recognize a
reach-forward loss of $885 million on the program. The charge, which was recorded during the fourth quarter of 2015, is primarily related to lower
anticipated revenues reflecting ongoing pricing and market pressures, as well as higher estimated costs due to the reduced production rate. We are
currently producing at a rate of 1.3 per month with plans to reduce the rate to 1.0 per month in March 2016, further reduce the rate to 0.5 per month
in September 2016 and then return to 1.0 per month in 2019. We have a number of completed aircraft in inventory as well as unsold production
positions and we remain focused on obtaining additional orders and implementing cost-reduction efforts. If we are unable to obtain sufficient orders
in  2016  and/or  market,  production  and  other  risks  cannot  be  mitigated,  the  program  could  face  an  additional  reach-forward  loss  that  may  be
material.
767 Program The accounting quantity for the 767 program increased by 34 units during 2015 due to the program's progress of obtaining additional
orders and delivering airplanes. The 767 assembly line includes a 767 derivative to support the tanker program. We are currently producing at a
combined tanker and
29

Table of Contents
commercial production rate of 1.5 per month and plan to increase to 2 per month in 2016. We plan to further increase the rate to 2.5 per month in
the fourth quarter of 2017.
777 Program The accounting quantity for the 777 program increased by 50 units during 2015 due to the program’s normal progress of obtaining
additional orders and delivering airplanes. We are currently producing at a rate of 8.3 per month and plan to reduce the rate to 7 per month in 2017.
In the fourth quarter of 2013, we launched the 777X, which features a new composite wing, new engines and folding wing-tips. The 777X will have a
separate program accounting quantity, which will be determined in the year of first airplane delivery, targeted for 2020.
787 Program We continue to produce at a rate of 10 per month and plan for rate increases to 12 per month in 2016 and 14 per month by the end of
the decade. First delivery of the 787-10 derivative aircraft is targeted for 2018. The accounting quantity of 1,300 units remains unchanged.
We remain focused on increasing the production rate to 12 per month in 2016 and improving productivity. We continue to monitor and address
challenges associated with aircraft production and assembly for both the 787-8 and 787-9, including management of our manufacturing operations
and extended global supply chain, completion and integration of traveled work, as well as completing and delivering early build aircraft. In addition,
we continue to work with our customers and suppliers to assess the specific impacts of schedule changes, including requests for contractual relief
related to delivery delays and supplier assertions.
During 2009, we concluded that the first three flight-test 787 aircraft could not be sold as previously anticipated due to the inordinate amount of
rework and unique and extensive modifications made to those aircraft. As a result, costs associated with these airplanes were included in research
and  development  expense.  Based  on  sales  activity  and  market  interest  we  continue  to  believe  that  the  remaining  787  flight-test  aircraft  are
commercially saleable and we continue to include costs related to these aircraft in program inventory. However, there is risk that we may be unable
to sell these aircraft. If we determine that any of the remaining flight-test aircraft cannot be sold, we would incur additional material charges related
to the reclassification of costs associated with those aircraft to research and development expense.
The  combination  of  production  challenges,  change  incorporation  on  early  build  aircraft,  schedule  delays,  customer  and  supplier  impacts  and
changes to price escalation factors has created significant pressure on program profitability and we continue to have near breakeven gross margins.
If risks related to these challenges, together with risks associated with planned production rate increases, or introducing or manufacturing the 787-
10 derivative as scheduled cannot be mitigated, the program could face additional customer claims and/or supplier assertions, further pressures on
program  profitability  and/or  a  reach-forward  loss.  We  continue  to  implement  mitigation  plans  and  cost-reduction  efforts  to  improve  program
profitability and address program risks.
Fleet Support We provide the operators of our commercial airplanes with assistance and services to facilitate efficient and safe airplane operation.
Collectively known as fleet support services, these activities and services begin prior to airplane delivery and continue throughout the operational life
of  the  airplane.  They  include  flight  and  maintenance  training,  field  service  support,  engineering  services,  information  services  and  systems  and
technical  data  and  documents.  The  costs  for  fleet  support  are  expensed  as  incurred  and  have  historically  been  approximately 1.5% of  total
consolidated costs of products and services.
30

Table of Contents
Program  Development The  following  chart  summarizes  the  time  horizon  between  go-ahead  and  planned  initial  delivery  for  major  Commercial
Airplanes derivatives and programs.
Reflects models in development during 2015
We launched the 787-10 in June 2013 and the 777X in November 2013.
Additional Considerations
The  development  and  ongoing  production  of  commercial  aircraft  is  extremely  complex,  involving  extensive  coordination  and  integration  with
suppliers and highly-skilled labor from thousands of employees and other partners. Meeting or exceeding our performance and reliability standards,
as  well  as  those  of  customers  and  regulators,  can  be  costly  and  technologically  challenging.  In  addition,  the  introduction  of  new  aircraft  and
derivatives, such as the 787-10, 737 MAX and 777X, involves increased risks associated with meeting development, production and certification
schedules. As a result, our ability to deliver aircraft on time, satisfy performance and reliability standards and achieve or maintain, as applicable,
program profitability is subject to significant risks. Factors that could result in lower margins (or a material charge if an airplane program has or is
determined to have reach-forward losses) include the following: changes to the program accounting quantity, customer and model mix, production
costs and rates, changes to price escalation factors due to changes in the inflation rate or other economic indicators, performance  or reliability
issues involving completed aircraft, capital expenditures and other costs associated with increasing or adding new production capacity, learning
curve, additional change incorporation, achieving anticipated cost reductions, flight test and certification schedules, costs, schedule and demand for
new airplanes and derivatives and status of customer claims, supplier assertions and other contractual negotiations. While we believe the cost and
revenue estimates incorporated in the consolidated financial statements are appropriate, the technical complexity of our airplane programs creates
financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be extended, which could trigger termination
provisions, order cancellations or other financially significant exposure.
Defense, Space & Security
Business Environment and Trends
United States Government Defense Environment Overview The enactment of The Bipartisan Budget Act of 2015 in November 2015 established
overall defense spending levels for FY2016 and FY2017. However, uncertainty remains with respect to levels of defense spending for FY2018 and
beyond, including risk of future sequestration cuts. Significant uncertainty also continues with respect to program-level appropriations for the U.S.
Department  of  Defense  ( U.S.  DoD )  and  other  government  agencies,  including  the  National  Aeronautics  and  Space  Administration,  within  the
overall  budgetary  framework  described  above.  Future  budget  cuts,  including  cuts  mandated  by  sequestration,  or  future  procurement  decisions
associated  with  the  authorization  and  appropriations  process  could  result  in  reductions,  cancellations  and/or  delays  of  existing  contracts  or
programs. Any of these impacts could have a material effect on the results of the Company’s operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
In addition to the risks described above, if Congress is unable to pass appropriations bills in a timely manner, a government shutdown could result
which may have impacts above and beyond those resulting from budget cuts, sequestration impacts or program-level appropriations. For example,
requirements to
31

Table of Contents
furlough employees in the U.S. DoD or other government agencies could result in payment delays, impair our ability to perform work on existing
contracts, and/or negatively impact future orders.
International Environment Overview The international market continues to be driven by complex and evolving security challenges and the need to
modernize  aging  equipment  and  inventories.  BDS  expects  that  it  will  continue  to  have  a  wide  range  of  international  opportunities  across  Asia,
Europe and the Middle East given the diverse regional threats.  
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$30,388
$30,881
$33,197
% of total company revenues
32%
34%
38%
Earnings from operations
$3,274
$3,133
$3,235
Operating margins
10.8%
10.1%
9.7%
Contractual backlog
$45,187
$46,974
$49,681
Unobligated backlog
$12,488
$14,939
$17,607
Since  our  operating  cycle  is  long-term  and  involves  many  different  types  of  development  and  production  contracts  with  varying  delivery  and
milestone schedules, the operating results of a particular year, or year-to-year comparisons of revenues, earnings and backlog may not be indicative
of future operating results. In addition, depending on the customer and their funding sources, our orders might be structured as annual follow-on
contracts, or as one large multi-year order or long-term award. As a result, period-to-period comparisons of backlog are not necessarily indicative of
future workloads. The following discussions of comparative results among periods should be viewed in this context.
Deliveries of units for new-build production aircraft, including remanufactures and modifications, were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
F/A-18 Models
35
44
48
F-15 Models
12
14
14
C-17 Globemaster III
5
7
10
CH-47 Chinook (New)
41
54
44
CH-47 Chinook (Renewed)
16
14
AH-64 Apache (New)
23
45
37
AH-64 Apache (Remanufactured)
38
37
45
P-8 Models
14
11
11
AEW&C
1
3
 
C-40A
1
1
Total
186
216
223
32

Table of Contents
Revenues
BDS revenues  in 2015 decreased by $493  million compared  with 2014 due  to  lower  revenues  in  all  three  segments. BDS revenues  in  2014
decreased by $2,316 million compared with 2013 primarily due to lower revenues of $1,775 million in the BMA segment and lower revenues of $509
million in the Network & Space Systems ( N&SS ) segment.
Earnings From Operations
BDS earnings from operations in 2015 increased by $141 million compared with 2014 due to higher earnings in all three segments. Included above
are net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments, which were $49 million lower in 2015 compared with 2014 , primarily reflecting higher
charges of $135 million on the USAF KC-46A Tanker contract recorded at BMA which more than offset higher favorable adjustments in the Global
Services & Support ( GS&S ) segment.
BDS earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $102 million compared with 2013 due to lower earnings of $200 million and $21 million in the
BMA and N&SS segments, partially offset by higher earnings of $119 million in the GS&S segment. Included above are net favorable cumulative
contract catch-up adjustments, which were $96 million higher in 2014 compared with 2013, primarily reflecting higher favorable adjustments in the
GS&S segment.
Backlog
Total backlog is comprised of contractual backlog, which represents work we are on contract to perform for which we have received funding, and
unobligated backlog, which represents work we are on contract to perform for which funding has not yet been authorized and appropriated. BDS
total backlog was $57,675 million at December 31, 2015 , reflecting a decrease of 7% from December 31, 2014 . BDS total backlog was $61,913
million at December 31, 2014, reflecting a decrease of 8% from December 31, 2013. For further details on the changes between periods, refer to the
discussions of the individual segments below.
Additional Considerations
Our BDS business includes a variety of development programs which have complex design and technical challenges. Many of these programs have
cost-type  contracting  arrangements.  In  these  cases,  the  associated  financial  risks  are  primarily  in  reduced  fees,  lower  profit  rates  or  program
cancellation if cost, schedule or technical performance issues arise. Examples of these programs include Ground-based Midcourse Defense ( GMD
), Proprietary and Space Launch System ( SLS ) programs.
Some of our development programs are contracted on a fixed-price basis. Many of these programs have highly complex designs. As technical or
quality issues arise during development, we may experience schedule delays and cost impacts, which could increase our estimated cost to perform
the work or reduce our estimated price, either of which could result in a material charge or otherwise adversely affect our financial condition. These
programs  are  ongoing,  and  while  we  believe  the  cost  and  fee  estimates  incorporated  in  the  financial  statements  are  appropriate,  the  technical
complexity of these programs creates financial risk as additional completion costs may become necessary or scheduled delivery dates could be
extended, which could trigger termination provisions, the loss of satellite in-orbit incentive payments, or other financially significant exposure. These
programs  have risk  for  reach-forward  losses  if our  estimated  costs  exceed  our estimated  contract  revenues.  Examples  of  significant  fixed-price
development programs include Saudi F-15, USAF KC-46A Tanker, Commercial Crew and commercial and military satellites.
33

Table of Contents
Boeing Military Aircraft
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$13,482
$13,500
$15,275
% of total company revenues
14%
15%
18%
Earnings from operations
$1,318
$1,301
$1,501
Operating margins
9.8%
9.6%
9.8%
Contractual backlog
$20,019
$21,119
$23,580
Unobligated backlog
$7,151
$8,020
$10,064
Revenues
BMA revenues in 2015 decreased by $18 million compared with 2014 primarily due to lower revenues of $1,083 million from fewer deliveries and
mix on the F/A-18, Apache and V-22 programs, partially offset by higher revenues related to a cumulative catch-up adjustment recorded in the third
quarter of 2015 on the F-15 program due to contract negotiations and higher milestone revenue on the USAF KC-46A Tanker program.
BMA revenues in 2014 decreased by $1,775 million, or 12%, compared with 2013 primarily due to a reduction of revenue of $1,730 million related to
F-15 and USAF KC-46A Tanker milestones, fewer C-17 aircraft deliveries and delivery mix on the P-8 program.
Earnings From Operations
BMA earnings from operations in 2015 increased by $17 million compared with 2014 primarily due to lower C-17 charges, higher Chinook deliveries
and higher earnings on the F-15 program, primarily due to a cumulative catch-up adjustment recorded in the third quarter of 2015. These increases
were partially offset by higher charges of $135 million on the USAF KC-46A Tanker contract and lower earnings on proprietary programs. BMA
recorded charges of $322 million in the second quarter of 2015 and $187 million in the second quarter of 2014 related to the USAF KC-46A Tanker
contract. In addition, BMA recorded a charge of $48 million in the first quarter of 2014 to write-off inventory and accrue termination liabilities as a
result of our decision to produce three fewer C-17 aircraft in 2015 than previously planned. Net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments
were $96 million lower in 2015 than in 2014 primarily driven by the USAF KC-46A Tanker charges and lower favorable F/A-18 adjustments, partially
offset by higher favorable F-15 program adjustments.
BMA earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $200 million, or 13%, compared with 2013 primarily due to 2014 charges of $235 million and
lower earnings of $73 million related to fewer deliveries on the C-17 program. The charges recorded in 2014 included $187 million related to the
USAF KC-46A Tanker contract and $48 million to write off inventory and accrue termination liabilities as a result of our 2014 decision to produce
three fewer C-17 aircraft in 2015 than previously planned. See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. These decreases were partially
offset by higher earnings of $65 million related to improved performance on the F/A-18 program. In addition, in 2013, we recorded a charge of $64
million to write off inventory and accrue termination liabilities as a result of the Republic of Korea's announcement to restart its F-X fighter aircraft
competition. Net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $39 million lower in 2014 than in 2013 primarily driven by the reach-
forward loss on the USAF KC-46A Tanker contract, partially offset by higher favorable adjustments to the F/A-18 and F-15 programs.
34

Table of Contents
Backlog
BMA total backlog at December 31, 2015 was $27,170 million , a decrease of 7% reflecting revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years,
partially offset by contract awards for the F-15, Apache, C-17 and F/A-18 programs. BMA total backlog at December 31, 2014 was $29,139 million,
a decrease of 13% reflecting revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years, partially offset by contract awards for the F/A-18, P-8 and
Apache programs.
Additional Considerations
C-17 and F/A-18 See the discussion of the C-17 and F/A-18 programs in Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
USAF KC-46A Tanker See the discussion of the USAF KC-46A Tanker program on pages 24 – 25 .
Network & Space Systems
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$7,751
$8,003
$8,512
% of total company revenues
8%
9%
10%
Earnings from operations
$726
$698
$719
Operating margins
9.4%
8.7%
8.4%
Contractual backlog
$7,368
$8,935
$9,832
Unobligated backlog
$4,979
$5,987
$6,076
Revenues
N&SS revenues in 2015 decreased by $252 million compared with 2014 primarily due to lower revenue of $1,061 million, primarily on satellite and
proprietary programs and volume and mix of sales to our United Launch Alliance ( ULA ) joint venture, partially offset by higher volume on the
Commercial Crew program.
N&SS revenues in 2014 decreased by $509 million compared with 2013 primarily due to a reduction of $812 million related to lower volume on
several government satellite, Electronic and Information Solutions (E&IS) and proprietary programs, partially offset by $257 million related to higher
volume on the Commercial Crew and SLS programs.
New-build satellite deliveries were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Commercial and civil satellites
3
5
3
Military satellites
1
4
35

Table of Contents
Earnings From Operations
N&SS earnings from operations in 2015 increased by $28 million compared with 2014 primarily due to higher earnings of $83 million from improved
performance on several E&IS programs partially offset by lower performance on a development program. Net favorable cumulative contract catch-
up adjustments were $10 million lower in 2015 than in 2014 primarily due to higher unfavorable adjustments on commercial satellite programs.
N&SS earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $21 million compared with 2013 primarily due to lower earnings of $84 million on several
commercial satellite programs related to lower milestone volume, partially offset by higher earnings of $68 million due to improved performance on
several government satellite programs  and our ULA joint  venture  as  well as  higher volume  on Commercial  Crew  during  the initial  performance
period. Net favorable cumulative contract catch-up adjustments were $12 million higher in 2014 than in 2013.
N&SS earnings from operations include equity earnings of $183 million , $211 million and $171 million primarily from our ULA joint venture in 2015,
2014 and 2013 , respectively.
Backlog
N&SS total backlog was $12,347 million at December 31, 2015 , reflecting a decrease of 17% from December 31, 2014 primarily due to revenue
recognized on contracts awarded in prior years, partially offset by current year contract awards including orders from NASA for International Space
Station  engineering  support  and  Post  Certification  Mission  1  on  the  Commercial  Crew  program. N&SS total  backlog  was  $14,922  million  at
December 31, 2014, reflecting a decrease of 6% from December 31, 2013 primarily due to revenue recognized on contracts awarded in prior years,
partially offset by current year contract awards for the Commercial Crew, commercial satellite and missile defense system programs.
Additional Considerations
United Launch Alliance See the discussion of Indemnifications to ULA and Financing Commitments in Notes 6 , 11 , and 12 to our Consolidated
Financial Statements.
Sea Launch See the discussion of the Sea Launch receivables in Note 10 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
LightSquared See the discussion of the LightSquared receivables in Note 5 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Global Services & Support
Results of Operations
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$9,155
$9,378
$9,410
% of total company revenues
10%
10%
11%
Earnings from operations
$1,230
$1,134
$1,015
Operating margins
13.4%
12.1%
10.8%
Contractual backlog
$17,800
$16,920
$16,269
Unobligated backlog
$358
$932
$1,467
36

Table of Contents
Revenues
GS&S revenues  in 2015 decreased by $223  million compared  with 2014 primarily  due  to  final AEW&C deliveries  and  lower  volume  in  several
Training Systems & Government Services ( TSGS ) programs, partially offset by higher volume on several Integrated Logistics ( IL ) programs.
GS&S revenues in 2014 decreased by $32 million compared with 2013 primarily due to lower volume of $277 million in IL and TSGS programs.
These  decreases  were  partially  offset  by  higher  Aircraft  Modernization  &  Sustainment  ( AM&S )  revenues  of  $245  million  primarily  related  to
deliveries of three AEW&C Peace Eagle to Turkey in 2014.
Earnings From Operations
GS&S earnings from operations in 2015 increased by $96 million compared with 2014 primarily due to improved performance across the segment.
Net  favorable  cumulative  contract  catch-up  adjustments  were $57  million higher  in 2015 than  in 2014 primarily  due  to  favorable  F-15  program
adjustments.
GS&S earnings from operations in 2014 increased by $119 million, or 12%, compared with 2013 primarily due to an increase of $145 million related
to improved performance in several MM&U programs, most notably the AEW&C Peace Eagle contract. Net favorable cumulative contract catch-up
adjustments were $123 million higher in 2014 than in 2013 primarily due to unfavorable adjustments on the AEW&C Peace Eagle contract in 2013.
Backlog
GS&S total backlog at December 31, 2015 was $18,158 million , an increase of 2% reflecting current year contract awards, including C-17 support
programs, Advanced Surveillance Command and Control and F-15 support programs, partially offset by revenue recognized on contracts awarded
in prior years. GS&S total backlog at December 31, 2014 was $17,852 million , which was largely unchanged from backlog of $17,736 million at
December 31, 2013.
Boeing Capital
Business Environment and Trends
BCC’s gross customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2015 totaled $3,459 million . A substantial portion of BCC’s portfolio is
concentrated  among  certain  U.S.  commercial  airline  customers.  BCC’s  portfolio  is  also  concentrated  by  varying  degrees  across  Boeing  aircraft
product types, most notably 717 and 747-8F aircraft.
BCC provided customer financing of $586 million and $489 million during 2015 and 2014 . While we may be required to fund a number of new
aircraft deliveries in 2016, we expect alternative financing will be available at reasonable prices from broad and globally diverse sources.
Aircraft values and lease rates are impacted by the number and type of aircraft that are currently out of service. Approximately 2,300 western-built
commercial jet aircraft ( 9.5% of current world fleet) were parked at the end of 2015 , including both in-production and out-of-production aircraft
types. Of these parked aircraft, approximately 11% are not expected to return to service. At the end of 2014 and 2013 , 9.8% and 9.2% of the
western-built commercial jet aircraft were parked. Aircraft valuations could decline if significant numbers of additional aircraft, particularly types with
relatively few operators, are placed out of service.
37

Table of Contents
Results of Operations    
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$413
$416
$408
Earnings from operations
$50
$92
$107
Operating margins
12%
22%
26%
Revenues
BCC segment revenues consist principally of lease income from equipment under operating lease, interest income from financing receivables and
notes, and other income. BCC ’s revenues in 2015 are consistent with 2014. BCC ’s revenues in 2014 increased by $8 million compared with 2013
primarily due to higher aircraft return condition payments of $60 million, partially offset by a decrease in finance lease income and lower interest
income.
Earnings From Operations
BCC’s earnings from operations are presented net of interest expense, provision for (recovery of) losses, asset impairment expense, depreciation
on leased equipment and other operating expenses. Earnings from operations in 2015 decreased by $42 million compared with 2014 primarily due
to higher asset impairment expense. Earnings from operations in 2014 decreased by $15 million compared with 2013 due to $60 million increase in
asset impairment expense, partially offset by a reduction in the provision for losses on receivables, driven by a change to a customer credit rating
recorded in the first quarter of 2014, in addition to lower depreciation and interest expense.
Financial Position
The following table presents selected financial data for BCC as of December 31:
(Dollars in millions)
2015
2014
Customer financing and investment portfolio, net
$3,449
$3,493
Other assets, primarily cash and short-term investments
480
615
Total assets
$3,929
$4,108
Other liabilities, primarily deferred income taxes
$1,099
$1,212
Debt, including intercompany loans
2,355
2,412
Equity
475
484
Total liabilities and equity
$3,929
$4,108
Debt-to-equity ratio
5.0-to-1
5.0-to-1
BCC’s customer financing and investment portfolio at December 31, 2015 decreased from December 31, 2014 primarily due to normal portfolio run-
off, impairments and dispositions, partially offset by the increased volume of $586 million . At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , BCC had $49 million
and $48 million of assets that were held for sale or re-lease, of which $15 million in 2015 had either signed preliminary agreements with deposits or
firm contracts to be sold or placed on lease. Additionally, aircraft subject to leases with a carrying value of approximately $111 million are scheduled
to be returned off lease during 2016 . We are seeking to remarket these aircraft or have the leases extended.
38

Table of Contents
BCC enters into certain transactions with Boeing, reflected in Unallocated items, eliminations and other, in the form of intercompany guarantees and
other subsidies that mitigate the effects of certain credit quality or asset impairment issues on the BCC segment.
Liquidity and Capital Resources
Cash Flow Summary
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
Non-cash items
2,392
2,515
2,516
Changes in working capital
1,795
897
1,078
Net cash provided by operating activities
9,363
8,858
8,179
Net cash (used)/provided by investing activities
(1,846)
2,467
(5,154)
Net cash used by financing activities
(7,920)
(8,593)
(4,249)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(28)
(87)
(29)
Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents
(431)
2,645
(1,253)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
11,733
9,088
10,341
Cash and cash equivalents at end of period
$11,302
$11,733
$9,088
Operating Activities Net cash provided by operating activities was $9.4 billion during 2015 , compared with $8.9 billion during 2014 and $8.2 billion
in 2013 . The increase of $0.5 billion in 2015 was primarily due to lower inventory growth, partially offset by lower receipts of advances and progress
billings. The increase of $0.7 billion in 2014 was primarily due to higher customer advances which more than offset higher gross inventory. Our
investment in gross inventories decreased by $0.3 billion in 2015 primarily in our BDS business, largely driven by ending production of C-17 aircraft,
which more than offset continued investment in commercial airplane program inventory. Our investment in gross inventories increased $7.6 billion in
2014 and $5.7 billion in 2013 , largely driven by continued investment in commercial airplane program inventory, primarily 787 inventory. Advances
and progress billings increased by $0.4 billion in 2015 , $6.9 billion in 2014 and $3.9 billion in 2013 , primarily due to payments from Commercial
Airplane customers. Discretionary contributions to our pension plans were insignificant in 2015 compared with $0.8 billion in 2014 and $1.5 billion in
2013 .
Investing Activities Cash used by investing activities was $1.8 billion during 2015 compared with $2.5 billion provided during 2014 and $5.2 billion
used during 2013 , largely due to changes in investments in time deposits. Net proceeds from investments were $0.6 billion in 2015 compared with
$4.8 billion in 2014 and net contributions to investments of $2.9 billion in 2013 . In 2015 , capital expenditures totaled $2.5 billion , up from $2.2
billion in 2014 and $2.1 billion in 2013 . We expect capital expenditures in 2016 to be consistent with 2015 due to continued investment to support
growth.
Financing Activities Cash used by financing activities was $7.9 billion during 2015 , a decrease of $0.7 billion compared with 2014 primarily due to
higher new borrowings of $0.8 billion and lower repayments of debt and distribution rights of $0.9 billion in 2015 , which more than offset higher
share repurchases of $0.8 billion and higher dividend payments of $0.4 billion in 2015 . Cash used by financing activities was $8.6 billion during
2014, an increase of $4.3 billion compared with 2013 primarily due to higher share repurchases of $3.2 billion, higher dividends paid of $0.6 billion
and a decrease in proceeds from stock options exercised of $0.8 billion in 2014, partially offset by higher new borrowings of $0.4 billion in 2014.
39

Table of Contents
During 2015 , we issued $1.7 billion and repaid $0.9 billion of debt. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 the recorded balance of debt was $10.0 billion
and $9.1 billion of which $1.2 billion and $0.9 billion was classified as short-term. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 this includes $2.4 billion of debt
attributable to BCC , of which $0.5 billion and $0.1 billion was classified as short-term.
During 2015 and 2014 we repurchased 46.7 million and 46.6 million shares totaling $6.8 billion and $6.0 billion through our open market share
repurchase program. In 2015 and 2014 , we had 0.7 million shares transferred to us from employees for tax withholdings. At December 31, 2015 ,
the amount available under the share repurchase plan, announced on December 14, 2015, totaled $14 billion .
Capital Resources We have substantial borrowing capacity. Any future borrowings may affect our credit ratings and are subject to various debt
covenants as described below. We have a commercial paper program that continues to serve as a significant potential source of short-term liquidity.
Throughout 2015 and at December 31, 2015 , we had no commercial paper borrowings outstanding. Currently,  we have $5.0 billion of unused
borrowing capacity on revolving credit line agreements. We anticipate that these credit lines will primarily serve as backup liquidity to support our
general corporate borrowing needs.
Financing commitments totaled $16.3 billion and $16.7 billion at December 31, 2015 and 2014 . We anticipate that we will not be required to fund a
significant portion of our financing commitments as we continue to work with third party financiers to provide alternative financing to customers.
Historically, we have not been required to fund significant amounts of outstanding commitments. However, there can be no assurances that we will
not be required to fund greater amounts than historically required. In addition, many of our non-U.S. customers finance aircraft purchases through
the Export-Import Bank of the United States. Following the expiration of the bank’s charter on June 30, 2015, the bank’s charter was reauthorized in
December  2015.  The  bank  is  now  authorized  through  September  30,  2019.  However,  until  the  U.S.  Senate  confirms  members  sufficient  to
reconstitute a quorum of the bank’s board of directors, the bank will not be able to approve any transaction totaling more than $10 million. As a
result, we may fund additional commitments and/or enter into new financing arrangements with customers.
In the event we require additional funding to support strategic business opportunities, our commercial aircraft financing commitments, unfavorable
resolution of litigation or other loss contingencies, or other business requirements, we expect to meet increased funding requirements by issuing
commercial paper or term debt. We believe our ability to access external capital resources should be sufficient to satisfy existing short-term and
long-term commitments and plans, and also to provide adequate financial flexibility to take advantage of potential strategic business opportunities
should  they  arise  within  the  next  year.  However,  there  can  be  no  assurance  of  the  cost  or  availability  of  future  borrowings,  if  any,  under  our
commercial paper program, in the debt markets or our credit facilities.
At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , our pension plans were $17.9 billion and $17.3 billion underfunded as measured under GAAP. On an Employee
Retirement Income Security Act ( ERISA ) basis our plans are more than 100% funded at December 31, 2015 with minimal required contributions in
2016 . We expect to make contributions to our plans of approximately $0.1 billion in 2016 . We may be required to make higher contributions to our
pension plans in future years.
At December  31,  2015 ,  we  were  in  compliance  with  the  covenants  for  our  debt  and  credit  facilities.  The  most  restrictive  covenants  include  a
limitation  on  mortgage  debt  and  sale  and  leaseback  transactions  as  a  percentage  of  consolidated  net  tangible  assets  (as  defined  in  the  credit
agreements), and a limitation on consolidated debt as a percentage of total capital (as defined). When considering debt covenants, we continue to
have substantial borrowing capacity.
40

Table of Contents
Contractual Obligations
The following table summarizes our known obligations to make future payments pursuant to certain contracts as of December 31, 2015 , and the
estimated timing thereof.
(Dollars in millions)
Total
Less
than 1
year
1-3
years
3-5
years
After 5
years
Long-term debt (including current portion)
$9,922
$1,186
$996
$2,358
$5,382
Interest on debt (1)
5,580
459
849
718
3,554
Pension and other postretirement cash requirements
14,146
640
1,718
4,222
7,566
Capital lease obligations
157
55
76
16
10
Operating lease obligations
1,529
244
405
277
603
Purchase obligations not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of
Financial Position
123,100
43,471
31,741
24,465
23,423
Purchase obligations recorded on the Consolidated Statements of
Financial Position
16,580
15,358
824
125
273
Total contractual obligations  (2)
$171,014
$61,413
$36,609
$32,181
$40,811
(1)  Includes interest on variable rate debt calculated based on interest rates at December 31, 2015 . Variable rate debt was 3% of our total debt at December 31, 2015 .
(2)  
Excludes income tax matters. As of December 31, 2015 , our net liability for income taxes payable, including uncertain tax positions, was $1,177 million . We are not able
to reasonably estimate the timing of future cash flows related to uncertain tax positions.
Pension  and  Other  Postretirement  Benefits Pension  cash  requirements  are  based  on  an  estimate  of  our  minimum  funding  requirements,
pursuant to ERISA regulations, although we may make additional discretionary contributions. Estimates of other postretirement benefits are based
on both our estimated future benefit payments and the estimated contributions to plans that are funded through trusts.
Purchase Obligations Purchase obligations represent contractual agreements to purchase goods or services that are legally binding; specify a
fixed,  minimum  or  range  of  quantities;  specify  a  fixed,  minimum,  variable,  or  indexed  price  provision;  and  specify  approximate  timing  of  the
transaction. Purchase obligations include amounts recorded as well as amounts that are not recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial
Position.
Purchase  Obligations  Not  Recorded  on  the  Consolidated  Statements  of  Financial  Position Production  related  purchase  obligations  not
recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position include agreements for inventory procurement, tooling costs, electricity and natural
gas  contracts,  property,  plant  and  equipment,  and  other  miscellaneous  production  related  obligations.  The  most  significant  obligation  relates  to
inventory  procurement  contracts.  We  have  entered  into  certain  significant  inventory  procurement  contracts  that  specify  determinable  prices  and
quantities,  and  long-term  delivery  timeframes.  In  addition,  we  purchase  raw  materials  on  behalf  of  our  suppliers.  These  agreements  require
suppliers and vendors to be prepared to build and deliver items in sufficient time to meet our production schedules. The need for such arrangements
with suppliers and vendors arises from the extended production planning horizon for many of our products. A significant portion of these inventory
commitments  is  supported  by  firm  contracts  and/or  has  historically  resulted  in  settlement  through  reimbursement  from  customers  for  penalty
payments to the supplier should the customer not take delivery. These amounts are also included in our forecasts of costs for program and contract
accounting. Some inventory procurement contracts may include escalation adjustments. In these limited cases, we have included our best estimate
of the effect of the escalation adjustment in the amounts disclosed in the table above.
41

Table of Contents
Purchase Obligations Recorded on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position Purchase obligations recorded on the Consolidated
Statements  of  Financial  Position  primarily  include  accounts  payable  and  certain  other  current  and  long-term  liabilities  including  accrued
compensation.
Industrial Participation Agreements We have entered into various industrial participation agreements with certain customers outside of the U.S. to
facilitate economic flow back and/or technology transfer to their businesses or government agencies as the result of their procurement of goods
and/or services from us. These commitments may be satisfied by our placement of direct work or vendor orders for supplies, opportunities to bid on
supply contracts, transfer of technology or other forms of assistance. However, in certain cases, our commitments may be satisfied through other
parties (such as our vendors) who purchase supplies from our non-U.S. customers. We do not commit to industrial participation agreements unless
a contract for sale of our products or services is signed. In certain cases, penalties could be imposed if we do not meet our industrial participation
commitments. During 2015 , we incurred no such penalties. As of December 31, 2015 , we have outstanding industrial participation agreements
totaling $18.4 billion that extend through 2030 . Purchase order commitments associated with industrial participation agreements are included in
purchase  obligations  in  the  table  above.  To  be  eligible  for  such  a  purchase  order  commitment  from  us,  a  foreign  supplier  must  have  sufficient
capability to meet our requirements and must be competitive in cost, quality and schedule.
Commercial Commitments
The following table summarizes our commercial commitments outstanding as of December 31, 2015 .
(Dollars in millions)
Total Amounts
Committed/Maximum
Amount of Loss
Less than
1 year
1-3
years
4-5
years
After 5
years
Standby letters of credit and surety bonds
$4,968
$3,127
$1,355
$182
$304
Commercial aircraft financing commitments
16,283
2,897
6,899
4,205
2,282
Total commercial commitments
$21,251
$6,024
$8,254
$4,387
$2,586
Commercial  aircraft  financing  commitments  include  commitments  to  provide  financing  related  to  aircraft  on  order,  under  option  for  deliveries  or
proposed as part of sales campaigns based on estimated earliest potential funding dates. Based on historical experience, we anticipate that we will
not be required to fund a significant portion of our financing commitments. However, there can be no assurances that we will not be required to fund
greater amounts than historically required. See Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Contingent Obligations
We have significant contingent obligations that arise in the ordinary course of business, which include the following:
Legal Various  legal  proceedings,  claims  and  investigations  are  pending  against  us.  Legal  contingencies  are  discussed  in  Note 20 to  our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Environmental Remediation We  are involved  with  various  environmental  remediation  activities  and have  recorded  a  liability  of $566 million at
December 31, 2015 . For additional information, see Note 11 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Income Taxes We have $1,617 million of unrecognized tax benefits at December 31, 2015 for uncertain tax positions. For further discussion of
income taxes, see Note 4 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
42

Table of Contents
Off-Balance Sheet Arrangements
We are a party to certain off-balance sheet arrangements including certain guarantees. For discussion of these arrangements, see Note 12 to our
Consolidated Financial Statements.
Non-GAAP Measures
Core Operating Earnings, Core Operating Margin and Core Earnings Per Share
Our Consolidated Financial Statements are prepared in accordance with Generally Accepted Accounting Principles in the United States of America (
GAAP ) which we supplement with certain non-GAAP financial information. These non-GAAP measures should not be considered in isolation or as a
substitute  for  the  related  GAAP  measures,  and  other  companies  may  define  such  measures  differently.  We  encourage  investors  to  review  our
financial  statements  and  publicly-filed  reports  in  their  entirety  and  not  to  rely  on  any  single  financial  measure.  Core  operating  earnings,  core
operating  margin  and  core  earnings  per  share  exclude  the  impact  of  certain  pension  and  other  postretirement  benefit  expenses  that  are  not
allocated to business segments - see Note 21 to our Consolidated Financial Statements. Management uses core operating earnings, core operating
margin and core earnings per share for purposes of evaluating and forecasting underlying business performance. Management believes these core
earnings measures provide investors additional insights into operational performance as unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit cost
primarily represent costs driven by market factors and costs not allocable to U.S. government contracts.
Reconciliation of GAAP Measures to Non-GAAP Measures
The table below reconciles the non-GAAP financial measures of core operating earnings, core operating margin and core earnings per share with
the most directly comparable GAAP financial measures of earnings from operations, operating margins and diluted earnings per share.
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Revenues
$96,114
$90,762
$86,623
Earnings from operations, as reported
$7,443
$7,473
$6,562
Operating margins
7.7%
8.2%
7.6%
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense
$298
$1,387
$1,314
Core operating earnings (non-GAAP)
$7,741
$8,860
$7,876
Core operating margins (non-GAAP)
8.1%
9.8%
9.1%
Diluted earnings per share, as reported
$7.44
$7.38
$5.96
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense (1)
$0.28
$1.22
$1.11
Core earnings per share (non-GAAP)
$7.72
$8.60
$7.07
Weighted average diluted shares (in millions)
696.1
738.0
769.5
(1)
Earnings per share impact is presented net of the federal statutory rate of 35.0%.
43

Table of Contents
Critical Accounting Policies
Contract Accounting
Contract accounting is used to determine revenue, cost of sales, and profit predominantly by our BDS business. Contract accounting involves a
judgmental  process  of  estimating  the  total  sales  and  costs  for  each  contract,  which  results  in  the  development  of  estimated  cost  of  sales
percentages.  For  each contract,  the amount  reported  as cost  of  sales  is determined  by applying the  estimated  cost  of  sales percentage  to  the
amount of revenue recognized.
Due to the size, duration and nature of many of our contracts, the estimation of total sales and costs through completion is complicated and subject
to many variables. Total contract sales estimates are based on negotiated contract prices and quantities, modified by our assumptions regarding
contract  options,  change  orders,  incentive  and  award  provisions  associated  with  technical  performance,  and  price  adjustment  clauses  (such  as
inflation or index-based clauses). The majority of these contracts are with the U.S. government where the price is generally based on estimated cost
to  produce  the  product  or  service  plus  profit.  Federal  Acquisition  Regulations  provide  guidance  on  the  types  of  cost  that  will  be  reimbursed  in
establishing  contract  price.  Total  contract  cost  estimates  are  largely  based  on  negotiated  or  estimated  purchase  contract  terms,  historical
performance trends, business base and other economic projections. Factors that influence these estimates include inflationary trends, technical and
schedule risk, internal and subcontractor performance trends, business volume assumptions, asset utilization, and anticipated labor agreements.
Revenue  and  cost  estimates  for  all  significant  contracts  are  reviewed  and  reassessed  quarterly.  Changes  in  these  estimates  could  result  in
recognition of cumulative catch-up adjustments to the contract’s inception to date revenues, cost of sales and profit, in the period in which such
changes are made. Changes in revenue and cost estimates could also result in a reach-forward loss or an adjustment to a reach-forward loss, which
would be recorded immediately in earnings. For the year ended December 31, 2015 , net unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including
reach-forward losses, across all contracts decreased Earnings from operations by $224 million . For the years ended December 31, 2014 and 2013
net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-forward losses, across all contracts increased Earnings from operations by $100
million and $242 million .
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is likely that materially different cost of sales amounts could be
recorded  if  we  used  different  assumptions  or  if  the  underlying  circumstances  were  to  change.  Changes  in  underlying  assumptions/estimates,
supplier performance, or circumstances may adversely or positively affect financial performance in future periods. If the combined gross margin for
all contracts in BDS for all of 2015 had been estimated to be higher or lower by 1%, it would have increased or decreased pre-tax income for the
year by approximately $304 million . In addition, a number of our fixed price development contracts are in a reach-forward loss position. Changes to
estimated losses are recorded immediately in earnings.
Program Accounting
Program  accounting  requires  the  demonstrated  ability  to  reliably  estimate  the  relationship  of  sales  to  costs  for  the  defined  program  accounting
quantity.  A  program  consists  of  the  estimated  number  of  units  (accounting  quantity)  of  a  product  to  be  produced  in  a  continuing,  long-term
production effort for delivery under existing and anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make
reasonably dependable estimates of the revenue and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. For each program, the amount reported as cost of
sales  is  determined  by  applying  the  estimated  cost  of  sales  percentage  for  the  total  remaining  program  to  the  amount  of  sales  recognized  for
airplanes delivered and accepted by the customer.
44

Table of Contents
Factors that must be estimated include program accounting quantity, sales price, labor and employee benefit costs, material costs, procured part
costs, major component costs, overhead costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and warranty costs. Estimation of the accounting
quantity for each program takes into account several factors that are indicative of the demand for the particular program, such as firm orders, letters
of intent from prospective customers, and market studies. Total estimated program sales are determined by estimating the model mix and sales
price for all unsold units within the accounting quantity, added together with the sales prices for all undelivered units under contract. The sales prices
for all undelivered units within the accounting quantity include an escalation adjustment for inflation that is updated quarterly. Cost estimates are
based  largely  on  negotiated  and  anticipated  contracts  with  suppliers,  historical  performance  trends,  and  business  base  and  other  economic
projections.  Factors  that  influence  these  estimates  include  production  rates,  internal  and  subcontractor  performance  trends,  customer  and/or
supplier claims or assertions, asset utilization, anticipated labor agreements, and inflationary or deflationary trends.
To ensure  reliability  in our estimates,  we employ  a rigorous  estimating  process  that  is reviewed  and updated  on a quarterly  basis.  Changes in
estimates  are  normally  recognized  on  a  prospective  basis;  when  estimated  costs  to  complete  a  program  exceed  estimated  revenues  from
undelivered units in the accounting quantity, a loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the
accounting quantity.
The program method of accounting allocates tooling and other non-recurring and production costs over the accounting quantity for each program.
Because of the higher unit production costs experienced at the beginning of a new program and substantial investment required for initial tooling and
other  non-recurring  costs,  new  commercial  aircraft  programs,  such  as  the  787  program,  typically  have  lower  initial  margins  than  established
programs. In addition, actual costs incurred for earlier units in excess of the estimated average cost of all units in the program accounting quantity
are included within program inventory as deferred production costs. Deferred production, unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs are
expected to be fully recovered when all units in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries is below the
estimated average cost as learning curve and other improvements are realized.
Due to the significance of judgment in the estimation process described above, it is reasonably possible that changes in underlying circumstances or
assumptions  could  have  a  material  effect  on  program  gross  margins.  If  the  combined  gross  margin  percentages  for  our  commercial  airplane
programs had been estimated to be 1% higher or lower it would have a similar effect on the Commercial Airplane segment’s operating margins. For
the year-ended December 31, 2015, a 1% increase or decrease in operating margins for our Commercial Airplane segment would have a $650
million impact on operating earnings.
The 747 is in a reach-forward loss position at December 31, 2015 while the 787 program had near breakeven margins during 2015. Absent changes
in estimated revenues or costs, subsequent 747 deliveries are recorded at zero margin. Reductions to the estimated loss in subsequent periods are
spread over all undelivered units in the accounting quantity, whereas increases to the estimated loss are recorded immediately as an additional
reach-forward loss. If we are unable to mitigate risks associated with the 747 and 787 programs, or if we are required to change one or more of our
pricing, cost or other assumptions related to these programs, we could be required to record additional reach-forward losses which could have a
material effect on our reported results.
Goodwill and Indefinite-Lived Intangible Impairments
We  test  goodwill  for  impairment  by  performing  a  qualitative  assessment  or  using  a  two-step  impairment  process.  If  we  choose  to  perform  a
qualitative assessment, we evaluate economic, industry and company-specific factors as an initial step in assessing the fair value of operations. If
we determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related operations, the
45

Table of Contents
two-step impairment process is then performed; otherwise, no further testing is required. For operations where the two-step impairment process is
used, we first compare the book value of net assets to the fair value of the related operations. If the fair value is determined to be less than book
value, a second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. In this process, a fair value for goodwill is estimated, based in part on
the fair value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. The shortfall of the fair value below carrying value represents the amount of
goodwill impairment.
We estimate the fair values of the related operations using discounted cash flows. Forecasts of future cash flows are based on our best estimate of
future sales and operating costs, based primarily on existing firm orders, expected future orders, contracts with suppliers, labor agreements and
general market conditions. Changes in these forecasts could significantly change the amount of impairment recorded, if any.
The cash flow forecasts are adjusted by an appropriate discount rate derived from our market capitalization plus a suitable control premium at the
date of evaluation. Therefore, changes in the stock price may also affect the amount of impairment recorded, if any.
We completed our assessment of goodwill as of April 1, 2015 and determined that there is no impairment of goodwill. As of December 31, 2015 , we
estimated that the fair value of each reporting unit significantly exceeded its corresponding carrying value. Changes in our forecasts, or decreases in
the value of our common stock could cause book values of certain operations to exceed their fair values which may result in goodwill impairment
charges in future periods.
As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , we had $490 million of indefinite-lived intangible assets related to the Jeppesen and Aviall brand and trade
names  acquired  in  business  combinations.  We  test  these  intangibles  for  impairment  by  comparing  their  carrying  value  to  current  projections  of
discounted cash flows attributable to the brand and trade names. Any excess carrying value over the amount of discounted cash flows represents
the amount of the impairment. A 10% decrease in the discounted cash flows would not impact the carrying value of these indefinite-lived intangible
assets.
Pension Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans will transition to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016. Accounting
rules  require  an  annual  measurement  of  our  projected  obligation  and  plan  assets.  These  measurements  are  based  upon  several  assumptions,
including  the  discount  rate  and  the  expected  long-term  rate  of  asset  return.  Future  changes  in  assumptions  or  differences  between  actual  and
expected outcomes can significantly affect our future annual expense, projected benefit obligation and Shareholders’ equity.
The following table shows the sensitivity of our pension plan liability and net periodic cost to a 25 basis point change in the discount rate as of
December 31, 2015 .
(Dollars in millions)
Change in discount rate
Increase 25 bps
Change in discount rate
Decrease 25 bps
Pension plans
Projected benefit obligation
($2,128)
$2,648
Net periodic pension cost
(129)
152
Pension  expense  is  also  sensitive  to  changes  in  the  expected  long-term  rate  of  asset  return.  A  decrease  or  increase  of  25  basis  points  in  the
expected long-term rate of asset return would have increased or decreased 2015 net periodic pension expense by $148 million . We expect 2016
net periodic pension cost
46

Table of Contents
to decrease by approximately $2,119 million and the portion recognized in earnings to decrease by approximately $378 million primarily due to lower
service cost and amortization of actuarial losses.
Other
Section  219  of  the  Iran  Threat  Reduction  and  Syria  Human  Rights  Act  of  2012  and  Section  13(r)  of  the  Securities  Exchange  Act  of  1934,  as
amended (the “Act”), require disclosure of certain activities, transactions or dealings relating to Iran that occurred during the period covered by this
report. Disclosure is required even if the activities, transactions or dealings were conducted in compliance with applicable law. We have disclosed
such activities in our Quarterly Report on Form 10-Q for the second quarter of 2015 and such disclosure is incorporated herein by reference. During
the fourth quarter of 2015, we agreed to sell aircraft maintenance manuals to Iran Air Tours. We generated no revenues or net profits during the
fourth quarter of 2015 from these activities. These sales were authorized by a license from the U.S. Office of Foreign Assets Control (“OFAC”).
Boeing  applied  for  the  OFAC  license  consistent  with  guidance  from  the  U.S.  government  in  connection  with  ongoing  negotiations  between  the
“P5+1” nations and Iran related to, among other things, the safety of Iran’s civil aviation industry. We may engage in additional activities pursuant to
this license, which sales may require additional disclosure pursuant to Section 13(r) of the Act.
Item 7A. Quantitative and Qualitative Disclosures About Market Risk
Interest Rate Risk
We  have  financial  instruments  that  are  subject  to  interest  rate  risk,  principally  fixed-rate  debt  obligations,  and  customer  financing  assets  and
liabilities. Additionally, BCC uses interest rate swaps with certain debt obligations to manage exposure to interest rate changes. Historically, we have
not experienced material gains or losses on our customer financing assets and liabilities due to interest rate changes. As of December 31, 2015 ,
the impact over the next 12 months of a 100 basis point rise in interest rates to our pre-tax earnings would not be significant. The investors in our
fixed-rate debt obligations do not generally have the right to demand we pay off these obligations prior to maturity. Therefore, exposure to interest
rate risk is not believed to be material for our fixed-rate debt.
Foreign Currency Exchange Rate Risk
We are subject to foreign currency exchange rate risk relating to receipts from customers and payments to suppliers in foreign currencies. We use
foreign  currency  forward  contracts  to  hedge  the  price  risk  associated  with  firmly  committed  and  forecasted  foreign  denominated  payments  and
receipts  related  to  our  ongoing  business.  Foreign  currency  forward  contracts  are  sensitive  to  changes  in  foreign  currency  exchange  rates.  At
December  31,  2015 ,  a  10%  increase  or  decrease  in  the  exchange  rate  in  our  portfolio  of  foreign  currency  contracts  would  have  increased  or
decreased our unrealized losses by $229 million . Consistent with the use of these contracts to neutralize the effect of exchange rate fluctuations,
such unrealized losses or gains would be offset by corresponding gains or losses, respectively, in the remeasurement of the underlying transactions
being hedged. When taken together, these forward currency contracts and the offsetting underlying commitments do not create material market risk.
47

Table of Contents
Item 8. Financial Statements and Supplementary Data
Index to the Consolidated Financial Statements
 
Page
Consolidated Statements of Operations
49
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
50
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position
51
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
52
Consolidated Statements of Equity
53
Summary of Business Segment Data
54
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
55
Note 2 - Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
66
Note 3 - Earnings Per Share
67
Note 4 - Income Taxes
68
Note 5 - Accounts Receivable
71
Note 6 - Inventories
72
Note 7 - Customer Financing
73
Note 8 - Property, Plant and Equipment
76
Note 9 - Investments
77
Note 10 - Other Assets
77
Note 11 - Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
78
Note 12 - Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
83
Note 13 - Debt
85
Note 14 - Postretirement Plans
87
Note 15 - Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
95
Note 16 - Shareholders’ Equity
99
Note 17 - Derivative Financial Instruments
100
Note 18 - Significant Group Concentrations of Risk
102
Note 19 - Fair Value Measurements
102
Note 20 - Legal Proceedings
104
Note 21 - Segment Information
105
Note 22 - Quarterly Financial Data
109
Reports of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm
110
48

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Operations
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Sales of products
$85,255
$80,688
$76,792
Sales of services
10,859
10,074
9,831
Total revenues
96,114
90,762
86,623
Cost of products
(73,446)
(68,551)
(65,640)
Cost of services
(8,578)
(8,132)
(7,553)
Boeing Capital interest expense
(64)
(69)
(75)
Total costs and expenses
(82,088)
(76,752)
(73,268)
14,026
14,010
13,355
Income from operating investments, net
274
287
214
General and administrative expense
(3,525)
(3,767)
(3,956)
Research and development expense, net
(3,331)
(3,047)
(3,071)
(Loss)/gain on dispositions, net
(1)
(10)
20
Earnings from operations
7,443
7,473
6,562
Other (loss)/income, net
(13)
(3)
56
Interest and debt expense
(275)
(333)
(386)
Earnings before income taxes
7,155
7,137
6,232
Income tax expense
(1,979)
(1,691)
(1,646)
Net earnings from continuing operations
5,176
5,446
4,586
Net loss on disposal of discontinued operations, net of taxes of $0, $0, $0
(1)
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
Basic earnings per share
$7.52
$7.47
$6.03
Diluted earnings per share
$7.44
$7.38
$5.96
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 54 – 109 .
49

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Comprehensive Income
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax:
Currency translation adjustments
(92)
(97)
(64)
Unrealized gains on certain investments, net of tax of ($5), $0 and $0
8
Unrealized (loss)/gain on derivative instruments:
Unrealized (loss) arising during period, net of tax of $77, $77, and $42
(140)
(137)
(75)
Reclassification adjustment for loss/(gain) included in net earnings, net of tax of ($43), ($4), and $9
79
7
(17)
Total unrealized loss on derivative instruments, net of tax
(61)
(130)
(92)
Defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits:
Net actuarial gain/(loss) arising during the period, net of tax of $402, $2,588, and ($3,437)
(732)
(4,612)
6,143
Amortization of actuarial losses included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of ($570), ($367),
and ($849)
1,038
661
1,516
Settlements and curtailments included in net income, net of tax of ($27), ($101), and ($33)
51
180
59
Pension and postretirement benefit/(cost) related to our equity method investments, net of tax ($2),
$15, and ($13)
3
(27)
24
Amortization of prior service cost included in net periodic pension cost, net of tax of ($22), ($12),
and ($6)
38
21
10
Prior service cost arising during the period, net of tax of ($496), $3, and $41
902
(5)
(74)
Total defined benefit pension plans & other postretirement benefits, net of tax
1,300
(3,782)
7,678
Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of tax
1,155
(4,009)
7,522
Comprehensive (loss)/income related to noncontrolling interests
(3)
10
9
Comprehensive income, net of tax
$6,328
$1,447
$12,116
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 54 – 109 .
50

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position  
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
 
 
December 31,
2015
2014
Assets
Cash and cash equivalents
$11,302
$11,733
Short-term and other investments
750
1,359
Accounts receivable, net
8,713
7,729
Current portion of customer financing, net
212
190
Inventories, net of advances and progress billings
47,257
46,756
Total current assets
68,234
67,767
Customer financing, net
3,358
3,371
Property, plant and equipment, net
12,076
11,007
Goodwill
5,126
5,119
Acquired intangible assets, net
2,657
2,869
Deferred income taxes
265
317
Investments
1,284
1,154
Other assets, net of accumulated amortization of $451 and $479
1,408
1,317
Total assets
$94,408
$92,921
Liabilities and equity
Accounts payable
$10,800
$10,667
Accrued liabilities
14,014
13,462
Advances and billings in excess of related costs
24,364
23,175
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt
1,234
929
Total current liabilities
50,412
48,233
Deferred income taxes
2,392
2,207
Accrued retiree health care
6,616
6,802
Accrued pension plan liability, net
17,783
17,182
Other long-term liabilities
2,078
1,566
Long-term debt
8,730
8,141
Shareholders’ equity:
Common stock, par value $5.00 – 1,200,000,000 shares authorized; 1,012,261,159 shares issued
5,061
5,061
Additional paid-in capital
4,834
4,625
Treasury stock, at cost
(29,568)
(23,298)
Retained earnings
38,756
36,180
Accumulated other comprehensive loss
(12,748)
(13,903)
Total shareholders’ equity
6,335
8,665
Noncontrolling interests
62
125
Total equity
6,397
8,790
Total liabilities and equity
$94,408
$92,921
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 54 – 109 .
51

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Cash Flows
(Dollars in millions)
 
 
 
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Cash flows – operating activities:
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
Adjustments to reconcile net earnings to net cash provided by operating activities:
Non-cash items –
Share-based plans expense
189
195
206
Depreciation and amortization
1,833
1,906
1,844
Investment/asset impairment charges, net
167
229
96
Customer financing valuation benefit
(5)
(28)
(11)
Loss on disposal of discontinued operations
1
Loss/(gain) on dispositions, net
1
10
(20)
Other charges and credits, net
364
317
528
Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
(157)
(114)
(128)
Changes in assets and liabilities –
Accounts receivable
(1,069)
(1,328)
(879)
Inventories, net of advances and progress billings
(1,110)
(4,330)
(5,562)
Accounts payable
(238)
1,339
(298)
Accrued liabilities
2
(1,088)
883
Advances and billings in excess of related costs
1,192
3,145
3,353
Income taxes receivable, payable and deferred
477
1,325
1,445
Other long-term liabilities
46
36
2
Pension and other postretirement plans
2,470
1,186
1,720
Customer financing, net
167
578
391
Other
(142)
34
23
Net cash provided by operating activities
9,363
8,858
8,179
Cash flows – investing activities:
Property, plant and equipment additions
(2,450)
(2,236)
(2,098)
Property, plant and equipment reductions
42
34
51
Acquisitions, net of cash acquired
(31)
(163)
(26)
Contributions to investments
(2,036)
(8,617)
(15,394)
Proceeds from investments
2,590
13,416
12,453
Purchase of distribution rights
(140)
Other
39
33
Net cash (used)/provided by investing activities
(1,846)
2,467
(5,154)
Cash flows – financing activities:
New borrowings
1,746
962
571
Debt repayments
(885)
(1,601)
(1,434)
Repayments of distribution rights and other asset financing
(185)
(280)
Stock options exercised
399
343
1,097
Excess tax benefits from share-based payment arrangements
157
114
128
Employee taxes on certain share-based payment arrangements
(96)
(98)
(63)
Common shares repurchased
(6,751)
(6,001)
(2,801)
Dividends paid
(2,490)
(2,115)
(1,467)
Other
(12)
Net cash used by financing activities
(7,920)
(8,593)
(4,249)
Effect of exchange rate changes on cash and cash equivalents
(28)
(87)
(29)
Net (decrease)/increase in cash and cash equivalents
(431)
2,645
(1,253)
Cash and cash equivalents at beginning of year
11,733
9,088
10,341
Cash and cash equivalents at end of year
$11,302
$11,733
$9,088
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 54 – 109 .

52

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Consolidated Statements of Equity
 
Boeing shareholders
 
 
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Common 
Stock
Additional 
Paid-In 
Capital
Treasury 
Stock
Retained 
Earnings
Accumulated 
Other 
Comprehensive 
Loss
Non- 
controlling 
Interest
Total
Balance at January 1, 2013
$5,061
$4,122
($15,937)
$30,037
($17,416)
$100
$5,967
Net earnings
4,585
9
4,594
Other comprehensive income, net of tax of ($4,246)
7,522
7,522
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
216
(16)
200
Excess tax pools
101
101
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
109
988
1,097
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(133)
79
(54)
Common shares repurchased
(2,801)
(2,801)
Cash dividends declared ($2.185 per share)
(1,642)
(1,642)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
13
13
Balance at December 31, 2013
$5,061
$4,415
($17,671)
$32,964
($9,894)
$122
$14,997
Net earnings
5,446
10
5,456
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax of $2,199
(4,009)
(4,009)
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
208
(20)
188
Excess tax pools
114
114
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
17
326
343
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(129)
48
(81)
Common shares repurchased
(6,001)
(6,001)
Cash dividends declared ($3.10 per share)
(2,210)
(2,210)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(7)
(7)
Balance at December 31, 2014
$5,061
$4,625
($23,298)
$36,180
($13,903)
$125
$8,790
Net earnings
5,176
(3)
5,173
Other comprehensive loss, net of tax of ($686)
1,155
1,155
Share-based compensation and related dividend equivalents
214
(25)
189
Excess tax pools
158
158
Treasury shares issued for stock options exercised, net
(29)
428
399
Treasury shares issued for other share-based plans, net
(134)
53
(81)
Common shares repurchased
(6,751)
(6,751)
Cash dividends declared ($3.82 per share)
(2,575)
(2,575)
Changes in noncontrolling interests
(60)
(60)
Balance at December 31, 2015
$5,061
$4,834
($29,568)
$38,756
($12,748)
$62
$6,397
See Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements on pages 54 – 109 .
53

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Summary of Business Segment Data
(Dollars in millions)
 
Years ended December 31,  
2015
2014
2013
Revenues:
Commercial Airplanes
$66,048
$59,990
$52,981
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
13,482
13,500
15,275
Network & Space Systems
7,751
8,003
8,512
Global Services & Support
9,155
9,378
9,410
Total Defense, Space & Security
30,388
30,881
33,197
Boeing Capital
413
416
408
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(735)
(525)
37
Total revenues
$96,114
$90,762
$86,623
Earnings from operations:
Commercial Airplanes
$5,157
$6,411
$5,795
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
1,318
1,301
1,501
Network & Space Systems
726
698
719
Global Services & Support
1,230
1,134
1,015
Total Defense, Space & Security
3,274
3,133
3,235
Boeing Capital
50
92
107
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
(1,038)
(2,163)
(2,575)
Earnings from operations
$7,443
$7,473
$6,562
Other (loss)/income, net
(13)
(3)
56
Interest and debt expense
(275)
(333)
(386)
Earnings before income taxes
7,155
7,137
6,232
Income tax expense
(1,979)
(1,691)
(1,646)
Net earnings from continuing operations
5,176
5,446
4,586
Net loss on disposal of discontinued operations, net of taxes of $0, $0, $0
(1)
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
This information is an integral part of the Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements. See Note 21 for further segment results.
54

Table of Contents
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements
Years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013
(Dollars in millions, except per share data)
Note 1 – Summary of Significant Accounting Policies
Principles of Consolidation and Basis of Presentation
The Consolidated Financial Statements included in this report have been prepared by management of The Boeing Company (herein referred to as
“Boeing,” the “Company,” “we,” “us,” or “our”). These statements include the accounts of all majority-owned subsidiaries and variable interest entities
that  are  required  to  be consolidated.  All  significant  intercompany  accounts  and  transactions  have  been  eliminated.  Certain  amounts  have  been
reclassified to conform to the current year presentation.
During 2015 we adopted FASB Accounting Standards Update No. 2015-17, Balance Sheet Classification of Deferred Income Taxes, which requires
that the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position reflect all deferred income tax assets and liabilities as non-current. The Company elected to
retrospectively apply the provisions of this standard and prior year balances have been revised to reflect the current year presentation.
Standards Issued and Not Yet Implemented
In May 2014, the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) issued Accounting Standards Update No. 2014-09, Revenue from Contracts with
Customers .  The  new  standard  was  originally  effective  for  reporting  periods  beginning  after  December  15,  2016  and  early  adoption  was  not
permitted. On August 12, 2015, the FASB approved a one year delay of the effective date to reporting periods beginning after December 15, 2017,
while permitting companies to voluntarily adopt the new standard as of the original effective date. The comprehensive new standard will supersede
existing  revenue  recognition  guidance  and  require  revenue  to  be  recognized  when  promised  goods  or  services  are  transferred  to  customers  in
amounts that reflect the consideration to which the company expects to be entitled in exchange for those goods or services. Adoption of the new
rules could affect the timing of revenue recognition for certain transactions. The guidance permits two implementation approaches, one requiring
retrospective application of the new standard with restatement of prior years and one requiring prospective application of the new standard with
disclosure of results under old standards. The Company is currently evaluating when to adopt the new standard, the impacts of adoption and the
implementation approach to be used.
Use of Estimates
Management makes assumptions and estimates to prepare financial statements in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United  States  of  America.  Those  assumptions  and  estimates  directly  affect  the  amounts  reported  in  the  Consolidated  Financial  Statements.
Significant estimates for which changes in the near term are considered reasonably possible and that may have a material impact on the financial
statements are disclosed in these Notes to the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Operating Cycle
For classification of certain current assets and liabilities, we use the duration of the related contract or program as our operating cycle, which is
generally longer than one year .
55

Table of Contents
Revenue and Related Cost Recognition
Contract Accounting Contract accounting is used for development and production activities predominantly by Defense, Space & Security ( BDS ).
The majority of business conducted by BDS is performed under contracts with the U.S. government and other customers that extend over several
years.  Contract  accounting  involves  a  judgmental  process  of  estimating  total  sales  and  costs  for  each  contract  resulting  in  the  development  of
estimated cost of sales percentages. For each contract, the amount reported as cost of sales is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales
percentage to the amount of revenue recognized. When the current estimates of total sales and costs for a contract indicate a loss, a provision for
the entire loss on the contract is recognized.
Changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effect on operating income are recognized using a cumulative catch-up adjustment
which recognizes in the current period the cumulative effect of the changes on current and prior periods based on a contract’s percent complete. In
2015 , net unfavorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-forward losses, across all contracts decreased Earnings from operations
by $224 and diluted EPS by $0.23 . In 2014 and 2013 net favorable cumulative catch-up adjustments, including reach-forward losses, across all
contracts increased Earnings from operations by $100 and $242 and diluted EPS by $0.10 and $0.23 . Significant adjustments during the three
years ended December 31, 2015 included reach-forward losses of $835 and $425 on the USAF KC-46A Tanker contract recorded during 2015 and
2014 .
We combine contracts for accounting purposes when they are negotiated as a package with an overall profit margin objective. These essentially
represent an agreement to do a single project for a single customer, involve interrelated construction activities with substantial common costs, and
are performed concurrently or sequentially. When a group of contracts is combined, revenue and profit are earned uniformly over the performance of
the combined contracts. Similarly, we may segment a single contract or group of contracts when a clear economic decision has been made during
contract negotiations that would produce different rates of profitability for each element or phase of the contract.
Sales  related  to  fixed-price  contracts  are  recognized  as  deliveries  are  made,  except  for  certain  fixed-price  contracts  that  require  substantial
performance over an extended period before deliveries begin, for which sales are recorded based on the attainment of performance milestones.
Sales related to contracts in which we are reimbursed for costs incurred plus an agreed upon profit are recorded as costs are incurred. The Federal
Acquisition  Regulations  provide  guidance  on  the  types  of  cost  that  will  be  reimbursed  in  establishing  contract  price.  Contracts  may  contain
provisions to earn incentive and award fees if specified targets are achieved. Incentive and award fees that can be reasonably estimated and are
probable are recorded over the performance period of the contract. Incentive and award fees that cannot be reasonably estimated are recorded
when awarded.
Program  Accounting Our  Commercial  Airplanes  segment  predominantly  uses  program  accounting  to  account  for  cost  of  sales  related  to  its
programs. Program accounting is applicable to products manufactured for delivery under production-type contracts where profitability is realized
over multiple contracts and years. Under program accounting, inventoriable production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and
warranty costs are accumulated and charged to cost of sales by program instead of by individual units or contracts. A program consists of the
estimated number of units (accounting quantity) of a product to be produced in a continuing, long-term production effort for delivery under existing
and anticipated contracts. The determination of the accounting quantity is limited by the ability to make reasonably dependable estimates of the
revenue and cost of existing and anticipated contracts. To establish the relationship of sales to cost of sales, program accounting requires estimates
of (a) the number of units to be produced and sold in a program, (b) the period over which the units can reasonably be expected to be produced,
and (c) the units’ expected sales prices, production costs, program tooling and other non-recurring costs, and routine warranty costs for the total
program.
56

Table of Contents
We recognize sales for commercial airplane deliveries as each unit is completed and accepted by the customer. Sales recognized represent the
price negotiated with the customer, adjusted by an escalation formula as specified in the customer agreement. The amount reported as cost of sales
is determined by applying the estimated cost of sales percentage for the total remaining program to the amount of sales recognized for airplanes
delivered and accepted by the customer. Changes in estimated revenues, cost of sales and the related effects on program margins are recognized
prospectively except in cases where the program is determined to have a reach-forward loss in which case the loss is recognized in the current
period. See Note 11 .
Concession  Sharing  Arrangements We  account  for  sales  concessions  to  our  customers  in  consideration  of  their  purchase  of  products  and
services  as  a  reduction  to  revenue  when  the  related  products  and  services  are  delivered.  The  sales  concessions  incurred  may  be  partially
reimbursed by certain suppliers in accordance with concession sharing arrangements. We record these reimbursements, which are presumed to
represent reductions in the price of the vendor’s products or services, as a reduction in Cost of products.
Spare Parts Revenue We recognize sales of spare parts upon delivery and the amount reported as cost of sales is recorded at average cost.
Service Revenue Service revenue is recognized when the service is performed with the exception of U.S. government service agreements, which
are accounted for using contract accounting. Service activities primarily include: support agreements associated with military aircraft and helicopter
contracts, space travel on Commercial Crew, ongoing maintenance of International Space Station, and technical and flight operation services for
commercial aircraft. Service revenue and associated cost of sales from pay-in-advance subscription fees are deferred and recognized as services
are rendered.
Financial  Services  Revenue We  record  financial  services  revenue  associated  with  sales-type/finance  leases,  operating  leases,  and  notes
receivable.
Lease and financing revenue arrangements are included in Sales of services on the Consolidated Statements of Operations. For sales-type/finance
leases, we record an asset at lease inception. This asset is recorded at the aggregate future minimum lease payments, estimated residual value of
the leased equipment, and deferred incremental direct costs less unearned income. Income is recognized over the life of the lease to approximate a
level rate of return on the net investment. Residual values, which are reviewed periodically, represent the estimated amount we expect to receive at
lease  termination  from  the  disposition  of  the  leased  equipment.  Actual  residual  values  realized  could  differ  from  these  estimates.  Declines  in
estimated residual value that are deemed other-than-temporary are recognized in the period in which the declines occur.
For operating leases, revenue on leased aircraft and equipment is recorded on a straight-line basis over the term of the lease. Operating lease
assets, included in Customer financing, are recorded at cost and depreciated over the period that we project we will hold the asset to an estimated
residual  value,  using  the  straight-line  method.  We  periodically  review  our  estimates  of  residual  value  and  recognize  forecasted  changes  by
prospectively adjusting depreciation expense.
For notes receivable, notes are recorded net of any unamortized discounts and deferred incremental direct costs. Interest income and amortization
of any discounts are recorded ratably over the related term of the note.
Reinsurance  Revenue Our  wholly-owned  insurance  subsidiary,  Astro  Ltd.,  participates  in  a  reinsurance  pool  for  workers’  compensation.  The
member agreements and practices of the reinsurance pool minimize any participating members’ individual risk. Reinsurance revenues were $136 ,
$135 and $160 during 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Reinsurance costs related to premiums and claims paid to the reinsurance pool were
$132 , $144 and $147 during 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Revenues and costs are presented net in Cost of sales in the Consolidated
Statements of Operations.
57

Table of Contents
Fleet Support
We  provide  assistance  and  services  to  facilitate  efficient  and  safe  aircraft  operation  to  the  operators  of  all  our  commercial  airplane  models.
Collectively known as fleet support services, these activities and services include flight and maintenance training, field service support, engineering
services, and technical data and documents. Fleet support activity begins prior to aircraft delivery as the customer receives training, manuals, and
technical consulting support. This activity continues throughout the aircraft’s operational life. Services provided after delivery include field service
support, consulting on maintenance, repair, and operational issues brought forth by the customer or regulators, updating manuals and engineering
data, and the issuance of service bulletins that impact the entire model’s fleet. Field service support involves our personnel located at customer
facilities providing and coordinating fleet support activities and requests. The costs for fleet support are expensed as incurred as Cost of services.
Research and Development
Research  and  development  includes  costs  incurred  for  experimentation,  design,  and  testing,  as  well  as  bid  and  proposal  efforts  related  to
government products and services which are expensed as incurred unless the costs are related to certain contractual arrangements with customers.
Costs that are incurred pursuant to such contractual arrangements are recorded over the period that revenue is recognized, consistent with our
contract  accounting  policy.  We  have  certain  research  and  development  arrangements  that  meet  the  requirement  for  best  efforts  research  and
development accounting. Accordingly, the amounts funded by the customer are recognized as an offset to our research and development expense
rather than as contract revenues. Research and development expense included bid and proposal costs of $286 , $289 and $285 in 2015 , 2014 and
2013 , respectively.
We have established cost sharing arrangements with some suppliers for the 787 program. Our cost sharing arrangements state that the supplier
contributions are for reimbursements of costs we incur for experimentation, basic design, and testing activities during the 787 development. In each
arrangement, we retain substantial rights to the 787 part or component covered by the arrangement. The amounts received from these cost sharing
arrangements are recorded as a reduction to research and development expenses since we have no obligation to refund any amounts received per
the arrangements regardless of the outcome of the development efforts. Specifically, under the terms of each agreement, payments received from
suppliers for their share of the costs are typically based on milestones and are recognized as earned when we achieve the milestone events and no
ongoing obligation on our part exists. In the event we receive a milestone payment prior to the completion of the milestone, the amount is classified
in Accrued liabilities until earned.
Share-Based Compensation
We provide various forms of share-based compensation to our employees. For awards settled in shares, we measure compensation expense based
on the grant-date fair value net of estimated forfeitures.  For awards settled in cash, or that may be settled in cash, we measure compensation
expense based on the fair value at each reporting date net of estimated forfeitures. The expense is recognized over the requisite service period,
which is generally the vesting period of the award.
58

Table of Contents
Income Taxes
Provisions for federal, state, and non-U.S. income taxes are calculated on reported Earnings before income taxes based on current tax law and also
include, in the current period, the cumulative effect of any changes in tax rates from those used previously in determining deferred tax assets and
liabilities. Such provisions differ from the amounts currently receivable or payable because certain items of income and expense are recognized in
different  time  periods  for  financial  reporting  purposes  than  for  income  tax  purposes.  Significant  judgment  is  required  in  determining  income  tax
provisions and evaluating tax positions.
The accounting for uncertainty in income taxes requires a more-likely-than-not threshold for financial statement recognition and measurement of tax
positions taken or expected to be taken in a tax return. We record a liability for the difference between the benefit recognized and measured for
financial statement purposes and the tax position taken or expected to be taken on our tax return. To the extent that our assessment of such tax
positions  changes,  the  change  in estimate  is  recorded  in  the  period  in  which  the  determination  is  made.  Tax-related  interest  and  penalties  are
classified as a component of Income tax expense.
Postretirement Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated  in  defined  benefit  pension  plans  will  transition  to  a  company-funded  defined  contribution  retirement  savings  plan  in  2016.  We  also
provide  postretirement  benefit  plans  other  than  pensions,  consisting  principally  of  health  care  coverage  to  eligible  retirees  and  qualifying
dependents. Benefits under the pension and other postretirement benefit plans are generally based on age at retirement and years of service and,
for some pension plans, benefits are also based on the employee’s annual earnings. The net periodic cost of our pension and other postretirement
plans is determined using the projected unit credit method and several actuarial assumptions, the most significant of which are the discount rate, the
long-term  rate  of asset  return,  and medical  trend  (rate  of  growth  for  medical  costs).  A portion  of  net  periodic  pension and other  postretirement
income or expense is not recognized in net earnings in the year incurred because it is allocated to production as product costs, and reflected in
inventory at the end of a reporting period. Actuarial gains and losses, which occur when actual experience differs from actuarial assumptions, are
reflected in Shareholders’ equity (net of taxes). If actuarial gains and losses exceed ten percent of the greater of plan assets or plan liabilities we
amortize them over the average future service period of employees. The funded status of our pension and postretirement plans is reflected on the
Consolidated Statements of Financial Position.
Postemployment Plans
We record a liability for postemployment benefits, such as severance or job training, when payment is probable, the amount is reasonably estimable,
and the obligation relates to rights that have vested or accumulated.
59

Table of Contents
Environmental Remediation
We  are  subject  to  federal  and  state  requirements  for  protection  of  the  environment,  including  those  for  discharge  of  hazardous  materials  and
remediation  of  contaminated  sites.  We  routinely  assess,  based  on  in-depth  studies,  expert  analyses  and  legal  reviews,  our  contingencies,
obligations, and commitments for remediation of contaminated sites, including assessments of ranges and probabilities of recoveries from other
responsible parties and/or insurance carriers. Our policy is to accrue and charge to current expense identified exposures related to environmental
remediation sites when it is probable that a liability has been incurred and the amount can be reasonably estimated. The amount of the liability is
based  on  our  best  estimate  or  the  low  end  of  a  range  of  reasonably  possible  exposure  for  investigation,  cleanup,  and  monitoring  costs  to  be
incurred. Estimated remediation costs are not discounted to present value as the timing of payments cannot be reasonably estimated. We may be
able to recover a portion of the remediation costs from insurers or other third parties. Such recoveries are recorded when realization of the claim for
recovery is deemed probable.
Cash and Cash Equivalents
Cash and cash equivalents consist of highly liquid instruments, such as commercial paper, time deposits, and other money market instruments,
which have original maturities of three months or less. We aggregate our cash balances by bank where conditions for right of set-off are met, and
reclassify any negative balances, consisting mainly of uncleared checks, to Accounts payable. Negative balances reclassified to Accounts payable
were $163 and $241 at December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
Inventories
Inventoried  costs  on  commercial  aircraft  programs  and  long-term  contracts  include  direct  engineering,  production  and  tooling  and  other  non-
recurring  costs,  and  applicable  overhead,  which  includes  fringe  benefits,  production  related  indirect  and  plant  management  salaries  and  plant
services, not in excess of estimated net realizable value. To the extent a material amount of such costs are related to an abnormal event or are fixed
costs not appropriately attributable to our programs or contracts, they are expensed in the current period rather than inventoried. Inventoried costs
include amounts relating to programs and contracts with long-term production cycles, a portion of which is not expected to be realized within one
year. Included in inventory for federal government contracts is an allocation of allowable costs related to manufacturing process reengineering.
Commercial aircraft programs inventory includes deferred production costs and supplier advances. Deferred production costs represent actual costs
incurred for production of early units that exceed the estimated average cost of all units in the program accounting quantity. Higher production costs
are experienced at the beginning of a new or derivative airplane program. Units produced early in a program require substantially more effort (labor
and  other  resources)  than  units  produced  later  in  a  program  because  of  volume  efficiencies  and  the  effects  of  learning.  We  expect  that  these
deferred costs will be fully recovered when all units included in the accounting quantity are delivered as the expected unit cost for later deliveries is
below the estimated average cost of all units in the program. Supplier advances represent payments for parts we have contracted to receive from
suppliers in the future. As parts are received, supplier advances are amortized to work in process.
The determination of net realizable value of long-term contract costs is based upon quarterly reviews that estimate costs to be incurred to complete
all contract requirements. When actual contract costs and the estimate to complete exceed total estimated contract revenues, a loss provision is
recorded. The determination of net realizable value of commercial aircraft program costs is based upon quarterly program reviews that estimate
revenue  and  cost  to  be  incurred  to  complete  the  program  accounting  quantity.  When  estimated  costs  to  complete  exceed  estimated  program
revenues to go, a program loss provision is recorded in the current period for the estimated loss on all undelivered units in the accounting quantity.
60

Table of Contents
Used aircraft purchased by the Commercial Airplanes segment and general stock materials are stated at cost not in excess of net realizable value.
See ‘Aircraft Valuation’ within this Note for a discussion of our valuation of used aircraft. Spare parts inventory is stated at lower of average unit cost
or net realizable value. We review our commercial spare parts and general stock materials quarterly to identify impaired inventory, including excess
or obsolete inventory, based on historical sales trends, expected production usage, and the size and age of the aircraft fleet using the part. Impaired
inventories are charged to Cost of products in the period the impairment occurs.
Included in inventory for commercial aircraft programs are amounts paid or credited in cash, or other consideration to certain airline customers, that
are referred to as early issue sales consideration. Early issue sales consideration is recognized as a reduction to revenue when the delivery of the
aircraft under contract occurs. If an airline customer does not perform and take delivery of the contracted aircraft, we believe that we would have the
ability to recover amounts paid. However, to the extent early issue sales consideration exceeds advances and is not considered to be otherwise
recoverable, it would be written off in the current period.
We net advances and progress billings on long-term contracts against inventory in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. Advances and
progress billings in excess of related inventory are reported in Advances and billings in excess of related costs.
Precontract Costs
We may, from time to time, incur costs in excess of the amounts required for existing contracts. If we determine the costs are probable of recovery
from  future  orders,  then  we  capitalize  the  precontract  costs  we  incur,  excluding  start-up  costs  which  are  expensed  as  incurred.  Capitalized
precontract costs are included in Inventories, net of advances and progress billings, in the accompanying Consolidated Statements of Financial
Position. Should future orders not materialize or we determine the costs are no longer probable of recovery, the capitalized costs would be written
off.
Property, Plant and Equipment
Property,  plant  and  equipment  are  recorded  at  cost,  including  applicable  construction-period  interest,  less  accumulated  depreciation  and  are
depreciated principally over the following estimated useful lives: new buildings and land improvements, from 10 to 40 years; and new machinery and
equipment, from 4  to 20 years. The principal methods of depreciation are as follows: buildings and land improvements, 150% declining balance;
and  machinery  and  equipment,  sum-of-the-years’  digits.  Capitalized  internal  use  software  is  included  in  Other  assets  and  amortized  using  the
straight  line  method  over 5 years.  We  periodically  evaluate  the  appropriateness  of  remaining  depreciable  lives  assigned  to  long-lived  assets,
including assets that may be subject to a management plan for disposition.
Long-lived  assets  held  for  sale  are  stated  at  the  lower  of  cost  or  fair  value  less  cost  to  sell.  Long-lived  assets  held  for  use  are  subject  to  an
impairment assessment whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying
value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between
the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
Asset Retirement Obligations
We record all known asset retirement obligations for which the liability’s fair value can be reasonably estimated, including certain asbestos removal,
asset decommissioning and contractual lease restoration obligations. Recorded amounts are not material.
61

Table of Contents
We also have known conditional asset retirement  obligations, such as certain asbestos remediation and asset decommissioning activities to be
performed in the future, that are not reasonably estimable due to insufficient information about the timing and method of settlement of the obligation.
Accordingly, these obligations have not been recorded in the Consolidated Financial Statements. A liability for these obligations will be recorded in
the period when sufficient information regarding timing and method of settlement becomes available to make a reasonable estimate of the liability’s
fair value. In addition, there may be conditional asset retirement obligations that we have not yet discovered (e.g. asbestos may exist in certain
buildings but we have not become aware of it through the normal course of business), and therefore, these obligations also have not been included
in the Consolidated Financial Statements.
Goodwill and Other Acquired Intangibles
Goodwill and other acquired intangible assets with indefinite lives are not amortized, but are tested for impairment annually and when an event
occurs or circumstances change such that it is more likely than not that an impairment may exist. Our annual testing date is April 1.
We  test  goodwill  for  impairment  by  performing  a  qualitative  assessment  or  using  a  two-step  impairment  process.  If  we  choose  to  perform  a
qualitative assessment and determine it is more likely than not that the carrying value of the net assets is more than the fair value of the related
operations,  the  two-step  impairment  process  is  then  performed;  otherwise,  no  further  testing  is  required.  For  operations  where  the  two-step
impairment  process  is  used,  we  first  compare  the  carrying  value  of  net  assets  to  the  fair  value  of  the  related  operations.  If  the  fair  value  is
determined to be less than carrying value, a second step is performed to compute the amount of the impairment. In this process, a fair value for
goodwill is estimated, based in part on the fair value of the operations, and is compared to its carrying value. The shortfall of the fair value below
carrying value represents the amount of goodwill impairment.
Indefinite-lived  intangibles  consist  of  brand  and  trade  names  acquired  in  business  combinations.  We  test  these  intangibles  for  impairment  by
comparing their carrying value to current projections of discounted cash flows attributable to the brand and trade names. Any excess carrying value
over the amount of discounted cash flows represents the amount of the impairment.
Our finite-lived acquired intangible assets are amortized on a straight-line basis over their estimated useful lives as follows: developed technology,
from 5 to 14 years; product know-how, from 6 to 30 years; customer base, from 3 to 19 years; distribution rights, from 3 to 27 years; and other, from
3 to 32 years. We evaluate the potential impairment of finite-lived acquired intangible assets whenever events or changes in circumstances indicate
that the carrying amount may not be recoverable. If the carrying value is no longer recoverable based upon the undiscounted future cash flows of
the asset, the amount of the impairment is the difference between the carrying amount and the fair value of the asset.
62

Table of Contents
Investments
Time deposits are held-to-maturity investments that are carried at cost.
Available-for-sale  securities  include  commercial  paper,  U.S.  government  agency  securities,  and  corporate  debt  securities.  Available-for-sale
securities are recorded at fair value, and unrealized gains and losses are recorded, net of tax, as a component of accumulated other comprehensive
income. Realized gains and losses on available-for-sale securities are recognized based on the specific identification method. Available-for-sale
securities are assessed for impairment quarterly.
The equity method of accounting is used to account for investments for which we have the ability to exercise significant influence, but not control,
over an investee. Significant influence is generally deemed to exist if we have an ownership interest in the voting stock of an investee of between
20% and 50% .
We  classify  investment  income  and  loss  on  our  Consolidated  Statements  of  Operations  based  on  whether  the  investment  is  operating  or  non-
operating in nature. Operating investments align strategically and are integrated with our operations. Earnings from operating investments, including
our  share  of  income  or  loss  from  equity  method  investments,  dividend  income  from  certain  cost  method  investments,  and  any  impairments  or
gain/loss on the disposition of these investments, are recorded in Income from operating investments, net. Non-operating investments are those we
hold  for  non-strategic  purposes.  Earnings  from  non-operating  investments,  including  interest  and  dividends  on  marketable  securities,  and  any
impairments or gain/loss on the disposition of these investments are recorded in Other income/(expense), net.
Derivatives
All derivative instruments are recognized in the financial statements and measured at fair value regardless of the purpose or intent of holding them.
We use derivative instruments to principally manage a variety of market risks. For derivatives designated as hedges of the exposure to changes in
fair value of the recognized asset or liability or a firm commitment (referred to as fair value hedges), the gain or loss is recognized in earnings in the
period of change together with the offsetting loss or gain on the hedged item attributable to the risk being hedged. The effect of that accounting is to
include in earnings the extent to which the hedge is not effective in achieving offsetting changes in fair value. For our cash flow hedges, the effective
portion of the derivative’s gain or loss is initially reported in comprehensive income and is subsequently reclassified into earnings in the same period
or  periods  during  which  the  hedged  forecasted  transaction  affects  earnings.  The  ineffective  portion  of  the  gain  or  loss  of  a  cash  flow  hedge  is
reported  in  earnings  immediately.  We  have  agreements  to  purchase  and  sell  aluminum  to  address  long-term  strategic  sourcing  objectives  and
international  business  requirements.  These  agreements  are  derivatives  for  accounting  purposes  but  are  not  designated  for  hedge  accounting
treatment. We also hold certain derivative instruments for economic purposes that are not designated for hedge accounting treatment. For these
aluminum  agreements  and  for  other  derivative  instruments  not  designated  for  hedge  accounting  treatment,  the  changes  in  their  fair  value  are
recorded in earnings immediately.
Aircraft Valuation
Used aircraft under trade-in commitments and aircraft under repurchase commitments In conjunction with signing a definitive agreement for
the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain customers that give them the right to trade in used
aircraft at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. Additionally, we have entered into contingent repurchase commitments with certain
customers wherein we agree to repurchase the Sale Aircraft at a specified price, generally 10 to 15 years after delivery of the Sale Aircraft. Our
repurchase of the Sale Aircraft is contingent upon a future, mutually acceptable agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft. If we execute an
agreement for the sale of additional new aircraft, and if the customer exercises its right to sell the Sale
63

Table of Contents
Aircraft to us, a contingent repurchase commitment would become a trade-in commitment. Our historical experience is that contingent repurchase
commitments infrequently become trade-in commitments.
Exposure related to trade-in commitments may take the form of:
(1) adjustments to revenue for the difference between the contractual trade-in price in the definitive agreement and our best estimate of the
fair value of the trade-in aircraft as of the date of such agreement, which would be recognized upon delivery of the Sale Aircraft, and/or
(2) charges  to  cost  of  products  for  adverse  changes  in  the  fair  value  of  trade-in  aircraft  that  occur  subsequent  to  signing  of  a  definitive
agreement for Sale Aircraft but prior to the purchase of the used trade-in aircraft. Estimates based on current aircraft values would be
included in Accrued liabilities.
The fair value of trade-in aircraft is determined using aircraft-specific data such as model, age and condition, market conditions for specific aircraft
and  similar  models,  and  multiple  valuation  sources.  This  process  uses  our  assessment  of  the  market  for  each  trade-in  aircraft,  which  in  most
instances begins years before the return of the aircraft. There are several possible markets in which we continually pursue opportunities to place
used aircraft. These markets include, but are not limited to, the resale market, which could potentially include the cost of long-term storage; the
leasing  market,  with  the  potential  for  refurbishment  costs  to  meet  the  leasing  customer’s  requirements;  or  the  scrap  market.  Trade-in  aircraft
valuation varies significantly depending on which market we determine is most likely for each aircraft. On a quarterly basis, we update our valuation
analysis based on the actual activities associated with placing each aircraft into a market or using current published third-party aircraft valuations
based on the type and age of the aircraft, adjusted for individual attributes and known conditions.
Used aircraft acquired by the Commercial Airplanes segment are included in Inventories at the lower of cost or net realizable value as it is our intent
to sell these assets. To mitigate costs and enhance marketability, aircraft may be placed on operating lease. While on operating lease, the assets
are included in Customer financing.
Customer financing Customer financing includes operating lease equipment, notes receivable, and sales-type/finance leases. Sales-type/finance
leases are treated as receivables, and allowances for losses are established as necessary.
We  assess  the  fair  value  of  the  assets  we  own,  including  equipment  under  operating  leases,  assets  held  for  sale  or  re-lease,  and  collateral
underlying receivables, to determine if their fair values are less than the related assets’ carrying values. Differences between carrying values and fair
values of sales-type/finance leases and notes and other receivables, as determined by collateral value, are considered in determining the allowance
for losses on receivables.
We use a median calculated from published collateral values from multiple third-party aircraft value publications based on the type and age of the
aircraft to determine the fair value of aircraft. Under certain circumstances, we apply judgment based on the attributes of the specific aircraft or
equipment,  usually  when  the  features  or  use  of  the  aircraft  vary  significantly  from  the  more  generic  aircraft  attributes  covered  by  outside
publications.
Impairment review for assets under operating leases and held for sale or re-lease We evaluate for impairment assets under operating lease or
assets held for sale or re-lease when events or changes in circumstances indicate that the expected undiscounted cash flow from the asset may be
less than the carrying value. We use various assumptions when determining the expected undiscounted cash flow, including our intentions for how
long we will hold an asset subject to operating lease before it is sold, the expected future lease rates, lease terms, residual value of the asset,
periods in which the asset may be held in preparation for a follow-on lease, maintenance costs, remarketing costs and the remaining economic
64

Table of Contents
life of the asset. We record assets held for sale at the lower of carrying value or fair value less costs to sell.
When we determine that impairment is indicated for an asset, the amount of impairment expense recorded is the excess of the carrying value over
the fair value of the asset.
Allowance for losses on customer financing receivables We record the potential impairment of customer financing receivables in a valuation
account, the balance of which is an accounting estimate of probable but unconfirmed losses. The allowance for losses on receivables relates to two
components of receivables: (a) receivables that are evaluated individually for impairment and (b) all other receivables.
We determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due
according to the original contractual terms of the receivable agreement, without regard to any subsequent restructurings. Factors considered in
assessing collectability include, but are not limited to, a customer’s extended delinquency, requests for restructuring and filings for bankruptcy. We
determine a specific impairment allowance based on the difference between the carrying value of the receivable and the estimated fair value of the
related collateral we would expect to realize.
We review the adequacy of the allowance attributable to the remaining receivables (after excluding receivables subject to a specific impairment
allowance) by assessing both the collateral exposure and the applicable cumulative default rate. Collateral exposure for a particular receivable is the
excess of the carrying value of the receivable over the fair value of the related collateral. A receivable with an estimated fair value in excess of the
carrying value is considered to have no collateral exposure. The applicable cumulative default rate is determined using two components: customer
credit ratings and weighted average remaining contract term. Internally assigned credit ratings, our credit quality indicator, are determined for each
customer in the portfolio. Those ratings are updated based upon public information and information obtained directly from our customers.
We have entered into agreements with certain customers that would entitle us to look beyond the specific collateral underlying the receivable for
purposes of determining the collateral exposure as described above. Should the proceeds from the sale of the underlying collateral asset resulting
from a default condition be insufficient to cover the carrying value of our receivable (creating a shortfall condition), these agreements would, for
example, permit us to take the actions necessary to sell or retain certain other assets in which the customer has an equity interest and use the
proceeds to cover the shortfall.
Each quarter we review customer credit ratings, published historical credit default rates for different rating categories, and multiple third-party aircraft
value publications as a basis to validate the reasonableness of the allowance for losses on receivables. There can be no assurance that actual
results will not differ from estimates or that the consideration of these factors in the future will not result in an increase or decrease to the allowance
for losses on receivables.
Warranties
In conjunction with certain product sales, we provide warranties that cover factors such as non-conformance to specifications and defects in material
and design. The majority of our warranties are issued by our Commercial Airplanes segment. Generally, aircraft sales are accompanied by a three
to four -year standard warranty for systems, accessories, equipment, parts, and software manufactured by us or manufactured to certain standards
under our authorization. These warranties are included in the programs’ estimate at completion. On occasion we have made commitments beyond
the  standard  warranty  obligation  to  correct  fleet-wide  major  issues  of  a  particular  model,  resulting  in  additional  accrued  warranty  expense.
Warranties issued by our BDS segments principally relate to sales of military aircraft and weapons hardware and are included in the contract cost
estimates. These sales are generally accompanied by a six month to two -year warranty period and cover systems, accessories, equipment, parts,
and software manufactured by us to certain contractual specifications. Estimated costs related to standard warranties are recorded in the
65

Table of Contents
period in which the related product sales occur. The warranty liability recorded at each balance sheet date reflects the estimated number of months
of warranty coverage outstanding for products delivered times the average of historical monthly warranty payments, as well as additional amounts
for certain major warranty issues that exceed a normal claims level. Estimated costs of these additional warranty issues are considered changes to
the initial liability estimate.
We  provide  guarantees  to  certain  commercial  airplane  customers  which  include  compensation  provisions  for  failure  to  meet  specified  aircraft
performance targets. We account for these performance guarantees as warranties. The estimated liability for these warranties is based on known
and anticipated operational characteristics and forecasted customer operation of the aircraft relative to contractually specified performance targets,
and anticipated settlements when contractual remedies are not specified. Estimated payments are recorded as a reduction of revenue at delivery of
the related  aircraft.  We have agreements  that  require  certain  suppliers  to compensate  us for  amounts  paid to  customers  for  failure  of  supplied
equipment to meet specified performance targets. Claims against suppliers under these agreements are included in Inventories and recorded as a
reduction  in  Cost  of  products  at  delivery  of  the  related  aircraft.  These  performance  warranties  and  claims  against  suppliers  are  included  in  the
programs’ estimate at completion.
Supplier Penalties
We record an accrual for supplier penalties when an event occurs that makes it probable that a supplier penalty will be incurred and the amount is
reasonably estimable. Until an event occurs, we fully anticipate accepting all products procured under production-related contracts.
Guarantees
We record a liability in Accrued liabilities for the fair value of guarantees that are issued or modified after December 31, 2002. For a residual value
guarantee  where  we  received  a  cash  premium,  the  liability  is  equal  to  the  cash  premium  received  at  the  guarantee’s  inception.  For  credit
guarantees, the liability is equal to the present value of the expected loss. We determine the expected loss by multiplying the creditor’s default rate
by  the  guarantee  amount  reduced  by  the  expected  recovery,  if  applicable,  for  each  future  period  the  credit  guarantee  will  be  outstanding.  If  at
inception of a guarantee, we determine there is a probable related contingent loss, we will recognize a liability for the greater of (a) the fair value of
the guarantee as described above or (b) the probable contingent loss amount.
Note 2 – Goodwill and Acquired Intangibles
Changes in the carrying amount of goodwill by reportable segment for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 were as follows:
Commercial
Airplanes
Boeing
Military
Aircraft
Network
& Space
Systems
Global
Services
& Support
Total
Balance at January 1, 2014
$2,108
$964
$1,513
$458
$5,043
Acquisitions
45
57
102
Goodwill adjustments
(22)
(4)
(26)
Balance at December 31, 2014
$2,131
$964
$1,566
$458
$5,119
Acquisitions
6
15
21
Goodwill adjustments
(14)
(14)
Balance at December 31, 2015
$2,123
$979
$1,566
$458
$5,126
66

Table of Contents
As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , we had indefinite-lived intangible assets with carrying amounts of $490 relating to trade names.
The gross carrying amounts and accumulated amortization of our acquired finite-lived intangible assets were as follows at December 31:
2015
2014
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization
Gross
Carrying
Amount
Accumulated
Amortization
Distribution rights
$2,245
$673
$2,245
$550
Product know-how
503
244
494
216
Customer base
600
403
619
381
Developed technology
455
357
500
386
Other
198
157
202
148
Total
$4,001
$1,834
$4,060
$1,681
Amortization expense for acquired finite-lived intangible assets for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 was $224 and $227 . Estimated
amortization expense for the five succeeding years is as follows:
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Estimated amortization expense
$211
$204
$185
$154
$145
During 2015 and 2014 we acquired $15 and $87 of finite-lived intangible assets, of which $0 and $24 related to non-cash investing and financing
transactions.
Note 3 – Earnings Per Share
Basic and diluted earnings per share are computed using the two-class method, which is an earnings allocation method that determines earnings
per  share  for  common  shares  and  participating  securities.  The  undistributed  earnings  are  allocated  between  common  shares  and  participating
securities as if all earnings had been distributed during the period. Participating securities and common shares have equal rights to undistributed
earnings.
Basic  earnings  per  share  is  calculated  by  taking  net  earnings,  less  earnings  available  to  participating  securities,  divided  by  the  basic  weighted
average common shares outstanding.
Diluted earnings per share is calculated by taking net earnings, less earnings available to participating securities, divided by the diluted weighted
average common shares outstanding.
67

Table of Contents
The elements used in the computation of basic and diluted earnings per share were as follows:
(In millions - except per share amounts)  
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Net earnings
$5,176
$5,446
$4,585
Less: earnings available to participating securities
4
6
7
Net earnings available to common shareholders
$5,172
$5,440
$4,578
Basic
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
688.0
728.9
760.8
Less: participating securities
1.1
1.3
1.9
Basic weighted average common shares outstanding
686.9
727.6
758.9
Diluted
Basic weighted average shares outstanding
688.0
728.9
760.8
Dilutive potential common shares (1)
8.1
9.1
8.7
Diluted weighted average shares outstanding
696.1
738.0
769.5
Less: participating securities
1.1
1.3
1.9
Diluted weighted average common shares outstanding
695.0
736.7
767.6
Net earnings per share:
Basic
$7.52
$7.47
$6.03
Diluted
7.44
7.38
5.96
(1)  Diluted earnings per share includes any dilutive impact of stock options, restricted stock units, performance-based restricted stock units and
performance awards.
The following table includes the number of shares that may be dilutive potential common shares in the future. These shares were not included in the
computation of diluted earnings per share because the effect was either antidilutive or the performance condition was not met.
(Shares in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Stock options
4.8
Performance awards
5.6
5.1
4.2
Performance-based restricted stock units
2.3
1.3
Note 4 – Income Taxes
The components of earnings before income taxes were:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
U.S.
$6,828
$6,829
$5,946
Non-U.S.
327
308
286
Total
$7,155
$7,137
$6,232
68

Table of Contents
Income tax expense/(benefit) consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Current tax expense
U.S. federal
$2,102
$676
($82)
Non-U.S.
122
91
76
U.S. state
21
69
11
Total current
2,245
836
5
Deferred tax expense
U.S. federal
(297)
828
1,531
Non-U.S.
4
34
41
U.S. state
27
(7)
69
Total deferred
(266)
855
1,641
Total income tax expense
$1,979
$1,691
$1,646
Net income tax payments were $1,490 , $355 and $209 in 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively.
The following is a reconciliation of the U.S. federal statutory tax rate of 35% to our effective income tax rates:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
U.S. federal statutory tax
35.0 %
35.0 %
35.0 %
Research and development credits (1)
(3.4)
(2.9)
(4.9)
Amendments to the R&E regulations (2)
(3.4)
Tax basis adjustment (3)
(3.6)
U.S. manufacturing activity tax benefit
(2.9)
(1.2)
(0.6)
Tax on international activities
(0.6)
(0.2)
(0.1)
Federal audit settlements  (4)
(3.6)
Other provision adjustments
(0.4)
0.2
0.4
Effective income tax rate
27.7 %
23.7 %
26.4 %
(1)  In the fourth quarter of 2015 and 2014, we recorded tax benefits of $235 and $ 188 , respectively related to the reinstatement of the research tax
credit. Research tax credits for the 2013 and 2012 tax years were both recorded in 2013.
(2)  In 2013, we recorded $212 for the issuance of favorable regulations related to research and experimental (R&E) expenditures.
(3)  In the second quarter of 2014 we recorded an incremental tax benefit of $265 related to the application of a 2012 Federal Court of Claims
decision which held that the tax basis in certain assets could be increased and realized upon the assets' disposition (tax basis adjustment).
(4)  In the second quarter of 2014, tax benefits of $116 and $143 were recorded as a result of the 2007-2008 and 2009-2010 federal tax audit
settlements.
Federal income tax audits have been settled for all years prior to 2011. The years 2011-2012 are currently being examined by the IRS. We are also
subject  to  examination  in  major  state  and  international  jurisdictions  for  the  2001-2015  tax  years.  We  believe  appropriate  provisions  for  all
outstanding tax issues have been made for all jurisdictions and all open years.
69

Table of Contents
Prior year balances of deferred tax (liabilities)/assets have been revised to reflect current year presentation. Significant components of our deferred
tax (liabilities)/assets at December 31 were as follows:
2015
2014
Inventory and long-term contract methods of income recognition
(10,401)
(10,156)
Pension benefits
6,303
6,145
Retiree health care benefits
2,513
2,572
Fixed assets, intangibles and goodwill (net of valuation allowance $16 and $18)
(1,837)
(1,782)
Other employee benefits
1,339
1,477
Customer and commercial financing
(777)
(853)
Accrued expenses and reserves
609
733
Net operating loss, credit and capital loss carryovers (net of valuation allowance of $89 and $63) (1)
216
266
Other
(92)
(292)
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets (2)
($2,127)
($1,890)
(1)  Of  the  deferred  tax  asset  for  net  operating  loss  and  credit  carryovers, $208 expires  in  years  ending  from  December  31, 2016 through
December 31, 2035 and $8 may be carried over indefinitely.
(2)  Included in the net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 are deferred tax assets in the amounts of $7,277 and
$8,007 related to Accumulated other comprehensive loss.
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets at December 31 were as follows:
2015
2014
Deferred tax assets
$13,128
$14,219
Deferred tax liabilities
(15,150)
(16,028)
Valuation allowance
(105)
(81)
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets
($2,127)
($1,890)
The measurement of deferred tax assets is reduced by a valuation allowance if, based upon available evidence, it is more likely than not that some
or all of the deferred tax assets will not be realized.
As  discussed  in  Note  1,  during  the  year  ended  December  31,  2015,  the  Company  retrospectively  adopted  ASU  No.  2015-17, Balance  Sheet
Classification of Deferred Taxes . The effects of the accounting change on the December 31, 2014 Statement of Financial Position were as follows:
2014
Revised
As Reported
Current deferred tax asset
$18
Non-current deferred tax asset
317
6,576
Current deferred tax liability
(8,484)
Non-current deferred tax liability
(2,207)
Net deferred tax (liabilities)/assets
($1,890)
($1,890)
We  have  provided  for  U.S.  deferred  income  taxes  and  foreign  withholding  tax  in  the  amount  of $35 on  undistributed  earnings  not  considered
indefinitely reinvested in our non-U.S. subsidiaries. We have not provided for U.S. deferred income taxes or foreign withholding tax on the remainder
of undistributed earnings from our non-U.S. subsidiaries of approximately $700 because such earnings are considered to
70

Table of Contents
be indefinitely reinvested and it is not practicable to estimate the amount of tax that may be payable upon distribution.
As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the amounts accrued for the payment of income tax-related interest and penalties included in the Consolidated
Statements of Financial Position were not significant. The amounts of interest benefit included in the Consolidated Statements of Operations were
not significant for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 .
A reconciliation of the beginning and ending amount of unrecognized tax benefits is as follows:
2015
2014
2013
Unrecognized tax benefits – January 1
$1,312
$1,141
$1,055
Gross increases – tax positions in prior periods
38
403
10
Gross decreases – tax positions in prior periods
(25)
(251)
(125)
Gross increases – current-period tax positions
292
217
202
Gross decreases – current-period tax positions
(1)
Settlements
(197)
Lapse of statute of limitations
(1)
Unrecognized tax benefits – December 31
$1,617
$1,312
$1,141
As of December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 , the total amount of unrecognized tax benefits was $1,617 , $1,312 and $1,141 , respectively, of which
$1,479 , $1,180 and $1,018 would affect the effective tax rate, if recognized. As of December 31, 2015 , these amounts are primarily associated with
U.S. federal tax issues such as the amount of research tax credits claimed, the U.S. manufacturing activity tax benefit, tax basis adjustments and
U.S. taxation of foreign earnings. Also included in these amounts are accruals for domestic state tax issues such as the allocation of income among
various state tax jurisdictions and the amount of state tax credits claimed.
Audit outcomes and the timing of audit settlements are subject to significant uncertainty. It is reasonably possible that within the next 12 months we
will resolve the matters presently under consideration for the 2011-2012 tax years with the IRS. Depending on the timing and outcome of that audit
settlement, unrecognized tax benefits could decrease by up to $115 based on current estimates.
Note 5 – Accounts Receivable, net
Accounts receivable at December 31 consisted of the following:
2015
2014
U.S. government contracts
$4,864
$4,281
Commercial Airplanes
2,250
1,749
Defense, Space & Security customers (1)
889
1,018
Reinsurance receivables
550
512
Other
254
296
Less valuation allowance
(94)
(127)
Total
$8,713
$7,729
(1)  Excludes U.S. government contracts
71

Table of Contents
The  following  table  summarizes  our  accounts  receivable  under  long-term  contracts  that  were  unbillable  or  related  to  outstanding  claims  as  of
December 31 :
Unbillable
Claims
2015
2014
2015
2014
Current
$2,024
$2,306
$29
Expected to be collected after one year
2,001
1,408
$70
73
Total
$4,025
$3,714
$70
$102
Under contract accounting unbillable receivables on long-term contracts arise when the sales or revenues based on performance attainment, though
appropriately recognized, cannot be billed yet under terms of the contract as of the balance sheet date. Any adjustment for the credit quality of
unbillable receivables, if required, would be recorded as a direct reduction of revenue. Factors considered in assessing the collectability of unbillable
receivables  include,  but  are  not  limited  to,  a  customer’s  extended  delinquency,  requests  for  restructuring  and  filings  for  bankruptcy.  Unbillable
receivables  related  to  commercial  customers  expected  to  be  collected  after  one  year  were $178 and $172 at December  31,  2015  and  2014 .
Accounts receivable related to claims are items that we believe are earned, but are subject to uncertainty concerning their determination or ultimate
realization.
Accounts  receivable  as  of December  31,  2015 ,  includes $104 of  unbillable  receivables  on  a  long-term  contract  with  New  LightSquared,  LLC
(LightSquared) related to the construction of two commercial satellites. One of the satellites has launched and has been accepted by the customer,
and  the  other  is  substantially  complete  but  remains  in  Boeing’s  possession.  On  May  14,  2012,  LightSquared  filed  for  Chapter  11  bankruptcy
protection. On December 7, 2015, LightSquared exited Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection and fully assumed the Boeing contract. We do not expect
to incur losses on these receivables.
Accounts receivable, other than those described above, expected to be collected after one year are not material.
Note 6 – Inventories
Inventories at December 31 consisted of the following:
2015
2014
Long-term contracts in progress
$13,858
$13,381
Commercial aircraft programs
55,230
55,220
Commercial spare parts, used aircraft, general stock materials and other
6,673
7,421
Inventory before advances and progress billings
75,761
76,022
Less advances and progress billings
(28,504)
(29,266)
Total
$47,257
$46,756
Long-Term Contracts in Progress
Long-term contracts in progress includes Delta launch program inventory that is being sold at cost to United Launch Alliance ( ULA ) under an
inventory supply agreement that terminates on March 31, 2021. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the inventory balance was $120 (net of advances
of $310 ) and $154 (net of advances of $322 ). At December 31, 2015 , $176 of this inventory related to unsold launches. See Note 12 .
72

Table of Contents
Included  in  inventories  are  capitalized  precontract  costs  of $732 at December  31,  2015 ,  primarily  related  to  KC-46A  Tanker  and $1,281 at
December 31, 2014 , primarily related to C-17. See Note 11 .
Commercial Aircraft Programs
At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 787 program: $34,656 and
$33,163 of work in process (including deferred production costs of $28,510 and $26,149 ), $2,551 and $2,257 of supplier advances, and $3,890 and
$3,801 of unamortized tooling and other non-recurring costs. At December 31, 2015 , $23,721 of 787 deferred production costs, unamortized tooling
and other non-recurring costs are expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that have firm orders and $8,679
is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent expected future orders.
At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , commercial aircraft programs inventory included the following amounts related to the 747 program: $942 and
$1,741 of deferred production costs, net of reach-forward losses, and $377 and $476 of unamortized tooling costs. At December 31, 2015 , $342 of
747 deferred production and unamortized tooling costs are expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that
have firm orders and $977 is expected to be recovered from units included in the program accounting quantity that represent expected future orders.
At December 31, 2015 we have a number of completed 747 aircraft in work in process inventory that we expect to recover from future orders.
Commercial  aircraft  programs  inventory  included  amounts  credited  in  cash  or  other  consideration  (early  issue  sales  consideration)  to  airline
customers totaling $3,166 and $3,341 at December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
Used aircraft in inventories at Commercial Airplanes totaled $267 and $275 at December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
Note 7 – Customer Financing
Customer financing primarily relates to the Boeing Capital (BCC) segment and consisted of the following at December 31:
2015
2014
Financing receivables:
Investment in sales-type/finance leases
$1,620
$1,535
Notes
256
370
Total financing receivables
1,876
1,905
Operating lease equipment, at cost, less accumulated depreciation of $338 and $571
1,710
1,677
Gross customer financing
3,586
3,582
Less allowance for losses on receivables
(16)
(21)
Total
$3,570
$3,561
The components of investment in sales-type/finance leases at December 31 were as follows:
2015
2014
Minimum lease payments receivable
$1,537
$1,475
Estimated residual value of leased assets
530
521
Unearned income
(447)
(461)
Total
$1,620
$1,535
73

Table of Contents
Operating lease equipment primarily includes large commercial jet aircraft and regional jet aircraft. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , operating
lease equipment included $49 and $48 available for sale or re-lease. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , we had firm lease commitments for $15 and
$0 of this equipment.
Financing receivable balances evaluated for impairment at December 31 were as follows:
2015
2014
Individually evaluated for impairment
$86
$86
Collectively evaluated for impairment
1,790
1,819
Total financing receivables
$1,876
$1,905
We determine a receivable is impaired when, based on current information and events, it is probable that we will be unable to collect amounts due
according to the original contractual terms. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , we had no material receivables that were greater than 30 days past
due and we had no impaired customer financing receivables during 2015 and 2014.
Income recognition is generally suspended for financing receivables at the date full recovery of income and principal becomes not probable. Income
is  recognized  when  financing  receivables  become  contractually  current  and  performance  is  demonstrated  by  the  customer.  For  the  year  ended
December  31,  2013,  interest  income  recognized  on  such  receivables  was $30 ,  and  the  average  recorded  investment  in  impaired  financing
receivables was $376 .
The  change  in  the  allowance  for  losses  on  financing  receivables  for  the  years  ended December  31,  2015,  2014  and  2013 ,  consisted  of  the
following:
2015
2014
2013
Beginning balance - January 1
($21)
($49)
($60)
Customer financing valuation benefit
5
28
11
Ending balance - December 31
($16)
($21)
($49)
Collectively evaluated for impairment
($16)
($21)
($49)
The adequacy of the allowance for losses is assessed quarterly. Three primary factors influencing the level of our allowance for losses on customer
financing  receivables  are  customer  credit  ratings,  default  rates  and  collateral  values.  We  assign  internal  credit  ratings  for  all  customers  and
determine the creditworthiness of each customer based upon publicly available information and information obtained directly from our customers.
Our rating categories are comparable to those used by the major credit rating agencies.
Our financing receivable balances at December 31 by internal credit rating category are shown below:
Rating categories
2015
2014
BBB
$973
$1,055
BB
536
B
258
633
CCC
23
131
Other
86
86
Total carrying value of financing receivables
$1,876
$1,905
At December 31, 2015 , our allowance related to receivables with ratings of B, BB and BBB. We applied default rates that averaged 16% , 10% and
2% to the exposure associated with those receivables.
74

Table of Contents
Customer Financing Exposure
Customer financing is collateralized by security in the related asset. The value of the collateral is closely tied to commercial airline performance and
overall market conditions and may be subject to reduced valuation with market decline. Declines in collateral values are also a significant driver of
our allowance for losses. Generally, out-of-production aircraft have experienced greater collateral value declines than in-production aircraft.
Our  customer  financing  portfolio  is  primarily  collateralized  by  out-of-production  aircraft.  The  majority  of  customer  financing  carrying  values  are
concentrated in the following aircraft models at December 31:
2015
2014
717 Aircraft ($372 and $421 accounted for as operating leases)
$1,415
$1,562
747 Aircraft (Accounted for as operating leases)
1,038
601
MD-80 Aircraft (Accounted for as sales-type finance leases)
314
358
757 Aircraft ($48 and $349 accounted for as operating leases)
270
370
767 Aircraft ($84 and $47 accounted for as operating leases)
185
158
737 Aircraft ($115 and $127 accounted for as operating leases)
115
156
MD-11 Aircraft (Accounted for as operating leases)
35
114
Charges related to customer financing asset impairment for the years ended December 31 were as follows:
2015
2014
2013
Boeing Capital
$162
$139
$67
Other Boeing
45
14
Total
$162
$184
$81
Scheduled receipts on customer financing are as follows:
Year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Beyond
2020
Principal payments on notes receivable
$54
$38
$104
$56
$4
Sales-type/finance lease payments receivable
255
231
220
207
174
$450
Operating lease equipment payments receivable
593
120
100
86
71
357
75

Table of Contents
Note 8 – Property, Plant and Equipment
Property, plant and equipment at December 31 consisted of the following:
2015
2014
Land
$536
$560
Buildings and land improvements
12,397
11,767
Machinery and equipment
13,187
12,867
Construction in progress
2,242
1,502
Gross property, plant and equipment
28,362
26,696
Less accumulated depreciation
(16,286)
(15,689)
Total
$12,076
$11,007
Depreciation expense was $1,357 , $1,414 and $1,338 for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. Interest capitalized
during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 totaled $158 , $102 and $87 , respectively.
Rental  expense  for  leased  properties  was $267 , $277 and $287 ,  for  the  years  ended December  31,  2015,  2014  and  2013 ,  respectively.  At
December 31, 2015 , minimum rental payments under capital leases aggregated $157 . Minimum rental payments under operating leases with initial
or  remaining  terms  of  one  year  or  more  aggregated $1,515 ,  net  of  sublease  payments  of $13 at December  31,  2015 .  Payments  due  under
operating and capital leases net of sublease amounts and non-cancellable future rentals during the next five years are as follows:
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Minimum operating lease payments, net of sublease amounts
$240
$217
$182
$157
$117
Minimum capital lease payments
55
47
29
12
4
Accounts payable related to purchases of property, plant and equipment were $502 and $299 for the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
76

Table of Contents
Note 9 – Investments
Our investments, which are recorded in Short-term and other investments or Investments, consisted of the following at December 31:
2015
 
2014
Time deposits
$456
$1,295
Pledged money market funds (1)
38
38
Available-for-sale investments
244
7
Equity method investments (2)
1,230
1,114
Restricted cash (3)
31
26
Other investments
35
33
Total
$2,034
$2,513
(1)  Reflects amounts pledged in lieu of letters of credit as collateral in support of our workers’ compensation programs. These funds can become
available within 30 days notice upon issuance of letters of credit.
(2)  Dividends received were $239 and $293 during 2015 and 2014 . Retained earnings at December 31, 2015 include undistributed earnings from
our equity method investments of $251 .
(3)  Restricted to pay certain claims related to workers’ compensation and life insurance premiums for certain employees.
Equity Method Investments
Our equity method investments consisted of the following as of December 31:
Segment
Ownership
Percentages
Investment Balance
2015
 
2014
United Launch Alliance
Network & Space Systems (N&SS)
50%
$908
$916
Other
Commercial Airplanes, N&SS and Global Services &
Support (GS&S)
322
198
Total equity method investments
$1,230
$1,114
Note 10 – Other Assets
Sea Launch
At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , Other assets included $356 of receivables related to our former investment in the Sea Launch venture which
became  payable  by  certain  Sea  Launch  partners  following  Sea  Launch’s  bankruptcy  filing  in  June  2009.  The $356 includes $147 related  to  a
payment made by us under a bank guarantee on behalf of Sea Launch and $209 related to loans (partner loans) we made to Sea Launch. The net
amounts  owed  to  Boeing  by  each  of  the  partners  are  as  follows:  S.P.  Koroley  Rocket  and  Space  Corporation  Energia  of  Russia  – $223 ,  PO
Yuzhnoye Mashinostroitelny Zavod of Ukraine – $89 and KB Yuzhnoye of Ukraine – $44 .
Although each partner is contractually obligated to reimburse us for its share of the bank guarantee, the Russian and Ukrainian partners have raised
defenses to enforcement and contested our claims. On February 1, 2013, we filed an action in the United States District Court for the Central District
of  California  seeking  reimbursement  from  the  other  Sea  Launch  partners  of  the $147 bank  guarantee  payment  and  the $209 partner  loan
obligations. On September 28, 2015, the district court granted summary judgment in
77

Table of Contents
Boeing’s favor on all claims against the other partners. Further proceedings will determine the final damage amount, including potential interest
payments. If the partners decide to appeal or seek reconsideration of the district court’s ruling additional proceedings would ensue. Prior to these
proceedings, we had filed a Notice of Arbitration with the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce seeking reimbursement from the other partners for a
portion of these amounts. In 2010, the arbitrator ruled that the Stockholm Chamber of Commerce lacked jurisdiction to hear the matter, which ruling
has been on appeal in the Swedish appellate courts since mid-2014. During the fourth quarter of 2015, the Supreme Court of Sweden confirmed our
right to pursue this appeal in the Swedish appellate courts . We believe the partners have the financial wherewithal to pay and intend to pursue
vigorously all of our rights and remedies. In the event we are unable to secure reimbursement  of $147 related to our payment under the bank
guarantee and $209 related to partner loans made to Sea Launch, we could incur additional charges. Our current assessment as to the collectability
of these receivables takes into account the current economic conditions in Russia and Ukraine, although we will continue to monitor the situation.
Spirit AeroSystems
As of December 31, 2015, Other assets included $140 of receivables related to an indemnification from Spirit AeroSystems, Inc. (Spirit), for costs
incurred related to pension and retiree medical obligations of former Boeing employees that were subsequently employed by Spirit. During the fourth
quarter of 2014, Boeing filed a complaint against Spirit in Delaware Superior Court seeking to enforce our rights to indemnification and to recover
from Spirit amounts incurred by Boeing for pension and retiree medical obligations. We expect to fully recover from Spirit and do not expect to incur
any losses.
Note 11 – Liabilities, Commitments and Contingencies
Accrued Liabilities
Accrued liabilities at December 31 consisted of the following:
2015
2014
Accrued compensation and employee benefit costs
$5,624
$5,868
Environmental
566
601
Product warranties
1,485
1,504
Forward loss recognition
757
414
Dividends payable
721
637
Income Taxes Payable
262
119
Other
4,599
4,319
Total
$14,014
$13,462
Environmental
The following table summarizes environmental remediation activity during the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
2015
2014
Beginning balance – January 1
$601
$649
Reductions for payments made
(78)
(89)
Changes in estimates
43
41
Ending balance – December 31
$566
$601
78

Table of Contents
The liabilities recorded represent our best estimate or the low end of a range of reasonably possible costs expected to be incurred to remediate
sites, including operation and maintenance over periods of up to 30 years. It is reasonably possible that we may incur charges that exceed these
recorded amounts because of regulatory agency orders and directives, changes in laws and/or regulations, higher than expected costs and/or the
discovery of new or additional contamination. As part of our estimating process, we develop a range of reasonably possible alternate scenarios that
includes the high end of a range of reasonably possible cost estimates for all remediation sites for which we have sufficient information based on our
experience  and  existing  laws  and  regulations.  There  are  some  potential  remediation  obligations  where  the  costs  of  remediation  cannot  be
reasonably estimated. At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the high end of the estimated range of reasonably possible remediation costs exceeded
our recorded liabilities by $853 and $874 .
Product Warranties
The following table summarizes product warranty activity recorded during the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
2015
2014
Beginning balance – January 1
$1,504
$1,570
Additions for current year deliveries
421
566
Reductions for payments made
(323)
(432)
Changes in estimates
(117)
(200)
Ending balance - December 31
$1,485
$1,504
Commercial Aircraft Commitments
In conjunction with signing definitive agreements for the sale of new aircraft (Sale Aircraft), we have entered into trade-in commitments with certain
customers that give them the right to trade in used aircraft  at a specified price upon the purchase of Sale Aircraft. The probability that trade-in
commitments will be exercised is determined by using both quantitative information from valuation sources and qualitative information from other
sources. The probability of exercise is assessed quarterly, or as events trigger a change, and takes into consideration the current economic and
airline industry environments. Trade-in commitments, which can be terminated by mutual consent with the customer, may be exercised only during
the period specified in the agreement, and require advance notice by the customer.
Trade-in commitment agreements at December 31, 2015 have expiration dates from 2016 through 2026 . At December 31, 2015 and 2014 , total
contractual trade-in commitments were $1,585 and $2,392 . As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , we estimated that it was probable we would be
obligated to perform on certain of these commitments  with net amounts payable to customers totaling $240 and $446 and the fair value of the
related trade-in aircraft was $240 and $446 .
79

Table of Contents
Financing Commitments
Financing commitments related to aircraft on order, including options and those proposed in sales campaigns, totaled $16,283 and $16,723 as of
December 31, 2015 and 2014 . The estimated earliest potential funding dates for these commitments as of December 31, 2015 are as follows:
Total
2016
$2,897
2017
3,664
2018
3,235
2019
2,884
2020
1,321
Thereafter
2,282
$16,283
As of December 31, 2015 , $15,919 of these financing commitments related to customers we believe have less than investment-grade credit. We
have  concluded  that  no  reserve  for  future  potential  losses  is  required  for  these  financing  commitments  based  upon  the  terms,  such  as
collateralization and interest rates, under which funding would be provided.
Standby Letters of Credit and Surety Bonds
We  have  entered  into  standby  letters  of  credit  and  surety  bonds  with  financial  institutions  primarily  relating  to  the  guarantee  of  our  future
performance  on  certain  contracts.  Contingent  liabilities  on  outstanding  letters  of  credit  agreements  and  surety  bonds  aggregated  approximately
$4,968 and $3,985 as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
Commitments to ULA
We and Lockheed Martin Corporation have each committed to provide ULA with additional capital contributions in the event ULA does not have
sufficient funds to make a required payment to us under an inventory supply agreement. As of December 31, 2015 , ULA’s total remaining obligation
to Boeing under the inventory supply agreement was $120 . See Note 6 .
C-17
Production of the C-17 aircraft ended in the fourth quarter of 2015. At December 31, 2015 , one aircraft remained unsold, while our backlog includes
international orders for four C-17 aircraft that are scheduled for delivery in 2016. During 2015 we received orders for six C-17 aircraft and we believe
it is probable that we will receive an order for the remaining unsold aircraft from an international customer. Should an order not materialize we could
incur charges to write down inventory.
F/A-18
At December 31, 2015 , our backlog included 48 F/A-18 aircraft under contract with the U.S. Navy. The orders in backlog include an order for 15
aircraft finalized in October 2015. The Consolidated Appropriations Act, 2016, passed in December 2015, funds 12 additional F/A-18 aircraft that,
combined  with  the  orders  in  backlog,  would  complete  production  in  mid-2018.  The  President’s  Fiscal  Year  2017  Budget  request  submitted  in
February  2016  includes  funding  for two additional  F/A-18  aircraft.  We  are  continuing  to  work  with  our  U.S.  customers  as  well  as  international
customers to secure additional orders that would extend the program beyond 2018. 
80

Table of Contents
Should additional orders not materialize, it is reasonably possible that we will decide to end production of the F/A-18 in 2018. We are still evaluating
the full financial impact of a potential production shutdown, including any recovery that may be available from the U.S. government.
KC-46A Tanker
We have also begun work on low rate initial production aircraft for the U.S. Air Force ( USAF ). The USAF is expected to authorize two low rate initial
production lots in 2016 for a total of 19 aircraft, subject to satisfactory progress being made on the Engineering, Manufacturing and Development
contract.  At  December  31,  2015,  we  had  approximately $429 of  capitalized  precontract  costs  and $1,589 of  potential  termination  liabilities  to
suppliers associated with the KC-46A Tanker.
Company Owned Life Insurance
McDonnell Douglas Corporation insured its executives with Company Owned Life Insurance (COLI), which are life insurance policies with a cash
surrender value. Although we do not use COLI currently, these obligations from the merger with McDonnell Douglas are still a commitment at this
time. We have loans in place to cover costs paid or incurred to carry the underlying life insurance policies. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , the
cash surrender value was $487 and $466 and the total loans were $456 and $439 . As we have the right to offset the loans against the cash
surrender value of the policies, we present the net asset in Other assets on the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31,
2015 and 2014 .
United States Government Defense Environment Overview
The  enactment  of  The  Bipartisan  Budget  Act  of  2015  in  November  2015  established  overall  defense  spending  levels  for  FY2016  and  FY2017.
However,  uncertainty  remains  with  respect  to  levels  of  defense  spending  for  FY2018  and  beyond,  including  risk  of  future  sequestration  cuts.
Significant  uncertainty  also  continues  with  respect  to  program-level  appropriations  for  the  U.S.  Department  of  Defense  (U.S.  DoD)  and  other
government agencies, including the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, within the overall budgetary framework described above. Future
budget  cuts,  including  cuts  mandated  by  sequestration,  or  future  procurement  decisions  associated  with  the  authorization  and  appropriations
process could result in reductions, cancellations and/or delays of existing contracts or programs. Any of these impacts could have a material effect
on the results of the Company’s operations, financial position and/or cash flows.
In addition to the risks described above, if Congress is unable to pass appropriations bills in a timely manner, a government shutdown could result
which may have impacts above and beyond those resulting from budget cuts, sequestration impacts or program-level appropriations. For example,
requirements to furlough employees in the U.S. DoD or other government agencies could result in payment delays, impair our ability to perform work
on existing contracts, and/or negatively impact future orders.
KC-46A Tanker and BDS Fixed-Price Development Contracts
Fixed-price development work is inherently uncertain and subject to significant variability in estimates of the cost and time required to complete the
work. BDS fixed-price contracts with significant development work include Commercial Crew, Saudi F-15, USAF KC-46A Tanker and commercial
and military satellites. The operational and technical complexities of these contracts create financial risk, which could trigger termination provisions,
order  cancellations  or  other  financially  significant  exposure.  Changes  to  cost  and  revenue  estimates  could  result  in  lower  margins  or  material
charges for reach-forward losses. For example, during the second quarter of 2015, higher estimated costs to complete the KC-46A Tanker contract
for the USAF resulted in a reach-forward loss of $835 .
81

Table of Contents
Recoverable Costs on Government Contracts
Our final incurred costs for each year are subject to audit and review for allowability by the U.S. government, which can result in payment demands
related to costs they believe should be disallowed. We work with the U.S. government to assess the merits of claims and where appropriate reserve
for amounts disputed. If we are unable to satisfactorily resolve disputed costs, we could be required to record an earnings charge and/or provide
refunds to the U.S. government.
Russia/Ukraine
We continue to monitor political unrest involving Russia and Ukraine, where we and some of our suppliers source titanium products and/or have
operations. A number of our commercial customers also have operations in Russia and Ukraine. To date, we have not experienced any significant
disruptions to production or deliveries. Should suppliers or customers experience disruption, our production and/or deliveries could be materially
impacted.
747 Program
During the fourth quarter of 2015, we recorded a charge of $885 to recognize a reach-forward loss on the 747 program primarily due to slower than
expected  growth  in  global  cargo  markets,  resulting  in  market  and  pricing  pressures  and  fewer  orders  than  anticipated  driving  reductions  in  our
planned production rates. The charge is primarily related to lower anticipated revenues reflecting ongoing pricing and market pressures as well as
higher estimated costs due to the reduction in the production rate from 1.0 per month to 0.5 per month in September 2016 . We currently plan to
return to a rate of 1.0 per month in 2019. We have a number of completed aircraft in inventory as well as unsold production positions and we remain
focused on obtaining additional orders and implementing cost-reduction efforts. If we are unable to obtain sufficient orders in 2016 and/or market,
production and other risks cannot be mitigated, the program could face an additional reach-forward loss that may be material.
787 Program
During 2015 the 787 program continued to have near breakeven gross margins. The combination of production challenges, change incorporation on
early build aircraft, schedule delays, customer and supplier impacts and changes to price escalation factors has created significant pressure on
program  profitability.  If  risks  related  to  this  program,  including  risks  associated  with  planned  production  rate  increases  or  introducing  and
manufacturing  the  787-10  derivative  as  scheduled  cannot  be  mitigated,  the  program  could  face  additional  customer  claims  and/or  supplier
assertions, as well as a reach-forward loss that may be material.
82

Table of Contents
Note 12 – Arrangements with Off-Balance Sheet Risk
We enter into arrangements with off-balance sheet risk in the normal course of business, primarily in the form of guarantees.
The  following  table  provides  quantitative  data  regarding  our  third  party  guarantees.  The  maximum  potential  payments  represent  a  “worst-case
scenario,” and do not necessarily reflect amounts that we expect to pay. Estimated proceeds from collateral and recourse represent the anticipated
values  of  assets  we  could  liquidate  or  receive  from  other  parties  to  offset  our  payments  under  guarantees.  The  carrying  amount  of  liabilities
represents the amount included in Accrued liabilities.
Maximum
Potential
Payments
Estimated
Proceeds from
Collateral/
Recourse
Carrying
Amount of
Liabilities
December 31,
2015
2014
2015
2014
2015
2014
Contingent repurchase commitments
$1,529
$1,375
$1,510
$1,364
$7
$5
Indemnifications to ULA:
Contributed Delta program launch inventory
107
114
Contract pricing
261
261
7
7
Other Delta contracts
231
150
5
Other indemnifications
63
20
Credit guarantees
30
30
27
27
2
2
Contingent  Repurchase  Commitments The  repurchase  price  specified  in  contingent  repurchase  commitments  is  generally  lower  than  the
expected fair value at the specified repurchase date. Estimated proceeds from collateral/recourse  in the table above represent the lower of the
contracted repurchase price or the expected fair value of each aircraft at the specified repurchase date.
Indemnifications  to  ULA In  2006,  we  agreed  to  indemnify  ULA  through  December  31,  2020  against  potential  non-recoverability  and  non-
allowability of $1,360 of Boeing Delta  launch program  inventory  included in contributed  assets  plus $1,860 of inventory subject to an inventory
supply agreement which ends on March 31, 2021 . Since inception, ULA has consumed $1,253 of the $1,360 of inventory that was contributed by us
and  has  yet  to  consume $107 .  Under  the  inventory  supply  agreement,  we  have  recorded  revenues  and  cost  of  sales  of $1,367 through
December 31, 2015 . ULA has made payments of $1,740 to us under the inventory supply agreement and we have made $71 of indemnification
payments to ULA.
We agreed to indemnify ULA against potential losses that ULA may incur in the event ULA is unable to obtain certain additional contract pricing from
the USAF for four satellite missions. We believe ULA is entitled to additional contract pricing. In December 2008, ULA submitted a claim to the
USAF to re-price the contract value for two satellite missions. In March 2009, the USAF issued a denial of that claim. In June 2009, ULA filed a
notice  of  appeal,  and  in  October  2009,  ULA  filed  a  complaint  before  the  Armed  Services  Board  of  Contract  Appeals  (ASBCA)  for  a  contract
adjustment for the price of the two satellite missions. In September 2009, the USAF exercised its option for a third satellite mission. During the third
quarter of 2010, ULA submitted a claim to the USAF to re-price the contract value of the third mission. The USAF did not exercise an option for a
fourth mission prior to the expiration of the contract. In March 2011, ULA filed a notice of appeal before the ASBCA, seeking to re-price the third
mission. On November 20, 2013, the ASBCA denied USAF motions for summary judgment against ULA in large part, leaving ULA ’s claims against
the USAF substantially intact. The hearing before the ASBCA concluded on December 20, 2013. The parties filed their final post-hearing briefs in
May  2014.  The  ASBCA  may  now  issue  a  decision  at  any  time.  If  ULA  is  ultimately  unsuccessful  in  obtaining  additional  pricing,  we  may  be
responsible for an
83

Table of Contents
indemnification payment up to $261 and may record up to $277 in pre-tax losses associated with the three missions.
Potential payments for Other Delta contracts include $85 related to deferred support costs and $91 related to deferred production costs. In June
2011,  the  Defense  Contract  Management  Agency  (DCMA)  notified  ULA  that  it  had  determined  that $271 of  deferred  support  costs  are  not
recoverable under government contracts. In December 2011, the DCMA notified ULA of the potential non-recoverability of an additional $114 of
deferred production costs. ULA and Boeing believe that all costs are recoverable and in November 2011, ULA filed a certified claim with the USAF
for collection of deferred support and production costs. The USAF issued a final decision denying ULA’s certified claim in May 2012. On June 14,
2012, Boeing and ULA filed a suit in the Court of Federal Claims seeking recovery of the deferred support and production costs from the U.S.
government. On November 9, 2012, the U.S. government filed an answer to our claim and asserted a counterclaim for credits that it alleges were
offset by deferred support cost invoices. We believe that the U.S. government’s counterclaim is without merit, and have filed an answer challenging
it on multiple grounds. The litigation is in the discovery phase and the Court has not yet set a trial date. If, contrary to our belief, it is determined that
some or all of the deferred support or production costs are not recoverable, we could be required to record pre-tax losses and make indemnification
payments to ULA for up to $317 of the costs questioned by the DCMA.
Other Indemnifications In conjunction with our sales of Electron Dynamic Devices, Inc. and Rocketdyne Propulsion and Power businesses and our
Commercial Airplanes facilities in Wichita, Kansas and Tulsa and McAlester, Oklahoma, we agreed to indemnify, for an indefinite period, the buyers
for costs relating to pre-closing environmental conditions and certain other items. We are unable to assess the potential number of future claims that
may be asserted under these indemnifications, nor the amounts thereof (if any). As a result, we cannot estimate the maximum potential amount of
future payments  under these indemnities and therefore,  no liability has been recorded.  To the extent that  claims have been made under these
indemnities and/or are probable and reasonably estimable, liabilities associated with these indemnities are included in the environmental liability
disclosure in Note 11 .
Credit  Guarantees We  have  issued  credit  guarantees,  principally  to  facilitate  the  sale  and/or  financing  of  commercial  aircraft.  Under  these
arrangements, we are obligated to make payments to a guaranteed party in the event that lease or loan payments are not made by the original
lessee or debtor or certain specified services are not performed. A substantial portion of these guarantees has been extended on behalf of original
lessees or debtors with less than investment-grade credit. Our commercial aircraft credit guarantees are collateralized by the underlying commercial
aircraft and certain other assets. Current outstanding credit guarantees expire within the next five years.
Industrial Revenue Bonds
Industrial Revenue Bonds (IRB) issued by the City of Wichita and St. Louis County were used to finance the purchase and/or construction of real
and personal property at our Wichita and St. Louis sites. Tax benefits associated with IRBs include a ten-year property tax abatement and a sales
tax exemption from the Kansas Department of Revenue, and a twelve-year property tax abatement and sales tax exemption from St. Louis County.
We record these properties on our Consolidated Statements of Financial Position, along with capital lease obligations to repay the proceeds of the
IRBs. We have also purchased the IRBs and therefore are the bondholders as well as the borrower/lessee of the properties purchased with the IRB
proceeds.
The capital lease obligations and IRB assets are recorded net in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position. As of December 31, 2015 and
2014 , the assets and liabilities associated with the City of Wichita and St. Louis County IRBs were $584 and $638 .
84

Table of Contents
Note 13 – Debt
On February 20, 2015 , we issued $750 of fixed rate senior notes consisting of $250 due March 1, 2025 that bear an annual interest rate of 2.5% ,
$250 due March 1, 2035 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.3% , and $250 due March 1, 2045 that bear an annual interest rate of 3.5% . The
notes  are  unsecured  senior  obligations  and  rank  equally  in  right  of  payment  with  our  existing  and  future  unsecured  and  unsubordinated
indebtedness. The net proceeds of the issuance totaled $722 , after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
On October 29, 2015 , we issued $900 of fixed rate senior notes consisting of $350 due October 30, 2020 that bear an annual interest rate of 1.65%
, $250 due October 30, 2022 that bear interest at the rate of 2.2% , and $300 due October 30, 2025 that bear interest at the rate of 2.6% . The notes
are unsecured senior obligations and rank equally in right of payment with our existing and future unsecured and unsubordinated indebtedness. The
net proceeds of the issuance totaled $881 , after deducting underwriting discounts, commissions and offering expenses.
Interest incurred, including amounts capitalized, was $497 , $504 and $548 for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively.
Interest expense recorded by BCC is reflected as Boeing Capital interest expense on our Consolidated Statements of Operations. Total Company
interest payments were $488 , $511 and $551 for the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively.
We have $4,980 currently available under credit line agreements, of which $2,465 is a 364-day revolving credit facility expiring in November 2016
and $2,365 expires in November 2020 , $90 in November 2019 , and $60 in November 2017 . The 364-day credit facility has a one-year term out
option which allows us to extend the maturity of any borrowings one year beyond the aforementioned expiration date. We continue to be in full
compliance with all covenants contained in our debt or credit facility agreements.
Short-term debt and current portion of long-term debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2015
2014
Unsecured debt securities
$1,004
$755
Non-recourse debt and notes
36
38
Capital lease obligations
53
64
Other notes
141
72
Total
$1,234
$929
85

Table of Contents
Debt at December 31 consisted of the following:
2015
2014
Unsecured debt securities
Variable rate: 3-month USD LIBOR plus 12.5 basis points due 2017
$250
$250
0.95% - 4.88% due through 2045
5,075
4,223
5.88% - 6.88% due through 2043
2,381
2,394
7.25% - 8.75% due through 2043
1,645
1,657
Non-recourse debt and notes
6.98% - 7.38% notes due through 2021
163
201
Capital lease obligations due through 2024
150
161
Other notes
300
184
Total debt
$9,964
$9,070
Total debt is attributable to:
2015
2014
BCC
$2,355
$2,412
Other Boeing
7,609
6,658
Total debt
$9,964
$9,070
At December 31, 2015 , $163 of  debt (non-recourse  debt,  notes  and capital  lease  obligations)  was  collateralized  by  customer  financing  assets
totaling $295 .
Scheduled principal payments for debt and minimum capital lease obligations for the next five years are as follows:
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
Scheduled principal payments
$1,242
$368
$703
$1,248
$1,126
86

Table of Contents
Note 14 – Postretirement Plans
The majority of our employees have earned benefits under defined benefit pension plans. Nonunion and the majority of union employees that had
participated in defined benefit pension plans will transition to a company-funded defined contribution retirement savings plan in 2016.
We fund our major pension plans through trusts. Pension assets are placed in trust solely for the benefit of the plans’ participants, and are structured
to maintain liquidity that is sufficient to pay benefit obligations as well as to keep pace over the long-term with the growth of obligations for future
benefit payments.
We also have other postretirement benefits (OPB) other than pensions which consist principally of health care coverage for eligible retirees and
qualifying dependents, and to a lesser extent, life insurance to certain groups of retirees. Retiree health care is provided principally until age 65 for
approximately half those retirees who are eligible for health care coverage. Certain employee groups, including employees covered by most United
Auto Workers bargaining agreements, are provided lifetime health care coverage. The funded status of the plans is measured as the difference
between the plan assets at fair value and the projected benefit obligation (PBO). We have recognized the aggregate of all overfunded plans in Other
assets, and the aggregate of all underfunded plans in either Accrued retiree health care or Accrued pension plan liability, net. The portion of the
amount by which the actuarial present value of benefits included in the PBO exceeds the fair value of plan assets, payable in the next 12 months, is
reflected in Accrued liabilities.
The components of net periodic benefit cost were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
2015
2014
2013
Service cost
$1,764
$1,661
$1,886
$140
$129
$148
Interest cost
2,990
3,058
2,906
248
289
263
Expected return on plan assets
(4,031)
(4,169)
(3,874)
(8)
(8)
(6)
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
196
177
196
(136)
(144)
(180)
Recognized net actuarial loss
1,577
1,020
2,231
31
8
95
Settlement/curtailment/other losses
290
461
104
10
1
Net periodic benefit cost
$2,786
$2,208
$3,449
$285
$275
$320
Net periodic benefit cost included in Earnings from
operations
$2,366
$3,215
$3,036
$288
$287
$353
In 2015 , we recorded charges of $290 related to curtailments and other benefit changes associated with certain of our defined benefit plans.
87

Table of Contents
The  following  tables  show  changes  in  the  benefit  obligation,  plan  assets  and  funded  status  of  both  pensions  and  OPB  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2015 and 2014 . Benefit obligation balances presented below reflect the PBO for our pension plans, and accumulated postretirement
benefit obligations (APBO) for our OPB plans.
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2015
2014
2015
2014
Change in benefit obligation
Beginning balance
$78,391
$68,625
$7,306
$7,008
Service cost
1,764
1,661
140
129
Interest cost
2,990
3,058
248
289
Plan participants’ contributions
5
6
Amendments
(1,379)
51
(19)
(43)
Actuarial (gain)/loss
(3,505)
10,655
(89)
334
Settlement/curtailment/other
(457)
(2,518)
10
7
Gross benefits paid
(3,382)
(3,126)
(486)
(449)
Subsidies
43
39
Exchange rate adjustment
(39)
(21)
(15)
(8)
Ending balance
$74,388
$78,391
$7,138
$7,306
Change in plan assets
Beginning balance at fair value
$61,119
$58,131
$141
$140
Actual return/(loss) on plan assets
(701)
5,893
1
10
Company contribution
59
784
5
8
Plan participants’ contributions
5
6
5
2
Settlement payments
(649)
(640)
Benefits paid
(3,284)
(3,039)
(20)
(19)
Exchange rate adjustment
(35)
(16)
Ending balance at fair value
$56,514
$61,119
$132
$141
Amounts recognized in statement of financial position at December 31
consist of:
Other assets
$10
$3
Other accrued liabilities
(101)
(93)
($390)
($363)
Accrued retiree health care
(6,616)
(6,802)
Accrued pension plan liability, net
(17,783)
(17,182)
Net amount recognized
($17,874)
($17,272)
($7,006)
($7,165)
Amounts recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss at December 31 were as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement Benefits
2015
2014
2015
2014
Net actuarial loss
$20,871
$21,321
$781
$877
Prior service costs/(credits)
(1,195)
385
(397)
(512)
Total recognized in Accumulated other comprehensive loss
$19,676
$21,706
$384
$365
88

Table of Contents
The  estimated  amount  that  will  be  amortized  from  Accumulated  other  comprehensive  loss  into  net  periodic  benefit  cost  during  the  year  ending
December 31, 2016 is as follows:
Pension
Other Postretirement
Benefits
Recognized net actuarial loss
$787
$22
Amortization of prior service costs/(credits)
38
(126)
Total
$825
($104)
The accumulated benefit obligation (ABO) for all pension plans was $72,330 and $75,655 at December 31, 2015 and 2014 . Key information for our
plans with ABO in excess of plan assets as of December 31 was as follows:
2015
2014
Projected benefit obligation
$74,188
$78,358
Accumulated benefit obligation
72,121
75,622
Fair value of plan assets
56,306
61,082
Assumptions
The following assumptions, which are the weighted average for all plans, are used to calculate the benefit obligation at December 31 of each year
and the net periodic benefit cost for the subsequent year.
December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Discount rate:
Pension
4.20%
3.90%
4.80%
Other postretirement benefits
3.80%
3.50%
4.20%
Expected return on plan assets
7.00%
7.00%
7.50%
Rate of compensation increase
4.00%
3.80%
4.00%
The discount rate for each plan is determined based on the plans’ expected future benefit payments using a yield curve developed from high quality
bonds that are rated as Aa or better by at least half of the four rating agencies utilized as of the measurement date. The yield curve is fitted to yields
developed from bonds at various maturity points. Bonds with the ten percent highest and the ten percent lowest yields are omitted. A portfolio of
about 400 bonds is used to construct the yield curve. Since corporate bond yields are generally not available at maturities beyond 30 years, it is
assumed that spot rates will remain level beyond that 30-year point. The present value of each plan’s benefits is calculated by applying the discount
rates to projected benefit cash flows. All bonds are U.S. issues, with a minimum outstanding of $50.
The pension fund’s expected return on plan assets assumption is derived from a review of actual historical returns achieved by the pension trust and
anticipated future long-term performance of individual asset classes. While consideration is given to recent trust performance and historical returns,
the assumption represents a long-term, prospective return. The expected return on plan assets component of the net periodic benefit cost for the
upcoming plan year is determined based on the expected return on plan assets assumption and the market-related value of plan assets (MRVA).
Since our adoption of the accounting standard for pensions in 1987, we have determined the MRVA based on a five -year moving average of plan
assets. As of December 31, 2015 , the MRVA was approximately $2,731 greater than the fair market value of assets.
89

Table of Contents
Assumed health care cost trend rates were as follows:
December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Health care cost trend rate assumed next year
6.50%
7.00%
7.00%
Ultimate trend rate
5.00%
5.00%
5.00%
Year that trend reached ultimate rate
2021
2018
2018
Assumed health care cost trend rates have a significant effect on the amounts reported for the health care plans. To determine the health care cost
trend rates we look at a combination of information including ongoing claims cost monitoring, annual statistical analyses of claims data, reconciliation
of forecast claims against actual claims, review of trend assumptions of other plan sponsors and national health trends, and adjustments for plan
design changes, workforce changes, and changes in plan participant behavior. A one-percentage-point change in assumed health care cost trend
rates would have the following effect:
Increase
Decrease
Effect on total of service and interest cost
$54
($44)
Effect on postretirement benefit obligation
647
(551)
Plan Assets
Investment Strategy The overall objective of our pension assets is to earn a rate of return over time to satisfy the benefit obligations of the pension
plans and to maintain sufficient liquidity to pay benefits and address other cash requirements of the pension fund. Specific investment objectives for
our  long-term  investment  strategy  include  reducing  the  volatility  of  pension  assets  relative  to  pension  liabilities,  achieving  a  competitive  total
investment return, achieving diversification between and within asset classes and managing other risks. Investment objectives for each asset class
are determined based on specific risks and investment opportunities identified.
We periodically update our long-term, strategic asset allocations. We use various analytics to determine the optimal asset mix and consider plan
liability characteristics, liquidity characteristics, funding requirements, expected rates of return and the distribution of returns. We identify investment
benchmarks for the asset classes in the strategic asset allocation that are market-based and investable where possible.
Actual allocations to each asset class vary from target allocations due to periodic investment strategy changes, market value fluctuations, the length
of time it takes to fully implement investment allocation positions, and the timing of benefit payments and contributions. Short-term investments and
exchange-traded derivatives are used to rebalance the actual asset allocation to the target asset allocation. The asset allocation is monitored and
rebalanced on a monthly basis.
The actual and target allocations by asset class for the pension assets at December 31 were as follows:
Actual Allocations
Target Allocations
Asset Class
2015
2014
2015
2014
Fixed income
48%
48%
47%
47%
Global equity
28
29
29
26
Private equity
5
5
5
6
Real estate and real assets
9
9
9
11
Hedge funds (1)
10
9
10
10
Total
100%
100%
100%
100%
(1)  As of January 1, 2015 the global strategies asset class was consolidated with the hedge funds asset class.
90

Table of Contents
Fixed  income  securities  are  invested  primarily  in  a  diversified  portfolio  of  long  duration  instruments.  Global  equity  securities  are  invested  in  a
diversified portfolio of U.S. and non-U.S. companies, across various industries and market capitalizations.
Real estate and real assets include global private investments that may be held through an investment in a limited partnership (LP) or other fund
structures and publicly traded investments (such as Real Estate Investment Trusts (REITs) in the case of real estate). Real estate includes, but is
not limited to, investments in office, retail, apartment and industrial properties. Real assets include, but are not limited to, investments in natural
resources  (such  as  energy,  farmland  and  timber),  commodities  and  infrastructure.  Private  equity  investment  vehicles  are  primarily  limited
partnerships (LPs) and fund-of-funds that mainly invest in U.S. and non-U.S. leveraged buyout, venture capital and special situation strategies.
Hedge fund investments seek to capitalize on inefficiencies identified across and within different asset classes or markets. Hedge fund strategy
types include, but are not limited to directional, event driven, relative value, long-short and multi-strategy.
Investment managers are retained for explicit investment roles specified by contractual investment guidelines. Certain investment managers are
authorized to use derivatives, such as equity or bond futures, swaps, options and currency futures or forwards. Derivatives are used to achieve the
desired  market  exposure  of  a  security  or  an  index,  transfer  value-added  performance  between  asset  classes,  achieve  the  desired  currency
exposure, adjust portfolio duration or rebalance the total portfolio to the target asset allocation.
As a percentage of total pension plan assets, derivative net notional amounts were 13.1% and 3.5% for fixed income, including to-be-announced
mortgage-backed securities and treasury forwards, and 4.0% and 2.0% for global equity and commodities at December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
Risk Management In managing the plan assets, we review and manage risk associated with funded status risk, interest  rate risk, market  risk,
counterparty risk, liquidity risk and operational risk. Liability matching and asset class diversification are central to our risk management approach
and  are  integral  to  the  overall  investment  strategy.  Further,  asset  classes  are  constructed  to  achieve  diversification  by  investment  strategy,  by
investment manager, by industry or sector and by holding. Investment manager guidelines for publicly traded assets are specified and are monitored
regularly  through  the  custodian.  Credit  parameters  for  counterparties  have  been  established  for  managers  permitted  to  trade  over-the-counter
derivatives.  Valuation  is  governed  through  several  types  of  procedures,  including  reviews  of  manager  valuation  policies,  custodian  valuation
processes, pricing vendor practices, pricing reconciliation, and periodic, security-specific valuation testing .
Fair Value Measurements The following table presents our plan assets using the fair value hierarchy as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 . The fair
value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined based on
quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs, and Level 3
includes  fair  values  estimated  using  significant  unobservable  inputs.  We  have  retrospectively  adopted  ASU  No.  2015-07, Disclosures  for
Investments in Certain Entities that calculate Net Asset Value Per Share . The fair value hierarchy now excludes certain investments which are
valued using Net Asset Value (NAVs) as a practical expedient.
91

Table of Contents
December 31, 2015
December 31, 2014
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Fixed income securities:
Corporate
$16,339
$16,336
$3
$17,488
$17,486
$2
U.S. government and agencies
4,801
4,800
1
5,224
5,224
Mortgage backed and asset backed
830
382
448
1,207
596
611
Municipal
1,475
1,475
1,636
1,636
Sovereign
907
907
1,073
1,073
Other
83
9
74
246
9
237
Derivatives:
Assets
25
25
49
49
Liabilities
(67)
(67)
(66)
(66)
Cash equivalents and other short-term
investments
1,015
1,015
792
792
Equity securities:
U.S. common and preferred stock (1)
5,165
5,164
1
7,605
7,605
Non-U.S. common and preferred stock
5,712
5,710
2
7,151
7,139
11
1
Derivatives:
Assets
11
11
9
9
Liabilities
(3)
(3)
(5)
(5)
Private equity  (1)
3
3
3
3
Real estate and real assets:
Real estate
447
447
500
500
Real assets
632
351
275
6
743
369
370
4
Derivatives:
Assets
3
3
2
2
Liabilities
(2)
(2)
(11)
(11)
Total
$37,376
$11,681
$25,231
$464
$43,646
$15,622
$27,403
$621
Fixed income common/collective/pooled
funds
$1,753
$2,127
Fixed income other
247
252
Equity common/collective pooled funds
4,948
2,658
Private equity
2,611
2,924
Real estate and real assets
3,637
3,523
Hedge funds
5,478
5,620
Total investments measured at NAV as a
practical expedient
$18,674
$17,104
Cash
$162
$115
Receivables
435
447
Payables
(133)
(193)  
 
 
Total
$56,514
$61,119
(1)  Level  1  private  equity  securities  have  been  reclassified  to  U.S.  common  and  preferred  stock.  These  are  publicly  traded  equities  that  were
distributed from private equity LPs.
92

Table of Contents
Fixed  income  securities  are  primarily  valued  upon  a  market  approach,  using  matrix  pricing  and  considering  a  security’s  relationship  to  other
securities for which quoted prices in an active market may be available, or an income approach, converting future cash flows to a single present
value amount. Inputs used in developing fair value estimates include reported trades, broker quotes, benchmark yields, and base spreads.
Common/collective/pooled funds are typically common or collective trusts valued at their NAVs that are calculated by the investment manager or
sponsor of the fund and have daily or monthly liquidity. Derivatives included in the table above are over-the-counter and are primarily valued using
an income approach with inputs that include benchmark yields, swap curves, cash flow analysis, rating agency data and interdealer broker rates.
Exchange-traded derivative positions are reported in accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected
in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Cash equivalents and other short-term investments (which are used to pay benefits) are held in a separate account which consists of a commingled
fund (with daily liquidity) and separately held short-term securities and cash equivalents. All of the investments in this cash vehicle are valued daily
using  a  market  approach  with  inputs  that  include  quoted  market  prices  for  similar  instruments.  In  the  event  a  market  price  is  not  available  for
instruments  with an original maturity  of one year or less,  amortized  cost  is used as a proxy  for fair value. Common  and preferred  stock  equity
securities are primarily valued using a market approach based on the quoted market prices of identical instruments.
Private  equity  and  private  debt  NAV  valuations  are  based  on  the  valuation  of  the  underlying  investments,  which  include  inputs  such  as  cost,
operating results, discounted future cash flows and market based comparable data. For those investments reported on a one-quarter lagged basis
(primarily LPs) we use NAVs, adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events.
Real estate and real asset NAV valuations are based on valuation of the underlying investments, which include inputs such as cost, discounted
future  cash  flows,  independent  appraisals  and  market  based  comparable  data.  For  those  investments  reported  on  a  one-quarter  lagged  basis
(primarily LPs) NAVs are adjusted for subsequent cash flows and significant events. Publicly traded REITs and infrastructure stocks are valued
using a market approach based on quoted market prices of identical instruments. Exchange-traded commodities futures positions are reported in
accordance with changes in daily variation margin which is settled daily and therefore reflected in the payables and receivables portion of the table.
Hedge  funds  consist  of  direct  hedge  funds  and  fund-of-fund  limited  liability  company  (LLC)  structures.  For  direct  hedge  funds  the  NAVs  are
generally based on valuation of the underlying investments. This is primarily done by applying a market or income valuation methodology depending
on the specific type of security or instrument held. The NAVs of the fund-of-funds are based on the NAVs of the underlying hedge funds as well as
any cash and accruals held at the fund-of-fund level. Redemptions in hedge funds are based on specific terms and conditions of the individual
funds.
Investments in private equity, private debt, real estate, real assets, and hedge funds are primarily calculated and reported by the General Partner
(GP), fund manager or third party administrator. Additionally, some investments in fixed income and equity are made via commingled vehicles and
are valued in a similar fashion. Pension assets invested in commingled and limited partnership structures rely on the NAV of these investments as
the practical expedient for the valuations.
93

Table of Contents
The following tables present a reconciliation of Level 3 assets (excluding investments which are valued using NAVs as a practical expedient) held
during the years ended December 31, 2015 and 2014 . Transfers into and out of Level 3 are reported at the beginning-of-year values.
January 1 
2015 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized (Losses)
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Into Level 3
December 31 
2015 Balance
Fixed income securities:
Corporate  (1)
$1
$1
$1
$3
U.S. government and agencies
(1)
1
1
Mortgage backed and asset
 backed (1)
611
($9)
(157)
3
448
Other
(3)
3
Equity securities:
U.S. common and preferred
stock
1
1
Non-U.S. common and
preferred stock
1
(2)
3
2
Private equity
3
3
Real assets
4
2
6
Total
$621
($12)
($153)
$8
$464
January 1 
2014 Balance
Net Realized and
Unrealized Gains
Net Purchases,
Issuances and
Settlements
Net Transfers
Into/(Out of)
Level 3
December 31 
2014 Balance
Fixed income securities:
Corporate (2)
$19
($7)
($10)
$2
Mortgage backed and asset
backed (2)
554
$14
10
33
611
Equity securities:
Non-U.S. common and
preferred stock
1
(1)
1
1
Private equity
3
3
Real assets
4
4
Total
$577
$14
$6
$24
$621
(1)  Certain fixed income securities were reclassified from corporate and mortgage backed and asset backed to U.S. government and agencies on
January 1, 2015.
(2)  Certain fixed income securities were reclassified from corporate to mortgage backed and asset backed on January 1, 2014.
The changes in unrealized (losses)/gains for Level 3 mortgage backed and asset backed fixed income securities still held at December 31, 2015
and 2014 were ($10) and $8 .
OPB Plan Assets The majority of OPB plan assets are invested in a balanced index fund which is comprised of approximately 60% equities and
40% debt securities. The index fund is valued using a market approach based on the quoted market price of an identical instrument (Level 1). The
expected rate of return on these assets does not have a material effect on the net periodic benefit cost.
94

Table of Contents
Cash Flows
Contributions Required pension contributions under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act ( ERISA ), as well as rules governing funding of
our non-U.S. pension plans, are expected to be minimal in 2016 . In 2016 we expect to make contributions to our pension plans of approximately
$100 .
Estimated Future Benefit Payments The table below reflects the total pension benefits expected to be paid from the plans or from our assets,
including both our share of the benefit cost and the participants’ share of the cost, which is funded by participant contributions. OPB payments
reflect our portion only.
Year(s)
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021-2025
Pensions
$4,311
$4,419
$4,479
$4,451
$4,488
$22,724
Other postretirement benefits:
Gross benefits paid
521
546
574
595
626
3,139
Subsidies
(38)
(38)
(38)
(37)
(37)
(177)
Net other postretirement benefits
$483
$508
$536
$558
$589
$2,962
Termination Provisions
Certain of the pension plans provide that, in the event there is a change in control of the Company which is not approved by the Board of Directors
and the plans are terminated within five years thereafter, the assets in the plan first will be used to provide the level of retirement benefits required
by ERISA , and then any surplus will be used to fund a trust to continue present and future payments under the postretirement medical and life
insurance benefits in our group insurance benefit programs.
We have an agreement with the U.S. government with respect to certain pension plans. Under the agreement, should we terminate any of the plans
under conditions in which the plan’s assets exceed that plan’s obligations, the U.S. government will be entitled to a fair allocation of any of the plan’s
assets based on plan contributions that were reimbursed under U.S. government contracts.
Defined Contribution Plans
We provide certain defined contribution plans to all eligible employees. The principal plans are the Company-sponsored 401(k) plans. The expense
for these defined contribution plans was $768 , $764 and $742 in 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively.
Note 15 – Share-Based Compensation and Other Compensation Arrangements
Share-Based Compensation
Our 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated, permits awards of incentive and non-qualified stock options, stock appreciation rights,
restricted stock or units, performance shares, performance restricted stock or units, performance units and other stock and cash-based awards to
our employees, officers, directors, consultants, and independent contractors. The aggregate number of shares of our stock authorized for issuance
under the plan is 87,000,000 .
Shares issued as a result of stock option exercises or conversion of stock unit awards will be funded out of treasury shares, except to the extent
there are insufficient treasury shares, in which case new shares will be issued. We believe we currently have adequate treasury shares to satisfy
these issuances during 2016 .
95

Table of Contents
Share-based plans expense is primarily included in General and administrative expense since it is incentive compensation issued primarily to our
executives. The share-based plans expense and related income tax benefit were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Stock options
$30
$62
$93
Restricted stock units and other awards
160
133
113
Share-based plans expense
$190
$195
$206
Income tax benefit
$68
$70
$76
Stock Options
In February 2013, we granted to our executives 6,591,968 options. The options have been granted with an exercise price equal to the fair market
value of our stock on the date of grant and expire ten years after the date of grant. The stock options vest over a period of three years, with 34%
vesting  after  the  first  year, 33% vesting  after  the  second  year  and  the  remaining 33% vesting  after  the  third  year.  If  an  executive  terminates
employment  for  any  reason,  the  non-vested  portion  of  the  stock  option  will  not  vest  and  all  rights  to  the  non-vested  portion  will  terminate.  We
discontinued granting options in 2014, replacing them with performance-based restricted stock units.
Stock option activity for the year ended December 31, 2015 is as follows:
Shares
Weighted Average
Exercise Price Per Share
Weighted Average
Remaining
Contractual Life
(Years)
Aggregate
Intrinsic Value
Number of shares under option:
Outstanding at beginning of year
18,504,645
$73.75
Exercised
(5,369,947)
74.40
Forfeited
(206,433)
76.14
Expired
(2,321)
77.95
Outstanding at end of year
12,925,944
$73.44
5.23
$920
Exercisable at end of year
11,249,575
$72.94
4.93
$806
The total intrinsic value of options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $385 , $250 and $546 , respectively.
Cash received from options exercised during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was $399 , $343 and $1,097 with a related tax
benefit of $135 , $87 and $190 , respectively, derived from the compensation deductions resulting from these option exercises. At December 31,
2015 , there was $4 of total unrecognized compensation cost related to our stock option plan which is expected to be recognized over a weighted
average period of two months . The grant date fair value of stock options vested during the years ended December 31, 2015, 2014 and 2013 was
$56 , $87 and $89 , respectively.
The stock options granted in February 2013 had a fair value of $15.85 which was estimated using the Black-Scholes option-pricing model with the
following assumptions: expected life of 6 years , expected volatility of 29.0% based upon our historical stock volatility, risk-free interest rates of 1.0%
, and expected dividend yield of 2.6% .
The expected volatility of the stock options is based on a combination of our historical stock volatility and the volatility levels implied on the grant
date  by  actively  traded  option  contracts  on  our  common  stock.  We  determined  the  expected  term  of  the  stock  option  grants  to  be  six  years,
calculated using the “simplified”
96

Table of Contents
method  in  accordance  with  the  SEC  Staff  Accounting  Bulletin  110.  We  use  the  “simplified”  method  since  we  changed  the  vesting  terms,  tax
treatment  and  the  recipients  of  our  stock  options  beginning  in  2006  such  that  we  believe  our  historical  data  prior  to  2006  does  not  provide  a
reasonable basis upon which to estimate expected term and we do not have enough option exercise data from our grants issued subsequent to
2006 to support our own estimate as a result of vesting terms and changes in the stock price.
Restricted Stock Units
In February  2015, 2014 and 2013 , we granted to our executives 590,778 , 695,651 and 1,375,414 restricted stock units (RSUs) as part of our long-
term incentive program with grant date fair values of $154.64 , $129.58 and $75.97 per unit, respectively. The RSUs granted under this program will
vest and settle in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. If an executive terminates employment because
of retirement, involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) will receive a proration of stock units based on active employment
during the three-year service period. In all other cases, the RSUs will not vest and all rights to the stock units will terminate. In addition to RSUs
awarded under our long-term incentive program, we grant RSUs to certain executives and employees to encourage retention or to reward various
achievements. These RSUs are labeled other RSUs in the table below. The fair values of all RSUs are estimated using the average of the high and
low stock prices on the date of grant.
RSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2015 was as follows:
Long-Term Incentive
Program
Other
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
3,032,539
1,147,098
Granted
634,960
223,282
Dividends
64,705
28,849
Forfeited
(128,628)
(64,542)
Distributed
(1,256,936)
(213,686)
Outstanding at end of year
2,346,640
1,121,001
Unrecognized compensation cost
$92
$43
Weighted average remaining contractual life (years)
1.8
2.0
The number of vested but undistributed RSUs at December 31, 2015 was not significant.
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units (PBRSUs) are stock units that pay out based on the Company’s total shareholder return as compared to
a group of peer companies over a three-year period. The award payout can range from 0% to 200% of the initial PBRSU grant, but will not exceed
400% of the initial value (excluding dividend equivalent credits). The PBRSUs granted under this program will vest at the payout amount and settle
in common stock (on a one-for-one basis) on the third anniversary of the grant date. If an executive terminates employment because of retirement,
involuntary layoff, disability, or death, the employee (or beneficiary) remains eligible under the award and, if the award is earned, will receive a
proration of stock units based on active employment during the three-year service period. In all other cases, the PBRSUs will not vest and all rights
to the stock units will terminate.
97

Table of Contents
In February 2015 and 2014, we granted to our executives 556,203 and 662,215 PBRSUs as part of our long-term incentive program with grant date
fair values of $164.26 and $136.12 per unit. Compensation expense for the award is recognized over the three-year performance period based upon
the grant date fair value estimated using a Monte-Carlo simulation model. The model used the following assumptions in 2015 and 2014: expected
volatility of 20.35% and 24.2% based upon our historical stock volatility, risk-free interest rates of 1.03% and 0.72% , and no expected dividend yield
because the units earn dividend equivalents.
PBRSU activity for the year ended December 31, 2015 was as follows:
Long-Term Incentive Program
Number of units:
Outstanding at beginning of year
623,102
Granted
556,203
Dividends
25,887
Forfeited
(82,157)
Outstanding at end of year
1,123,035
Unrecognized compensation cost
$82
Weighted average remaining contractual life (years)
1.8
Other Compensation Arrangements
Performance Awards
Performance Awards are cash units that pay out based on the achievement of long-term financial goals at the end of a three-year period. Each unit
has an initial value of $100 dollars. The amount payable at the end of the three-year performance period may be anywhere from $0 to $200 dollars
per unit, depending on the Company’s performance against plan for a three-year period. The Compensation Committee has the discretion to pay
these awards in cash, stock, or a combination of both after the three-year performance period. Compensation expense, based on the estimated
performance payout, is recognized ratably over the performance period.
During 2015, 2014 and 2013 , we granted Performance Awards to our executives with the payout based on the achievement of financial goals for
each three -year period following the grant date. The minimum payout amount is $0 and the maximum amount we could be required to pay out for
the 2015, 2014 and 2013 Performance Awards is $349 , $327 and $255 , respectively. The 2013 grant is expected to be paid out in cash in March
2016 .
Deferred Compensation
The Company has a deferred compensation plan which permits executives to defer receipt of a portion of their salary, bonus, and certain other
incentive awards. Participants can diversify deferred compensation among 23 investment funds including a Boeing stock unit account.
Total expense related to deferred compensation was $63 , $44 and $238 in 2015, 2014 and 2013 , respectively. As of December 31, 2015 and 2014
, the deferred compensation liability which is being marked to market was $1,191 and $1,234 .
98

Table of Contents
Note 16 – Shareholders’ Equity
On  December  14,  2015,  the  Board  approved  a  new  repurchase  plan  for  up  to  $ 14,000 of  common  stock,  replacing  the  previously  authorized
program. The program will expire when we have used all authorized funds or is otherwise terminated.
As of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , there were 1,200,000,000 shares of common stock and 20,000,000 shares of preferred stock authorized. No
preferred stock has been issued.
Changes in Share Balances
The following table shows changes in each class of shares:
Common
Stock
Treasury
Stock
Balance at January 1, 2013
1,012,261,159
256,630,628
Issued
(17,903,704)
Acquired
26,155,537
Balance at December 31, 2013
1,012,261,159
264,882,461
Issued
(6,719,270)
Acquired
47,370,415
Balance at December 31, 2014
1,012,261,159
305,533,606
Issued
(7,288,113)
Acquired
47,391,861
Balance at December 31, 2015
1,012,261,159
345,637,354
99

Table of Contents
Accumulated Other Comprehensive Loss
Changes in Accumulated other comprehensive income/(loss) (AOCI) by component for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 were
as follows:
Currency
Translation
Adjustments
Unrealized
Gains and
Losses on
Certain
Investments
Unrealized
Gains and
Losses on
Derivative
Instruments
Defined Benefit
Pension Plans &
Other Postretirement
Benefits
Total (1)
Balance at January 1, 2013
$214
($8)
$86
($17,708)
($17,416)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications
(64)
(75)
6,093
5,954
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
(17)
1,585
(2)  
1,568
Net current period Other comprehensive loss
(64)
(92)
7,678
7,522
Balance at December 31, 2013
$150
($8)
($6)
($10,030)
($9,894)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications
(97)
(137)
(4,644)
(4,878)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
7
862
(2)  
869
Net current period Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(97)
(130)
(3,782)
(4,009)
Balance at December 31, 2014
$53
($8)
($136)
($13,812)
($13,903)
Other comprehensive income/(loss) before reclassifications
(92)
$8
(140)
173
(51)
Amounts reclassified from AOCI
79
1,127
(2)  
1,206
Net current period Other comprehensive income/(loss)
(92)
8
(61)
1,300
1,155
Balance at December 31, 2015
($39)
($197)
($12,512)
($12,748)
(1)  Net of tax.
(2)  Primarily relates to amortization of actuarial losses for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 , and 2013 totaling $1,038 , $661 , and
$1,516 (net of tax of ($570) , ($367) , and ($849) ), respectively. These are included in the net periodic pension cost of which a portion is
allocated to production as inventoried costs. See Note 14 .
Note 17 – Derivative Financial Instruments
Cash Flow Hedges
Our cash flow hedges include foreign currency forward contracts, commodity swaps, and commodity purchase contracts. We use foreign currency
forward  contracts  to  manage  currency  risk  associated  with  certain  transactions,  specifically  forecasted  sales  and  purchases  made  in  foreign
currencies. Our foreign currency contracts hedge forecasted transactions through 2021 . We use commodity derivatives, such as swaps and fixed-
price purchase commitments to hedge against potentially unfavorable price changes for items used in production. Our commodity contracts hedge
forecasted transactions through 2020 .
Fair Value Hedges
Interest rate swaps under which we agree to pay variable rates of interest are designated as fair value hedges of fixed-rate debt. The net change in
fair value of the derivatives and the hedged items is reported in Boeing Capital interest expense.
Derivative Instruments Not Receiving Hedge Accounting Treatment
We have entered into agreements to purchase and sell aluminum to address long-term  strategic sourcing objectives and international business
requirements. These agreements are derivative instruments for
100

Table of Contents
accounting purposes. The quantities of aluminum in these agreements offset and are priced at prevailing market prices. We also hold certain foreign
currency forward contracts which do not qualify for hedge accounting treatment.
Notional Amounts and Fair Values
The notional amounts and fair values of derivative instruments in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31 were as
follows:
Notional
  amounts (1)
Other assets
Accrued
liabilities
2015
2014
2015
2014
2015
2014
Derivatives designated as hedging instruments:
Foreign exchange contracts
$2,727
$2,586
$23
$9
($304)
($204)
Interest rate contracts
125
125
9
10
Commodity contracts
40
31
2
1
(13)
(24)
Derivatives not receiving hedge accounting treatment:
Foreign exchange contracts
436
319
4
21
(11)
(5)
Commodity contracts
725
3
Total derivatives
$4,053
$3,064
38
41
(328)
(233)
Netting arrangements
(23)
(16)
23
16
Net recorded balance
$15
$25
($305)
($217)
(1)  Notional amounts represent the gross contract/notional amount of the derivatives outstanding.
Gains/(losses) associated with our cash flow and undesignated hedging transactions and their effect on Other comprehensive income/(loss) and Net
earnings were as follows:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
Effective portion recognized in Other comprehensive income/(loss), net of taxes:
Foreign exchange contracts
($136)
($135)
Commodity contracts
(4)
(2)
Effective portion reclassified out of Accumulated other comprehensive loss into earnings, net of taxes:
Foreign exchange contracts
(67)
6
Commodity contracts
(12)
(13)
Forward points recognized in Other income, net:
Foreign exchange contracts
12
28
Undesignated derivatives recognized in Other income, net:
Foreign exchange contracts
(1)
(7)
Based on our portfolio of cash flow hedges, we expect to reclassify losses of $156 (pre-tax) out of Accumulated other comprehensive loss into
earnings  during  the  next  12  months.  Ineffectiveness  related  to  our  hedges  recognized  in  Other  income  was  insignificant  for  the  years  ended
December 31, 2015 and 2014 .
We have derivative instruments with credit-risk-related contingent features. For foreign exchange contracts with original maturities of at least five
years,  our  derivative  counterparties  could  require  settlement  if  we  default  on  our  five-year  credit  facility.  For  certain  commodity  contracts,  our
counterparties could require
101

Table of Contents
collateral posted in an amount determined by our credit ratings. The fair value of foreign exchange and commodity contracts that have credit-risk-
related contingent features that are in a net liability position at December 31, 2015 was $51 . At December 31, 2015 , there was no collateral posted
related to our derivatives.
Note 18 – Significant Group Concentrations of Risk
Credit Risk
Financial instruments involving potential credit risk are predominantly with commercial aircraft customers and the U.S. government. Of the $12,393
in gross accounts receivable and gross customer financing included in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position as of December 31, 2015 ,
$5,633 related  predominantly  to  commercial  aircraft  customers  ( $2,096 of  accounts  receivable  and $3,537 of  customer  financing)  and $4,864
related to the U.S. government.
Of  the $3,586 in  gross  customer  financing, $2,487 related  to  customers  we  believe  have  less  than  investment-grade  credit  including  Silk  Way
Airlines,  AirBridgeCargo  Airlines  and  American  Airlines  who  were  associated  with 13% , 13% and 9% ,  respectively,  of  our  financing  portfolio.
Financing for aircraft is collateralized by security in the related asset and in some instances security in other assets as well.
Other Risk
As of December 31, 2015 , approximately 38% of our total workforce was represented by collective bargaining agreements and approximately 13%
of our total workforce was represented by agreements expiring in 2016.
Note 19 – Fair Value Measurements
The fair value hierarchy has three levels based on the reliability of the inputs used to determine fair value. Level 1 refers to fair values determined
based on quoted prices in active markets for identical assets. Level 2 refers to fair values estimated using significant other observable inputs and
Level 3 includes fair values estimated using significant unobservable inputs. The following table presents our assets and liabilities that are measured
at fair value on a recurring basis and are categorized using the fair value hierarchy.
December 31, 2015
December 31, 2014
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Total
Level 1
Level 2
Assets
Money market funds
$4,504
$4,504
$3,826
$3,826
Available-for-sale investments:
Commercial paper
87
87
Corporate notes
79
79
U.S. government agencies
83
83
Other
20
20
7
7
Derivatives
15
15
25
$25
Total assets
$4,788
$4,524
$264
$3,858
$3,833
$25
Liabilities
Derivatives
($305)
($305)
($217)
($217)
Total liabilities
($305)
($305)
($217)
($217)
102

Table of Contents
Money market funds, available-for-sale debt investments and equity securities are valued using a market approach based on the quoted market
prices or broker/dealer quotes of identical or comparable instruments.
Derivatives include foreign currency, commodity and interest rate contracts. Our foreign currency forward contracts are valued using an income
approach based on the present value of the forward rate less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. Commodity derivatives are valued
using an income approach based on the present value of the commodity index prices less the contract rate multiplied by the notional amount. The
fair value of our interest rate swaps is derived from a discounted cash flow analysis based on the terms of the contract and the interest rate curve.
Certain  assets  have  been  measured  at  fair  value  on  a  nonrecurring  basis  using  significant  unobservable  inputs  (Level  3).  The  following  table
presents the nonrecurring losses recognized for the years ended December 31 due to long-lived asset impairment, and the fair value and asset
classification of the related assets as of the impairment date:
2015
2014
Fair Value
Total Losses
Fair Value
Total Losses
Operating lease equipment
$270
($159)
$187
($170)
Property, plant and equipment
8
(6)
19
(15)
Other assets and Acquired intangible assets
(17)
Total
$278
($165)
$206
($202)
The fair value of the impaired operating lease equipment is derived by calculating a median collateral value from a consistent group of third party
aircraft value publications. The values provided by the third party aircraft publications are derived from their knowledge of market trades and other
market factors. Management reviews the publications quarterly to assess the continued appropriateness and consistency with market trends. Under
certain circumstances, we adjust values based on the attributes and condition of the specific aircraft or equipment, usually when the features or use
of the aircraft vary significantly from the more generic aircraft attributes covered by third party publications, or on the expected net sales price for the
aircraft. Property, plant and equipment, Other assets and Acquired intangible assets were primarily valued using an income approach based on the
discounted cash flows associated with the underlying assets.
For Level 3 assets that were measured at fair value on a nonrecurring basis during the year ended December 31, 2015 , the following table presents
the fair value of those assets as of the measurement date, valuation techniques and related unobservable inputs of those assets.
Fair
Value
Valuation
Technique(s)
Unobservable Input
Range
Median or Average
Operating lease equipment
$270
Market approach
Aircraft value publications
$226 - $394 (1)
Median $343
Aircraft condition
adjustments
($112) - $39 (2)
Net ($73)
(1)  The range represents the sum of the highest and lowest values for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, according to the third party
aircraft valuation publications that we use in our valuation process.
(2)  The negative amount represents the sum, for all aircraft subject to fair value measurement, of all downward adjustments based on consideration
of individual aircraft attributes and condition. The positive amount represents the sum of all such upward adjustments.
103

Table of Contents
Fair Value Disclosures
The  fair  values  and  related  carrying  values  of  financial  instruments  that  are  not  required  to  be  remeasured  at  fair  value  on  the  Consolidated
Statements of Financial Position at December 31 were as follows:
December 31, 2015
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair
Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Accounts receivable, net
$8,713
$8,705
$8,705
Notes receivable, net
255
273
273
Liabilities
Debt, excluding capital lease obligations
(9,814)
(11,292)
(11,123)
($169)
December 31, 2014
Carrying
Amount
Total Fair
Value
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Assets
Accounts receivable, net
$7,729
$7,845
$7,845
Notes receivable, net
366
395
395
Liabilities
Debt, excluding capital lease obligations
(8,909)
(10,686)
(10,480)
($206)
The fair value of Accounts receivable is based on current market rates for loans of the same risk and maturities. The fair values of our variable rate
notes  receivable  that  reprice  frequently  approximate  their  carrying  amounts.  The  fair  values  of  fixed  rate  notes  receivable  are  estimated  with
discounted cash flow analysis using interest rates currently offered on loans with similar terms to borrowers of similar credit quality. The fair value of
our debt that is traded in the secondary market is classified as Level 2 and is based on current market yields. For our debt that is not traded in the
secondary market, the fair value is classified as Level 2 and is based on our indicative borrowing cost derived from dealer quotes or discounted cash
flows. The fair values of our debt classified as Level 3 are based on discounted cash flow models using the implied yield from similar securities. With
regard to other financial instruments with off-balance sheet risk, it is not practicable to estimate the fair value of our indemnifications and financing
commitments  because  the  amount  and  timing  of  those  arrangements  are  uncertain.  Items  not  included  in  the  above  disclosures  include  cash,
restricted cash, time deposits and other deposits, commercial paper, money market funds, Accounts payable and long-term payables. The carrying
values of those items, as reflected in the Consolidated Statements of Financial Position, approximate their fair value at December 31, 2015 and
2014 . The fair value of assets and liabilities whose carrying value approximates fair value is determined using Level 2 inputs, with the exception of
cash (Level 1).
Note 20 – Legal Proceedings
Various  legal  proceedings,  claims  and  investigations  related  to  products,  contracts,  employment  and  other  matters  are  pending  against  us.
Potentially material contingencies are discussed below.
We are subject to various U.S. government inquiries and investigations, from which civil, criminal or administrative proceedings could result or have
resulted in the past. Such proceedings involve or could involve claims by the government for fines, penalties, compensatory and treble damages,
restitution and/or forfeitures. Under government regulations, a company, or one or more of its operating divisions or
104

Table of Contents
subdivisions, can also be suspended or debarred from government contracts, or lose its export privileges, based on the results of investigations. We
believe, based upon current information, that the outcome of any such government disputes and investigations will not have a material effect on our
financial position, results of operations, or cash flows. Where it is reasonably possible that we will incur losses in excess of recorded amounts in
connection with any of the matters set forth below, we will disclose either the amount or range of reasonably possible losses in excess of such
amounts or, where no such amount or range can be reasonably estimated, the reasons why no such estimate can be made.
Employment, Labor and Benefits Litigation
In the second quarter of 2014, Boeing agreed to a $90 settlement with plaintiffs in the Harkness case with respect to litigation initiated by former
Boeing employees in 2007 upon the sale of the Wichita facility to Spirit AeroSystems, Inc. (Spirit) in 2005. The settlement was approved by the
district court in a fairness hearing in September 2015. The payment was made in the fourth quarter and the indemnification receivable from Spirit is
included in Other Assets at December 31, 2015.
On October 13, 2006, we were named as a defendant in a lawsuit filed in the U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Illinois. Plaintiffs, seeking
to represent a class of similarly situated participants and beneficiaries in The Boeing Company Voluntary Investment Plan (the VIP), alleged that
fees and expenses incurred by the VIP were and are unreasonable and excessive, not incurred solely for the benefit of the VIP and its participants,
and were undisclosed to participants. The plaintiffs further alleged that defendants breached their fiduciary duties in violation of §502(a)(2) of ERISA
, and sought injunctive and equitable relief pursuant to §502(a)(3) of ERISA . The parties reached a provisional settlement on August 26, 2015,
subject to a fairness hearing currently scheduled for March 2016. We do not expect this matter or the associated settlement to have a material effect
on our financial position, results of operations or cash flows.
Note 21 – Segment Information
We operate in five principal segments: Commercial Airplanes; Boeing Military Aircraft ( BMA ), Network & Space Systems ( N&SS ), and Global
Services  &  Support ( GS&S ),  collectively Defense,  Space  &  Security ;  and Boeing  Capital .  All  other  activities  fall  within  Unallocated  items,
eliminations and other. See page 54 for the Summary of Business Segment Data, which is an integral part of this note.
The Commercial Airplanes segment develops, produces and markets commercial jet aircraft and provides related support services, principally to the
commercial airline industry worldwide.
Our BMA segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of manned and unmanned military aircraft and weapons
systems for global strike, including fighter aircraft and missile systems; vertical lift including rotorcraft and tilt-rotor aircraft; mobility, surveillance and
engagement, including battle management, airborne, anti-submarine, transport and tanker aircraft.
Our N&SS segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of the following products and related services: electronics
and information solutions, including command, control, communications, computers, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance (C4ISR), cyber
and information solutions, and intelligence systems; strategic missile and defense systems; space and intelligence systems, including satellites and
commercial satellite launch vehicles; and space exploration.
Our GS&S segment provides customers with mission readiness through total support solutions. Our global services business sustains aircraft and
systems with a full spectrum of products and services through integrated logistics, including supply chain management and engineering support;
aircraft modernization and sustainment; and training systems and government services, including pilot and maintenance training. In addition, our
GS&S segment is engaged in the research, development, production and modification of airborne surveillance command and control aircraft. GS&S
international operations include Boeing Defence U.K. Ltd., Boeing Defence Australia, and Alsalam Aircraft Company, a joint venture.
105

Table of Contents
Our BCC segment facilitates, arranges, structures and provides selective financing solutions for our Boeing customers.
The unallocated activities of Engineering, Operations & Technology ( EO&T ) and Shared Services  Group (SSG),  Corporate  and intercompany
guarantees  provided  to BCC are  included  in  Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other. EO&T provides  Boeing  with  technical  and  functional
capabilities,  including  information  technology,  research  and  development,  test  and  evaluation,  technology  strategy  development,  environmental
remediation management and intellectual property management.
While our principal operations are in the United States, Canada and Australia, some key suppliers and subcontractors are located in Europe and
Japan. Revenues, including foreign military sales, are reported by customer location and consisted of the following:
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Asia, other than China
$13,433
$11,900
$12,200
Europe
12,248
11,898
10,622
China
12,556
11,029
10,555
Middle East
10,846
9,243
9,165
Oceania
2,601
1,757
1,657
Canada
1,870
1,901
1,486
Africa
1,398
2,596
621
Latin America, Caribbean and other
1,875
2,596
2,725
Total non-U.S. revenues
56,827
52,920
49,031
United States
39,287
37,842
37,592
Total revenues
$96,114
$90,762
$86,623
Revenues from the U.S. government (including foreign military sales through the U.S. government), primarily recorded at BDS, represented 27% ,
30% and 34% of  consolidated  revenues  for 2015 , 2014 and 2013 ,  respectively.  Approximately 4% and 3% of  operating  assets  were  located
outside the United States as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 . The information in the following tables is derived directly from the segments’ internal
financial reporting used for corporate management purposes.
Depreciation and Amortization
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Commercial Airplanes
$625
$674
$632
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
142
164
131
Network & Space Systems
106
114
120
Global Services & Support
80
75
69
Total Defense, Space & Security
328
353
320
Boeing Capital Corporation
87
97
110
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
793
782
782
Total
$1,833
$1,906
$1,844
106

Table of Contents
Capital Expenditures
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Commercial Airplanes
$889
$698
$694
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
128
175
186
Network & Space Systems
98
93
96
Global Services & Support
62
68
48
Total Defense, Space & Security
288
336
330
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
1,273
1,202
1,074
Total
$2,450
$2,236
$2,098
Unallocated capital expenditures relate primarily to assets managed by SSG on behalf of the five principal segments.
We recorded Earnings from operations associated with our cost and equity method investments of $64 , $58 and $25 in our Commercial Airplanes
segment and $210 , $229 and $203 in BDS, primarily in our N&SS segment, for the years ended December 31, 2015 , 2014 and 2013 , respectively.
For segment reporting purposes, we record Commercial Airplanes segment revenues and cost of sales for airplanes transferred to other segments.
Such transfers may include airplanes accounted for as operating leases and considered transferred to the BCC segment and airplanes transferred
to the BDS segment for further modification prior to delivery to the customer. The revenues and cost of sales for these transfers are eliminated in the
Unallocated  items  and  eliminations  caption.  For  segment  reporting  purposes,  we  record  BDS  revenues  and  cost  of  sales  for  the  modification
performed on airplanes received from Commercial Airplanes when the airplane is delivered to the customer or at the attainment of performance
milestones.
Intersegment revenues, eliminated in Unallocated items, eliminations and other, are shown in the following table.
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Commercial Airplanes
$1,831
$1,822
$879
Boeing Capital
15
19
29
Total
$1,846
$1,841
$908
107

Table of Contents
Unallocated Items, Eliminations and other
Unallocated  items,  eliminations  and  other  includes  costs  not  attributable  to  business  segments  as  well  as  intercompany  profit  eliminations.  We
generally allocate costs to business segments based on the U.S. federal cost accounting standards. Components of Unallocated items, eliminations
and other are shown in the following table.
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
Share-based plans
($76)
($67)
($95)
Deferred compensation
(63)
(44)
(238)
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
(90)
(72)
(69)
Eliminations and other unallocated items
(511)
(593)
(859)
Sub-total
(740)
(776)
(1,261)
Pension
(421)
(1,469)
(1,374)
Postretirement
123
82
60
Pension and Postretirement
(298)
(1,387)
(1,314)
Total
($1,038)
($2,163)
($2,575)
Unallocated Pension and Other Postretirement Benefit Expense
Unallocated pension and other postretirement benefit expense represents the portion of pension and other postretirement benefit costs that are not
recognized  by  business  segments  for  segment  reporting  purposes.  Pension  costs,  comprising Generally  Accepted  Accounting  Principles  in  the
United States of America ( GAAP ) service and prior service costs, are allocated to Commercial Airplanes. Pension costs are allocated to BDS using
U.S.  Government  Cost  Accounting  Standards ( CAS ),  which  employ  different  actuarial  assumptions  and  accounting  conventions  than GAAP .
These costs are allocable to government contracts. Other postretirement benefit costs are allocated to business segments based on CAS , which is
generally based on benefits paid.
Assets
Segment assets are summarized in the table below.
December 31,
2015
2014
Commercial Airplanes
$57,253
$55,149
Defense, Space & Security:
Boeing Military Aircraft
6,811
7,229
Network & Space Systems
6,307
5,895
Global Services & Support
4,549
4,589
Total Defense, Space & Security
17,667
17,713
Boeing Capital
3,492
3,525
Unallocated items, eliminations and other
15,996
16,534
Total
$94,408
$92,921
Assets included in Unallocated items, eliminations and other primarily consist of Cash and cash equivalents, Short-term  and other investments,
Deferred tax assets, capitalized interest and assets held by SSG as well as intercompany eliminations.
108

Table of Contents
Note 22 – Quarterly Financial Data (Unaudited)
2015
2014
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
4th
3rd
2nd
1st
Total revenues
$23,573
$25,849
$24,543
$22,149
$24,468
$23,784
$22,045
$20,465
Total costs and expenses
(20,642)
(21,600)
(21,350)
(18,496)
(20,711)
(20,075)
(18,670)
(17,296)
Earnings from operations
1,161
2,580
1,683
2,019
2,025
2,119
1,787
1,542
Net earnings
1,026
1,704
1,110
1,336
1,466
1,362
1,653
965
Basic earnings per share
1.52
2.50
1.61
1.89
2.05
1.88
2.26
1.30
Diluted earnings per share
1.51
2.47
1.59
1.87
2.02
1.86
2.24
1.28
Cash dividends declared per share
2.00
1.82
1.64
1.46
Common stock sales price per share:
High
150.59
149.18
155.50
158.83
135.78
130.58
138.39
144.57
Low
128.56
115.14
138.44
126.18
116.32
117.87
121.92
118.77
Quarter end
144.59
130.95
138.72
150.08
129.98
127.38
127.23
125.49
Gross profit is calculated as Total revenues minus Total costs and expenses. Total costs and expenses includes Cost of products, Cost of services
and Boeing Capital interest expense.
During the fourth quarter of 2015, we recorded a reach-forward loss of $885 on the 747 program.
During the second quarter of 2015 and 2014, higher estimated costs to complete the KC-46A Tanker contract for the U.S. Air Force resulted in
reach-forward losses of $835 and $425 .
In the fourth quarter of 2015 and 2014, we recorded income tax benefits of $235 and $188 related to the reinstatement of the research tax credit for
2015 and 2014.
During the second quarter of 2014, we recorded an incremental tax benefit of $265 that related to the application of a 2012 Federal Court of Claims
decision. We also recorded tax benefits of $116 and $143 as a result of the 2007-2008 and 2009-2010 federal tax audit settlements.
We recorded charges related to defined benefit pension plan changes of $334 in the first quarter of 2014.
We increased our quarterly dividend from $0.73 to $0.91 in December 2014 and to $1.09 in December 2015.
109

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
The Boeing Company
Chicago, Illinois
We have audited the accompanying consolidated statements of financial position of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of
December 31, 2015 and 2014 , and the related consolidated statements of operations, comprehensive income, equity, and cash flows for each of
the  three  years  in  the  period  ended December  31,  2015 .  The  financial  statements  are  the  responsibility  of  the  Company’s  management.  Our
responsibility is to express an opinion on the financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards
require that we plan and perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material misstatement.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes
assessing  the  accounting  principles  used  and significant  estimates  made  by  management,  as  well  as  evaluating  the  overall  financial  statement
presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, such consolidated financial statements present fairly, in all material respects,  the financial position of The Boeing Company and
subsidiaries as of December 31, 2015 and 2014 , and the results of their operations and their cash flows for each of the three years in the period
ended December 31, 2015 , in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the United States of America.
We have also audited, in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States), the Company’s internal
control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015 , based on the criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued
by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission and our report dated February 10, 2016 expressed an unqualified
opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
February 10, 2016
110

Table of Contents
REPORT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
To the Board of Directors and Shareholders of
The Boeing Company
Chicago, Illinois
We have audited the internal control over financial reporting of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the “Company”) as of December 31, 2015 ,
based  on  criteria  established  in Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013) issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the
Treadway  Commission.  The  Company’s  management  is  responsible  for  maintaining  effective  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  and  for  its
assessment of the effectiveness of internal control over financial reporting, included in the accompanying Management’s Report on Internal Control
Over Financial Reporting. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on the Company’s internal control over financial reporting based on our audit.
We conducted our audit in accordance with the standards of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (United States). Those standards
require  that  we plan and perform  the audit to  obtain  reasonable  assurance  about whether  effective  internal  control  over financial  reporting  was
maintained in all material respects. Our audit included obtaining an understanding of internal control over financial reporting, assessing the risk that
a  material  weakness  exists,  testing  and  evaluating  the  design  and  operating  effectiveness  of  internal  control  based  on  the  assessed  risk,  and
performing such other procedures as we considered necessary in the circumstances. We believe that our audit provides a reasonable basis for our
opinion.
A company’s internal control over financial reporting is a process designed by, or under the supervision of, the company’s principal executive and
principal  financial  officers,  or  persons  performing  similar  functions,  and  effected  by  the  company’s  board  of  directors,  management,  and  other
personnel to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements for external
purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles. A company’s internal control over financial reporting includes those policies
and  procedures  that  (1)  pertain  to  the  maintenance  of  records  that,  in  reasonable  detail,  accurately  and  fairly  reflect  the  transactions  and
dispositions of the assets of the company; (2) provide reasonable assurance that transactions are recorded as necessary to permit preparation of
financial statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, and that receipts and expenditures of the company are being
made  only  in  accordance  with  authorizations  of  management  and  directors  of  the  company;  and  (3)  provide  reasonable  assurance  regarding
prevention  or  timely  detection  of  unauthorized  acquisition,  use,  or  disposition  of  the  company’s  assets  that  could  have  a  material  effect  on  the
financial statements.
Because of the inherent limitations of internal control over financial reporting, including the possibility of collusion or improper management override
of controls, material misstatements due to error or fraud may not be prevented or detected on a timely basis. Also, projections of any evaluation of
the effectiveness of the internal control over financial reporting to future periods are subject to the risk that the controls may become inadequate
because of changes in conditions, or that the degree of compliance with the policies or procedures may deteriorate.
In our opinion, the Company maintained, in all material respects, effective internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015 , based
on the criteria established in Internal Control – Integrated Framework (2013) issued by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway
Commission.
We  have  also  audited,  in  accordance  with  the  standards  of  the  Public  Company  Accounting  Oversight  Board  (United  States),  the  consolidated
financial statements  as of  and for  the year  ended December 31, 2015 of the Company and our report  dated February 10, 2016 expressed an
unqualified opinion on those financial statements.
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
February 10, 2016
111

Table of Contents
Item 9. Changes in and Disagreements with Accountants on Accounting and Financial Disclosure
None.
Item 9A. Controls and Procedures
(a) Evaluation of Disclosure Controls and Procedures.
Our Chief Executive Officer and Chief Financial Officer have evaluated our disclosure controls and procedures as of December 31, 2015 and have
concluded that these disclosure controls and procedures are effective to ensure that information required to be disclosed by us in the reports that we
file or submit under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the time periods specified in the
Securities and Exchange Commission’s rules and forms and is accumulated and communicated to our management, including the Chief Executive
Officer and Chief Financial Officer, as appropriate to allow timely decisions regarding required disclosure.
(b) Management’s Report on Internal Control Over Financial Reporting.
Our  management  is  responsible  for  establishing  and  maintaining  adequate  internal  control  over  financial  reporting,  as  such  term  is  defined  in
Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f). Our management conducted an evaluation of the effectiveness of our internal control over financial reporting based
on  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework  (2013)  issued  by  the  Committee  of  Sponsoring  Organizations  of  the  Treadway
Commission.  Based  on  this  evaluation  under  the  framework  in  Internal  Control  –  Integrated  Framework,  our  management  concluded  that  our
internal control over financial reporting was effective as of December 31, 2015 .
Our internal control over financial reporting as of December 31, 2015 , has been audited by Deloitte & Touche LLP, an independent registered public
accounting firm, as stated in their report which is included in Item 8 of this report and is incorporated by reference herein.
(c) Changes in Internal Controls Over Financial Reporting.
There were no changes in our internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the fourth quarter of 2015 that have materially affected or
are reasonably likely to materially affect our internal control over financial reporting.
Item 9B. Other Information
None.
112

Table of Contents
Part III
Item 10. Directors, Executive Officers and Corporate Governance
Our executive officers and their ages as of February 10, 2016 , are as follows:
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Bertrand-Marc Allen
42
Senior Vice President, President of Boeing International since February 2015. Mr. Allen previously
served as President of Boeing Capital Corporation from March 2014 to February 2015; Corporate
Vice President, Boeing International and Chairman and President of Boeing (China) Co., Ltd. from
March 2011 to March 2014; and Vice President, Global Law Affairs from May 2007 to March 2011.
Heidi B. Capozzi
46
Effective March 1, 2016, Ms. Capozzi will serve as Senior Vice President, Human Resources. Ms.
Capozzi currently serves as Vice President of Leadership Development, Talent Management and
Organization  Effectiveness  since  April  2013.  She  previously  served  as  Director  of  Human
Resources  for  the  Airplane Programs  division of  Commercial  Airplanes  from  April  2011 to  April
2013; and Director of Human Resources for the Surveillance and Engagement division of Boeing
Military Aircraft from May 2009 to April 2011.
Christopher M. Chadwick
55
Executive  Vice  President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Boeing  Defense,  Space  &
Security since December 2013. Mr. Chadwick joined Boeing in 1982, and his previous positions
include  President  of  Boeing  Military  Aircraft  from  March  2009  to  December  2013;  President  of
Precise Engagement and Mobility Systems from February 2008 to February 2009; Vice President
and  General  Manager,  Global  Strike  Systems  from  January  2006  to  January  2008;  and  Vice
President of F/A-18 from January 2004 to December 2005.
Raymond L. Conner
60
Vice Chairman, President and Chief Executive Officer of Commercial Airplanes since December
2013.  Mr.  Conner  joined  Boeing  in  1977,  and  his  previous  positions  include  Executive  Vice
President,  President  and  Chief  Executive  Officer  of  Commercial  Airplanes  from  June  2012  to
December 2013; Senior Vice President of Sales and Customer Support of Commercial Airplanes
from August 2011 to June 2012; Vice President and General Manager, Supply Chain Management
and Operations of Commercial Airplanes from December 2008 to August 2011; Vice President of
Sales, Commercial Airplanes from December 2007 to December 2008; and Vice President and
General Manager of the 777 Program. Mr. Conner serves on the board of Johnson Controls, Inc.
Thomas J. Downey
51
Senior Vice President, Communications since January 2007. Mr. Downey joined Boeing in 1986,
and  his  prior  positions  include  Vice  President,  Corporate  Communications;  Vice  President,
Commercial  Airplanes  Communications;  Corporate  Vice  President,  Internal  and  Executive
Communications; and General Manager of Communications and Community Relations for Military
Aircraft and Missile Systems unit.
113

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Timothy J. Keating
54
Senior  Vice  President,  Government  Operations  since  joining  Boeing  in  June  2008.  Mr.  Keating
served  as  Senior  Vice  President,  Global  Government  Relations  at  Honeywell  International  Inc.
from  October  2002  to  May  2008.  Prior  thereto,  Mr.  Keating  was  Chairman  of  the  Board  and
Managing Partner of Timmons and Company (a Washington, D.C. lobbying firm).
J. Michael Luttig
61
Executive Vice President, General Counsel since April 2009. Mr. Luttig joined Boeing in May 2006
as Senior Vice President, General Counsel. From October 1991 to May 2006, he served on the
United States  Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit.  Mr. Luttig  previously served  as Assistant
Attorney General of the United States, Counselor to the Attorney General at the Department of
Justice  and  Principal  Deputy  Assistant  Attorney  General  at  the  Department  of  Justice  and  was
associated  with  Davis  Polk  &  Wardwell  LLP.  Mr.  Luttig  serves  as  Director,  Franklin  Templeton
Mutual Funds.
Dennis A. Muilenburg
52
President and Chief Executive Officer and a member of the Board of Directors since July 2015.
Mr.  Muilenburg  joined  Boeing  in  1985,  and  his  previous  positions  include  Vice  Chairman,
President  and  Chief  Operating  Officer  from  December  2013  to  July  2015;  Executive  Vice
President, President and Chief Executive Officer of BDS from September 2009 to December 2013;
President of Global Services & Support from February 2008 to August 2009; Vice President and
General Manager of Combat Systems from May 2006 to February 2008; and Vice President and
Program  Manager  for  Future  Combat  Systems.  Mr.  Muilenburg  also  serves  on  the  board  of
Caterpillar Inc.
Anthony M. Parasida
60
Senior Vice President, Human Resources and Administration since April 2013. Mr. Parasida joined
Boeing in 1978, and his previous positions include Senior Vice President from October 2012 to
April 2013; President of Global Services & Support from September 2009 to October 2012; Vice
President and General Manager of Surveillance and Engagement Systems from January 2006 to
September  2009;  and  Vice  President  of  P-8;  and  Vice  President  of  F/A-18.  Effective  March  1,
2016,  Mr.  Parasida  will  cease  to  serve  as  Senior  Vice  President,  Human  Resources  and
Administration. He will remain a Senior Vice President of the Company until May 1, 2016 when he
will retire from the Company.
Diana L. Sands
50
Senior Vice President, Office of Internal Governance since April 2014. Effective March 1, 2016,
Ms. Sands will serve as Senior Vice President, Office of Internal Governance and Administration.
Ms.  Sands  previously  served  as  Vice  President  of  Finance  and  Corporate  Controller  from
February  2012  to  April  2014  and  Vice  President  of  Investor  Relations,  Financial  Planning  &
Analysis  from  February  2010  to  February  2012.  Prior  to  that,  she  held  positions  in  Investor
Relations, Financial Planning and in Corporate Treasury.
114

Table of Contents
Name
Age
Principal Occupation or Employment/Other Business Affiliations
Gregory D. Smith
49
Chief  Financial  Officer,  Executive  Vice  President,  Business  Development  and  Strategy  since
February 2015. Mr. Smith previously served as Executive Vice President, Chief Financial Officer
from February 2012 to February 2015; Vice President of Finance and Corporate Controller from
February 2010 to February 2012; and Vice President of Financial Planning & Analysis from June
2008 to February 2010. From August 2004 until June 2008, he served as Vice President of Global
Investor Relations at Raytheon Company. Prior to that, he held a number of positions at Boeing
including  CFO,  Shared  Services  Group;  Controller,  Shared  Services  Group;  Senior  Director,
Internal Audit; and leadership roles in supply chain, factory operations and program management.
John J. Tracy
61
Chief Technology Officer and Senior Vice President, Engineering, Operations & Technology since
October 2006. Dr. Tracy joined Boeing in 1981, and his previous positions include Vice President
of  Engineering  and  Mission  Assurance  for  BDS;  Vice  President  of  Structural  Technologies,
Prototyping,  and  Quality  for  Phantom  Works;  and  General  Manager  of  Engineering  for  Military
Aircraft and Missiles.
Information relating to our directors and nominees will be included under the caption “Election of Directors” in the 2016 Proxy Statement for our
Annual Shareholders Meeting scheduled to be held on May 2, 2016 and is incorporated by reference herein. The information required by Items 405,
407(d)(4) and 407(d)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Stock Ownership Information – Section 16(a) Beneficial Ownership
Reporting Compliance” and “Board Committees” in the 2016 Proxy Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Codes of Ethics. We have adopted (1) The Boeing Company Code of Ethical Business Conduct for the Board of Directors; (2) The Boeing Company
Code of Conduct for Finance Employees which is applicable to our Chief Executive Officer (CEO), Chief Financial Officer (CFO), Controller and all
finance employees; and (3) The Boeing Code of Conduct that applies to all employees, including our CEO (collectively, the Codes of Conduct). The
Codes of Conduct are posted on our website, www.boeing.com, and printed copies may be obtained, without charge, by contacting the Office of
Internal  Governance,  The  Boeing  Company,  100  N.  Riverside  Plaza,  Chicago,  IL  60606.  We  intend  to  disclose  promptly  on  our  website  any
amendments to, or waivers of, the Codes of Conduct covering our CEO, CFO and/or Controller.
No family relationships exist among any of the executive officers, directors or director nominees.
Item 11. Executive Compensation
The  information  required  by  Item  402  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  captions  “Compensation  Discussion  and  Analysis,”
“Compensation  of  Executive  Officers,”  and  “Compensation  of  Directors”  in  the 2016 Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is  incorporated  by
reference herein. The information required by Item 407(e)(4) and 407(e)(5) of Regulation S-K will be included under the captions “Compensation
Committee  Interlocks  and  Insider  Participation”  and  “Compensation  Committee  Report”  in  the 2016 Proxy  Statement,  and  that  information  is
incorporated by reference herein.
115

Table of Contents
Item 12. Security Ownership of Certain Beneficial Owners and Management and Related Stockholder Matters
The  information  required  by  Item  403  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Stock  Ownership  Information”  in  the 2016 Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Equity Compensation Plan Information
We currently maintain two equity compensation plans that provide for the issuance of common stock to officers and other employees, directors and
consultants. Each of these compensation plans was approved by our shareholders. The following table sets forth information regarding outstanding
options and shares available for future issuance under these plans as of December 31, 2015 :
Plan Category
Number of shares
to be issued upon
exercise of outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
Weighted-average
exercise price of
outstanding
options, warrants
and rights
Number of securities
remaining available for
future issuance under
equity compensation
plans (excluding
shares reflected
in column (a))
(a)
(b)
(c)
Equity compensation plans approved by shareholders
Stock options
12,925,944
$73.44
Deferred compensation
2,979,943
Other stock units (1)
5,713,711
Equity compensation plans not approved by
shareholders
None
None
None
Total (2)
21,619,598
$73.44
16,894,098
(1)  
Includes 2,246,070      shares  issuable  in  respect  of  PBRSUs  subject  to  the  satisfaction  of  performance  criteria  and  assumes  payout  at
maximum levels.
(2)  
Excludes the potential performance awards which the Compensation Committee has the discretion to pay in cash, stock or a combination of
both after the three-year performance periods which end in 2015 , 2016 and 2017 .
For further information, see Note 15 to our Consolidated Financial Statements.
Item 13. Certain Relationships and Related Transactions, and Director Independence
The  information  required  by  Item  404  of  Regulation  S-K  will  be  included  under  the  caption  “Related  Person  Transactions”  in  the 2016 Proxy
Statement, and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
The information required by Item 407(a) of Regulation S-K will be included under the caption “Director Independence” in the 2016 Proxy Statement,
and that information is incorporated by reference herein.
Item 14. Principal Accounting Fees and Services
The information required by this Item will be included under the caption “Principal Accountant Fees and Services” in the 2016 Proxy Statement, and
that information is incorporated by reference herein.
116

Table of Contents
PART IV
Item 15. Exhibits, Financial Statement Schedules
(a) List of documents filed as part of this report:
1.
Financial Statements
Our consolidated financial statements are as set forth under Item 8 of this report on Form 10-K.
2.
Financial Statement Schedules
All  schedules  are  omitted  because  they  are  not  applicable,  not  required,  or  the  information  is  included  in  the  consolidated  financial
statements.
3.
Exhibits
(3) Articles of Incorporation and By-Laws.
(i)
Amended  and  Restated  Certificate  of  Incorporation  of  The  Boeing  Company  dated  May  5,  2006  (Exhibit  3.1  to  the
Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated May 1, 2006).
(ii)
By-Laws of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated December 14, 2015 (Exhibit 3.2 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated December 15, 2015).
(10)Material Contracts.
Bank Credit Agreements
(i)
364-Day  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  November  4,  2015,  among  The  Boeing  Company,  the  Lenders  party  thereto,
Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated November 4, 2015).
(ii)
Five-Year  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  November  10,  2011,  among  The  Boeing  Company,  the  Lenders  party  thereto,
Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as joint lead arrangers and joint book managers, JPMorgan
Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative agent (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated November 10, 2011).
(iii)
Amendment No. 1 dated as of October 9, 2014 to the Five-Year Credit Agreement, dated as of November 10, 2011, among
The Boeing Company, the Lenders party thereto, Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as joint lead
arrangers and joint book managers, JPMorgan Chase Bank, N.A. as syndication agent and Citibank, N.A. as administrative
agent (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 14, 2014).
(iv)
Amendment  No.  2 dated  as  of  November  4,  2015  to  the  Five-Year  Credit  Agreement,  dated  as  of  November  10,  2011,
among The Boeing Company, the Lenders party thereto, Citigroup Global Markets Inc. and J.P. Morgan Securities LLC as
joint  lead  arrangers  and  joint  book  managers,  JPMorgan  Chase  Bank,  N.A.  as  syndication  agent  and  Citibank,  N.A.  as
administrative agent (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated November 4, 2015).
117

Table of Contents
Business Acquisition Agreements
(v)
Joint  Venture  Master  Agreement,  dated  as  of  May  2,  2005,  by  and  among  Lockheed  Martin  Corporation,  The  Boeing
Company and United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. (Exhibit (10)(i) to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30,
2005).
(vi)
Delta Inventory Supply Agreement, dated as of December 1, 2006, by and between United Launch Alliance, L.L.C. and The
Boeing Company (Exhibit (10)(vi) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2006).
Management Contracts and Compensatory Plans
(vii)
Summary  of  Non-Employee  Director  Compensation  (Exhibit  10(i)  to  the  Company’s  Form  10-Q  for  the  quarter  ended
September 30, 2014).
(viii)
Deferred Compensation Plan for Directors of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated effective January 1, 2008
(Exhibit 10.2 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).
(ix)
Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated on January 1, 2008 (Exhibit
10.1 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).
(x)
Incentive Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries, as amended and restated April 27,
2015 (Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015).
(xi)
The Boeing Company Elected Officer Annual Incentive Plan, as amended and restated effective April 27, 2015 (Exhibit 10.4
to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended June 30, 2015).
(xii)
The  Boeing  Company  1997  Incentive  Stock  Plan,  as  amended  effective  May  1,  2000  and  further  amended  effective
January 1, 2008 (Exhibit 10.5 to the Company’s Current Report on Form 8-K dated October 28, 2007).
(xiii)
Transition and Retirement Agreement dated June 22, 2015 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K
dated June 22, 2015).
(xiv)
Supplemental  Pension  Agreement  between  The  Boeing  Company  and  J.  Michael  Luttig  dated  January  25,  2007,  as
amended on November 14, 2007 (Exhibit (10)(xxx) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2007).
(xv)
Supplemental Benefit Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated on August 25, 2014, effective
March 1, 2014 (Exhibit 10(ii) to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter ended September 30, 2014).
(xvi)
Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company, as amended and restated as of January
1, 2016.
(xvii) The  Boeing  Company  Executive  Layoff  Benefits  Plan,  as  amended  and  restated  effective  January  1,  2010  (Exhibit  (10)
(xxix) to the Company’s Annual Report on Form 10-K for the year ended December 31, 2009).
(xviii) The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan.
(a)
Plan, as amended and restated effective April 27, 2015 (Exhibit 10.3 to the Company’s Form 10-Q for the quarter
ended June 30, 2015).
(b)
Form of Non-Qualified Stock Option Grant Notice of Terms (Exhibit (10)(xvii)(b) to the Company’s Form 10-K for the
year ended December 31, 2010).
(c)
Form of Notice of Terms of Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units.
118

Table of Contents
(d)
Form of Performance Award Notice.
(e)
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units.
(f)
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units dated February 27, 2012 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated February 27, 2012).
(g)
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units dated December 17, 2012 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated December 17, 2012).
(h)
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units dated February 24, 2014 (Exhibit 10.1 to the Company’s Current
Report on Form 8-K dated February 24, 2014).
(i)
Form of Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units dated February 23, 2015.
(j)
Notice of Terms of Restricted Stock Units (Exhibit 10.2 to the Company's Current Report on Form 8-K dated June 22,
2015).
(12) Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges.
(14) Codes of Ethics.
(i)
The
 Boeing
 Company
 Code
 of
 Ethical
 Business
 Conduct
 for
 Members
 of
 the
 Board
 of
 Directors
(www.boeing.com/resources/boeingdotcom/company/general_info/pdf/conduct_for_directors.pdf).
(ii)
The
 Boeing
 Company
 Code
 of
 Conduct
 for
 Finance
 Employees
(www.boeing.com/resources/boeingdotcom/company/general_info/pdf/code-of-conduct-for-finance.pdf).
(iii)
The Boeing Company Code of Conduct
(www.boeing.com/resources/boeingdotcom/principles/ethics_and_compliance/pdf/english.pdf).
(21) List of Company Subsidiaries.
(23) Consent of Independent Registered Public Accounting Firm.
(31) Section 302 Certifications.
(i)
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
(ii)
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 302 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
(32) Section 906 Certifications.
(i)
Certification of Chief Executive Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
(ii)
Certification of Chief Financial Officer pursuant to Section 906 of Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.
119

Table of Contents
(99) Additional Exhibits.
(i)
Commercial Program Method of Accounting (Exhibit (99)(i) to the 1997 Form 10-K).
(101)
Interactive Data Files.
(101.INS)
  XBRL Instance Document
(101.SCH)
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Schema Document
(101.CAL)
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Calculation Linkbase Document
(101.DEF)
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Definition Linkbase Document
(101.LAB)
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Label Linkbase Document
(101.PRE)
  XBRL Taxonomy Extension Presentation Linkbase Document
In accordance with Item 601(b)(4)(iii)(A) of Regulation S-K, copies of certain instruments defining the rights of holders of long-term debt of the
Company are not filed herewith. Pursuant to this regulation, we hereby agree to furnish a copy of any such instrument to the SEC upon request.
120

Table of Contents
Signatures
Pursuant to the requirements of Section 13 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the registrant has duly caused this report to be signed on its
behalf by the undersigned, thereunto duly authorized, on February 10, 2016 .
THE BOEING COMPANY
(Registrant)
By:  
/s/ Robert E. Verbeck
 
Robert E. Verbeck – Senior Vice President, Finance and Corporate
Controller
121

Table of Contents
Pursuant to the requirements of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, this report has been signed below by the following persons on behalf of the
registrant and in the capacities indicated on February 10, 2016 .
/s/ Dennis A. Muilenburg
/s/ Edmund P. Giambastiani, Jr.
Dennis A. Muilenburg – President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
Edmund P. Giambastiani, Jr. – Director
(Principal Executive Officer)
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
/s/ Lynn J. Good
Gregory D. Smith – Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice
President, Business Development and Strategy
Lynn J. Good – Director
(Principal Financial Officer)
/s/ Robert E. Verbeck
/s/ Lawrence W. Kellner
Robert E. Verbeck – Senior Vice President, Finance and Corporate
Controller
Lawrence W. Kellner – Director
(Principal Accounting Officer)
/s/ W. James McNerney, Jr.
/s/ Edward M. Liddy
W. James McNerney, Jr. – Chairman 
Edward M. Liddy – Director
/s/ David L. Calhoun
/s/ Susan C. Schwab
David L. Calhoun – Director
Susan C. Schwab – Director
/s/ Arthur D. Collins, Jr.
/s/ Ronald A. Williams
Arthur D. Collins, Jr. – Director
Ronald A. Williams – Director
/s/ Kenneth M. Duberstein
/s/ Mike S. Zafirovski
Kenneth M. Duberstein – Director
Mike S. Zafirovski – Director
122

EXHIBIT 10 (xvi)
SUPPLEMENTAL EXECUTIVE RETIREMENT PLAN
FOR EMPLOYEES OF THE BOEING COMPANY
(As Amended and Restated as of January 1, 2016)
SECTION 1. PURPOSE OF THE PLAN
The Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company was originally effective January 1, 1999.
Prior to 2008, the plan provided two separate benefits to participants, the Supplemental Benefit and the Excess Benefit. The purpose
of the Supplemental Benefit is to provide retirement benefits to supplement the benefits provided by the Pension Value Plan, for a
select group of management or highly compensated employees of The Boeing Company and its Affiliates or Subsidiaries who are
participants in the Pension Value Plan. The purpose of the Excess Benefit component is to provide restoration and excess benefits to
eligible  employees  of  The  Boeing  Company  and  its  Affiliates  or  Subsidiaries  who  are  participants  in  the  Pension  Value  Plan.
Effective January 1, 2008, for ease of communications with participants, the plan was restated to merge both components into a
single SERP Benefit. This change was not intended to have a substantive impact on participant benefits.
The adoption of the Plan is not intended to result in any duplication of benefits by awarding additional benefits for any period of
service  with  the  Company  for  which  the  participant  is  otherwise  entitled  to  benefits  under  another  non-qualified  plan.  The
Committee will have sole and absolute discretion in determining whether an adjustment in benefits under this Plan is necessary to
prevent a prohibited duplication of benefits.
The Plan was restated effective January 1, 2008 to comply with section 409A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
The Plan was restated effective January 1, 2009 to make additional clarifying changes. The Plan was restated effective as of May 1,
2013 to make Designated Domestic Partners and same sex Spouses eligible for pre-commencement survivor benefits and optional
forms of benefit with a survivor annuity under the Plan. These Designated Domestic Partner benefits will be available to Participants
whose Commencement Date (or pre-commencement death) occurs on or after May 1, 2013 and before January 1, 2017.
Notwithstanding any provision in the Plan to the contrary, effective December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue under the
Pension Value Plan (other than the allocation of Interest Credits to the extent required under Section 4.2 of the Pension Value Plan).
To reflect this change, benefits will cease to accrue under this Plan as of December 31, 2015 (other than as attributable to such
Interest Credits).
SECTION 2. DEFINITIONS
Except as otherwise specified in this Section, capitalized terms have the same meaning as provided for those terms under the Pension
Value Plan.
- 1 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Actuarial Equivalent or Actuarially Equivalent – means an amount of equal value determined as follows:
(a) For purposes of calculating a lump sum, the Actuarial Equivalent will be determined on the basis of the interest and mortality
assumptions used to calculate lump sum benefits under the PVP, as it shall be amended from time to time.
(b)  For  purposes  of  calculating  a  Surviving  Spouse  Option  or  Domestic  Partner  Option,  the  Actuarial  Equivalent  will  be
determined  on  the  basis  of  a  6%  interest  rate  and  the  RP-2000  mortality  table,  mixed  collar,  projected  to  2015  using
Scale AA, with a 50/50 male/female blend.
Affiliate or Subsidiary – means a member of a controlled group of corporations (as defined in Code section 1563(a), determined
without regard to Code sections 1563(a)(4) and (e)(3)(C)), a group of trades or businesses (whether incorporated or not) which
are under common control within the meaning of Code section 414(c), or an affiliated service group (as defined in Code sections
414(m) or 414(o)) of which The Boeing Company is a part.
  
Benefit Service – means the Benefit Service recognized under the PVP, except as modified below.
If a Participant has commenced a benefit under this Plan following a deemed Separation from Service under Code section 409A
due to an Authorized Period of Absence classified as Pre-Retirement Leave, additional Benefit Service will not be recognized
during this Authorized Period of Absence. Nor will Benefit Service be recognized for a period of reduced services, where a
Participant Separates from Service due to a reasonably anticipated permanent reduction in services of at least 50 percent (for
reasons other than an Authorized Period of Absence).
Code – means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
Commencement Date – means the date as of which an Employee’s payments commence under Section 6.A.2. of this Plan.
Committee – means the Employee Benefit Plans Committee.
Company – means The Boeing Company, its successors in interest, and its Affiliates and Subsidiaries.
Compensation – means annualized base rate of pay from the Company.
E-Series Payroll – means the executive designation of level E1 to E6 at the Company.
Employee – means any person who is employed as a common law employee of the Company.
- 2 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Excess Benefit – means the benefits provided by Section 5 of this Plan. Effective as of December 31, 2015, the Excess Benefit will
cease to accrue under this Plan (other than as attributable to the allocation of Interest Credits under the PVP).
Final Average Pay – means the greater of the following:
(a) the highest five completed consecutive calendar years of Compensation divided by five, or
(b) the daily Compensation received during the last 1,825 days before the Participant’s Termination of Employment, divided by
1,825 and multiplied by 365 or, if a Participant has less than 1,825 days between his or her Employment Commencement
Date and his or her Termination of Employment, the Compensation received during that period divided by the number of
days in that period and multiplied by 365. For purposes of this calculation, February 29 and March 1 of any leap year shall be
treated as one day.
For purposes of computing Final Average Pay, periods during an Authorized Period of Absence generally will be included as if
the  Participant  were  compensated  at  the  rate  of  pay  he  or  she  was  receiving  immediately  before  the  Authorized  Period  of
Absence. However, if a Participant has commenced a benefit under this Plan following a deemed Separation from Service under
Code  section  409A  due  to  an  Authorized  Period  of  Absence  classified  as  Pre-Retirement  Leave,  Compensation  will  not  be
counted during this Authorized Period of Absence.
Similarly,  Compensation  will  not  be  counted  toward  Final  Average  Pay  to  the  extent  paid  during  a  Participant’s  period  of
reduced  services,  where  the  Participant  has  Separated  from  Service  due  to  a  reasonably  anticipated  permanent  reduction  in
services of at least 50 percent (for reasons other than an Authorized Period of Absence).
ULA and USA Pay . For purposes of determining Final Average Pay for a Participant who transfers employment directly from
the Company to ULA or USA, the term Compensation generally includes the Participant’s annualized base rate of pay with ULA
or USA for the period of uninterrupted executive service at ULA or USA, as applicable, provided that the Participant transfers
directly from the E-Series Payroll at the Company to executive status at ULA or USA. ULA and USA base pay will not be
included under this Plan for any period following the Participant’s removal from this executive status. In addition, ULA and
USA base pay will not be included as Compensation under this Plan for any period after a Participant has commenced a benefit
under this Plan.
Final Average Incentive Pay – means the five consecutive awards made under the Incentive Compensation Plan that produce the
highest sum, divided by five. The term “awards” include amounts awarded instead of cash and amounts not yet vested, but it
does not include any accrued awards not yet made or awards made after the month in which a Termination of Employment
occurs. Where fewer than five awards have been made to a Participant under the Incentive Compensation Plan during the five-
year averaging period, all awards during this period will be counted.
- 3 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

However, if a Participant has commenced a benefit under this Plan following a deemed Separation from Service under Code
section 409A due to an Authorized Period of Absence classified as Pre-Retirement Leave, awards made during this Authorized
Period of Absence will not be included. Similarly, incentive awards will not be counted toward Final Average Incentive Pay to
the extent awarded during a Participant’s period of reduced services, where the Participant has Separated from Service due to a
reasonably anticipated permanent reduction in services of at least 50 percent (for reasons other than an Authorized Period of
Absence).
In addition, Final Average Incentive Pay will not include any portion of an incentive award that the Company seeks to recover
under the Clawback Policy provision of the Incentive Compensation Plan.
ULA  and  USA  Incentive  Pay  .  For  purposes  of  determining  Final  Average  Incentive  Pay  for  a  Participant  who  transfers
employment  directly  from  the  Company  to  ULA  or  USA,  the  term  Incentive  Compensation  Plan  generally  includes  any
applicable annual incentive plan at ULA or USA for the period of uninterrupted executive service at ULA or USA, as applicable,
provided that the Participant transfers directly from the E-Series Payroll at the Company to executive status at ULA or USA.
ULA and USA annual incentive plans will not be included under this Plan for any period following the Participant’s removal
from this executive status. Solely for the Plan Year in which the Participant transfers to ULA or USA, Final Average Incentive
Pay will include awards made under both the Incentive Compensation Plan of the Company and the similar plan maintained by
ULA or USA, as applicable. In addition, ULA and USA incentive pay will not be included as Compensation under this Plan for
any period after a Participant has commenced a benefit under this Plan.
Frozen Benefit – has the meaning given in Section 4.F.3.
Heritage Boeing Participant – means a Participant who has a Heritage Benefit from The Boeing Company Employee Retirement
Plan.
Heritage MDC Participant –  means  a  Participant  who  has  a  Heritage  Benefit  from  the  Employee  Retirement  Income  Plan  of
McDonnell Douglas Corporation, Salaried Plan.
Heritage BNA Participant – means a Participant who has a Heritage Benefit from the Boeing North American Retirement Plan.
Incentive Compensation Plan – means, as applicable, The Boeing Company Elected Officer Annual Incentive Plan, the Incentive
Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries, or an authorization to make an award in lieu of an
award under either of the foregoing plans.
MDC 50/30 Date – means the date on which a Participant with a Heritage MDC Benefit both attains age 50 and earns 30 years of
Accumulated Benefit Service.
Offset Benefit – has the meaning given in Section 4.B.
- 4 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Participant – means an Employee who satisfies the eligibility criteria in either Section 4.A. or Section 5.A.
PVP or Pension Value Plan – means The Pension Value Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company (formerly known as The
Boeing  Company  Pension  Value  Plan  for  Heritage  MDC  Employees  and  The  Boeing  Company  Pension  Value  Plan),  as
amended from time to time. Effective as of December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue under the PVP (other than the
allocation of Interest Credits to the extent required under Section 4.2 of the PVP).
Plan – means the Supplemental Executive Retirement Plan for Employees of The Boeing Company as herein set forth, together with
any amendments that may be adopted. Effective as of December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue under this Plan (other
than as attributable to the allocation of Interest Credits under the PVP).
Plan Year – means the calendar year.
Separation from Service or Separates from Service – means an Employee’s death, retirement, or termination of employment from
the Company within the meaning of Code section 409A. For purposes of determining whether a Separation from Service has
occurred, Affiliates and Subsidiaries are defined by using the language “at least 80 percent” to define the controlled group under
Code section 1563(a) in lieu of the 50 percent default rule stated in Treasury Regulation section 1.409A-1(h)(3).
A Separation from Service is deemed to include a reasonably anticipated permanent reduction in the level of services performed
by an Employee, to less than 50 percent of the average level of services performed by the Employee during the immediately
preceding 36-month period.
SERP Benefit – For a Participant whose most recent date of hire or rehire was before January 1, 2008, the SERP Benefit equals the
greater of the Participant’s vested Supplemental Benefit, to the extent eligible, or the Participant’s vested Excess Benefit.
For a Participant hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2008, the SERP Benefit will equal the vested Excess Benefit for periods
after this date. No Supplemental Benefit will accrue for periods after January 1, 2008. Solely for purposes of eligibility for the
Supplemental Benefit, the term “rehire” will not include a Participant’s return directly from an Authorized Period of Absence or
a Participant’s rehire during a Layoff Period.
The SERP Benefit will be calculated after the Supplemental Benefit (if eligible) and Excess Benefit are each reduced to reflect
commencement  before  age  65,  if  applicable,  in  accordance  with  the  actuarial  factors  described  in  Sections  4  and  5  herein.
Supplemental Benefits or Excess Benefits that are not 100% vested will be disregarded for purposes of calculating the SERP
Benefit.
- 5 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Effective as of December 31, 2015, the SERP Benefit will cease to accrue under this Plan (other than as attributable to the
allocation of Interest Credits under the PVP).
Specified Employee – means an Employee who is a “specified employee” within the meaning of Code section 409A. Specified
Employee status is determined on the last day of the prior Plan Year, to take effect as of April 1 of the Plan Year for a 12-month
period.  Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  Specified  Employees  shall  be  determined  by  including  the  employees  whom  the
Company reasonably determines to be the 75 top-paid officers of the Company rather than the 50 top-paid officers as provided
under Code section 416(i)(1)(A), to the extent permitted under Code section 409A.
Supplemental  Benefit –  means  the  benefits  provided  by  Section  4  of  this  Plan.  Effective  as  of  December  31,  2015,  the
Supplemental Benefit will cease to accrue under this Plan.
Target Benefit – has the meaning given in Section 4.B.
Total Average Compensation – means Final Average Pay plus Final Average Incentive Pay, with the result divided by twelve.
Total  Average  Compensation  for  a  Participant  who  ceased  to  be  on  the  E-Series  Payroll  before  January  1,  1999  will  be
determined as of January 1, 1999. Total Average Compensation for a Participant who ceases to be on the E-Series Payroll on or
after January 1, 1999 will be determined as of the date the Participant first ceases to be on the E-Series Payroll.
ULA – means United Launch Alliance, LLC, a joint venture of The Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation. The term
ULA includes its subsidiary United Launch Services, LLC.
USA – means United Space Alliance, LLC, a joint venture of The Boeing Company and Lockheed Martin Corporation.
- 6 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

SECTION 3. THE SERP BENEFIT
The SERP Benefit under this Plan generally is calculated as the greater of a Participant’s vested Supplemental Benefit (to the extent
eligible) or the Participant’s vested Excess Benefit, each reduced to reflect commencement prior to age 65, if applicable. However, a
Participant hired or rehired on or after January 1, 2008 will not be eligible to accrue a Supplemental Benefit for periods after this
date. Solely for purposes of eligibility for the Supplemental Benefit, the term “rehire” will not include a Participant’s return directly
from an Authorized Period of Absence or a Participant’s rehire during a Layoff Period.
Supplemental Benefits are described in Section 4. Excess Benefits are described in Section 5. Rules applicable to both Supplemental
Benefits and Excess Benefits are provided under this Section 3.
Prior to 2008, the Supplemental Benefit and Excess Benefit were described herein and communicated to Participants as two separate
benefits. For ease of communication, these dual components are restated as a single benefit effective as of January 1, 2008. In all
cases, the restatement will provide the same total benefit as of December 31, 2007 as the formulas of the pre-2008 plan.
In no event will the SERP Benefit for any Participant who is transferred to ULA or USA duplicate any benefits provided under an
individual agreement with the Company.
Effective as of December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue under this Plan. No Supplemental Benefit or Excess Benefit will
accrue for any Participant after this date (other than as attributable to the allocation of Interest Credits under the PVP).
A.
Special Bridging Rules for Early Retirement Benefits
Special bridging rules apply to a Participant who is described in both Sections 3.A.1. and 3.A.2. below. In this case, the Participant’s
SERP Benefit will be calculated as of the date on which he or she would satisfy the conditions for an Early Retirement Date under
the PVP. The SERP Benefit will be reduced to reflect early commencement as follows. First, the separate components of the SERP
Benefit  will  be reduced  as of the  Early  Retirement  Date,  in accordance  with  the  actuarial  reduction  described  in Section  4.C.1.
(Supplemental Benefit) or Section 5 (Excess Benefit), as applicable. Second, the SERP Benefit will be further reduced for each
month that the Participant’s Commencement Date under this Plan precedes the month in which the Participant would satisfy the
conditions for an Early Retirement Date, in accordance with the Actuarial Equivalent factors for calculating lump sums under the
PVP.
Benefits under this Section 3.A. remain payable in accordance with the timing rules of Section 6.A.2.
- 7 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

1.
The Participant Separated from Service (including deemed Separations from Service) in a manner (such as layoff)
that  permits  the  accrual  of  additional  vesting  service  credit  toward  early  retirement  eligibility  following  such
separation.
2.
The Participant is described in one of the following categories as of his or her Separation from Service:
(a)
The Participant has attained age 54 or older with 9 or more years of Vesting Service (but has not yet attained
both age 55 and 10 years of Vesting Service), or
(b)
The  Participant  has  a  Heritage  MDC  Benefit  and  has  attained  age  54  or  older  with  29  or  more  years  of
Accumulated Benefit Service (but has not yet reached an MDC 50/30 Date).
B.     Special Calculation for MDC 50/30 Date After Separation
Special calculation rules apply to a Participant described in both Sections 3.B.1. and 3.B.2.
1.
The Participant Separated from Service (including deemed Separations from Service) in a manner (such as layoff)
that  permits  the  accrual  of  additional  vesting  service  credit  toward  early  retirement  eligibility  following  such
separation.
2.
The Participant has a Heritage MDC Benefit and has attained age 49 or older (but not age 54) with 29 or more years
of Accumulated Benefit Service as of his or her Separation from Service (but has not yet reached an MDC 50/30
Date).
In this case, the Participant’s SERP Benefit will remain payable in accordance with the timing rules of Section 6.A.2.
In addition, upon the Participant’s Early Retirement Date, a separate lump sum payment will be made to the Participant to represent
any missed payments as a result of the delayed commencement beyond the Participant’s MDC 50/30 Date. Specifically, this lump
sum will equal the total of the monthly payments that would have been payable to the Participant, beginning on the first of the month
following the Participant’s MDC 50/30 Date and ending immediately prior to his or her Early Retirement Date, plus interest at the
rate used to calculate lump sums under the PVP.
C.     Forfeiture
The  Committee  may  determine,  in  its  sole  discretion,  that  a  Participant  will  forfeit  any  part  or  all  of  his  or  her  SERP  Benefit
(whether or not vested) if any of the following circumstances occur while employed by the Company or within five (5) years after
termination  of  such  employment,  provided  that  the  provisions  of  paragraphs  3.  and  4.  shall  apply  only  with  respect  to  benefits
accrued on or after January 1, 2008:
- 8 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

1.
The Participant is convicted of a felony involving theft, fraud, embezzlement, or other similar unlawful acts against
the Company or against the Company’s interests. For purposes of this Plan, “other similar unlawful acts against the
Company  or  against  the  Company’s  interests”  shall  include  any  other  unlawful  act  (i)  committed  against  the
Company, or the interests of the Company, including, but not limited to, a governmental agency or instrumentality
which conducts business with the Company, or a customer of the Company, or (ii) affecting the Company or the
interests of the Company, in such a manner that is determined to be detrimental to, prejudicial to or in conflict with
the Company or the interests of the Company, as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion.
2.
The Participant, directly or indirectly, engages in any activity, whether individually or as an employee, consultant or
otherwise,  which  the  Committee  determines,  in  its  sole  discretion,  to  be  an  activity  in  which  the  Participant  is
“engaging in competition” with any significant aspect of Company business. For purposes of this Plan, “engaging in
competition”  shall  include  but  is  not  limited  to  representing,  providing  services  to,  or  being  an  employee  of  or
associated in a business capacity, any person or entity that is engaged, directly or indirectly, in competition with any
Company business or that takes a position adverse to any Company business, regardless of the position or duties the
Participant  takes,  in  such  a  manner  that  is  determined  to  be  detrimental  to,  prejudicial  to  or  in  conflict  with  the
interests of the Company, all as determined by the Committee in its sole discretion.
3.
The  Participant,  without  the  advance  approval  of  the  Company’s  Senior  Vice  President,  Human  Resources  and
Administration,  induces  or  attempts  to  induce,  directly  or  indirectly,  any  of  the  Company’s  employees,
representatives or consultants to terminate, discontinue or cease working with or for the Company, or to breach any
contract with the Company, in order to work with or for, or enter into a contract with, the Participant or any third
party.
4.
The Participant disparages or otherwise makes any statements about the Company, its products, or its employees that
could  be  in  any  way  viewed  as  negative  or  critical.  Nothing  in  this  paragraph  will  apply  to  legally  protected
statements to government agencies or statements made in the course of sworn testimony in administrative, judicial, or
arbitral proceedings.
To the extent the Participant has already commenced payment of his or her SERP benefit, the Committee will be entitled to pursue
any and all legal and equitable relief against the Participant to enforce the forfeiture of and recover such SERP benefit. The forfeiture
provisions will continue to apply unless and to the extent modified by a court of competent jurisdiction. However, if any portion of
these forfeiture provisions is held by such a court to be unenforceable, these provisions shall be deemed amended to limit their scope
to the broadest scope that such authority determines is enforceable, and as so amended shall continue in effect.
- 9 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

In addition, the Committee will, in all appropriate circumstances, require reimbursement of any SERP Benefit attributable to an
incentive award that the Company seeks to recover under the Clawback Policy provision of the Incentive Compensation Plan.
D.     Participants Rehired After Commencement Date
The SERP Benefit of a Participant who is rehired (or who returns from an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced
level of services that constitutes a deemed Separation from Service under Code section 409A) after his or her Commencement Date
will be determined under this Section 3.D.
1.    Calculation and Payment of Old SERP Benefit
The portion of the Participant’s SERP Benefit that accrued before the initial Commencement Date (or during an Authorized Period
of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services that constitutes a deemed Separation from Service) will be referred to as the
“Old SERP Benefit” for purposes of this Section 3.D.
A Participant’s Old SERP Benefit will not be suspended by reason of the Participant’s rehire or return from Authorized Period of
Absence or a period of a reduced level of services. This portion of the SERP Benefit will continue to be paid following rehire or
return, in the form originally elected by the Participant, without regard to the period following rehire or return.
2.    Calculation and Payment of New SERP Benefit
(a)    Rehires After 1/1/08 – Excess Benefit Only
In general, a Participant rehired on or after January 1, 2008 will not be eligible to accrue a Supplemental Benefit for periods after
this date. (This exclusion does not apply to a Participant hired before January 1, 2008, who returns on or after this date directly from
an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services , or who is rehired on or after this date but during a
Layoff Period). Following rehire, this Participant will be entitled to accrue only an Excess Benefit attributable to periods after the
date of rehire (“New SERP Benefit”). The New SERP Benefit for this Participant will equal: (a) the Participant’s benefits under the
PVP for periods after rehire determined without regard to the limitations under Code sections 415 and 401(a)(17), reduced (but not
below zero) by (b) any benefit payable to or on account of the Participant under the PVP for periods after rehire. The New SERP
Benefit will be determined without regard to benefits, compensation, and Benefit Service accrued before rehire.
The Participant’s New SERP Benefit will remain subject to the timing rules under Section 6.A.2., without regard to any Separation
from Service that occurred prior to rehire. The Participant may elect the form of payment for the New SERP Benefit at the time of
commencement, in accordance with Section 6.A.1.
- 10 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

(b)
Returns from Leave, Reduced Services or Layoff After 1/1/08– Supplemental and Excess Benefit
A Supplemental Benefit can accrue (to the extent eligible) for a Participant hired before January 1, 2008, who returns on or after this
date directly from an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services , or who is rehired on or after this date
but  during  a  Layoff  Period.  For  such  Participant,  the  total  SERP  Benefit  will  be  recalculated  (as  described  below)  as  of  the
subsequent Commencement Date as if no prior Separation from Service had occurred, then reduced by the payments previously
received. This total SERP Benefit will be further reduced by the Old SERP, but to no less than zero, to produce the New SERP
Benefit payable.
The total SERP Benefit equals the greater of (i) and (ii) below.
(i)
The total Supplemental Benefit (if eligible). For purposes of calculating the Participant’s total Supplemental Benefit
as of his or her subsequent Commencement Date, the total Target Benefit will equal the amount determined under
Section 4.B. (taking account of Benefit Service and Total Average Compensation accrued before and after rehire),
reduced  for  early  commencement  by  the  applicable  reduction  factors  described  in  Section  4.C.  The  total  Target
Benefit will be reduced by the total Offset Benefit (accrued before and after rehire), which offset represents the PVP
benefit as if no prior Separation had occurred.
(ii)
The  total  Excess  Benefit,  calculated  as  if  no  prior  Separation  from  Service  had  occurred  and  reduced  for  early
retirement as applicable.
The Participant’s total SERP Benefit is further offset by the value of payments made prior to the subsequent Commencement Date
from this Plan, or from any other non-qualified defined benefit-type pension plan or arrangement (including under an individual
contract) sponsored or paid for by the Company. The value of these benefit payments will be determined by (i) increasing each
benefit payment with interest from the time such benefit payment was made to the time of the subsequent Commencement Date in
accordance with the Actuarial Equivalent factors for calculating lump sums under the PVP (the “Commencement Date Factors”),
and then (ii) converting the sum of the interest-adjusted benefit payments from (i) above at the subsequent Commencement Date to a
Single Life Annuity using the Commencement Date Factors. No reduction will be made for benefit payments payable under any tax-
qualified pension plan (and its corresponding non-qualified plan) attributable to service not treated as Benefit Service taken into
account under Section 4.B.1.(a).
For any Participant hired on or after January 1, 2008 who returns directly from an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a
reduced  level  of  services,  or  who  is  rehired  during  a  Layoff  Period,  the  total  SERP  Benefit  will  be  recalculated  following  the
methodology described above (with regard to the Excess Benefit only). No Supplemental Benefit will be payable.
In no event will this Participant’s recalculated total SERP Benefit be less than the Old SERP Benefit which is in pay status.
- 11 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

For purposes of this Section 3.D.2.(b), the New SERP Benefit will equal: (i) the recalculated total SERP Benefit described above,
minus (ii) the Old SERP Benefit defined in Section 3.D.1.
The Participant’s New SERP Benefit will remain subject to the timing rules under Section 6.A.2., without regard to any Separation
from Service that occurred prior to rehire. The Participant may elect the form of payment for the New SERP Benefit at the time of
commencement, in accordance with Section 6.A.1.
(c)    Rehires Who Retired Prior to 2008
For  a  Participant  who  rehired  and  had  a  subsequent  Commencement  Date  before  January  1,  2008,  the  New  SERP  Benefit  was
comprised  of  a  New  Supplemental  Benefit  and  a  New  Excess  Benefit  (both  as  defined  below)  which  were  calculated  and  paid
separately, in accordance with the terms of the Plan at that time.
The New Supplemental Benefit was recalculated as if no prior retirement had occurred, and then offset for all payments previously
made, as described in Section 3.D.2.(b) above.
The  New  Excess  Benefit  was  recalculated  solely  with  regard  to  new  accruals  under  the  PVP,  as  described  in  Section  3.D.2.(a)
above..
E.     Participants Rehired Before Commencement Date
The SERP Benefit of a Participant who is rehired before his or her Commencement Date will be determined under this Section 3.E.
1.    Calculation and Payment of Old SERP Benefit
The Participant’s Old SERP Benefit for purposes of this Section 3.E. is calculated as the amount that would have been payable to the
Participant at age 55, attributable to the prior period of employment, if he or she had not rehired or returned. This amount will be the
greater of (a) and (b) below:
(a)
The  Supplemental  Benefit  accrued  and  vested  before  the  prior  Separation  from  Service  (or  as  of  the  end  of  an
Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services that constitutes a deemed Separation from
Service), calculated as described further below.
(b)
The  Excess  Benefit  accrued  and  vested  as  to  the  first  period  of  employment,  reduced  for  early  retirement  as
applicable, in accordance with the applicable Vested Termination factors under the PVP.
For purposes of calculating the Participant’s Supplemental Benefit, his or her Target Benefit will equal the amount determined under
Section 4.B., taking account of the Participant’s Benefit Service and Total Average Compensation as of the prior Separation from
Service (or as of the end of an
- 12 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services that constitutes a deemed Separation from Service). The
Target Benefit will be reduced for early commencement by the applicable terminated vested reduction factors described in Section
4.C.2. and further reduced by the Offset Benefit. The Participant’s Offset Benefit will be calculated as the PVP benefit earned prior
to the original Separation from Service and payable at age 55 (i.e., with interest credits projected to age 55), in accordance with the
applicable reduction factors under the PVP for calculating a Vested Termination Benefit.
The Participant’s Old SERP Benefit will remain subject to the timing rules under Section 6.A.2. With regard to the Participant’s Old
SERP Benefit, the Participant will be treated as having experienced a Separation from Service. Payment of the Old SERP Benefit
will commence as of the first of the month following the Participant’s attainment of age 55. Payment of the Old SERP Benefit will
commence as of this date even if the Participant attains age 55 while on an Authorized Period of Absence, or after he or she rehires.
The  Participant  may  elect  the  form  of  payment  for  this  Old  SERP  Benefit  at  the  time  of  commencement,  in  accordance  with
Section 6.A.1.
2.    Calculation and Payment of New SERP Benefit
In general, a Participant rehired on or after January 1, 2008 will not be eligible to accrue a Supplemental Benefit for periods after
this date. (This exclusion does not apply to a Participant hired before January 1, 2008, who returns on or after this date directly from
an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services, or who is rehired on or after this date but during a Layoff
Period). Following rehire, this Participant will be entitled to accrue only an Excess Benefit attributable to periods after the date of
rehire (“New SERP Benefit”). The New SERP Benefit for this Participant will equal: (a) the Participant’s benefits under the PVP for
periods after rehire determined without regard to the limitations under Code sections 415 and 401(a)(17), reduced (but not below
zero) by (b) any benefit payable to or on account of the Participant under the PVP for periods after rehire. The New SERP Benefit
will be determined without regard to benefits, compensation, and service accrued before rehire.
A Supplemental Benefit can accrue (to the extent eligible) for a Participant hired before January 1, 2008, who returns on or after this
date directly from an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a reduced level of services, or who is rehired on or after this date
but during a Layoff Period. For such Participant, the total SERP Benefit will be recalculated as of the subsequent Commencement
Date as if no prior Separation from Service had occurred, following the methodology in Section 3.D.2.(b). For purposes of this
Section 3.E.2., the New SERP Benefit will equal: (i) the recalculated total SERP Benefit described above, minus (ii) the Old SERP
Benefit defined in Section 3.E.1.
For any Participant hired on or after January 1, 2008 who returns directly from an Authorized Period of Absence or a period of a
reduced level of services , or who is rehired during a Layoff Period, the total SERP Benefit will be recalculated as of the subsequent
Commencement  Date  as  if  no  prior  Separation  from  Service  had  occurred,  subject  to  offset  for  the  value  of  any  non-qualified
benefits previously paid , following the methodology in Section 3.D.2.(b) (with regard to the Excess Benefit only). For purposes of
this Section 3.E.2., the New SERP Benefit will equal: (i) the recalculated
- 13 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

total SERP Benefit described above, minus (ii) the Old SERP Benefit defined in Section 3.E.1. No Supplemental Benefit will be
payable.
With regard to the timing of payment of the New SERP Benefit, the Participant will be treated as if no Separation from Service had
occurred  prior  to  rehire  or  return.  The  Participant  may  elect  the  form  of  payment  for  the  New  SERP  Benefit  at  the  time  of
commencement, in accordance with Section 6.A.1.
F.     Pilot Early Leave
An  annual  recalculation  will  be  made  for  a  Participant  who  commences  benefits  under  Section  6.A.2.(a)  following  a  deemed
Separation from Service under Code section 409A due to an Authorized Period of Absence classified as Pilot Early Leave.
For this Participant, the benefit payable under this Plan will be recalculated as of January 1 of each Plan Year following the year in
which benefits commence following the methodology in Section 3.D.2.(b), as if no prior Separation from Service had occurred. For
purposes of this calculation, the Participant’s benefit will be reduced by early retirement reduction factors and further offset by the
value of payments previously made, to compute additional accruals (if any) earned during the period of Pilot Early Leave in the prior
Plan Year, calculated using the same methodology of Section 3.D.2.(b). Such additional accruals (if any) will be paid commencing
February  1  of  each  year  in  which  recalculation  occurs,  in  the  form  originally  elected  by  the  Participant.  In  no  event  will  this
recalculation reduce a participant’s benefit.
Recalculation will cease after the Plan Year following the end of the Pilot Early Leave.
- 14 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

SECTION 4. THE SUPPLEMENTAL BENEFIT
A.     Eligibility and Participation
An Employee will be eligible for the Supplemental Benefit if the Employee either (1) is on the E-Series Payroll on or after January
1, 1999, or (2) was a participant in the Supplemental Retirement Plan for Executives of The Boeing Company as of December 31,
1998 and as of January 1, 1999 was (a) on an Authorized Period of Absence from the E-Series Payroll, (b) on a layoff (bridging
period) from the E-Series Payroll that began on or after January 1, 1996, or (c) on the management payroll but had been on the E-
Series Payroll for some period on or after January 1, 1989.
An Employee who retired on January 1, 1999 is not eligible to participate in the Plan.
An Employee eligible to participate in the Plan will become a Participant on the later of (1) the date the Employee satisfies the
eligibility conditions or (2) the date the Employee becomes an Active Participant in the PVP. A rehired Employee who previously
participated in the Plan will become a Participant again on the later of (1) the date the Employee satisfies the eligibility conditions
again after rehire or (2) the date the Employee becomes an Active Participant in the PVP again after rehire.
If a Participant remains actively employed by the Company, but is no longer on the E-Series Payroll, the Target Benefit will remain
frozen as of the later of January 1, 1999 or the date the Participant was removed from the E-Series Payroll.
Effective  as of December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue  under this Plan. No Supplemental  Benefit  will accrue for any
Participant after this date.
B.     Amount of Supplemental Benefit
Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  Section  F,  the  Supplemental  Benefit  payable  to  a  Participant  retiring  at  his  or  her  Normal
Retirement Date is a monthly amount equal to (1) minus (2) below, provided that the monthly Supplemental Benefit shall not be less
than zero.
(1)
The greater of the following:
(a)    the Target Benefit – a monthly amount equal to 1.6% multiplied by the Participant’s Benefit Service multiplied
by the Participant’s Total Average Compensation, or
(b)    the Frozen Benefit, as described in Section 4.F.3., if applicable,
provided,  however,  that  the  amount  determined  under  this  Section  4.B.1.  shall  not  exceed  the  Participant’s
Compensation at Termination of Employment divided by twelve.
- 15 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

(2)
The Offset Benefit – a monthly amount equal to the benefits payable (or which would have been payable but for a
Participant’s or Beneficiary’s receipt of a lump sum distribution) to or on account of the Participant under the PVP,
adjusted  to  reflect  payment  at  the  Participant’s  Commencement  Date  as  a  Single  Life  Annuity  according  to  the
provisions of the PVP.
If the Participant retires after his or her Normal Retirement Date, calculation of the Target Benefit will include Compensation and
Benefit Service attained before and after the Normal Retirement Date, and the Offset Benefit will be adjusted to reflect the late
retirement according to the provisions of the PVP.
Effective  as of December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue  under this Plan. No Supplemental  Benefit  will accrue for any
Participant after this date.
C.     Early Retirement Benefits and Vested Terminated Retirement Benefits
Subject to the timing rules in Section 6 and the actuarial reductions described below, a Participant will be entitled to retire and
commence  benefits  before  his  or  her  Normal  Retirement  Date  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of  the  PVP  governing  early
retirement benefits and vested retirement benefits. An unreduced benefit will not be available, even to a Heritage MDC Participant
who has attained age 50 with 30 years of Accumulated Benefit Service.
1.    Early Retirement Benefits
If the Participant  retires directly from active employment  with the Company and commences benefits before his or her Normal
Retirement Date, the Target Benefit will be reduced by ¼% for each month that the Participant’s Commencement Date precedes his
or her sixty-second birthday. The Offset Benefit will be adjusted to reflect the early retirement according to the provisions of the
PVP.
2.    Vested Terminated Retirement Benefits
If  a  Participant  terminates  employment  with  a  vested  Supplemental  Benefit  and  commences  benefits  before  his  or  her  Normal
Retirement  Date,  the  Target  Benefit  will  be  reduced  by  ½%  for  each  month  that  the  Vested  Terminated  Participant’s
Commencement Date precedes his or her sixty-fifth birthday. The Offset Benefit will be adjusted to reflect the Vested Terminated
Participant’s early commencement of benefits according to the provisions of the PVP.
D.     Disability Retirement Benefits
A Participant who was on an approved medical leave of absence on or before April 1, 2003 and who otherwise met the eligibility
requirements  for  a  Disability  Retirement  Date  under  the  PVP  on  or  before  December  1,  2004  would  be  entitled  to  a  disability
retirement benefit equal to his unreduced Supplemental Benefit in accordance with the provisions of the PVP governing disability
retirement benefits. Disability benefits were payable under this Plan only when and to the extent that the
- 16 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Participant  received  disability  retirement  benefits  under  the  PVP.  This  Section  4.D.  applies  only  to  benefits  that  accrued  and
commenced payment before December 31, 2004, and it has no application after that date.
E.     Vesting
No  Supplemental  Benefit  shall  be  payable  to  a  Participant  until  such  Participant  is  vested  in  such  Supplemental  Benefit.  A
Participant  will  vest  100%  in  his  Supplemental  Benefit  at  the  later  of  the  following:  (1)  the  date  the  Participant  vests  100%  in
retirement  benefits  provided  under the PVP, or (2) the date the Participant  has been on the E-Series  Payroll  for a period of 36
consecutive months. For these purposes, an Authorized Period of Absence from the E-Series Payroll will count as a period on the E-
Series Payroll. If an Employee ceases to be on the E-Series Payroll for any reason other than an Authorized Period of Absence, and
the Employee later returns to the E-Series Payroll, periods of service on E-Series Payroll will not be aggregated for purpose of
determining whether the 36-consecutive month requirement has been met.
For  purposes  of  computing  vesting  for  a  Participant  who  transfers  employment  directly  from  the  Company  to  ULA  or  USA,
uninterrupted service at ULA or USA as an executive will be credited toward the 36 consecutive months requirement described
herein, provided that the Participant transfers directly from the E-Series Payroll at the Company to executive status at ULA or USA,
as applicable. ULA and USA service will not be credited toward vesting under this Plan for any period following the Participant’s
removal from this executive status. For purposes of computing vesting for a participant who transfers employment directly from
ULA or USA to the Company, uninterrupted service at ULA or USA as an executive will be credited toward the 36 consecutive
months requirement described herein, provided that the Participant transfers directly from executive status at ULA or USA to the E-
Series Payroll at the Company. ULA and USA service will not be credited toward vesting under this Plan for any period prior to the
Participant’s attainment of this executive status at ULA or USA, as applicable.
Any Participant who was on the E-Series Payroll on January 1, 1999 or was a Participant in the Supplemental Retirement Plan for
Executives of The Boeing Company as of December 31, 1998, will be 100% vested in his or her Supplemental Benefit if he or she is
vested in his or her benefits under the PVP. A Participant will also be 100% vested if he or she dies before benefits commence with a
surviving spouse or becomes eligible for a disability retirement benefit, but only if he or she has vested in his or her benefits under
the PVP.
If a Participant retires or Separates from Service (other than a deemed Separation from Service due to an Authorized Period of
Absence) before vesting in the Supplemental Benefit, the Participant generally will forfeit all rights to the Supplemental Benefit. To
the extent  the benefit  under  this Plan becomes 100% vested during an Authorized  Period  of Absence  that constitutes  a deemed
Separation from Service, it will remain subject to the payment timing rules under Section 6.A.2.
If  a  Participant  Separates  from  Service  after becoming  vested  in  the  Supplemental  Benefit,  and  the  Participant  is  subsequently
rehired or returns from an Authorized Period of Absence, the
- 17 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Supplemental Benefit accrued after rehire and return will be 100% vested (even if the Participant fails to be on the E-Series Payroll
for 36 consecutive months following rehire or return).
F.     Transfers
Effective  January  1,  1999,  certain  participants  in  certain  of  the  qualified  plans  sponsored  by  the  Company  and  its  Affiliates  or
Subsidiaries were transferred from those qualified plans to the PVP. In addition, effective July 1, 1999, certain participants in the
Boeing North American Retirement Plan were transferred from that plan to the PVP. In conjunction with the transfer to the PVP,
those participants were also transferred from various non-qualified plans in which they participated into this Plan. As of October 5,
2000, certain participants in The Times Mirror Pension Plan became participants in the PVP.
The following provisions are intended to insure that no benefits were lost as a result of transfers into this Plan or otherwise. These
provisions are not intended to result in any duplication of benefits by awarding additional benefits for any period of service with the
Company for which the Participant is otherwise entitled to benefits under another non-qualified plan.
1.    Final Average Pay
For Heritage Boeing and Heritage MDC Participants, Final Average Pay will equal the greater of (1) Final Average Pay as defined in
Section 2, or (2) the following amount as calculated solely for the period ending January 1, 1999:
    
(a)
For  Heritage  Boeing  Participants,  the  portion  of  Final  Average  Monthly  Total  Earnings  as  defined  in  the
Supplemental Retirement Plan for Executives of The Boeing Company, determined by reference to Final Average
Monthly Earnings as defined in The Boeing Company Employee Retirement Plan, multiplied by twelve;
(b)
For  Heritage  MDC  Participants,  the  portion  of  Average  Monthly  Salary  as  defined  in  the  Employee  Retirement
Income  Plan  of  McDonnell  Douglas  Corporation,  Salaried  Plan  determined  without  inclusion  of  any  payments  of
incentive compensation awards and without regard to any compensation limits under the Code, multiplied by twelve.
2.    Final Average Incentive Pay
For  Heritage  Boeing  and  Heritage  MDC  Participants,  Final  Average  Incentive  Pay  will  equal  the  greater  of  (1)  Final  Average
Incentive Pay as defined in Section 2, or (2) the following amount as calculated solely for the period ending January 1, 1999:
(a)
For  Heritage  Boeing  Participants,  the  portion  of  Final  Average  Monthly  Total  Earnings  as  defined  in  the
Supplemental Retirement Plan for Executives of The Boeing Company, determined by reference to awards under the
Incentive Compensation Plan, multiplied by twelve;
- 18 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

(b)
For  Heritage  MDC  Participants,  the  portion  of  Average  Monthly  Salary  as  defined  in  the  Employee  Retirement
Income Plan of McDonnell Douglas Corporation, Salaried Plan determined by reference to incentive compensation
awards of such Participants, multiplied by twelve.
For Heritage Boeing Participants retiring during February or March 1999, this section will be applicable through such Participant’s
Commencement Date, so that the Final Average Incentive Pay calculated under (a) above will include awards made in 1999 under
the Incentive Compensation Plan.
3.
Frozen Benefit
For a Heritage Boeing Participant, the Frozen Benefit will be the Participant’s benefits under the Supplemental Retirement Plan for
Executives  of  The  Boeing  Company  determined  as  of  January  1,  1999,  adjusted  according  to  the  provisions  of  the  PVP  for
commencement of benefits on the Participant’s Commencement Date and for payment in the form of a Single Life Annuity.
For a Participant on the E-Series Payroll as of July 1, 1999 who was eligible to retire from the Boeing North American Retirement
Plan as of June 30, 1999, that Participant’s Frozen Benefit as of June 30, 1999 will equal the Target Benefit (as defined in Section
4.B.)  as  of  June  30,  1999  plus  the  Participant’s  benefit  under  the  Boeing  North  American  Retirement  Plan  and  Boeing  North
American non-qualified plans as of June 30, 1999, all adjusted according to the provisions of the PVP for commencement of benefits
on June 30, 1999 and for payment in the form of a Single Life Annuity.
4.    Times Mirror Indexing Benefit
As the result of the Company’s acquisition of Jeppesen Sanderson, Inc., its two subsidiaries (Jeppesen DataPlan, Inc. and Nobeltec
Corporation), and Airspace Safety Analysis Corporation (“ASAC”), certain participants in the PVP were provided a Jeppesen/ASAC
Indexing Benefit, but no Benefit Service was provided for Periods of Service prior to October 5, 2000. Notwithstanding Section
4.B., the calculation of the Offset Benefit under this Plan shall not include the Jeppesen/ASAC Indexing Benefit.
- 19 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

SECTION 5. THE EXCESS BENEFITS
A.     Eligibility
An Employee will be eligible for an Excess Benefit if the Employee is entitled to a benefit from the PVP and such benefit is limited
by Code sections 415 and/or 401(a)(17).
Effective as of December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue under the PVP (other than the allocation of Interest Credits to the
extent required under Section 4.2 of the PVP). Accordingly, benefits will cease to accrue under this Plan (other than as attributable to
such Interest Credits). No Excess Benefit will accrue for any Participant after this date (other than as attributable to the allocation of
Interest Credits under the PVP).
B.     Amount of Excess Benefits
A Participant’s Excess Benefit is equal to the Participant’s benefits under the PVP determined without regard to the limitations under
Code sections 415 and 401(a)(17), reduced (but not below zero) by any benefit payable to or on account of the Participant under the
PVP.
For Heritage BNA Participants, the Excess Benefit shall also include any benefit accrued as of June 30, 1999 under the Unfunded
Supplemental  Deferred  Compensation  Plan  for  Employees  who  are  Participating  in  the  Rockwell  International  Deferred
Compensation Plan due to the failure to include deferred bonuses as compensation under the Boeing North American Retirement
Plan,  indexed  after  June  30,  1999  for  increases  in  compensation  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  governing  the  Participant's
Heritage Benefit under the PVP.
The Excess Benefit is not intended to duplicate any similarly determined benefit under any other non-qualified plan.
Effective as of December 31, 2015, benefits will cease to accrue under the PVP (other than the allocation of Interest Credits to the
extent required under Section 4.2 of the PVP). Accordingly, benefits will cease to accrue under this Plan (other than as attributable to
such Interest Credits). No Excess Benefit will accrue for any Participant after this date (other than as attributable to the allocation of
Interest Credits under the PVP).
C.
Adjustments for Commencement Dates other than the Normal Retirement Date
The Excess Benefit generally will be adjusted for a Participant’s Commencement Date that is not his or her Normal Retirement Date
according to the same rules governing such adjustments under the PVP.
However, where a Participant’s Commencement Date occurs after January 1, 2008, and after April 1 st of the Plan Year following the
Plan Year in which he or she attains age 70½, his or her Excess
- 20 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

Benefit will be calculated as if the Participant’s benefit under the PVP had not previously commenced.
D.     Vesting
The Excess Benefit will vest and be forfeited according to the same rules governing vesting and forfeitures under the PVP.
- 21 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

SECTION 6.    PAYMENT OF BENEFITS
A.     Payment of Benefits
1.    Form of Payment
In general, a Participant who is eligible to receive a SERP Benefit will be paid in the form of a Single Life
Annuity. An eligible Participant may elect prior to the Commencement Date to receive the SERP Benefit in
the form of either (i) a Single Life Annuity, (ii) an Actuarially Equivalent Surviving Spouse Option (with a
50%, 75%, or 100% survivor benefit payable to the Spouse), or (iii) solely for Commencement Dates on or
after May 1, 2013 and before January 1, 2017, an Actuarially Equivalent Domestic Partner Option (with a
50%, 75% or 100% survivor benefit payable to the Designated Domestic Partner). An election made under
this Section will be irrevocable after the Commencement Date.
To  the  extent  a  Participant  does  not  elect  a  Surviving  Spouse  Option  or  a  Domestic  Partner  Option  (if
available) before the Commencement Date, the SERP Benefit will be paid in the form of a 50% Surviving
Spouse Option (if married to a Spouse), or in the form of a Single Life Annuity (in all other cases). Marital
status will be determined at the time of commencement of benefits. A Participant who fails to confirm his or
her marital status will be presumed to be unmarried, and benefits will be paid in the form of a Single Life
Annuity.
If the Participant receives his or her benefit in the form of a Surviving Spouse Option or Domestic Partner
Option  (if  available),  and  the  Participant  survives  his  or  her  Spouse  or  Designated  Domestic  Partner,  as
applicable,  the  Participant’s  monthly  payment  will  increase  on  a  prospective  basis,  commencing  as  of  the
beneficiary’s death, to equal the monthly payment the Participant would have received had he or she been paid
in the form of a Single Life Annuity.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the SERP Benefit will be paid in a single lump sum if the Actuarial Equivalent
present value is $15,000 or less as of the commencement date.
In  the  event  that  guidance  issued  by  the  IRS  or  Treasury  Department  under  Code  section  409A  requires
application  of  the  aggregation  rule  provided  under  Treasury  Regulation  section  1.409A-3(j)(4)(v)(A)  or
successor regulation to a nondiscretionary cashout, the cashout described above will operate only to the extent
that this aggregation rule is satisfied.
- 22 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

2.    Timing of Payment
(a)
General Rule
The SERP Benefit will be paid or commence as of the first day of the month following the later of the
events described in (A) and (B) below.
(i)
The Participant’s attainment of age 55.
(ii)
The Participant’s Separation from Service.
A special rule applies to a Heritage MDC Participant who Separates from Service after attaining age
50, and who has 30 years of Accumulated Benefit Service. For this Heritage MDC Participant, the
SERP Benefit will be paid as of the first of the month following the Separation from Service.
See subsection (c) below for special timing rules applicable to Specified Employees.
(b)
Participants Working Past Age 70½
Effective January 1, 2008, the SERP Benefit for a Participant who continues to work past age 70½ will
be paid as of the first of the month following the Participant’s Separation from Service. This rule does
not apply to any Participant whose benefits commenced prior to January 1, 2008.
(c)
Specified Employees
A Specified Employee will not receive any distribution under this Plan during the six-month period
immediately following his or her Separation from Service.
The  SERP  Benefit  of  a  Specified  Employee  will  be  calculated  as  of  the  first  day  of  the  month
immediately following his or her Separation from Service (or age 55 if later). All payments missed
during the six-month waiting period described above will be paid in a single sum after the completion
of this six-month waiting period.
In the event of a Specified Employee’s death during the six-month waiting period, the waiting period
will cease to apply. The Specified Employee’s benefits will be distributed in accordance with Section
6.B.2. (Death Benefits).
- 23 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

B.     Death Benefits
1.    Death Before Commencement of Benefits
If a Participant dies before benefit commencement under the Plan, a death benefit based upon the Participant’s
accrued SERP Benefit at the time of death will be payable to his or her surviving Spouse, as of the first of the
month following the Participant’s death.
If a Participant  dies after  commencing  a portion  of his or her benefit,  but less than the entire benefit,  the
survivor benefit described herein will apply solely to the portion of the benefit that has not yet commenced.
In general, where a Participant dies after attaining age 55, death benefits under this subsection B.1. will be
paid to the Spouse in the form of a 100% Surviving Spouse Option. Where a Participant dies before attaining
age 55, except as provided below, these death benefits will be paid in the form of a 50% Surviving Spouse
Option.
A special rule applies to a Heritage MDC Participant who dies after attaining age 50. For this Heritage MDC
Participant,  death  benefits  under  this  subsection  B.1.  will  be  paid  to  the  Spouse  in  the  form  of  a  100%
Surviving Spouse Option rather than a 50% Surviving Spouse Option.
Benefits  payable  in  the  form  of  a  Surviving  Spouse  Option  generally  will  be  reduced  by  the  appropriate
actuarial  factors  under  this  Plan,  based  on  whether  the  Participant  satisfied  the  requirements  for  an  Early
Retirement Benefit or Vested Terminated Benefit at the time of death. Benefits payable before a Participant’s
earliest  commencement  date  under  Section  6.A.2.(a)  will  be  further  reduced  below  this  age  based  on  the
Actuarial Equivalent factors used to calculate lump sum benefits under the PVP.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the SERP Benefit will be paid in a single lump sum if the Actuarial Equivalent
present value is $15,000 or less as of the commencement date. In the event that guidance issued by the IRS or
Treasury Department under Code section 409A requires application of the aggregation rule provided under
Treasury Regulation section 1.409A-3(j)(4)(v)(A) or successor regulation to a nondiscretionary cashout, the
cashout described above will operate only to the extent that this aggregation rule is satisfied.
If  a  Participant  dies  on  or  after  May  1,  2013  and  before  January  1,  2017  with  no  surviving  Spouse,  the
Participant’s Designated Domestic Partner, if any, will be eligible for the death benefit otherwise payable to a
Spouse under this Section. No benefit will be payable to a Designated Domestic Partner in
- 24 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

the event that a Participant is married to a Spouse (as defined under the Plan) upon the Participant’s death. For
purposes of this subsection, a Participant’s designation of a domestic partnership will remain in effect until
terminated by the Participant, in accordance with procedures established by the Plan Administrator for the
Plan.
If  a  Participant  dies  on  or  after  January  1,  2017  with  no  surviving  Spouse,  then  no  death  benefit  will  be
payable under the Plan.
2.
Death After Commencement of Benefits
If the Participant dies after his or her benefits commence, benefits will be paid in accordance with the form of
benefits elected under Section 6.A.1. above.
If a Participant  dies after  commencing  a portion  of his or her benefit,  but less than the entire benefit,  the
survivor benefit described herein will apply solely to the portion of the benefit that has already commenced.
If the  surviving  Spouse  or Designated  Domestic  Partner  dies  while  receiving  benefit  payments,  no further
payments will be made to the Spouse’s or Designated Domestic Partner’s estate or beneficiaries.
C.     Delays in Payment
Payment  of  benefits  under  this  Article  may  be  delayed  to  the  extent  permitted  under  Code  section  409A,  as
determined by the Committee.
D.
Involuntary Inclusion in Income
If  a  determination  is  made  by  the  Internal  Revenue  Service  that  the  benefit  of  any  Participant  (or  his  or  her
beneficiary) is subject to current income taxation under Code section 409A, then the taxable portion of such benefit
will be immediately distributed to the Participant (or his or her beneficiary), notwithstanding the general timing rule
described in Section 6.A.2. above.
- 25 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

SECTION 7. NONASSIGNABILITY
Except as otherwise provided herein, the SERP Benefit shall not be subject in any manner to anticipation, alienation, sale, transfer,
assignment, pledge, charge, execution, attachment, garnishment or any other legal process. Any attempt to take any such action shall
be void and shall authorize the Committee, in its sole and absolute discretion, to forfeit all further right and interest in any benefit
under  this  Plan.  The  Committee  may,  however,  recognize  domestic  relations  orders,  generally  subject  to  the  same  rules  and
procedures  governing  qualified  domestic  relations orders under the PVP, and provided  that any benefits  transferred  due to such
domestic  relations  order  shall  reduce  any  benefits  to  which  the  Participant  would  otherwise  be  entitled  under  this  Plan.
Notwithstanding  the  foregoing,  a  domestic  relations  order  will  be  recognized  under  this  Plan  solely  to  the  extent  that  benefits
commence to the alternate payee or beneficiary at the same time as benefit payments commence to the Participant. In addition, the
SERP Benefit may be reduced by the amount of any tax obligation paid by the Company, its Affiliates or Subsidiaries on behalf of a
Participant or surviving spouse.
SECTION 8. UNFUNDED STATUS OF PLAN
No  funds  shall  be  segregated  or  earmarked  for  any  current  or  former  Participant,  beneficiary  or  other  person  under  the  Plan.
However, the Company may establish one or more trusts to assist in meeting its obligations under the Plan, the assets of which shall
be  subject  to  the  claims  of  the  Company’s  general  creditors.  No  current  or  former  Participant,  beneficiary  or  other  person,
individually or as a member of a group, shall have any right, title or interest in any account, fund, grantor trust, or any asset that may
be acquired  by the Company  or an Affiliate  in respect of its obligations  under the Plan (other than as a general  creditor  of the
Company or such Affiliate with an unsecured claim against its general assets.
SECTION 9. ADMINISTRATION
The Plan shall be administered by the Committee. The Committee shall make such rules, interpretations, determinations of fact and
computations as it may, in its sole and absolute discretion, deem appropriate. Any decision of the Committee with respect to the
Plan, including (without limitation) any calculation of a benefit, shall be conclusive and binding on all persons.
SECTION 10. AMENDMENT AND TERMINATION
The Board of Directors of The Boeing Company shall have the authority to amend or terminate the Plan at any time. The Board of
Directors of The Boeing Company may delegate the authority to amend the Plan at any time, in its sole discretion. Such amendment
or termination shall not adversely affect or impair the benefit entitlements in course of payment to retired employees and surviving
beneficiaries, the contingent rights to the continuance of benefit payments to the beneficiaries of retired employees named as joint
annuitants, or the accrued benefit as defined in this Section of all eligible employees then in the employ of the Company.
- 26 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

For the purpose of this section, an accrued benefit will be determined for each eligible employee in accordance with the provisions
of Sections 3 through 5 but based on Benefit Service, Total Average Compensation, Compensation and the accrued benefit provided
by the PVP, all determined as of the effective date of the amendment or termination.
In general, upon the termination of the Plan with respect to any Participant, the affected Participants will not be entitled to receive a
distribution until the time specified in Section 6. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company may, in its discretion, terminate the
entire Plan and pay each Participant a single lump-sum distribution of his or her entire accrued benefit to the extent permitted under
conditions set forth in Code section 409A and IRS or Treasury guidance thereunder.
SECTION 11. DISTINCT STATUS OF PLANS
For purposes of Title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended, the Plan shall consist of the following
three distinct employee benefit plans: (1) a plan granting the Supplemental Benefit; (2) a plan granting the portion of the Excess
Benefit determined by disregarding the limitations imposed by section 415 of the Code; and (3) a plan granting the portion of the
Excess Benefit determined by disregarding the limitations imposed by section 401(a)(17) of the Code.
SECTION 12. EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS
Nothing in the Plan shall be deemed to give any person any right to remain in the employ of the Company or affect any right of the
Company to terminate a person’s employment with or without cause.
SECTION 13. CLAIMS PROCEDURE
The procedures for making claims for benefits under the Plan and for having the denial of a benefits claim reviewed shall be the
same as those procedures set forth in the PVP.
SECTION 14. COMPLIANCE WITH CODE SECTION 409A
It  is  intended  that  amounts  deferred  under  this  Plan  will  not  be  taxable  under  section  409A  of  the  Code  with  respect  to  any
individual. All provisions of this Plan shall be construed in a manner consistent with this intent.
SECTION 15. CONSTRUCTION
 
The validity of the Plan or any of its provisions will be determined under and will be construed according to federal law and, to the
extent permissible, according to the internal laws of the state of Illinois. If any provision of the Plan is held illegal or invalid for any
reason, such determination will not affect the remaining provisions of the Plan and the Plan will be construed and enforced as if said
illegal or invalid provision had never been included.
- 27 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

SECTION 16. LEGAL ACTION
No legal action may be brought in court on a claim for benefits under the Plan after 180 days following the decision on appeal (or
180 days following the expiration of the time to make an appeal if no appeal is made).
- 28 -
SERP 1/1/16 restatement

EXHIBIT 10 (xviii) (c)
Notice of Terms of
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Units
«Grant_Date»
To:        «Name»
BEMSID:    «BEMS_ID»
As part of its executive compensation program, The Boeing Company (the “Company”) has awarded you a Performance - Based Restricted Stock Unit award
effective «Grant_Date» (the “Grant Date”). The terms and conditions of the award are as follows:
1.
PBRSU Award. You have been awarded «PBRSU_Units» Performance - Based Restricted Stock Units. Each Performance - Based Restricted Stock Unit
(“PBRSU”) corresponds to one share of Boeing Common Stock. Your PBRSUs are awarded pursuant to The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock
Plan, as amended and restated from time to time (the “Plan”) and the award is subject to the terms of the Plan, including the maximum award provisions.
If there is any inconsistency between the terms of this notice and the terms of the Plan, the Plan’s terms will control. A summary of the Plan accompanies
this notice.
2.
PBRSU Account. The Company will maintain a record of the number of awarded PBRSUs in an account established in your name.
3.
Vesting Provisions:
3.1 General. Subject to your continued employment or other service with the Company or its subsidiaries through «Vesting Date» (the “Vesting Date”)
(except  as  otherwise  provided  herein),  the  Award  shall  become  vested  based  upon  the  Company’s  “Relative  Total  Shareholder  Return”  in  terms  of
percentile ranking as compared to the Peer Companies (as defined in Exhibit A) over the period beginning immediately after the Grant Date and ending
immediately prior to the Vesting Date (the “Measurement Period”) in accordance with the following:
    
Relative Total Shareholder Return Ranking over Measurement Period
Payout % Level
91 st  Percentile or Higher
200%
81 st  - 90 th   Percentile
175%
71 st  - 80 th   Percentile
150%
61 st  - 70 th   Percentile
125%
51 st  - 60 th   Percentile
100%
41 st  - 50 th   Percentile
75%
31 st  - 40 th   Percentile
50%
21 st  - 30 th   Percentile
25%
0 - 20 th   Percentile
0%
In the event of a payout percentage level above 100%, you will be awarded additional PBRSUs so that the total number of PBRSUs which vest as of the
Vesting Date (excluding dividend equivalent PBRSUs) equals the original PBRSU award amount multiplied by the payout percentage level. In the event
of a payout percentage level below 100%, your PBRSUs awarded under Section 1 will be forfeited to the extent necessary to provide that the total number
of PBRSUs which vest as of the Vesting Date (excluding dividend equivalent PBRSUs) equals the original PBRSU award amount multiplied by the
payout percentage level.

3.2 Payout Limits. In no event shall the value of your PBRSU award as of the Vesting Date exceed 400% of the Target PBRSU Award Amount on the
Grant Date. The 400% cap will be adjusted downward proportionately in the event of your retirement, layoff, disability, death or leave of absence during
the Measurement Period. Any dividend equivalent PBRSUs (as defined in Section 4) earned throughout the Measurement Period will not count toward
the 400% cap.
The Target PBRSU Award Amount on the Grant Date is defined as the product of your base salary (as of December 31 of the year prior to the award) and
your target PBRSU multiple (based on your E - series grade as of March 1 of the year of the award).
4.
Dividend Equivalents Credited on Your PBRSUs.
4.1 While PBRSUs are in your account, they will earn dividend equivalents in the form of additional PBRSUs. Specifically, as of each dividend payment
date for Boeing stock, your PBRSU account will be credited with additional PBRSUs (“dividend equivalent PBRSUs”) equal in number to the number of
shares of Boeing stock that could be bought with the cash dividends that would be paid on the PBRSUs in your account if each PBRSU were a share of
Boeing stock. The number of PBRSUs that results from the calculation will be calculated to two decimal places.
4.2 The number of shares of Boeing stock that could be bought with the cash dividends will be calculated based on the “Fair Market Value” of Boeing
stock on the applicable dividend payment date. “Fair Market Value” here means the average of the high and the low per share trading prices for Boeing
stock as reported in The Wall Street Journal for the specific dividend payment date, or in such other source as the Company deems reliable.
4.3 Dividend equivalent PBRSUs will vest at the same time and in the same manner as the PBRSUs with which they are associated. Dividend equivalent
PBRSUs will be adjusted in accordance with the payout level percentage determined under Section 3.1 in the same manner as the PBRSUs with which
they are associated. Accumulated dividend equivalent PBRSUs will be multiplied by the same payout percentage level and dividend equivalent PBRSUs
will be added or forfeited, as necessary, so that the total dividend equivalent PRBSUs which vest as of the Vesting Date will equal the dividend equivalent
PBRSUs which accumulate during the Measurement Period multiplied by the payout percentage level.
5.
Adjustment in Number of PBRSUs. The number of PBRSUs in your account will be adjusted proportionately for any increase or decrease in the number
of issued shares of Boeing stock resulting from any stock split, combination or exchange of shares, consolidation, spin - off or recapitalization of shares,
or any similar capital adjustment or the payment of any stock dividend.
6.
Termination due to Retirement, Layoff, Disability, or Death. In the event your employment is terminated by reason of retirement, layoff, disability, or
death, your PBRSU payout, including any dividend equivalent PBRSUs, will be prorated based on the number of full and partial calendar months you
spent on the active payroll during the Measurement Period (beginning with the first full calendar month after the Grant Date). Payout for the award will
be made at the same time as payment would have been made had you not had a termination of employment and will in all respects be subject to the
Company’s actual Relative Total Shareholder Return achievement for the full Measurement Period. For purposes of this award, “retirement” means
retirement under the conditions that satisfy the terms of the Company’s or subsidiary’s defined benefit pension plan in which you participate. If you are
not a participant in such a defined benefit pension plan, “retirement” means termination of employment voluntarily by you after you have attained either
(i) age 55 with 10 years of service, or (ii) age 62 with one year of service. For purposes of this award, “disability” means a disability entitling you to
benefits under the long - term disability policy sponsored by the Company or one of its subsidiaries that applies to you.
7.
Forfeiture Upon Other Terminations. In the event your employment is terminated prior to the Vesting Date for any reason (including for cause and
resignation) other than those reasons described in Section 6, all unvested PBRSUs (and all associated dividend equivalent PBRSUs) granted hereunder
shall immediately be forfeited by you and canceled.
8.
Leave of Absence. Unless otherwise required by law, in the event you have an authorized leave of absence at any time during the Measurement Period
which absence extends beyond three full calendar months (including any absence that began before the Grant Date), your PBRSU payout, including any
dividend equivalent PBRSUs, will be prorated based on the number of full and partial calendar months you spent on the active payroll during the

Measurement Period (beginning with the first full calendar month after the Grant Date). Payout for the award will be made at the same time as payment
would have been made without regard to any leave of absence, and will in all respects be subject to the Company’s actual Relative Total Shareholder
Return achievement for the full Measurement Period.
9.
PBRSU Award Payable in Stock.
9.1 Distribution from your PBRSU account will be made as soon as reasonably possible after the Vesting Date, but not later than 60 days after the Vesting
Date. Distribution will be in whole shares of Boeing stock, provided that in the event you are on an International payroll as of the distribution date, your
distribution will be paid in cash. The number of shares distributed will be equal to the number of whole vested PBRSUs in your account, subject to
deductions described in Section 9.2. Fractional share values will be applied to income tax withholding.
9.2 The Company will deduct from the distribution of your vested PBRSUs any withholding or other taxes required by law and may deduct any amounts
due from you to the Company or to any subsidiary of the Company.
10.
Transfer. PBRSUs are not transferable except by will or applicable laws of descent and distribution.
11.
Clawback Policy. These PBRSU Awards are subject to the Clawback Policy adopted by the Company’s Board of Directors, as amended from time to
time, which currently provides as follows:
The Board shall, in all appropriate circumstances, require reimbursement of any annual incentive payment or long-term incentive payment to an executive
officer where: (1) the payment was predicated upon achieving certain financial results that were subsequently the subject of a substantial restatement of
Company financial statements filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission; (2) the Board determines the executive engaged in intentional
misconduct that caused or substantially caused the need for the substantial restatement; and (3) a lower payment would have been made to the executive
based upon the restated financial results. In each such instance, the Company will, to the extent practicable, seek to recover from the individual executive
the amount by which the individual executive’s incentive payments for the relevant period exceeded the lower payment that would have been made based
on the restated financial results. For purposes of this policy, the term “executive officer” means any officer who has been designated an executive officer
by the Board.

The Boeing Company
Performance-Based Restricted Stock Unit
Exhibit A - Calculation of Relative Total Shareholder Return
•
“ Relative Total Shareholder Return ” means the Company’s TSR relative to the TSR of the Peer Companies. Relative Total Shareholder Return will be
determined by ranking the Company and the Peer Companies from highest to lowest according to their respective TSRs. After this ranking, the percentile
performance of the Company relative to the Peer Companies will be determined as follows:
P = 1 - R - 1
N - 1
where:    “P” represents the percentile performance which will be rounded, if necessary, to the nearest whole percentile by application of regular rounding.
“N” represents the number of Peer Companies as of the Vesting Date, plus the Company.
“R” represents Company’s ranking among the Peer Companies.
Example: If there are 23 Peer Companies, and the Company ranked 8 th , the performance would be at the 70 th percentile: .70 = 1 - ((8-1)/(24-1)).
Relative Total Shareholder Return shall be calculated by the Compensation Committee of the Board of Directors of the Company based on the terms set forth
in this Exhibit A subject to the Compensation Committee’s sole and absolute discretion, provided that in no event shall the Compensation Committee take any
action that would constitute “positive discretion” with respect to awards intended to qualify as “performance - based compensation” under Section 162(m) of
the Internal Revenue Code.
•
“ TSR ” means, for the Company and each of the Peer Companies, the company’s total shareholder return, expressed as a percentage, which will be calculated
by dividing (i) the Closing Average Share Value by (ii) the Opening Average Share Value and subtracting one from the quotient.
Example : An illustrative example of a TSR calculation is attached at the end of this Exhibit.
•
“ Opening Average Share Value ” means the average Share Value over the trading days in the Opening Average Period.
•
“ Opening Average Period ” means the 20 trading days immediately following the Grant Date.
•
“ Accumulated Shares ” means, for a given trading day, the sum of (i) one (1) share and (ii) the cumulative number of shares of the company’s common stock
purchasable with dividends declared on the company’s common stock to that point during the Measurement Period, assuming same day reinvestment of such
dividends at the closing price on the ex-dividend date.
•
“ Closing Average Share Value ” means the average Share Value over the trading days in the Closing Average Period.
•
“ Closing Average Period ” means the 20 trading days immediately preceding the Vesting Date.
•
“ Share Value ” means, with respect to a given trading day, the closing price of the company’s common stock multiplied by the Accumulated Shares for such
trading day.
•
“ Peer Companies ” means the following companies:
3M
Ford
Johnson Controls
AT&T
General Dynamics
Lockheed Martin
Caterpillar
General Electric
Northrop Grumman
Chevron
Honeywell
Procter & Gamble
Cisco Systems
IBM
Raytheon
E. I. du Pont de Nemours
Intel
United Parcel Services
EADS (Airbus)
Johnson & Johnson
United Technologies
Exxon Mobil
Verizon Communications

The Peer Companies may be changed as follows:
(i)    In the event of a merger, acquisition or business combination transaction of a Peer Company with or by another Peer Company, the surviving entity shall
remain a Peer Company.
(ii)     In the event of a merger of a Peer Company with an entity that is not a Peer Company, or the acquisition or business combination transaction by or with
a Peer Company, or with an entity that is not a Peer Company, in each case where the Peer Company is the surviving entity and remains publicly traded, the
surviving entity shall remain a Peer Company.
(iii)     In the event of a merger or acquisition or business combination transaction of a Peer Company by or with an entity that is not a Peer Company, a “going
private” transaction involving a Peer Company or the liquidation of a Peer Company, where the Peer Company is not the surviving entity or is otherwise no
longer publicly traded, the company shall no longer be a Peer Company.
(iv)     In the event of a bankruptcy of a Peer Company, such company shall remain a Peer Company.
(v)    In the event of a stock distribution from a Peer Company consisting of the shares of a new publicly-traded company (a “spin-off”), the Peer Company
shall remain a Peer Company and the stock distribution shall be treated as a dividend from the Peer Company based on the closing price of the shares of the
spun-off company on its first day of trading.  The performance of the shares of the spun-off company shall not thereafter be tracked for purposes of calculating
TSR.
•
Each Peer Company’s “common stock” shall mean that series of common stock that is publicly traded on a registered U.S. exchange or, in the case of a non-
U.S. company, an equivalent non-U.S. exchange. For purposes of calculating TSR, the value on any given trading day of any Peer Company shares traded on a
foreign exchange will be converted to U.S. dollars.

•
The following example illustrates the calculation of TSR for Boeing with Grant Date of January 1, 2012 and Vesting Date of January 1, 2015.
Opening Average Share Value (1/3/2012 - 1/31/2012)        $74.84
Closing Average Share Value (12/3/2014 - 12/31/2014)    $137.02
TSR (expressed as percentage)                83.10%
Opening Average
Closing Average
Date
Close
Ex- Div.
Accum. 
Shares
Share 
Value
Date
Close
Ex- Div.
Accum.
Shares
Share
Value
1/31/2012
$74.18
$0.00
1.00
$74.18
12/31/2014
$129.98
$0.00
1.069367
$139.00
1/30/2012
$74.16
$0.00
1.00
$74.16
12/30/2014
$131.83
$0.00
1.069367
$140.97
1/27/2012
$74.55
$0.00
1.00
$74.55
12/29/2014
$132.29
$0.00
1.069367
$141.47
1/26/2012
$75.31
$0.00
1.00
$75.31
12/26/2014
$131.63
$0.00
1.069367
$140.76
1/25/2012
$75.82
$0.00
1.00
$75.82
12/24/2014
$131.24
$0.00
1.069367
$140.34
1/24/2012
$75.36
$0.00
1.00
$75.36
12/23/2014
$130.03
$0.00
1.069367
$139.05
1/23/2012
$75.51
$0.00
1.00
$75.51
12/22/2014
$128.22
$0.00
1.069367
$137.11
1/20/2012
$75.52
$0.00
1.00
$75.52
12/19/2014
$126.23
$0.00
1.069367
$134.99
1/19/2012
$75.56
$0.00
1.00
$75.56
12/18/2014
$125.67
$0.00
1.069367
$134.39
1/18/2012
$75.06
$0.00
1.00
$75.06
12/17/2014
$125.06
$0.00
1.069367
$133.74
1/17/2012
$75.24
$0.00
1.00
$75.24
12/16/2014
$124.25
$0.00
1.069367
$132.87
1/13/2012
$74.60
$0.00
1.00
$74.60
12/15/2014
$122.08
$0.00
1.069367
$130.55
1/12/2012
$75.51
$0.00
1.00
$75.51
12/12/2014
$120.77
$0.00
1.069367
$129.15
1/11/2012
$74.74
$0.00
1.00
$74.74
12/11/2014
$123.37
$0.00
1.069367
$131.93
1/10/2012
$75.00
$0.00
1.00
$75.00
12/10/2014
$124.64
$0.00
1.069367
$133.29
1/9/2012
$74.53
$0.00
1.00
$74.53
12/9/2014
$129.66
$0.00
1.069367
$138.65
1/6/2012
$73.98
$0.00
1.00
$73.98
12/8/2014
$130.28
$0.00
1.069367
$139.32
1/5/2012
$73.53
$0.00
1.00
$73.53
12/5/2014
$132.21
$0.00
1.069367
$141.38
1/4/2012
$74.33
$0.00
1.00
$74.33
12/4/2014
$131.32
$0.00
1.069367
$140.43
1/3/2012
$74.22
$0.00
1.00
$74.22
12/3/2014
$131.97
$0.00
1.069367
$141.12

EXHIBIT 10 (xviii) (d)
The Boeing Company Performance Award Notice
To: «Name»
BEMS ID: «BEMS_ID»
This Performance Award consists of units that will be paid in either cash or Boeing stock, subject to the Compensation Committee’s (the
“Committee”) discretion, if earned at the end of a three-year performance period. Your Performance Award is granted pursuant to The
Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated from time to time (the "Plan"), and the award is subject to the terms
and conditions of the Plan. If there is any inconsistency between the terms of this notice and the terms of the Plan, the Plan's terms shall
control. A copy of the Plan Summary has been included with this notice.
Overview of Your 2015 Performance Award Grant
Grant Date: «Grant Date»
Number of Units Granted: «Performance Award Units»
Performance Period: «Three Year Performance Period»
1.
Target Value of Performance Awards. The Performance Award target value (or “initial value”) will be based on a multiple of your
salary as of December 31, 20XX, with the multiple determined by your executive grade. The target value will be expressed as a number
of units (rounded to the nearest unit), each of which has an initial value equal to $100.
2.
Performance Measure . For the 20XX-20XX Performance Period, the performance measure will be three-year cumulative Economic
Profit based on the 20XX Long-Range Business Plan. The Compensation Committee retains discretion in calculating actual performance
to exclude the impact of extraordinary and/or non-recurring items deemed not reflective of the Company’s core operating performance.
Such non-recurring items may include, but are not limited to, exogenous events, acquisitions, divestitures, changes in accounting
principles, or “extraordinary items” determined under generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP).
3.
Final Award Determination. Final amounts payable will be determined following the end of the Performance Period. The amount
payable may be anywhere from $0 to $200 per unit, depending on the Company’s performance against plan for the period ending on
December 31, 20XX. The final award will range from 0% to a maximum of 200% of the Performance Award target value, as outlined
below. There will be straight-line interpolation to determine payouts between minimum and target, and target and maximum.
Level of Performance
Final Performance Award Unit
Value
EP Achievement
(% of Plan)
Payout Factor
(% of Target Award)
Maximum
$200
___%
200%
Target
$100
Plan
100%
Minimum
$0
 ___%
0%

4.
Continued Employment. Subject to the terms and conditions outlined under section 5, this Performance Award is granted on the
condition that you remain employed by the Company from the date of grant through the entire performance period. You will not have any
right to payment of any award unless and until all terms, conditions, and provisions of the Performance Award program that affect you
have been complied with as specified herein. Your Performance Awards, however, shall not impose upon the Company any obligation to
retain you in its employ for any given period or upon any specific terms of employment .
5.
Termination due to Retirement, Layoff, Disability, or Death. In the event your employment is terminated by reason of retirement,
layoff, disability, or death, you shall continue to be eligible to participate in the performance period, provided you were on the active
payroll on the grant date. Your Performance Award payout will be prorated based on the number of full and partial months spent on the
active executive payroll during the three-year performance period. Payment for the award will be made at the same time as payment
would have been made had you not had a termination of employment. The term “retirement” means retirement under the conditions that
satisfy the terms of the Company’s or subsidiary’s defined benefit pension plan in which you participate. If you are an executive who is
not eligible to participate in a defined benefit pension plan, “retirement” means termination of employment voluntarily by you after you
have attained either (i) age 55 with 10 years of service, or (ii) age 62 with one year of service. “Disability” here means a disability
entitling you to benefits under the long-term disability policy sponsored by the Company or one of its subsidiaries that applies to you.
6.
Other Terminations. In the event your employment is terminated prior to payment of the Performance Award for reasons other than
those described in section 5, the Performance Award granted hereunder shall immediately be forfeited by you and canceled. This includes
termination for cause and resignation.
7.
Leave of Absence. Unless otherwise required by law, in the event you have an authorized leave of absence at any time during the
performance period which absence extends beyond three full calendar months (including any absence that began before the grant date),
your Performance Award payout will be prorated based on the number of full and partial months spent on the active payroll.
8.
Form and Timing of Payment of Performance Awards. Any payment of the Performance Awards shall be made in either cash or
shares of Boeing stock, at the Compensation Committee’s discretion. The Performance Award payment shall be made within a reasonable
time following the end of the performance period. For certain eligible participants, amounts to be paid in connection with Performance
Awards may be deferred in accordance with the Company’s deferred compensation plan then in place.
The Company will deduct from your Performance Award distribution any withholding or other taxes required by law and may deduct any
amounts due from you to the Company or to any Company subsidiary. In the event of a stock distribution, shares will be in a number
equal to the whole number of shares that could be purchased with the total Performance Award cash payout, based on the average of the
high and low per share trading prices for the common stock of the Company as reported for the “New York Stock Exchange - Composite
Transactions” on the date of distribution, after reduction to pay the applicable withholding amounts. Fractional share values will be
applied to Federal tax withholding.
9.
Beneficiaries. A participant may designate one or more beneficiaries to receive Performance Award distributions upon the death of the
participant. If no beneficiary has been designated, all such amounts shall be paid to the personal representative of the participant. The
form of beneficiary designation shall be determined by the Committee.

10. Transferability. This Performance Award is not transferable by you, whether voluntarily or involuntarily, by operation of law or
otherwise, except as provided in the Plan. If any assignment, pledge, transfer, or other disposition, voluntary or involuntary, of this
Performance Award shall be made, or if any attachment, execution, garnishment, or lien shall be issued against or placed upon the
Performance Award, then your right to the Performance Award shall immediately cease and terminate and you shall promptly forfeit to
the Company the Performance Award awarded under this notice.
11. Successors. All obligations of the Company under the Performance Award program shall be binding on any successor to the Company,
whether the existence of such successor is the result of a direct or indirect purchase, merger, or consolidation, or otherwise, of all or
substantially all the business and/or assets of the Company.
12. Amendment, Modification and Termination . The Board of Directors (or its delegate) has the authority to amend, modify, or terminate
the Performance Award program. No termination, amendment, or modification may adversely affect in any material way any
Performance Award previously granted without the written consent of the participant involved.
13. Clawback Policy . This Performance Award is subject to the Clawback Policy adopted by the Company’s Board of Directors, as
amended from time to time, which currently provides as follows:
The Board shall, in all appropriate circumstances, require reimbursement of any annual incentive payment or long-term incentive
payment to an executive officer where: (1) the payment was predicated upon achieving certain financial results that were subsequently
the subject of a substantial restatement of Company financial statements filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission; (2) the
Board determines the executive engaged in intentional misconduct that caused or substantially caused the need for the substantial
restatement; and (3) a lower payment would have been made to the executive based upon the restated financial results. In each such
instance, the Company will, to the extent practicable, seek to recover from the individual executive the amount by which the individual
executive’s incentive payments for the relevant period exceeded the lower payment that would have been made based on the restated
financial results. For purposes of this policy, the term “executive officer” means any officer who has been designated an executive officer
by the Board.

EXHIBIT 10 (xviii) (e)
Notice of Terms of
Restricted Stock Units
«Grant Date»
To:        «Name»
BEMSID:    «BEMS_ID»
As part of its executive compensation program, The Boeing Company (the “Company”) has awarded you a Restricted Stock Unit award. The terms and conditions
of the award are as follows:
1.
RSU Award. You have been awarded «RSU Units» Restricted Stock Units. Each Restricted Stock Unit (RSU) has the potential to become one share of
Boeing stock. Your RSUs are awarded pursuant to The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan, as amended and restated from time to time (the
“Plan”) and the award is subject to the terms of the Plan. If there is any inconsistency between the terms of this notice and the terms of the Plan, the Plan’s
terms will control. A summary of the Plan accompanies this notice.
2.
RSU Account. The Company will maintain a record of the number of awarded RSUs in an account established in your name.
3.
Vesting of RSUs. Your RSUs will vest «Three Years From Grant Date» or, if earlier, on the date your employment with the Company terminates because
of retirement, layoff, disability, or death.
4.
Stock Issuance at Vesting. At the time your RSUs vest, the Company will issue to you shares of Boeing stock equal in number to the vested number of
whole RSUs in your account, after deduction of shares to cover appropriate taxes and other charges as described in paragraph 12.2.
5.
Dividends Credited on Your RSUs.
5.1 While RSUs are in your account, they will earn dividend equivalents in the form of additional RSUs. Specifically, as of each dividend payment date
for Boeing stock, your RSU account will be credited with additional RSUs (“dividend equivalent RSUs”) equal in number to the number of shares of
Boeing stock that could be bought with the cash dividends that would be paid on the RSUs in your account if each RSU were a share of Boeing stock. The
number of RSUs that results from the calculation will be to two decimal places.
5.2 The number of shares of Boeing stock that could be bought with the cash dividends will be calculated based on the “Fair Market Value” of Boeing
stock on the applicable dividend payment date. “Fair Market Value” here means the average of the high and the low per share trading prices for Boeing
stock as reported in The Wall Street Journal for the specific dividend payment date, or in such other source as the Company deems reliable.
5.3 Dividend equivalent RSUs will vest at the same time as the RSUs with which they are associated.
6.
Adjustment in Number of RSUs. The number of RSUs in your account will be adjusted proportionately for any increase or decrease in the number of
issued shares of Boeing stock resulting from any stock split, combination or exchange of shares, consolidation, spin-off or recapitalization of shares, or
any similar capital adjustment or the payment of any stock dividend.
7.
Termination due to Retirement, Layoff, Disability, or Death. In the event your employment is terminated by reason of retirement, layoff, disability, or
death, your RSU payout, including any dividend equivalent RSUs, will be prorated based on the number of full and partial calendar months you spent on
the active payroll during the three-year performance period (beginning with the first full calendar month after the date of grant). Payment for this award
will be made as soon as administratively possible, but not later than 60 days after your termination of employment. The term “retirement” means
retirement under the conditions that satisfy the terms of the Company’s

or subsidiary’s defined benefit pension plan in which you participate. If you are an executive who is not eligible to participate in a defined benefit pension
plan, “retirement” means termination of employment voluntarily by you after you have attained either (i) age 55 with 10 years of service, or (ii) age 62
with one year of service. "Disability" here means a disability entitling you to benefits under the long-term disability policy sponsored by the Company or
one of its subsidiaries that applies to you.
8.
Other Terminations. In the event your employment is terminated prior to payment of the RSUs for reasons other than those described in paragraph 7, all
RSUs granted hereunder shall immediately be forfeited by you and canceled. This includes termination for cause and resignation.
9.
Specified Employees. However, for anyone who is a Specified Employee (as defined in the Deferred Compensation Plan for Employees of The Boeing
Company) at the time of vesting, and who was eligible for retirement (as defined in paragraph 7) at the date of this grant or who became so eligible
between the grant date and the vesting date described in paragraph 3 above, distributions upon vesting due to retirement, layoff or disability (as defined in
paragraph 7) will be delayed until six months after the date of vesting based on Internal Revenue Code Section 409A.
10.
Leave of Absence. Unless otherwise required by law, in the event you have an authorized leave of absence at any time during the vesting period which
absence extends beyond three full calendar months (including any absence that began before the grant date), your RSU payout, including any dividend
equivalent RSUs, will be prorated based on the number of full and partial months spent on the active payroll (beginning with the first full calendar month
after the date of grant).
11.
Forfeiture of Non-Vested RSUs. If your employment with the Company and all subsidiaries of the Company terminates before the expiration of the
vesting date of the award for any reason other than retirement (as defined in paragraph 7), layoff, disability (as defined in paragraph 7), or death, your
nonvested RSUs will be forfeited and canceled. Dividend equivalent RSUs will be forfeited and canceled along with the RSUs with which they are
associated.
12.
RSU Award Payable in Stock.
12.1 Distribution from your RSU account will be made as soon as reasonably possible after the vesting of your RSUs, but not later than 60 days after the
applicable vesting date. Distribution will be in whole shares of Boeing stock. The number of shares distributed will be equal to the number of whole
vested RSUs in your account, subject to deductions described in paragraph 12.2. Fractional share values will be applied to income tax withholding.
12.2 The Company will deduct from the distribution of your vested RSUs any withholding or other taxes required by law and may deduct any amounts
due from you to the Company or to a subsidiary of the Company.
12.3 In the event you transfer from the US based payroll to an International payroll, your distribution will be paid in cash to comply with certain
international security trading regulations.
13.
Transfer. RSUs are not transferable except by will or applicable laws of descent and distribution.
14.
Clawback Policy. These RSU Awards are subject to the Clawback Policy adopted by the Company’s Board of Directors, as amended from time to time,
which currently provides as follows: 
The Board shall, in all appropriate circumstances, require reimbursement of any annual incentive payment or long-term incentive payment to an executive
officer where: (1) the payment was predicated upon achieving certain financial results that were subsequently the subject of a substantial restatement of
Company financial statements filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission; (2) the Board determines the executive engaged in intentional
misconduct that caused or substantially caused the need for the substantial restatement; and (3) a lower payment would have been made to the executive
based upon the restated financial results. In each such instance, the Company will, to the extent practicable, seek to recover from the individual executive
the amount by which the

individual executive’s incentive payments for the relevant period exceeded the lower payment that would have been made based on the restated financial
results. For purposes of this policy, the term “executive officer” means any officer who has been designated an executive officer by the Board.

EXHIBIT 10 (xviii) (i)
Notice of Terms of
Restricted Stock Units
February 23, 2015
To:        
BEMSID:    
As part of the Executive Compensation Program, The Boeing Company (the “Company”) has awarded you a Restricted Stock Unit award. The terms and
conditions of the award are as follows:
1.
RSU Award . You have been awarded _______ Restricted Stock Units. Each Restricted Stock Unit (RSU) has the potential to become one share of
Boeing stock. Your RSUs are awarded pursuant to “The Boeing Company 2003 Incentive Stock Plan for Employees” (the “Plan”) and the award is
subject to the terms of the Plan. A summary of the Plan accompanies this notice.
2.
RSU Account . The Company will maintain a record of the number of awarded RSUs in an account established in your name.
3.
Vesting of RSUs . ______________ of the RSUs along with the related dividend equivalents (as defined in paragraph 5.1) will vest on _______________.
The remainder of the RSUs along with the related dividend equivalents will vest on _______________. You must be employed by the Company or one of
its subsidiaries on the vesting date, in order for the RSUs to vest. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if your employment with the Company terminates before
a vesting date because of involuntary layoff, disability, or death, all of the RSUs will vest.
"Disability" here means a disability entitling a participant to benefits under a long-term disability policy sponsored by the Company or one of its
subsidiaries.
4.
Stock Issuance at Vesting. At the time your RSUs vest, the Company will issue to you shares of Boeing stock equal in number to the vested number of
whole RSUs in your account, after deduction of shares to cover appropriate taxes and other charges as described in paragraph 9.2.
5.
Dividends Credited on Your RSUs.
5.1 While RSUs are in your account, they will earn dividend equivalents in the form of additional RSUs. Specifically, as of each dividend payment date
for Boeing stock, your RSU account will be credited with additional RSUs (“dividend equivalent RSUs”) equal in number to the number of shares of
Boeing stock that could be bought with the cash dividends that would be paid on the RSUs in your account if each RSU were a share of Boeing stock. The
number of RSUs that results from the calculation will be to two decimal places.
5.2 The number of shares of Boeing stock that could be bought with such cash dividends will be calculated based on the “Fair Market Value” of Boeing
stock on the applicable dividend payment date. “Fair Market Value” here means the average of the high and the low per share trading prices for Boeing
stock as reported in The Wall Street Journal for the specific dividend payment date, or in such other source as the Company deems reliable.
5.3 Dividend equivalent RSUs will vest at the same time as the RSUs with which they are associated.
6.
Adjustment in Number of RSUs . The number of RSUs in your account will be adjusted proportionately for any increase or decrease in the number of
issued shares of Boeing stock resulting from any stock split, combination or exchange of shares, consolidation, spin-off or recapitalization of shares, or
any similar capital adjustment or the payment of any stock dividend.

7.
Termination due to Layoff, Disability, or Death . In the event your employment is terminated by reason of layoff, disability, or death, your RSU payout,
including any dividend equivalent RSUs, will vest after termination of employment. Payment for such awards will be made as soon as administratively
possible, but not later than 60 days after your termination of employment.
8.
Forfeiture of Non-Vested RSUs . If your employment with the Company or a subsidiary of the Company terminates before a vesting date for the award
for any reason other than layoff, disability (as defined in paragraph 3), or death, your nonvested RSUs will be forfeited and canceled. Dividend equivalent
RSUs will be forfeited and canceled along with the RSUs with which they are associated.
9.
RSU Award Payable in Stock.
9.1 Distribution from your RSU account will be made as soon as reasonably possible after the vesting of your RSUs, but not later than 60 days after the
applicable vesting date. Distribution will be in whole shares of Boeing stock. The number of shares distributed will be equal to the number of whole
vested RSUs in your account, subject to deductions described in paragraph 9.2. Fractional share values will be applied to income tax withholding.
9.2 The Company will deduct from the distribution of your vested RSUs any withholding or other taxes required by law and may deduct any amounts due
from you to the Company or to a subsidiary of the Company.
10.
Transfer. RSUs are not transferable except by will or applicable laws of descent and distribution.
11.
Clawback Policy. These RSU Awards are subject to the Clawback Policy adopted by the Company’s Board of Directors, as amended from time to time,
which currently provides as follows:
The Board shall, in all appropriate circumstances, require reimbursement of any annual incentive payment or long-term incentive payment to an executive
officer where: (1) the payment was predicated upon achieving certain financial results that were subsequently the subject of a substantial restatement of
Company financial statements filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission; (2) the Board determines the executive engaged in intentional
misconduct that caused or substantially caused the need for the substantial restatement; and (3) a lower payment would have been made to the executive
based upon the restated financial results. In each such instance, the Company will, to the extent practicable, seek to recover from the individual executive
the amount by which the individual executive’s incentive payments for the relevant period exceeded the lower payment that would have been made based
on the restated financial results. For purposes of this policy, the term “executive officer” means any officer who has been designated an executive officer
by the Board.

EXHIBIT 12
Computation of Ratio of Earnings to Fixed Charges
The Boeing Company and Subsidiaries
(Dollars in millions)
Years ended December 31,
2015
2014
2013
2012
2011
Earnings before income taxes
$
7,155 $
7,137 $
6,232 $
5,910 $
5,393
Fixed charges excluding capitalized interest
391
455
514
603
677
Amortization of previously capitalized interest
90
72
74
75
64
Net adjustment for earnings from affiliates
(34)
7
13
69
(38)
Earnings available for fixed charges
$7,602
$7,671
$6,833
$6,657
$6,096
Fixed charges:
Interest and debt expense (1)
$339
$402
$461
$551
$626
Interest capitalized during the period
158
102
87
74
57
Rentals deemed representative of an interest factor
52
53
53
52
51
Total fixed charges
$549
$557
$601
$677
$734
Ratio of earnings to fixed charges
13.8
13.8
11.4
9.8
8.3
(1)  Amount does not include tax-related interest expense which is reported as a component of Income tax expense in our Condensed Consolidated
Statements of Operations.

EXHIBIT 21
The Boeing Company Subsidiaries
Name
Place of Incorporation
Astro Limited
Bermuda
Aviall Services, Inc.
Delaware
Aviall UK, Inc.
Delaware
Aviall, Inc.
Delaware
BCC Equipment Leasing Corporation
Delaware
Boeing Aerospace Operations, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Aerostructures Australia Pty Ltd.
Australia
Boeing Aircraft Holding Company
Delaware
Boeing Australia Holdings Proprietary Limited
Australia
Boeing Canada Operations Ltd.
Canada
Boeing Capital Corporation
Delaware
Boeing CAS Holding GmbH
Germany
Boeing Commercial Aviation Services Europe Limited
United Kingdom
Boeing Defence Australia Ltd
Australia
Boeing Global Holdings Corporation
Delaware
Boeing Intellectual Property Licensing Company
Delaware
Boeing International B.V. & Co. Holding KGaA
Germany
Boeing International Logistics Spares, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Logistics Spares, Inc.
Delaware
Boeing Netherlands B.V.
Netherlands
Boeing Operations International, Incorporated
Delaware
Boeing US Training and Flight Services L.L.C.
Delaware
Insitu, Inc.
Washington
Jeppesen DataPlan, Inc.
Delaware
Jeppesen GmbH
Germany
Jeppesen Sanderson, Inc.
Delaware
In accordance with Item 601(b)(21) of Regulation S-K, the company has omitted from this Exhibit the names of its subsidiaries which, considered in
the aggregate or as a single subsidiary, do not constitute a significant subsidiary as defined in Rule 1-02(w) of Regulation S-X.

EXHIBIT 23
CONSENT OF INDEPENDENT REGISTERED PUBLIC ACCOUNTING FIRM
We consent to the incorporation by reference in Registration Statement Nos. 33-25332, 33-31434, 33-43854, 33-58798, 33-52773, 333-16363, 333-
26867,  333-32461,  333-32491,  333-32499,  333-32567,  333-41920,  333-54234,  333-73252,  333-107677,  333-140837,  333-156403,  333-160752,
333-163637, and 333-195777 on Form S-8 and Registration Statement No. 333-202311 on Form S-3 of our reports dated February 10, 2016 ,
relating to the consolidated financial statements of The Boeing Company and subsidiaries (the “Company"), and the effectiveness of the Company’s
internal control over financial reporting, appearing in this Annual Report on Form 10-K of the Company, for the year ended December 31, 2015 .
/s/ Deloitte & Touche LLP
Chicago, Illinois
February 10, 2016

EXHIBIT 31(i)
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Dennis A. Muilenburg , certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: February 10, 2016
/s/ Dennis A. Muilenburg
Dennis A. Muilenburg
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director

EXHIBIT 31(ii)
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
RULE 13a-14 OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE ACT OF 1934,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 302 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
I, Gregory D. Smith , certify that:
1.
I have reviewed this annual report on Form 10-K of The Boeing Company;
2.
Based on my knowledge, this report does not contain any untrue statement of a material fact or omit to state a material fact necessary to
make the statements made, in light of the circumstances under which such statements were made, not misleading with respect to the period
covered by this report;
3.
Based on my knowledge, the financial statements, and other financial information included in this report, fairly present in all material respects
the financial condition, results of operations and cash flows of the registrant as of, and for, the periods presented in this report;
4.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I are responsible for establishing and maintaining disclosure controls and procedures (as defined
in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(e) and 15d-15(e)) and internal control over financial reporting (as defined in Exchange Act Rules 13a-15(f) and
15d-15(f)) for the registrant and have:
(a)
Designed  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures,  or  caused  such  disclosure  controls  and  procedures  to  be  designed  under  our
supervision, to ensure that material information relating to the registrant, including its consolidated subsidiaries, is made known to us by
others within those entities, particularly during the period in which this report is being prepared;
(b)
Designed such internal control over financial reporting, or caused such internal control over financial reporting to be designed under our
supervision, to provide reasonable assurance regarding the reliability of financial reporting and the preparation of financial statements
for external purposes in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles;
(c)
Evaluated the effectiveness of the registrant’s disclosure controls and procedures and presented in this report our conclusions about the
effectiveness of the disclosure controls and procedures, as of the end of the period covered by this report based on such evaluation;
and
(d)
Disclosed in this report any change in the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting that occurred during the registrant’s most
recent fiscal quarter (the registrant’s fourth fiscal quarter in the case of an annual report) that has materially affected, or is reasonably
likely to materially affect, the registrant’s internal control over financial reporting; and
5.
The registrant’s other certifying officer(s) and I have disclosed, based on our most recent evaluation of internal control over financial reporting,
to the registrant’s auditors and the audit committee of the registrant’s board of directors (or persons performing the equivalent functions):
(a)
All significant  deficiencies  and  material  weaknesses  in  the  design  or  operation  of  internal  control  over  financial  reporting  which  are
reasonably likely to adversely affect the registrant’s ability to record, process, summarize and report financial information; and
(b)
Any fraud, whether or not material, that involves management or other employees who have a significant role in the registrant’s internal
control over financial reporting.
Date: February 10, 2016
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
Gregory D. Smith
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Business Development and Strategy

EXHIBIT 32(i)
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2015 , as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Dennis A. Muilenburg , President, Chief Executive Officer and
Director of the Company, certify, pursuant to 18 U.S.C. § 1350, as adopted pursuant to § 906 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ Dennis A. Muilenburg
Dennis A. Muilenburg
President, Chief Executive Officer and Director
February 10, 2016

EXHIBIT 32(ii)
CERTIFICATION PURSUANT TO
18 U.S.C. SECTION 1350,
AS ADOPTED PURSUANT TO
SECTION 906 OF THE SARBANES-OXLEY ACT OF 2002
In connection with the Annual Report of The Boeing Company (the “Company”) on Form 10-K for the period ending December 31, 2015 , as filed
with the Securities and Exchange Commission on the date hereof (the “Report”), I, Gregory D. Smith , Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice
President,  Business  Development  and  Strategy of  the  Company,  certify,  pursuant  to  18  U.S.C.  §  1350,  as  adopted  pursuant  to  §  906  of  the
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, that:
(1) The Report fully complies with the requirements of Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended; and
(2) The information contained in the Report fairly presents, in all material respects, the financial condition and results of operations of the Company.
/s/ Gregory D. Smith
Gregory D. Smith
Chief Financial Officer and Executive Vice President, Business Development and Strategy
February 10, 2016
